THE Old Leaven purged out. OR, THE APOSTASY Of this DAY further Opened.

BEING A true and faithful Narrative of the orderly Proceedings and Dealings of
the Lesser part of the Congregation formerly walking with Mr. John Sympson,
with and against several Soldiers of the Army, who (being fallen in with the
APOSTASY of this DAY, contrary to Professed and Declared Principles, and the
many outgoings of the Lord thereupon) are withdrawn and separated from,
together with Mr. Sympson their Chief Abettor, and others, after near two Years
laboring, whilst we were in the Congregation, and near two Years more since.

AS ALSO The true Coppies of seven of the Letters, which Mr. Sympson wrote with
his own Hand, and sent to the Congregation whilst he was a Prisoner for Truth
in Windsor-Castle.

WITH An Answer to several Objections, that have been, or may be raised
against Printing and Publishing the Whole.

ALL Humbly presented to Public view, not in Strife, Vainglory, or to be
seen of Men, but we hope out of conscience, to endeavor a Recovering of the
Name of the Lord, which has layen under so great reproach, through Misreports
raised of us since our first withdrawing.

2 Cor. 6.17, 18. Wherefore, come out from among them, and be ye separate,
says the Lord, and touch not the unclean thing, and I will receive you. And
will be a Father unto you, and ye shall be my Sons and Daughters, says the
Lord Almighty.

2 These. 3.6. Now we command you Brethren, in the Name of our Lord Jesus
Christ, that you withdraw your selves from every Brother that walks
disorderly, etc.

2 Timothy 3.4, 5. Traitors, heady, high-minded, lovers of pleasures, more then
lovers of God, having a form of godliness, but denying the power thereof; from
such turn away.

Printed in the Year of our Lord, 1658.

To all that love the Lord Jesus Christ in sincerity, in this evil day,
whether in Churches, or out,
Beloved in our Lord,
INcrease of Faith, Hope, Love, Humility, Zeal, Wisdom, and Patience, with all
other the fruits of the Spirit be multiplied unto, and bestowed upon you,
according to the purchase of our Lord Jesus, who is King of Saints and Nations:
that you may be able to stand upon the Sea of glass Rev. 15.2.
mingled with Fire, and maintain your Victory over the Beast, and his Image,
and Number of his name, having the Harps of God in your hands, that when his
Judgments Rev. 15.4.
shall be made manifest, and a reward given to Babylon, according to his word,
you may not with the Merchants and great Men of the Earth, stand afar off, Rev.
18.10, 11.
crying alas, alas, but may with the Angel and the followers of the Lamb, who
are called, chosen and faithful, with rejoicing say; Rev. 16.5. compared with
chapter 19.2.
Righteous art thou O Lord, because thou have judged thus.

How unmeet such as we are above any, who have obtained like precious faith, to
appear in this public manner, is best known to the Lord and our own souls,
being in some measure through his Free grace, made sensible of our
insufficiency to so weighty a Work, the consideration whereof might wholly
discourage our proceeding herein, did not the honor of God, the interest of
Christ Jesus our Lord groundedly provoke us thereunto; for now as all will
behold, whether Saints or Sinners, so many being already prejudiced in their
judgments thorough false reports received of us, (as they have been apt enough)
will shoot their arrows against us, but with how much unwarrantableness on
their parts, let the Reader judge by this ensuing Narrative. Others being
convinced of the truth and goodness of the cause we are engaged in, as they do
not speak against us, so on the other hand, lest they should come under the
like reproach with us, are silent in saying any thing on our behalf, yet some
Elijahs there are, who have been and still are willing to bear part of the
burden with us: Adding hereunto, that we are a stumbling block to many,
thorough the many failings, infirmities and miscarriages such poor
nothing-creatures as we are, have been compassed with, in the management of so
honorable and weighty a cause as this is, for which each one of us have great
reason to be truly humbled before the Lord (though hereby we may humbly say,
Are we as Signs Isa. 8.18.
and Wonders in Isreal?) Howerver, notwithstanding all the reproaches and hard
speeches that hitherto has attended us from many of our Brethren, and
Familiars, (whom we desire dearly to love in the Lord) as well as from the
Apostates of this day; the latter of which as we have and may expect it, so we
do not much regard it. We have been strengthened in our Head the Lord Jesus, to
bear up under all, though many halts and stops have been made in this work
thereby, which has caused some searchings of heart amongst us; and we trust
that the same power and goodness of our Father, which has been so wonderfully
manifested toward us to this very day, will still carry us on therein, to the
glory of his grace, by Jesus Christ, which is to be acknowledged by us before
him and his people, with all humility and thankfulness; some passages whereof
are inserted in these following particulars.





Sympson gave out upon our first withdrawing, that he was confident we should
break asunder within three months, (or thereabouts) as the just hand of the
Lord against us. And therefore the Lord having so graciously owned us, we do
not desire to be fore-casting what will be the event or issue of this our
public testimony, but looking up to him, desire to rest satisfied in this,
that herein we have done no more then our duty, for these following reasons.

generation, sinning against so great light as never was known before, (amongst
whom the Soldiers and Mr. Sympson we are separated from are apart) it may
appear there is a remnant among the Churches of Christ, who do not wink at, or
comply with so great iniquity, but do desire to bear a suitable Testimony
against, and make a due separation from it.

Reas. 2. There being many reproaches and calumnies cast upon us, as to the
matter and ground of our separation and withdrawing to this day, so as that
the name of the Lord is greatly reproached thorough these Misreports concerning
us; it might therefore hereby appear, that the cause why we do so, is for such
sins as are publicly scandalous and sinful, that so whatever becomes of our
persons the truth may be vindicated.

Reas. 3. That all who fear the Lord in uprightness of heart, may consider and
see it is their duty to withdraw and separate from all such persons; For what
says the Apostle? 1 Cor. 5.6.
Know you not that a little leaven leaveneth the whole lump? Purge out
therefore the old leaven, etc. And may it not be spoken with grief of heart,
that the lump, or generality of the Churches in this day, are much leavened
with a lukewarm, sensual, selfish spirit, seeking the honor and favor of men
for their own advantage, rather then setting the Lord before them, and
approving their hearts to him, and endeavoring after the advancement of his
glory in the world, which comes to pass in a great measure for want of doing
their duty to such persons in this particular.

Reas. 4. That if it should please the Lord to call any, or all of us, further
to suffer herein, or upon such like account, it may appear we suffer for his
Name sake and not as evil doers; the mouths of many professors having been
already opened in this respect, though we could wish it has not rather been
to palliate and cover over their own Apostasy.

Reas. 5. Because thus says the Scripture, 1 Timothy 5.20. com. with Deur. 19, 20.
Them that sin (to wit, in the sight of all men as these have done, and that
against the light of Nature and Grace) rebuke before all, that others also may
see and fear, and do no more so wi^kedly; for as Jannes and Jambres, Korah,
Dathan and Abiram, with their company, withstood Moses 2 Timothy, 2.8 comp. with
Number. 16.3, 12, 13, 14.
in the work of GOD in their day, so these likewise do resist his cause and
truth in our day, proceeding from iniquity to iniquity.

Reas. 6. That so such as are unknown to us, and have been already engaged in
this work of separation, may be encouraged, and not discouraged, and may know
that whatsoever their afflictions and trialls are thereupon, the same are also
accomplished in others of their Brethren upon the same account, that so from a
spirit of love to truth we may be strengthening one another hands in so blessed
and honorable a work.

Rea. 7. If Pilate was so sensible of the innocence of Jesus Christ, that he
could do no less but (in the presence of the Court, and the whole multitude)
take water and wash his hands, saying these words, (the better to clear himself
from being guilty of his blood) Mat, 27.19, 24.
I am free from the blood of this just man, look ye to it: Does it not much
more concern us in such a day as this, when our Lord in his members and cause
contended for in the late wars is again crucified afresh and put to open
shame, to take this water of our public testimony in the presence both of
Saints and Sinners, and testify our dislike of, and separation from so great
iniquity, as also the persons guilty thereof: And if our Lord Jesus could
charge upon the Jews Mat. 23.34, 35.
all the righteous blood shed from Abel to that day, and Peter, Act. 3.13. and
so Stephen Act. 7.51, 52. likewise charge them for retaining their forefathers
wicked spirit (though they Mat. 23.30.
pretended otherwise) manifested in denying, betraying, delivering up and
killing of Christ and the Saints, who were witnesses to the truth in that day;
May not we justly fear that if we should be silent in this day, the guilt of
their blood which was shed in the late wars, as also of the sufferings of the
Saints formerly, and yet imprisoned for their faithfulness to the despised
cause and interest of Christ, who did and do offer themselves so willingly, may
be found upon us when the Lord makes inquisition for the same, and we come to
be partakers of that judgment, which we are persuaded will lie heavy upon all
that shall be found guilty, more or less.

Reas. 8. Because of the so plain discovery (through a general silence) of a
Laodicean, or lukewarm spirit for Christ, in this day, which the Lord loathes
and threatens Rev. 3.15, 16.
to spue out of his mouth; But on the contrary commends the Churches of Ephesus
and Smyrna, etc. Rev. 2.2, 3, 10.
for their zeal and faithfulness, in discovering of, and not bearing with sin
nor sinners, yea the Lord delights in such who offer themselves willingly; And
the Inhabitants of Meroz Judge. 5.9, ^3.
are cursed with a bitter curse, not because they appeared against Gods cause
and people, but for standing Neuters, and not coming forth (when an opportunity
was offered) to his help against the mighty. So in Psalm. 94.16. there seems to
be another plain word of instruction in this case, where the Prophet by way of
Proclamation has these words, Who will rise up for me against the evil doers?
Who will stand up for me against the workers of iniquity? He does not say (as
some say now) Sit still, and let God alone, for he will find out ways and
means to do his work in his appointed time himself, for he has power at
command; why do you trouble your selves more then a great many wiser men? No:
So the Lord seems to speak in this day, as once John said, 2 King. 9.32.
Who is on my side, who? And although such poor creatures as we are can add
nothing to him, yet he loves to see us show our good affection, and to do
what we are able, and he has so appointed, that Isa. 26.6. comp. with Jer.
49, 20.
the foot, yea the feet of the poor, and the steps (viz the endeavors) of the
needy shall tread down the lofty City. And the least of the Flock shall draw
them out, etc. And it may not be forgotten how that the Parliament in the time
of the late war, as they took notice of Neuters by way of dislike on the one
hand, so they did very kindly resent the constant good affections of others, on
the other hand.

Reas. 9. When sin comes to be National; First, in respect of the sin it self.
Secondly, in respect of the persons committing it, being in a National or
public capacity. Thirdly, And contrary to professed and declared light, as the
sin of this day is, and persisting therein after many admonitions, so as that
we may truly say of the transgressors of this day, as the Spirit of the Lord by
Isaiah said of Israel of old Isa. 30.1, 2.
Woe to the rebellious children, says the Lord, that take counsel, but not of
me; that cover with a covering, but not of my spirit, that they may add sin to
sin; that walk to go down to Egypt, and have not asked at my mouth, to
strengthen themselves in the strength of Pharaoh, and to trust in the shadow of
Egypt, etc. Now as in verse the eight, the Prophet is commanded to go write is
before them in a Table, and note it in a Book, that it may be for the time to
come for ever and ever, that this is a rebellious people, etc. so ought we to
do the same, if we would be found faithful to the Lord, and his despised Cause
and People in our day, as the Prophet Isaiah was in his, the sins, and persons
committing them in our day, being very like the sins, and persons guilty
thereof, in that day: And though to bear up a suitable testimony in this day, be
as irksome unto us as it was to Jeremiah, chap. 20.8, 9, 10. yet when we
consider what encouragement he had from the Lord to hold on his way, Jer.
15.19, 20, 21. com. with chap. 1.17, 18, 19.
and not to return to them, and though they might lay many snares for him, he
would stand by him, and make him as a fenced City, and brazen walls against
them, and be with him, to save and deliver him. We are comfortably persuaded
that he will likewise be with us his poor nothing creatures, in this our
testimony, if we be found faithful herein unto the death, as he was.

For these forementioned Reasons, among others that might be given, are we
encouraged to publish our proceedings, from the day of our first withdrawing,
to the day of our separation, being the substance of three years laboring, or
thereabouts, for the Name and Cause of our Lord Jesus; and therefore give us
leave to contend earnestly for the faith of the Kingdom of our Lord Jesus, once
delivered to the Saints, and for common Justice and righteousness, which has
been sealed unto with so much of the Saints (and others) blood in the late
Wars, though now it be very unworthily betrayed, not by Enemies, but professed
Friends, many of whom are Brethren in Church-Relation.

We hope we can, as in the presence of the Lord that searches all htarts,
(however others may judge of us) profess our selves very disirous to follow
after those things which makes for peace, so far as the shoes of the Gospel
will carry us; but to have peace with Dishonesty, Injustice, Unrighteousness,
Lying, Deceit, or Oppression, etc. is contrary to the mind of the Gospel of
peace, 2 Cor. 6.14 Phil. 4.8
any of which sins should Paul himself been found guilty of, were ground
sufficient by his own Argument, 2 Cor. 7.2.
for the Church of Corinth (and so by consequence for any other Church) to
refuse Communion with him; therefore to have peace upon this account, is to
have peace where God would have war, and to bring our selves under that woe
pronounced against those Isa. 5.20
who call evil good, and good evil; that put darkness for light, and light for
darkness, etc.

And if any shall yet blame us for appearing in this public way, give us leave
to say unto them as David said unto his brethren when he came into the Camp of
Israel, 1 Samuel 17.29.
What have we now done? is there not a cause? Adding hereunto also, the report
gone out amongst many of those from whom we are separated, saying, That if we
could prove any thing against the Soldiers, they were ready to do their duty
toward them as well ae we: Wherefore it is very requisite that others should
see the matter of fact, and judge whether from the whole we had not just ground
for this our withdrawing and separation; and we also hope, that such among them
who are sensible of the evil testified against, will bear with us in what we
have done therein. But if any shall say of us deridingly, as Michal said of
David, 2 Samuel 6.20
How glorious was the King of Israel to day, who uncovered himself in the eyes
of his servants as one of the vain fellows shamelesly uncovereth himself, etc.
Give us leave for answer, to say as David said, It is for the Lord, otherwise
we had rather be silent then displease any, much less those whom we dearly love
in the Lord. But if this be to be vile, we shall yet be more vile, and we hope
in our own sight also; and although flesh may in some respects be ready to show
it self in this case, yet if all things be duly considered, there is little
reason for it; for where flesh would show it self, it is for some advantage;
but it seems to us as if there were little fleshly advantage to be reaped by
it; for flesh naturally loves a good report of all especially among the
generallity of professors; Luk 11.43.
but do we not hereby, yea, have we not already lost the good report of men,
and of Brethren too? Again, flesh loves the Rulers favor, Prove. 29 26.
where there is hopes of honor, profit, or preferment, etc. But on the
contrary, do we not hereby hazard our Estates, and lives and all? But admit
that flesh will be showing it self, as we have sufficient cause to fear, and as
we have experience, and may too sadly complain thereof in our own souls, in the
best and most warrantable Work the Lord may require of us, yet this ought not
to be matter of discouragement, but of caution. Pray therefore for us all ye
faithful ones, in the Work, Kingdom, and patient expectation of our Lord Jesus,
Rev. 1.9.
to whom this especially is directed, and on whose behalf (in a great measure)
this Testimony comes, We humbly entreat that you would beg of the Lord that
flesh may receive a rebuke every way. What temptations we have, and do meet
withal, none knows so well as our selves, it being sometimes suggested to us,
That it were better to lay down our Testimony, and venture no further, then run
the hazard that may follow thereupon; but when we think of that Scripture, Mat.
25.23. comp. with Luke 12: from 35, to 45.
Well done good and faithful servant, thou have been faithful in a little, I
will make thee Ruler over much, enter thou into thy Masters joy, etc. It is
then matter of encouragement to us to persevere therein, considering also how
easy a thing it is for us to lose the Crown of our Testimony, Rev. 3.11. by
declining the Cause of Christ we through Grace have been, and yet are engaged
in, although we may not lose the salvation of our own souls; which puts us in
mind of Barnabas, of whom it was said, Acts 11.22, 23, 24.
He was a good man, and full of the Holy Ghost, exhorting the Saints at Antioch
to cleave unto the Lord with full purpose of heart; yet afterward this good
man received a check by joining with John, whose Surname was Mark, who left
Paul in the Work at Pamphilia, Acts 15.38:
that Paul testifies against him for so doing and afterward we do not hear of
Barnabas in any further Work for Christ, as formerly he had been; so good it is
to stick close to Christ in an Evil day. And have we not also this further
promise, Rev: 31.10:
Because thou have kept the word of my patience, I also will keep thee from
the hour of temptation, which shall come upon all the world, to try them that
dwell upon the earth.

It would have been too long and tedious to have inserted the whole matter, as
it was publicly debated in the whole Congregation, drawn from those six
scandalous sins laid to the charge of the Soldiers then amongst us; Moreover,
we should thereby have given occasion to some to have given a Reply to many
things, which we suppose will hereby be avoided. But if any notwithstanding our
endeavors, shall adventure to blemish the Truth, and Cause, we do hereby
contend for, we trust the Lord will give us wisdom to make an humble and sober
Reply ^o such persons if need be: And therefore for the better clearing of
truth to the understanding of the Reader, some Marginal Annotations are only
added, whereby the matter of fact is proved by the Armies Declarations, and
Engagements, etc. whilst they pretended to be faithful to the cause of Christ,
whereof the Soldiers aforementioned, were then, and still are Members; besides
several particulars proved against them, all being contained in our first
paper, and after that comes in our gradial proceedings against them, and their
Abettors, upon their perseverance in so great evil, that so it may appear we
have walked according to Rule, in order to the convincing, and recovering of
them, if the Lord had so pleased.

We know upon perusal of the subject matter contained in this Book, there will
be many infirmities, and weaknesses, showing forth themselves therein; but we
hope the Lord has given you such bowels of tenderness as to pass them over,
and rather be eying the drift and scope of what is intended hereby, and
therefore shall take up no more time in an Epistolary way, but leave it unto
the blessing of the Lord, with this Exhortation to you, as well as unto our
selves, 2 Timothy: 2: 19: com: with Jude 23:
Let every one that names the Name of Christ depart from iniquity, hating even
the garment spotted by the flesh, that so at the appearing of our Lord Jesus,
he may say unto us, Well done good and faithful Servants, enter you into your
Masters Joy.

Signed in the name and by the appointment of the greater number of the
Congregation, who have separated from those now walking with Mr. John Sympson.
Humphrey Hathorn, Caleb Ingold, John Seely, John Portmans.


THE Old Leaven purged out: OR, The Apostasy of this day further opened.
A true Copy of our first Paper to Mr. SYMPSON, and the other part of the
Congregation, after we were withdrawn upon the account of the Soldiers,
declaring the grounds and reasons of our withdrawing; Dated the first day of
the fourth month, 1656. Delivered in writing at London-house the next first day
after the date hereof, by six of our Brethren, accompanied with the whole.
Only the Marginal Annotations were since added, to prove what we have
asserted in the body of our papers.

Dearly beloved Brethren and Sisters in our Lord Jesus Christ,
HAving spent some time together, and apart, to seek the Lord for counsel and
direction since we absented our selves from you, having had (as we hope) some
sorrow and grief of heart that we cannot with any comfort partake with you at
present of those Ordinances our Lord Jesus has left his people to be exercised
in until his second coming and appearance, and we trust have endeavored in
some degree of sincerity to search our own hearts concerning those sins laid to
our charge, as Incharitableness, Pride, Rashness, Self-will'dness, Arrogance,
etc. which we must acknowledge to be in as in too great a measure, yet
doubtless this we may speak to the glory of the free Grace of our Father in
Jesus Christ, That notwithstanding Satan, togegether with the body of sin we
carry about us, has had great advantage to blemish that blessed Cause and
Interest we have been so long contending for, we may (we hope), declare, That
in ^^plicity, and godly sincerity, this Work has been managed by us; and also,
that it is out of love to Truth, as well as on Truths behalf, we are so far
engaged. It is in the conclusion of our waiting upon, and seeking to the Lord
much upon our hearts, to lay before you the Truth we are so much under a Cloud
for, that if the Lord will we may find such a fruit of this our seeking to, and
waiting upon him, as will bring most glory to God, and comfort to you and us,
and the provoking the Churches of Christ in this Nation, too generally fallen
in with the iniquity of this day.

Dear Brethren and Sisters, and longed for in the Lord, You very well know how
for some years together the Lord has been risen out of his holy place Isa.
26.21.
to punish the Inhabitants of the Earth for their iniquity; and notwithstanding
those Inhabitants have, and do under a form of godliness get into Zion; yet so
narrow has the Lord been, and still is in his search at this day, that Isa.
33.14. comp. with chap 4.4, 5.
the sinners in Zion are afraid; for he has set up his fire in Zion, and
furnace in Jerusalem, and will not leave till he has thoroughly purged his
floor; in which great Work we find that his own people have not been without
their refinings in regard of so great filth they carry about them; for he
says, Isa. 4.4.5:
that he must wash away the filth of the daughter of Zion from the midst
thereof, and purge away the blood of Jerusalem by a spirit of Judgment, and a
spirit of Burning, that upon all the glory may be a defense. The nature of this
Work has been not only by the Sword of the Spirit, which is the word of God
in the (...) of his Servrnts the Prophets; but also by the Sword of a man, (or
the material Sword) and herein we find the Saints not only by their prayers,
but their persons also have been instrumental, making good that Word in the
Psalms, Psalm. 149 4.
Let the high praises of God be in their ^^^ths, and a two-edged Sword in their
hands, to execute upon the Adversaries of his glory, the judgments written, to
bind their

* * Was not the vengeance executed upon the King, his Issue, Nobles, Gentry,
Clergy, and other abettors, a manifest return of prayer to the Lords people,
and in part a fulfilling of that Scripture? Yea, let the army and the soldiers
from whom we are separated, look over their Declarations and Remonstrances,
etc. upon this-account; See Abridgm: Remonst: at Alb^ns, page: 30-31: o^ Book,
called The Looking. Glass; and Decl: July: 19 1650: page: 46, 47: of that Book:
Decl Aug: 1. 1650: p: 48, 49, 50. or in a sheet or paper commonly seen: Decl:
after old Parl: was dissolved, p. 53, 54: and in their Speech to the little
Part: p. 55, 56, 58, 61, 62, 63: of the aforementioned book; and we entreat all
the churches of Christ in this city, and the three Nations, to consider how far
they encouraged the army therein, and whether they did not take up arms for the
interest and cause of Christ, at the invitation of their Pastors and Elders; if
not so, we are not able to judge upon what account churches, as churches,
should be sent unto, to take up the material Sword; but if t^^e, what means
this general silence under, and falling in with the present power upon the old
^^ock of Monarchy: who not only have taken the remainder of the great Houses,
Robes, and Revenues, etc: out of the spoils of the late Monarchy, and put them
among their ownstuff, which ought to be improved to carry on the work of the
Lord, but also the old bribing practice of giving and receiving honors, with
other arbitrary and antichristian powers (that part of the accursed thing which
should wholly be destroyed) to uphold themselves and court in that outward
Pomp, Pride, Luxury, yea greater oppression and tyranny, which so much faith,
prayer and appeals has formerly been put up and exercised, blood and treasure
spent for the ruin and destruction of:

Kings in Chains, and Nobles in Feters of Iron, etc. But oh! that which we
desire to mourn before the Lord for, is. That after nine or ten years War,
wherein for the latter part thereof, our adversaries have been but as dust
before the Wind, not being able to stand before the Faith, Prayers, and Persons
of the Lords people, either by Sea or Land; Wherein we cannot but think that
the dispensation of the Lord has been somewhat like that of Israel in their
journey to Canaan, and our present standing somewhat like that in the sixth and
seventh of Joshua, where Achan thorough his Covetousness made bold with a wedge
of Gold, and Babylonish Garment, contrary to the command of the Lord in the
destruction of Jericho, upon which account it is called an Accursed thing,
wherein give us leave humbly to observe this,

e e Mr. Sympson upon asecond day at All hallows, spoke, from Joshua 6.26.
Cursed be the man before the lord, that rises up, and build^s the City
Jericho, etc. and raised the same observation from the words, that we have here
inserted, and did then say, That he looked upon the late King and his Monarchy,
with the Hierarchy of the Bishops, to be that Jericho, in whose ruin the lord
was as much glorified as in that of Jericho, being the fruit of the faith and
prayers of the lords people, as well as of their persons; and that whosoever
should build it, or when built, maintain it, did hazard the bringing
themselves, under the curse of the lord for so doing; and by way of allusion
unto Jericho, did spiritually discover the present apostasy, manifesting how
dangerous it was to be an abettor unto, and a complyer with the lericho
builders of this day.

That that person, or those persons who shall build that which the Lord has
got himself so much glory in the destruction of, do transgress the Command of
the Lord, and hazard the bringing themselves under the Curse of the Lord for so
doing, and such also who partake with them in this their building, become
guilty thereof before the Lord, and not only so, but to partake of the Wedge
of God, and Babylonish Garment; surely such persons are in a high measure
accessory to such transgressions, by means whereof the Work of the Lord is
retarded, as to any visible appearance; yea he is withdrawn from us, and goes
not forth with our Forces

f Has there not been a series of providence loudly witnessing against the
present apostasy since its first rise; and to mention but three or four of
many; First, In frustrating the consultations of both his Parliaments, though
(as we conceive) they were called and garbled on purpose to settle the person
in power. Secondly, the very chargeable, and in a great measure fruitless
expedition of the Navy to the Straits. Thirdly, The wonderful blasting that so
much boasted of design to, and at Hypaniola, though some have vainly said, That
the Lord was bound to carry on that design, to manifest their integrity for
Christ's interest; yet has it hitherto been greatly dishonorable to this
Nation, and the loss of many thousand lives by a few cow-killers, and a great
mortality there, and at Iamaica: Fourthly, In not only withdrawing the prayers
of his people, from, but engaging them against it; and their forces does
clearly declare that God is departed from them, and become their Enemy, Isa:
26:11:

by Sea or Land, as of old, but we fall and consume away before our Enemies,
according to that in Isa. 30.15, 16, 17. And now give us leave in the fear of
the Lord (and we hope in humility) to declare, That our dear brethren who wear
the Sword to maintain the present Power and Government, (the new erected
Jericho of this day) being all of the formerly engaged for God and Christ
before the present Apostasy, cannot free themselves from those public sins
laid before them by us in the presence of the Congregation to wit, Gal. 2.18.
Rom 21.32. Romans 2.3. Phil 4.8.
First, Treason, contrary to an Act

g If every just Ordinance of man ought to be obeyed, 1 Pet: 2:13: then surely
this Act of Jan. 30. 1648, with that of March 17. following, (see
Looking-Glass, page 43, 44.) being a fruit of the Parliament, together with the
Lords people, and the armies public testimony against Oppression and Tyranny,
as also Monarchy the foundation thereof; in prosecution whereof, the Army and
Navy were wonderfully blessed against all opposers; not that we magnify that
form of Government otherwise then as we saw it at that time more conducing to
the advancement of the interest of Christ, and the Nations liberty, and more
refined in its nature than Kingly Government could be at the best, from whom
many corrupt members being purged, Tyranny was in some measure suppressed, and
the cause of Christ carried on in opposition to antichrist; for otherwise we
judge that all forms of men's invention may be broken and made void, when they
answer not the end for which they were appointed.

made by Parliament, the then Authority of this Nation, after many outgoings of
God, not only against the late King as a Tyrant, but against his Monarchy as
the root of Tyranny, whereby the Form, as well as the Power, was destroyed, as
that Jericho which stood in opposition to the Lord, his Cause and People; so
that to build it, or when built, to maintain it, the Lord being much glorified
in the ruin of it can be no less then publicly scandalous; for without the
Army, of which our Brethren are Members, (and some of them very eminent in
office) in the judgment of reason this

h An image of the Beast in regard it prosecutes the same tyrannical interest
from a tincture of the same spirit which the late King did; stands upon the
same, yea a more bloody bottom, so much of the Saints and others blood being
shed in opposition to it, is more arbitrary then the former, having first by
himself, and secondly, under the false cover of a second garbled Company of
Sallary and self-interested men, without the lords people, and the Nations
consent, taken the Military power, and a negative voice, etc. which no King
ever was allowed; and is not only sinful and scandalous, but contrary to the
mind of the lord, and right Reason; (Therefore when Soul through a spirit of
apostasy in, and from the wrath of God upon the people, was chosen king, Samuel
declared he would be such a one, 1 Samuel 8.9, 10 v: 18: lays op^n the arbitrary
power and oppression of a king, or monarchy) so that he is only diverse in name
through the old threadbare pretense of giving liberty to the lords people,
which is no other then to go peaceaby to their several meetings, and home
again, if they let him alone, and not reprove his tyranny and usurpation; but
to all who speak against it, and comply not with him therein, he is both in
look, and in deed, more stout then his fellows, as by his former and late
actions to some does plainly appear.

Image of the Beast now set up, could not stand: and though our Brother Kelzey
was pleased to say, That he or they were Traitors who spoke, or rose up against
him who had now the power of the Nation, though usurpedly, in his hand, thereby
endeavoring to fasten than upon us which he himself, with the rest, are guilty
of; yea, we think it is plain to every one that will not shut their eyes
against the light, that it can be no treason to speak against a person who has
no Law for his standing or practice,

i The Army in Remonstrance at Albons, Novem. 16: 1648: and in the Abridgement
thereof, (See looking-Glass, ^. 7, 28, 30) to justify their pressing for
justice against the king in opposition to the Parliament, about the personal
Treaty, do say, That where a person trusted with a limited power to rule
according to law, shall not only pervert that Trust, but assume hurtful powers
never committed to him, and swallow up all foundations of right and liberties,
into his absolute will and power, to imposs, tak^ away, and destroy at his
pleasure, etc. and shall by force uphold himself in that tyrannical power, is
guilty of the highest treason against the highest law amongst men, and forfeits
all that trust and power he had, and sets the people free to take their best
advantage to bring him to justice etc. And in answer to that common objection
from Romans 13.1. Let every soul be subject to the higher powers, etc. (urged by
malignants in that day, as by members of Churches, and others now) they say,
Paul speaks of magistracy in its constitution, not of a person abusively
exercising it, to be Gods instrument for good to every one, an encourager of
good in every man, and an enemy to evil, therefore the kings of the Israelites
must know the law for a rule, for this they quote, Deuteronomy. 17.2 kings ii, 12.2
Sam. 23. wherein we apprehend they speak the will and mind of God: Now if a
lawful power acting thus, or king Charles, between whom and the people was some
kind of compact and agreement, could not, nor was not then reputed to be Gods
Ordinance, and might not only be spoken against, but brought to justice, then
surely O. Cromwell who forces his power upon us, committing the same, and
greater wickedness, is much less Gods Ordinance, and may not only be spoken
against, but brought under the same, and greater condemnation, And for our
brethren the Soldiers to be abetting and supporting such abominations, having
formerly declared and engaged against them, may, and ought to be reproved, and
in case they persist therein, to be withdrawn from, yea, to disown all Church
relation with them:

but like a brute beast, has broken all the bounds and limits of Law or Reason
to accomplish his lustful Will, therefore where there is no Law, there is no
transgression; And what Law of the Nation do we transgress? yea, Is there not a
good Law of the Land that does justify us in making it Treason for the person
now in Power to act singly in the Government; and our Brethren who abet him
that he may not be brought to public Justice, are likewise transgressors of
that Law; yea the Instrument of Government shall be Judge, he having therein
sworn to maintain all the the laws of this land, of which that Act is one, yet
in force, so that we humbly think they do directly come under the reproof of
that Scripture, 2 Timothy 3.4. in these Words, Traitors, heady, high minded,
having a form of godliness, but denying the power thereof; from such turn away;
which is the more considerable if compared with the first verse of that
chapter, where the Apostle among other sins, reckons that to be one of the
dangerous sins of the last times; and that likewise in the sixth of Luke,
verse 16. where our Lord Jesus speaking concerning Judas, calls him Traitor,
foretelling what he would do to him; and whether the cause of Christ be not
betrayed

k Judas professing love to the person of Christ, as a friend and Disciple,
afterward falling in with the Power in being betraying him into their hands
for 30. pieces of silver, was called a Traitor; So the army having declared for
the advancement of his Kingdom and Interest in opposition to Antichrist,
Monarchy and Tyranny, and after all, for the riches and preserments of this
world, to deliver up this blessed cause, and the people who are kept faithful
to it, to be persecuted and imprisoned by their General, who to keep power in
his hand, is acting upon that foundation, and does those very, and worse
things, for which the former Tyrant and Monarchy were destroyed, in the mean
while (like Judas when he kissed Christ) pretending faithfulness thereunto; they
may more truly be called Traitors then he, having herein acted not only the
part of treacherous Judas, but been more vile then the wicked Magistrates.

by this generation for whom our Brethren do so-stifly contend, we leave unto
the Lord and you to judge; yea with grief of heart we may speak it to be truth.

Secondly, which is the sadness of it, our Brethren cannot free themselves
from being guilty of the breach of that Engagement

l See the Engagement in page 46: of the forementioned Book, which was sent to
the Officers and Soldiers to sign, to take off the reproach cast upon them,
That they cut off the King to set up one of their own; we look not upon their
transgression so much to consist in being against a Commonwealth otherwise
then as it was opposed to Monarchy, which was, is, and in the hand of any
single person but Christ, will be tyrannical and antichristian: And if
self-interest, Oppression, and arbitrary power were not more established now
then before, we should be the more silent, being to eye the end of an
Engagement, and the form only as it answers the end; but we may truly say
there is a breach of the form, with the power and end also, as is plain to
every eye not by ast with gifts and preferments, which ( Deuteronomy. 16: 19:) does
blind the eyes of the wise, etc.

given by the Parliament to all that served them, To be true and faithful to
the Government as it was then established, without a King and House of Lords.
Besides the Declaration of the Army

m See this Declaration in the same book, page 3, as also Deol. July 19. 1650.
page 46, 47 say they, A party in Parliament true to God and their Trust, did
bring to justice, and cause to be executed the late King, did lay aside the
House of Lords, and for the good of the people, resolved the Government into a
Commonwealth, and removed the King and Kingship, And that it might appear the
advancement of the Kingdom of Christ, was in the womb of all their
undertakings, they cause more particularly to declare for the same, see Decl.
Aug: 1: 1650, say they, And having these things singly in our eye, namely, the
destruction of antichrist, and the advancement of the Kingdom of Jesus Christ,
etc. and being persuaded in our consciences that the King and his Monarchy was
one of the ten horns of the beast, spoken of Rev: 17.12, 13, 14 and being
witnesses to so much innocent blood of the Saints he had shed in supporting the
beast, and considering the loud cries of the souls of the Saints under the
altar, we were carried forth to desire justice upon the King, etc: We are not
soldiers of fortune, nor merely the servants of men; we have not only
proclaimed Christ to be our King by profession; but desire to admit him to the
exercise of his royal authority in our hearts, and to follow him whither
soever, he goes, it is our prayer daily that those that seat the Lord in
England and Scotland, may become one in the hand of the Lord, and join
together in the advancement of the Kingdom of Christ, and throwing down, and
trampling upon the seat of the Beast; why should not Scotland as well as
England, rejoice to see the horns of the beast cut off, that we may join
together to hate the whore and burn her flesh with fire, etc, and in another
Decl. page 54: of the same Book, they desire the people might forget Monarchy.
See their speech to the little Parliament, page 55, 61, 62, 63: of the
aforementioned book, where much is spoken to this purpose: And what interest is
now exalted but self-interest? how is antichrist destroyed but in changing
Bishops for Triers? What Church and people delivered but the National Church,
and such as are willing quietly to walk under the former abominations? what
means the present Monarchy? at whole door will the blood of the Saints shed in
opposition to the late King, lie? yea, and the blood of the King and his party
lyespunctel; Give leave to instance Hos. 1: 4: Yet a little while, and I will
avenge the blood of Jezrel upon the house of John; Are not our brethren and the
army soldiers of Fortune, and the servants of; men now? if not so, would they
crouch to such abominations as these? Have they not chosen another King besides
Jesus? Surely these Declarations and Engagements stare them in the face, and at
which they could not but blush if their consciences were not feared; see what
is the mind of the Lord concerning this thing in the following Scriptures,
Numb. 30.2. Eccles. 5.4 compared with Psalm: 66 13, 14. Deuteronomy: 33:2^: Isa: 5.9 3
Hos. 10.4. Mal. 3:5 Gal: 3:15:2 Timothy: 3:3:

June 14. 1647. likewise another upon the Armies going into Scotland, dated
July 10. 1650 wherein they do voluntarily, and without compulsion declare unto
the World that they will not set up a single person over the Nation, though he
were such a one as they could most confide in; looking upon that form of
Government not only to be tyrannical; but antichristian. And many, more
reasons are there laid down to ground their judgments upon truth, according
to the Scriptures; whereby it plainly appears to us they are no less then
guilty of Covenant Breaking and false swearing, whatsoever may be said to the
contrary, by objecting, That me can not prove their hands were to any such
Declarations or Engagments, for it is all one if they being then in, or
belonging to the Army, and did in their place prosecute the ends of those
Declarattions and Engagements against the Stuarts Party, and other opposers,
never in the least declaring against the matter and ends thereof.

Thirdly, For one sin does not go without its Concomitants; the Lords people,
their own Brethren are oppressed, first, Because they cannot pay Taxes

n Besides the forementioned particulars, the very same, and greater arbitrary
powers, (which they declared should not be exercised by any, much less by
themselves) viz. a negative voice, the costly pomp of a Court, of which the man
in power once said, He abhorred that way of government for nothing more; a House
of Lords, of whom he said, It would never be well whilst there was one Lord
left in England, and till the Earl of Manchester was called Mr. Montague.
Keeping men in prison without bringing them to trial. Injustice in proceeding
at Law. Paying Taxes whilst Oppression remains: Forming a balancing party in
the Parliament for his interest: Forcing ^rebble damages from those who refuse
to pay Tithes: Locking up Printing-Presses against whom they please; Upholding
Monopolies, Which is, as in other things, so now up. on the Bible; with many
other particulars that might be named, all practiced in this day, which the
Army, the generality of the Churches, and other godly prodeclared against, as
may be seen in the several Declarations, Remonstrances, Petitions, and Letters
of the army; as also the large petition presented to the Parliament by
thousands well affected people in, and about London, in page 9, 13, 14, 18, 19,
20, 21, 25, 29, 32, 33, 37, 38, 39, 40, 41. of Book called, The Looking-Glass.
And yet for our Brethren and the Army after all, to be upholding not only the
same, but greater oppressions (and chiefly among themseves) it can be no less
then open apostasy. And to demand, much more force the Lords people, and
others, to pay Taxes to maintain them herein, (it being evident they ventured
their Estates, Lives and all with them, whilst prosecuting the cause of
Christ) it can be no other then Oppression in a hign degree. With those
Scriptures in the Margent, see Obad. ver. 13.

to maintain them in their present standing of apostasy and backsliding.
Secondly, Mic. 2.2 Zeph. 3.4. comp. with Ezekiel. 22.27. Ezekiel. 46.18. Pro. 22.22.
Zech. 7.10. Neh. 5. v. 9, to 14. Iam. 2.6.
Tithes

o To demand, much more force the payment of tithes for maintenance of
parish-Ministers, or others upon that account, is against the dispensation of
the Gospel, Heb. 7.12. The Levitical priesthood being changed, so is the Law,
Heb. 7 13. Christ sprang from Judah, of which Tribe was no priest to receive
tithes; the National Ministers pretend to receive their Commission from Christ
who sprang from Judah, and not from the Priesthood which was of the tribe of
Levi: There is no New-Teltament-Rule for any dwelling within such a compass of
ground, to build a Steeple-house to preach the Gospel in, or to compel all, or
any within that bounds, to come to hear that Minister which is either appointed
by themslves, or by others imposed upon them; and whether they come or no, to
demand, much less force a contribution to help maintain that House and
Minister, and in case they refuse, to hale them before Magistrates, and cast
them in prison, this is no other then the invention of the Pope, and his
Brethren, the Magistrates of Antichrist, to support their interest and power
over the people, and not the mind of Jesus Christ, whose appointment is, That
although his Ministers who administer their spiritual things to others, should
if they are poor live of the Gospel, and reap of their carnal things, 1 Cor. 9,
10, 14. com. with Gal. 6.6. yet he has no where appointed that any should be
compelled to hear, or maintain them, much less presecuted of imprisoned for
refusing either, but the contrary; see Matthew. 10.8, 11, 13, 14 com. with Luke
10.5. to 10. The Lord in Mich 3: 5: does threaten those priests and prophets
that teach for hire, and divine for money, and prepare war against him that
puts not into their mouths, com. with Isa. 56.11. All which (with much more
that might be spoken to this purpose) being considered, we wonder how such who
have so highly declared for Christ against antichrist, dare be supporting of
such abominations; he that runs may read the daily Oppression of this kind,
except there be a bowing down to the Golden Image of the national Clergy, with
her head:

are forced from many, to the oppression of some, and the undoing of others;
and so they oppress a man and his house, a man and his Heritage. Now it is not
so much our selves are likely to suffer if we should willingly walk after the
Commandment, but the glory of him who has called us out of darkness into his
marvelous light, will be so much blemished, as is beyond expression. And indeed
this is much to be lamented that there are so few to bear up their testimony
for the Lord against the Evildoers at this day. Likewise our posterities, if
the Lord should not mercifully ease us of our Oppressors, would feel the weight
of so great bondage, as to be at the will and mercy of one man to dispose of
their persons and Estates, and this backed with an Army of thirty thousand men;
and what is likely to be the consequence if the Lord should continue us under
this bondage; we think that eighth chap. of the first of Samuel, from verse 9.
to verse 19. to gether with Amos 5.10, 11, 12. will plainly make out the
sadness of our condition, and the dislike of such who shall quietly acquiess
in, and approve of those oppressions, and the sad condition also of such who
shall be active for such Oppressors, and Oppressions. Moreover we desire to ask
our Brethren who wear the Sword, these two questions; First, Whether they do
not receive the unrighteous Wages of War in a time of peace? Secondly,
Whether the Wages so received be not to enslave us

p A Testimony for this in the former and present imprisonment of many of the
servants of Christ for testifying against the abominations of this day; to wit,
Mr. Carew, Major General Harrison, Mr. Feake, Mr. Rogers, Mr. Courtny, Coll.
Rich, Sir Henry Vane, Major General Overton, Vice Admiral Lawson, M. Cann:
Cornet Day, and several others, some whereof remain in prison to this day; and
the Soldiers, the chief instruments in this oppression, yea their General
lately to take off the odium that such a wicked act would bring upon him,
Commissionates the Mayor and Sheriffs of the City, (who employ the baser sort
of man, (Act. 17.15.) that like themselves will do any drudgery is put upon
them) to come to the meeting in Coleman street to interrupt and hale the Lords
faithful people to prison for nothing but pleading for, and pressing after
those good things which himself and the army have been greatly instrumental to
lead them into, and for declaring against their backsliding from them;
therefore what man or woman that has any love to Christ, his Cause and People,
can pay Taxes to maintain such Oppression and Persecution, or hold communion
with any of them in the Ordinances of Christ.

in our consciences, as well as in our persons? For whatever the Government
says, We shall have liberty of conscience, it is only to such who can quietly
acquiess in their unjust and Antichristian proceedings.

Fourthly, Persecusion of Saints;

q Besides what is already mentioned concerning the Soldiers being instrumental
to imprison the faithful in this day, and what is hinted in this place, there
are some things more particularly charged upon Coll. Kelzey Major Strange,
Capt. Harrison, etc. immediately following the sixth head; adding hereunto
(besides the Scriptures in the margent) Obad. v. 10, 11, 12. where Esau is
charged for his violence and persecution against his brother Jacob, and for
standing on the other side when his Enemies dealt hardly with him. Then surely
they are guilty who uphold the present persecution, and say, It is possible our
Brethren suffer for evil-doing. Let also Acts 7.58 comp. with chap. 22.20. be
considered, where Paul after conversion, acknowledges himself a persecutor
before conversion, for standing by, and keeping the Raiment of them which
stoned Stephen, thereby consenting to his death. And are not the Soldiers who
are members of Churches, and professed brethren, much more guilty, who can
imprison their brethren themselves, and be their Jaylors too? Yea, some of them
to get the applause and favor of man, lie in wait to catch the Lords people,
who visit their Brethren in prison, and when they have caught them, like Soul.
Acts 9.2. go to the head persecutor to obtain an Order to keep them there, as
Mr. Feake was dealt withal at the Tower, not long since; yea, Coll. Eaxter,
one of the new Lords, many times keeping not only the acquaintance, but Wives
and Relations of the Lords people (in his custody) from visiting of them, which
Heathens would abhor to do, see Acts 24.23: and yet the plausible pretenses
these men make, are with their Pastors, etc. and some other professors,
(blinded as themselves) like the whore, Prove. 30.20. wiping her mouth, as if
they had done no evil. Wherefore we may justly take up the lamentation of the
Prophet, Psalm. 55.10, 11, 12, 13, 14. which we desire the Reader to peruse
particularly.

for plain it is many of our Brethren and others, 2 Chronicles. 36.16. Matt. 23.30,
31, 34. 2 Chro. 19.2. Esther did otherwise, chap. 8.3, 5. com. with chap. 7.3,
4, 6. yea she desired that the ren sons of Haman the persecutor might be hanged
also, Esth. 9.13. Luke 11.23.
suffer imprisonment for bearing testimony against the present Iniquity, having
no evil to lay to their charge; and in this that which we would mourn before
the Lord for, is, That some of our Brethren do not stick to say, That it is
possible they suffer for evil-doing. Which word, It is possible, is no less to
us then an indirect justifying the persecutors in their imprisoning of them,
thereby adding affliction to their bonds; wherein we think that Scripture does
truly reach them, Prove. 17.15. He that justifies the wicked, and condemns
the just, even they both are abomination to the Lord. And in this the Soldiers
are altogether instrumental, having neither the Law of God or man to justify
their practice by civil Officers. And we are sure that good Moses, though he
might have been owned and honored as Son to Pharoahs Daughter, could not in
conscience slay in Pharoahs Court when he beheld the affliction of his
Brethren, Heb. 11.24, 25, 26. though we think his condition there was more
harmless, and might more have been improved to the glory of God, and the good
of his Brethren, then our Brethren, employment can possibly be, and yet he
forsook Pharoahs Court.

Fifthly, By this present Apostasy the whole body of the Laws, Mic. 6.16. 2.
King. 10.29, 30, 31, 32. Isa. 29.13, 14. com. with Matt. 15.8, 9.


r Upon search into the Laws, Statutes, and Customs of this Nation, it will
appear most of them are contrary to Scriptute, as that of Felony, which for
stealing to the value of 5. s. is death; but for further satisfaction, see that
Book called Examen Legum Angliae: And indeed we may well wonder how any man
pretending conscience, could at once swear to maintain such a numberless
number, being most of them made in the times of popery. It were likewise to be
wished that all other subordinate Officers, as Justices of Peace, sider how
they can with comfort take such Oaths as they do; for it is time now for
professors to look before they leap.

Statutes, and Customs of this Land are sworn to be maintained without any
enquiry into the equity or justice of them, which brings in the support of many
wicked and

s We call that Antichristian which is set up for Christ's institution, yet has
no warrant in Scripture; and surely it never entered into the heart of Christ to
set up Patrons, Parsons, Viccars, Curates, Triers, Deans, Doctors, Chancellors,
etc. but are from the Pope, and continued by the succeeding popish, carnal,
selfish kings, Queens, and Protectors of this Nation, as will appear upon
search; wherefore let that Scripture Amos 8.14. compared with 1 King. 12.26,
27, 28, 29. be considered, where Jeroboam set up two calves, at Dan and Bethel,
to the end the people might not go up to Jerusalem to worship, fearing the
Kingdom would return to the house of David; and thereby caused them to lay
aside his true worship, which thing became a sin and a snare unto Israel. And
does not the upholding the National clergy, etc, run parallel? and as God was
then greatly dishonored, is he not so now? for do they not by their practice
declare that Christ as a Son in his house, was not so faithful as Moses a
servant? whom first the Pope, and all others to this day, acting as Head of the
church directly, or Law received a just recompense of reward, how shall this
generation escape, who maintain an invention of worship in opposition to
Christ, and force the people to bow down to it by the payment of rythes, though
the Tithes, Tenths, and first Fruits, which are claimed as the Magistrates,
Clergy, and others due, are no other in their rise then what King Harry the
eighth took from the Pope, and the Pope with his Priests had before cheated our
forefathers of, under pretense of good works and charity to merit heaven by,
and for saying prayers for their souls, and the souls of their deceased
ancestors, that they might escape the torments of hell; for further
satisfaction, see a Book called The Great Case of Tithes stated, sold for 3 d.
at the Black-spread-Eagle near the west of Paul's, which notably discovers how
Parsons, Viccars, and Curates, etc, with Tithes were at first brought in, and
have been continued to this day.

Antichristian Laws, some whereof are already put? in execution, as that of
Patrons, parsons, Viccars, Curates, Tithes, together with the old Hierarchy of
Bishops, though couched under a new Name of Triers; and in this we conceive our
Brethren are guilty also; for time was the Army did declare for removing every
yoke from the necks of the Lords People, whether Civil, or Ecclesiastical, and
that they were not Mercenary to serve the lusts of men, as now they are, some
of them also pleading for the Right of Tithes, and by deceitful words excuse
these abominations to the grief of our hearts, and do stand by to maintain him
who is the Head of this Apostasy.

Sixthly, The great reproach

t If what is reported from other countries may be believed, the reproach unto
the Name of God by this apostasy is so great, that it is sufficient ignominy to
be known as an English professor: And as for our own Nation, all who joined
with the Army in the work according to their former good professions and
Declarations, are a stink in the Nostrils both of the late Kings party, and
others, insomuch that in a deriding manner they say to our very faces, etc. Did
we not tell you before how things would be carried? we knew the spirits of
these men you followed, better then you did, as now you se^: Did not we tell
you they desired the destruction of the King that they might get into the
Throne themselves is not Oliver Cromwell a greater Tyrant now, then ever King.
Charles was You simply out of honest intents followed him, thinking to have
greater liberty and privileges, which we always told you would be otherwise,
and we think you find our words true now. You then scrupled the paying a little
ship money, and such small matters; But what do you say to the great Taxes and
Burdens laid upon the Nation now, and yet know not what they will do further?
And say others of them, Though we were grieved at cutting off the Kings head,
yet when we considered the honest things the army held forth in their
Declarations against their own self-interest, and for liberty in opposition to
oppression, we were the more quiet, hoping they would have been as good as
their words; but now we see plainly you are all a company of juglers, and
intended nothing else in all you said, and did but your own advancement; this
is the godly army; we will never trust professors more for your sakes. And many
more of the like, and worse expressions, whereby Religion is made a scorn; so
that we may say in truth as Nathan said to David, 2 Same 12: 13. Because by
this apostasy so great occasion is given the enemies of the Lord to blaspheme,
therefore shall not this iniquity pass away without some special judgment:
Adding hereunto the great reproach that is brought upon the ways of Christ by
the divisions and breaches among his own people, such as has not been for many
generations past; it puts that Scripture often in some of our thoughts, Mat.
18.7. Offenses will come, but woe to that man by whom the offense comes. And is
there not just offense given by the army and our Brethren in particular? More
especially, Coll. Kelzey, who said in the presence of the whole congregations,
That if any should rise up against the present Power, under what pretense
soever, he would sheath his sword in their bowels, though his own Brethren, for
he should look upon them as disturbers of the peace. And have we not cause to
be offended and grieved at these things? can we sit at Christ's Table with such
persons as he? Surely no.

brought to the Name of God, Lam. 2.15 16. Romans 2.23, 24. com. with Isa. 52
5.6. Psa. 79.4. Dan. 9.16.2 Sam. 12 14
his Cause, and Son at this day, which makes the hearts of the righteous sad,
whom the Lord would not have fadned, 2 King. 19 3: Jam. 2: 7: Psa: 69: 9. Ezck.
13.22.
and the Enemy great ground to rejoice that so large profession should end in
the greatest oppression and wickedness that we could have expected from the
adversaries of his glory, against whom so great a contest has been by blood
for so many years; and for our Brethren to own and approve of him who has so
greatly dishonored the Lord, by serving him with their Swords in their hands,
cannot we think free them from being transgressors thereof in a high measure.

And now we shall humbly lay before you some particular instances from these
generals, though one would think this were enough to every impartial eye; for
by how much sin comes to be countenanced, Isa. 10.1.
etc carried on by a Law, by so much it is the more dangerous for particular
persons to fall in with it.

Our Brother Kelzey cannot be freed from having a hand in the [v] rise of the
Government (the Cockatrice Egg of this day) in regard himself and Coll.

u Coll. Kelzey did at Mr. Sapmsons house in Coleharbour, before many brethren,
more fully confess what was laid to his charge in coming down to the Fleet,
then is laid down in the paper: Moreover at that time he said also, That before
his coming down to the Fleet he was at a Meeting of the Officers of the Army
when the Government was presented to them in writing for their approbation, and
that he himself did alder something therein, and so gave his consent, it being
his judgment and conscience, (as he said) although when his coming down to the
Fleet was first laid to his charge, it was denied by him in these words, That
he had not directly, or indirectly a hand in the rise of the Government;
whereby he was guilty of a plain untruth; only this is to be remembered, That
whereas it is said in the paper, Coll. Clark was with him when the first came
down to the Fleet, it was a mistake, for it seems he came down alone that time.

Clark was employed in December, 1653. to come down to the Fleet then riding
before Portsmouth, and brought along with them the Paper of Government in
writing, with a blank in that Article where the Persons Name who was to be
Protector, should be inserted; when it was also declared that it was thought
the Lord General should be the Man, but it was not yet determined. Likewise
since that he has taken upon him to be a Major General, whereby the Nation is
divided into Provinces, the plain fruit of Monarchical Conquest, as if twelve
or thirteen years War, wherein so much blood both of the Saints and others had
been spilt, though in pretense for Christ; yet indeed to establish the lustful
interest of one particular person, founded upon a more Tyrannical and
Antichristian bottom then the late King, who was cut off for his Tyranny.
Moreover as a Fruit of this our Brothers new degree of honor, he has
oppressed several of the Lords People by forcing Taxes from them, as from Coll.
Rich.

A copy of Coll. Rich his Letter to Kelzey, was produced to know the reason of
his sending Soldiers to quarter upon him; and Kelzey's answer, wherein he
declared, That there they should quarter till the Tax were paid.

a prisoner for truth, of which we have been particular in making it out how
long the Soldiers quartered at his house in Kent, selling his Corn, killing
three of his Tenants sheep for Food, and last of all distrained, which they
might have done at first, but that they resolved to make the yoke as heavy as
they could; and not only so, but took between four of five pounds more then
the Tax came to. Likewise since that, Taxes have been forced from Capt. Burcher
Capt. Owen, and Capt. Price, in Canterbury; from the first of whom the
Soldiers This also was by Kelzeys Order.
took to the value of thirty shillings, to pay for their quarters a day and
night, (as they said) and if this be not Oppression, we know not what it. Also
he justifies the imprisonment of our Brethren by saying, It Is possible they
suffer for evil-doing.

Our Brother Capt. Harrison was Keeper to our Brother Sympson whilst he was a

x It is some grief of heart unto us that we should make mention of Mr.
Sympson's Name, as declined from that spirit of Testimony which was upon him
whilst he continued a prisoner.

prisoner for truth; and though he might do it in love, yet that will only
excuse the aggravation of the sin, and not the sin it self; for we are to do no
evil that good may come of it; yea we are to avoid every appearance of evil;
and since that, the Church took cognizance of our Brothers evil therein, and
did declare their dislike of that act, yet notwithstanding have they received
him by their last vote, without the least acknowledgement of his sin.

Our Brother Ducket did in the presence of the Brethren at London-house declare
his full approbation of the present Government, as if there had been no sin in
its first rise; and indeed did so justify the iniquity of this day, that the
generallity of the Brethren were much dis-satisfied with him. Also he declared,
That he would have none in his troop but such as would engage to be true to the
present power; which did then much dis-satisfie the Brethren, and our Brother
Sypmson also; since which he has been in Scotland.

Our Brother Strange had the custody of our Brother Major General Harrison,
until we think he was ashamed out of it by some of the Lords servants who came
to visit him, professing their non-communion with our brother Strange in common
eating, whilst he was his brothers Jailer. Likewise our brother, Strange did
ask our brother Speneer in Marybone-Park, Whether the Soldiers had sold their
Debentors unto him, Brother Spencer answered, No, he did profess they would not
sell them. Strange answered, Is not their To wit, the time allowed them to look
after their own occasions.
time out? if it be, cashiere them. This our Brother Strange denied, saying, If
that can be proved you may judge all the rest to be true; but it was witnessed
to his face at our brother Gardners house. Likewise he did declare, That he
would have none of the congregation in his troop, which came to be made known
upon this occasion, Our brother Hathorne declared to our brother Spencer his
desire to ride in the Major Generals. Troop, whereupon our brother Spencer
sent him to the Major General; but not having an opportunity to speak with him,
he less his Errand with brother Strange; and coming back to brother Spencer, he
told him, Thou have undone thy self, for Strange has said he will have none of
the Congregation in his Troop; which he also denied with a great deal of
cavilling, but it was witnessed to his face.

Our brother Summer being asked what he fought for now, he replied, For half
Crowns. Whether a Saint if called to venture his life only for money, can with
comfort lay it down, having nothing of conscience to engage him, we leave unto
the Lord and you to judge.

These things still lying upon our hearts, we judged it our duty to present
them unto you, and lay them before you, and with humility to offer these
following Queries as the Grounds and Reasons of our absence to this day.

1 1. Whether there be not from what has been already offered, ground to
believe that our Brethren are under sin, and that scandalous, though they
excuse it by saying, It does not appear to be so to them?

2 2. Whether it be not according to the Rule to deal with a Brother upon the
account of sin committed,

y When we laid the Soldiers evil to their charge, they excused it, saying, It
did not appear to be so to them: The incestuous person, 1 Cor. 5.5. was to be
dealt withal for sin committed, though his conviction was afterward: The
reason why they will not acknowledge their sin, is because Deuteronomy. 16.19: A gift
blinds the eyes of the wise, and perverts the words of the righteous. And Prove.
17.8. A gift is as a precious stone in the eyes of him that has it;
wheresoever it turns, it prospers; implying, if the heart desires gifts, it
will be ready to serve their end who gives them, therefore (Prove. 18.16.) it is
said, A man's gift makes room for him, and brings him before great men. And if
they have such power upon them, not wonder if they prevail upon our brethren,
so lately raised up from a mean condition, who whilst they are willing to
receive their money, will not acknowledge their serving of them to bean evil.
Paul (1 Cor. 5.2.) reproves the Church for keeping the incestuous person so
long among them; and yet the present Churches keep Army-men, and others among
them, though their sin be as plain as the incestuous persons was.

whether he be convinced of it, or not, such dealing being in order to
conviction? but in case he shall be convinced, or not be convinced, yet if he
do not forsake it by turning from his evil way, the censure, of the Church is
to pass upon him notwithstanding.

3 3. Whether you have not in some degree missed of the will of God in
receiving them amongst you without so much as a word of

z Besides Ephesians. 5.11. see Psalm. 50.16, 17, 18. comp. with Prove. 24.24. where
you may find it is not only a consenting to, and a partaking with evil, but a
saying to the wicked, Thou art righteous, when we see persons commit sin, and
not reprove them: And if what is said in Prove. 24.24. be true, He that says to
the wicked, Thou art righteous, him shall the people curse, Nations shall abhor
him; then surely not only the people of this, but the Nations abroad when they
come to hear of the apostasy of the Army and them in power, from those good
principles, leading to the advancement of Zion, and the Kingdom of Christ,
(formerly declared for) which had they been pursued, would have brought in so
much good to the whole creation, they will not only abhor them, but also curse
those godly people both in, and out of Churches, who instead of doing their
duty in reproving and withdrawing from the (the only means to put a stop
thereunto, and to revive the works again) do sit down with, and strengthem
therein, whereby that good is kept from coming to them.

Admonition from the Lord, as being jealous of their souls, least sin (though
as they say, unseen to them) lying hid in their hearts, should at last break
forth in a greater measure, to the greater dishonor of God.

4 4. Whether you do not in a great measure bid them

a Psalm. 50.18. compared with Prove: 24: 25: it is a partaking with evil to
approve of persons that commit it, see Job 34: 8: compared with 2 John chap:
10: verse ^^:

God speed in their Employments as they now stand, and thereby become partakers
of their evil deeds?

5 5. Whether our Brethren do not by their continuance in these sins, walk

b 2 Thessalonians: 3: 6: Disorderly walking is declared in v: 8: 11: to be eating a
man's bread for naught, or not answering the end for which that bread is given;
Now our Brethren receiving pay and sallaries from the present Power, which is
the bread extorted by them from the people, pretending for their good, and yet
employing it contrary thereunto, (as our experience can witness) our Brethren
upholding them therein, may truly be said to eat the peoples bread for naught;
therefore verse 14: of that chapter, we are to note such disorderly persons,
and have no fellowship with them, that they may be ashamed: And 1 Cor: 5: 11:
we are not to keep company, or eat with a brother that is covetous, or an
extortioner, etc: And we conceive by what has been already (and may be)
offered, it does (and will) appear our brethren are herein guilty also: See
Psalm: 26: 4, 5, ti: to this purpose:

disorderly? If so, Whether we have not ground in Scripture to withdraw from
every Brother that walks disorderly, and for a time to absent our selves from
the Church having voted communion with them, notwithstanding their sin? For it
cannot be that we should sit down with the

c The Reader may judge it a contradiction for us in this Query to call them a
Church in distinction from our selves, and yet in the close of our following
Papers to judge otherwise: To which we answer, That upon our first coming off
we were greatly in the dark, but waiting upon the Lord for light and direction
herein, did afterward discern, that where the major part fell in with
scandalous sins, the lesser part with drawing from them upon that account, the
Lord did look upon those who had the truth and purity on their side, to have
virtually the power of the church in them, though the lesser number; of which
more may be seen in our last Paper.

Church, and not sit down with them, as the case now stands, our end being (if
the Lord so please) that the Church might consider whether sin be not at
their door in so voteing communion with them.

6 6. Whether we are not in the Lords way, Matthew. 18.19, 20. Jam, 1.5. chap.
5.16. Mal. 3.16. Luke 24.14, 15, 17, 32.
desiring to be resolved in these things? If out of the way, (as is supposed)
it is by meeting together to seek the Lord for counsel and direction, not
mixing our selves with others, (as is reported) or running into the World for
our liberty to sin, but opening our hearts before the Lord, and each to other,
to find out wherein, if so be that we have missed of the Will of God.

7 7. Whether those terms of Schismatics and faction to make a rent in the
Church, and that we have no Scripture to warrant our practice, Matt. 18.7 Romans
16.17.
(as many say) be not unduly and wrongfully charged upon us? Considering also,
that we were a year and upwards by a patient waiting, endeavoring to bring the
matter before the Church, and when brought before them, they refusing to deal
with our Brethren for the same.

8 8. Whether to comply with our Brethren lying under these sins, 1 Cor. 13.6.
be not a breach of the bond of love? according to that in the Corinths, Love
rejoiceth not in iniquity, but rejoiceth in the truth And whether it be the
union and wisdom of the spirit, to hold the bond of peace without purity?
according to that in James 3.17. The wisdom that is from above, is first pure,
then peaceable, etc. So that our present practice seems unto us to be a
pressing after that Grace of love in its true end according to the Scripture;
yea, it is counted by the Lord a hating of our brother, to see sin upon him,
and not to admonish him, Lev. 19.17. Matt. 18.16, 17.
and to withdraw from him in cafe that Admonition bring him not to such an
acknowledgement of his sin as to forsake it.

9 9. Whether it be sufficient to excuse us at the great day of the Lord,

d The occasion of this query did arise from the great outcry made against us
by the generality of them, charging us with Schism, and making division in the
Church, when our Lord says that offenees will come, but woe be to those by whom
they do come: And whether the crying evil of the Soldiers has not justly
given offense, and Mr. Simpson, and some others chiefly abetting of them, has
not also added thereunto, we leave unto the upright in heart to judge; and
whether it be not a popish principle, and also they do not hereby condemn their
own practice in seperating from the National church (so called) of England, in
saying, There is no withdrawing from a Brother walking disorderly, because the
mayor part of a congregation falls in with them: And is it not the argument of
the Church of Rome at this day, who say we do withdraw from the Mother Church,
because the grand apostasy first sprang from a true Church in home, who in
number have all along been the mayor part.

that We did cry out, The Temple of the Lord, the Temple of the Lord are we,
when at the same time it will appear that we have those amongst us who do
defile the Temple of the Lord to the view of the World; for the Temple of God
is holy; and that you should rejoice in such defilement, surely all such
rejoicing is not good: And whether our Lord Jesus by the Evangelist John does
not charge five of the seven Churches in the Revelation for complying with sin,
yea one of them for their lukewarmness is threatened to be spued out of his
mouth, as being a Church only in Name, and not in deed; and one of the other
two (to wit, Smyrna) has no sin laid to their charge, but are exhorted to be
faithful unto death, and they shall receive a Crown of life, for the Devil
would cast some of them into prison: Now we suppose that the Devil there, it
taken for some of his Instruments, which makes out, That their testimony was of
such a public nature, that the power in being would take hold of them; and yet
it cannot be supposed but that they had their sins of weakness, though nothing
is laid to their charge in regard of their faithfulness to some present Truth.

10 10. Whether sin in a Church of Christ (we mean sins of scandal) be not
more dishonorable

e If the incestuous persons sin, or two or three Brethren committing the same,
or other sins, be dishonorable to God, then surely if the church (whose duty it
is to reprove, and cast out such from amongst them; Matthew. 18 17. com. with 1
Cor. 5.13.) should either be guilty of the same, or own them that are so, their
sin would be so much more. But to come more home to our present case, see Numb.
chap. 14. chap. 16. where the lesser part of the congregation (to wit, Moses,
Aaron, Caleb and Joshua, who were pressing on from Egypt to Canaan, the work of
God in that generation) were counted faithful, and owned by him for that very
cause; but the greater part of the conregation, who said, Let us make a
captain, and return into Egypt, and would have stoned Moses and Aaron, etc.
their sin was so dishonorable to God, and did so provoke the eyes of his glory,
that their carcasses must fall, and not see the good Land they were going into,
yea and their children after them wander in the Wilderness forty years. And in
Numb. 16. The sin of the greater part of the congregation in joining with Korah
and the renowned men amongst them in opposition to the Spirit of the Lord in
Moses, etc. upon the forementioned account (see verse 13, 14) was like wise so
abominable in his fight, that he bid Moses and Aaron, ver. 21, 24, 26. Separ te
from them, and also speak to the congregation to depart from the Tents of those
wicked men, and touch nothing of thews, lest they be consumed in all their
sins. Then surely the wickedness of them in Power, who have indeed made a
Captain, and are gone back to Egypt, and those that uphold them, whilst they
oppose and persecute the Lords spirit in his little Remnant, who are pressing
from Monarchy and Tyranny, toward the promised Zion, and Kingdom of Christ,
(the work of God in this generation) does equal, if not exceed the sin of that
congregation, and of Korah and his company; and it is as great an evil to touch
with them, or receive any of their things upon that account and as dishonorable
to God to stand by, and uphold them therein, (or for Churches or others to own
them that do so) as it was to have countenanced, upheld or touched with Korah
and his company in that day.

to God then the like in a private brother, or two or three Brethren? And how
can we be said to withdraw from every Brother that walks disorderly, when we
quietly sit down with the Church that owns them in their sin, (as we conceive)
and do break bread with, and prophecy amongst them? for we cannot see how this
will hold before the Lord when we are to avoid every appearance of evil.

11 11. Whether to acquiess in the judgment of a Church concerning sin, though
a restimony have been born against it, be not something of the relics of the
man of sin, and in process of time may not bring us under this Maxim, To
believe as the Church believes, though we ought to be very tender and careful
how we proceed in such a business, that we be upright in heart before the Lord,
earnestly seeking to him for direction and counsel?

12 12. Whether our Brethren that wear the Sword, are not to be charged with
Schism, and making a rent in the Church, having through their just offense
given to many Brethren and Sisters in the Congregation, and many other choice
Saints in the Nation, made division amongst us? and as we hear several others
standing in the like quality with them, have been

f There was a mistake about the Soldiers mentionend in this query, as cast
our of two Congregations in Wales; for so soon as they began to lay their sin
to their charge, they withdrew themselves, and came no more to them, as we are
since informed, otherwise they had proceeded further against them.

cast out of two Churches in Wales upon the same occasion, to wit, Mr. Jenkin
Jones, and Mr. Powells Churches; and likewise (as we hear) another in England,
whose Name at present we have forgotten.

13 13. Whether that Principle of the Congregation, namely, Communion with
Saints upon the account of union with the Head, be not unduly charged, as
broken by us, when it is not intended, by so good and righteous a principle,
that a Brother or Sister should take a liberty thereby, as an occasion to the

Gal. 5.13.
Flesh, to walk scandalously among Saints and sinners, for that is the
corruption, and not the true end of it.

The consideration whereof we think does lie with such sorrow upon our souls,
as we may truly say has wrung tears out of some of our hard hearts.

We shall not add more at present, fearing it may be thought we have been too
large in this already; only this, that whereas it is said, Nothing would
content us but the sudden casting out of our Brethren without an orderly
process according to the Scripture, to which end we had resolved our present
withdrawing before we came to the Church: We do therefore desire to leave this
with you as before the Lord, That it was the least in our thoughts so to do,
for we hoped that truth would have taken so much place, as that our brethren
would have been admonished of their sin by the Church, and so to have withdrawn
from them if happily through a more narrow search into their hearts hereby, the
Lord might please out of his Grace to discover this their sin, which has, and
does bring so great dishonor to the Name of the Lord, though at present (as
they say) unseen to them; and in this Work not to have counted them as enemies,
but admonished them as brethren; but so sudden a vote for communion with them,
lying under so great sin, as we judge by what was offered that day, did so
amaze us, that when we came out of London-House, we knew not what to do, only
some of us did then conclude to meet together, to enquire what was the mind of
the Lord in this thing; in which way of seeking to him we have continued to
this day. Now we hope you will bear with us, and put a brotherly interpretation
upon any thing therein that may not seem to carry with it that Love, Affection,
and Gentleness which we desire from our hearts should be, it not being our
intention to justify our selves in any evil, but rather to lie at the Lords,
and your feet therein; yet would gladly be found faithful to the Lord in such a
day as this, when they that tempt God are delivered, and they that work
wickedness are set up; yea, he that departs from evil makes himself a prey,
and a snare is laid for him that reproves in the Gate. Thus we humbly leave
these our thoughts to your serious consideration, hoping that whatever our
failings may be, yet we shall not want the guidance and direction of his spirit
in every way of truth; and we also trust, That as you are in some measure
pressing after that excellent Grace of Love, so you may abound therein more and
more, in knowledge and in all judgment, that you may approve things that are
excellent in such a day as this, being sincere, and without offense until the
day of Christ, being filled with the fruits of Righteousness, which are by
Jesus Christ, to the praise and glory of God; and then it will be our joy and
rejoicing to return unto you; and in the mean time we judge it our duty to be
waiting upon the Lord and you, till his mind and Will be further revealed
concerning us; in whose protection we leave you, and remain.

Dated the first day of the fourth Month, 1656. Your poor, destitute, and
mourning Brethren and Sisters in some measure, till the Lord restore you to
your primitive spirit of Faith, Light, Love, and Zeal for his glory, wherein
you have been as a Beacon upon the top of a Mountain.

AFter some solemn waiting upon the Lord, this Paper was signed by threescore
in number, or thereabouts, and was intended so to have been given in, but was
otherwise determined upon for these two Reasons; First, Because in such an evil
day as this, we ought not to trust in a Friend, no, not in a Guide, but to keep
the door of our mouths from those that lie in our bosom; If so, then not to
trust our hands with those who had so unworthily betrayed the Cause of Christ.
Secondly, It was judged most for the glory of God to go in person all of us,
being about twelve more then signed it, and own the said Paper, which would be
more authentic, and less advantage given against any particular person; and
therefore an exact Copy was drawn out, and carried unsigned, all of us
accompanying the Brethren (to whom it was chiefly committed) unto London-House,
the next first day after the date thereof; when being come, a Brother of ours
stood up, and spoke a few Words to this effect, That we were here come to
present unto them in brotherly love, after solemn waiting upon the Lord, a
Paper, containing the evil of those persons amongst them, against whom we had
been so long contending, together with the Grounds and Reasons of our
withdrawing to this day, which we had the more hastened to give in, in regard
we were several times urged thereunto by several Brethren sent by their
appointment unto us; and further, desired that liberty might be granted unto
one of the Brethren (by us entrusted) for the reading of it; Which was not
only denied us, but much scruple raised by some, What Scripture-Warrant we had
to give in our dissatisfactions in Writing. To which answer was made, That we
judged it our Gospel-liberty to give it in by writing, or otherwise, as might
be most for the glory of God; for by this writing we did give in our joint
Testimony against the present evil, with the reasons of our withdrawing, which
we apprehended could not be so well done by a private brother, or brethren in
speaking; but that we might have had just grounds of exceptions against some
things that might be spoken against such brethren. Hereupon our Brother Marsh
who walks with them, said, That he thought it was not only our Gospel-liberty,
but the Scripture would warrant our practice, else Paul's writing to the
Corinthians about the incestuous person, was not warrantable; but if it was,
then our practice had ground in Scripture, and therefore conceived there need
be no further discourse about that. And by this means was that Scruple in some
measure removed, and some Way made for the reading of our Paper, but not by any
one of us, which although we judged it a little unreasonable, yet for peace
sake we condescended thereunto, and accordingly delivered in our Paper, which
was read by the Brother aforementioned, though it was so late before he began,
that there was hardly time to read it thorough by daylight, much less to
debate it, and open the Scriptures therein; however before we departed, they
made us a promise that We should have full liberty another time to read it our
selves deliberately, and debate it, with the Scriptures laid down for proof of
what was there asserted; and We also promised them to come whenever they
should desire it. And so We departed for that time, continuing with one accord
together in prayer and supplication, expecting to hear from them according to
promise; but contrary hereunto, in some Weeks after, they sent for several
Pastors and Members out of other Congregations without our consent, to receive
their Advice how to deal with us: Their Names are as follows.

Mr. Cockayn, Mr. Jackson, Mr. Roberts, Mr. Jessey, Mr. Hubbard, Mr. Isles, Mr.
Knowles, Mr. Highland, Mr. Bradshaw, Mr. Jacksen, Chir. Mr Woolaston. Mr.
Barebone, Mr. Tailor.
Having knowledge of this Meeting thorough the report of others, We did appoint
a time to seek the Lord, to consider what might be our duty, and how far we
should appear therein, or whether we should appear or not; and at last came to
this issue, That we should appoint several Brethren in the Name of the whole,
to go unto those Brethren above mentioned, when they should meet with the other
part of the Congregation, and acquaint them with the Grounds and Reasons why we
could not own them in the Work they were come about. The Reasons are these.

1 1. They (meaning those from whom we were withdrawn) had not performed their
promise to us, having declared when We were last with them, That the Paper
presented should be debated in the Church, according to the Scriptures there
inserted; Which has not yet been done, though We promised to be with them
whenever they would send for us about it.

2 2. We see no rule in Scripture that any Brethren from any Churches, or
others, should be sent for to debate our Paper before it had been debated in
the Church amongst us, and the Scriptures in the Margent opened.

3 3. We conceive it had been meet according to Scripture, that We the Brethren
and Sisters differing from them, should have had cognizance and approbation of
the persons so nominated, to debate the matter in difference.

4 4. Whether they have taken the consent of the

h We would not be understood by these two Queries as if we did judge that in
extraordinary cales particular Brethren out of Churches might not be sent for
without the consent of their respective congregations, to determine a
Church-difference, there being only one occasional practice by the Church at
Antioch to Jerusalem, Act. 15 2. But that which we chiefly aim at, (as by the
third, and the close of the fifth Query will appear) was their sending without
our consent in the Name of the church, when we our selves were a part; likewise
there was several persons there, against whom we had just exceptions, if it had
then been meet to speak of it. Moreover their case was ordinary, not difficult
to them, for that most of the churches in the city, more or less, seem to us
guilty of the same transgression; and therefore we apprehend that such a
practice was more binding to them then to us, as our case at this time stands,
otherwise we desire to keep strictly to every primitive practice that has any
such instructions for us.

Churches for the choice of those Brethren they have sent for? If not, What
Scripture Rule they have to do so?

5 5. Whether such a practice does not savor of an arbitrary spirit amongst
men? much more among the Churches of Christ, in calling several Brethren
without the consent of the Churches to whom they belong, which We cannot own
lest we should betray the cause of Christ for which we contend, into the hands
of a few, which will be a bad president for other Churches for the time to come.

The said Queries being laid before the Brethren aforementioned, did so prevail
with them, as they not only judged it unmeet, but did wholly refuse to meddle
with the matter in difference as the case then stood, declaring It was but
reasonable We should have a free debate of our Paper in the Congregation,
according to promise, before any other means be used, and so they departed for
that time

Within a short time after this, a day and time was agreed upon between us and
the other part of the Congregation, from whom we were withdrawn to seek the
Lord together, and then to proceed to the debate of our Paper, though that
which provoked them hereunto, (as We conceive was from the refusal of those
Brethren they sent for to meddle therein, as the case stood, rather then their
own voluntary act: But the day appointed being come, the forepart of it was
spent in prayer, opening our hearts before the Lord, and each other, hereby
hoping such a spirit might be sound both in them and us, as the debate would
have been to the glory of God, and the discovery of truth on either side; but
instead thereof, so many grating expressions both in prayer and speaking were
uttered by Mr. Sympson against us, as was to the grief of most of us, and the
indisposing of some in a great measure unto the Work We were met about: However
about two in the Afternoon, we proceeded to the debate of our Paper with some
reasonable liberty, though commonly interrupted by Mr. Sympson, who when any
thing came close upon the Soldiers, would frequently be speaking in excusing
of them, and condemning us. In the close of the day having got through our
Paper, We desired to have the result of the Congregation, Whether by what was
laid before them, they did not judge the Soldiers to be guilty of those sins
laid to their charge by us? Whereupon Mr. Sympson stood up, and spoke in Words
to this effect, That he looked upon us as such who had made a rent in the
Church, and that there was a mark set upon us by the Holy Spirit, being such as
had made

i We desire that Scripture, Romans 16.17, 18. may be considered, where those
words spoken by Mr. Sympson are laid down, and it will appear the Apostle was
speaking of such persons as we are now separated from, to wit, such as serve
not the Lord Jesus, but their own bellies. May we not truly say, That worldy
interest and self-advantage has been the ground and root of this apostasy,
wherein the Soldiers are chief; and to palliate so great wickedness, are not
good words, and fair speeches the cover by which they deceive the hearts of the
simple? and give us leave humbly to ask what belly-advantage have we thereby?
Do we not rather hazard all that is near and dear unto us? yea, we are become
the reproach of most professors, having much evil laid to our charge, through
we trust it shall appear that it is groundlesly.

division; and therefore we should have no vote with them, neither should there
be any vote in the Church except we would withdraw; Which not a little grieved
our spirits: But notwithstanding so foul an aspersion, we made little reply,
but waited to hear what others would say; but a general silence continuing, we
concluded that the major part were of his mind: Whereupon we departed, and
waited patiently for some time, to see whether they would send us their
thoughts about the Soldiers, since they would not let us have a vote with
them; and least if should be laid aside, which Mr. Sympson endeavored all
along to do; We did by Messengers remind them several times, likewise to know
whether those Words then spoken by Mr. Sympson were the sense of the whole,
which they disowned, as being Mr. Sympsons Words alone; but to the other We
could get no return to this day, as by our next Paper given in to them, does
more at large appear. Likewise before the delivery of the ensuing Paper, having
spent some particular time to seek the Lord for direction and counsel, and also
to enquire into his Will at this time, it was judged a duty incumbent upon us
to go to our Brother Sympson, and lay his evil before him in abetting the
Soldiers, and declining the Testimony of Christ he had suffered for in Windsor
Castle, as by several Letters from thence being read amongst us, did appear,
(some Copies whereof the Reader may peruse in the close of this Book) and
accordingly six Brethren in the Name of the whole, were sent unto him, and with
all humility to entreat his hearing of what by them we had to say; which
accordingly they did; but how unkindly they were received, will appear by the
eusuing Narrative, being the substance of what then passed between him and them.

The 11th. of the 9th. Month, 1656.
A brief account of some Passages between our Brother Sympson, and the
Brethren appointed by us to meet with him about some Letters he wrote to the
Congreation during the time of his imprisonment in Windsor Castle, it being
apprehended he is very much fallen from the truths therein laid down, to the
great dishonor of the Gospel, and the grief of many of the faithful in this
day.
THE six Brethren appointed to this Work, met at a Brothers House in
Coloman-street the day abovementioned, about two in the Afternoon, to commend
their present Work unto the Lord, and desire his blessing upon them therein,
and then made their repair to our Brother Sympson, where after a little waiting
for the coming of our Brothers, Shrimpton and Marsh, who desired (as the
Brethren were informed) to hear what should pass in relation to the Letters:
This motion was also made by Brother Powell, being also present, That before
any progress be made, there might be a word put up to the Lord for a blessing.
To which end another brother made answer, That it would be necessary the naked
ground of their coming should be first laid down, that we might pray with
understanding. Which being done, the Brethren sent by us declared their
readiness to join therein: Hereupon one of the Brethren proceeded to declare
the ground of their coming to this effect; That several of our Brother Sympsons
Letters from Windsor Castle being presented to several Brethren who met at our
Brother Caryes house intentionally upon another account; but those Letters
intervening, we spent our time in perusing them, which in the reading did so
work upon their hearts, that they throught meet to present unto the Brethren
and Sisters (in whose Name they were then come) the said Letters, and to offer,
Whether some Brethren should not be chosen in the Name of the rest, humbly to
lay the matter contained in them before him, that if it were the Will of the
Lord he might be convinced wherein, and how far he had declined the Cause and
Interest of our Lord Jesus, and be provoked to that old Spirit of Life and Zeal
in testifying to so glorious a Cause, and accordingly upon reading of them we
were of one heart that the Brethren aforementioned, in the Name of the whole,
be desired to lay them before him with as much love and tenderness as could be;
and that we were also reproved in our own spirits as having missed of the Will
of the Lord that we had it no more upon our hearts to beg mercy for him at the
Throne of Grace, that the Lord would restore unto him that primitive spirit for
the cause of Christ; and that many of our hearts were broken on his behalf at
the reading of his Letters. After an account thus given, it was offered that a
Word should be spoken to the Lord in prayer before any discourse should be. Our
Brother Sympson then spoke to this effect; That having had some knowledge of
their coming from some of us, and the occasion of their coming from some others
before their meeting here, he had privately commended the business they were
come about, unto the Lord, as he did suppose they also had done; likewise he
judged that if any of them should speak unto the Lord in prayer he could not
freely join with them; so neither if he should speak there might be that
spoken wherein they could not freely join with him, which being pre-considered,
be judged it most convenient to proceed to the work without prayer; and
thereupon spoke further to this purpose; That since they professed they had in
all plainness declared the ground of their coming, he would give them as plain
an Answer, which that he might the better do, he should lay down his Answer
under three heads: 1. As to themselves, and those whom they represented. 2. As
to the Church, meaning those with whom he walked. 3. As to the Letters about
which our Brethren came.


As to the first, They were to know that he could not have discoursed with them
in regard that the Church had dealt with us, and not only declared their
dissatisfaction of our withdrawing from them, but also that he had in the Name
of the Church admonished us of our evil therein, and that they had waited upon
us a great while, to the end we might repent and return; but we persisting in
our sin, and refusing to hear the Church, we were thereby cut off from the
privileges of the Church, and therefore he could not look upon us as Brethren,
but as heathens and publicans, and so to refuse discourse with them upon
account of the Brotherhood, according to that in Matthew 18. Which though they
might look upon as very harsh, and a manifestation of little love, yet it being
the Rule of Christ in the Gospel, he therefore was not to dispute the reason of
it, but rather to judge, That obedience to the commands of Christ in this, as
well as in other things, is the only rule of love, and therefore did declare,
That the Church having so proceeded against us, he could not entertain any
debate with them about those Letters. Which brought in the third Head, to which
he spoke to this effect; That the Letters about which they came were directed
to the Church, (meaning those with whom he walked) and if he had written any
thing therein contrary to sound dectrine, or otherwise, he must appeal unto the
Church, as Paul did from Agrippa to Caesar; and if the Church thought meet upon
perusal to call him to an account for any thing therein, he should be ready to
answer it before them; but he could not give way to the debating of them by our
Brethren for the reasons aforementioned, besides he could not in this case
bring himself under the judgment of his adversaries, (or Words to that
purpose) and thereby also give away the privileges of the Church into the
hands of such whom according to the Rule of the Gospel be must look upon as
Heathens and Publicans; but if they or any other would come in their own

k Mr. Sympson did not mean by coming in our own Name, to receive us as
Brethren, but as Heathens and Publicans.

Name, he should be ready to discourse with them; yet herein it was to be
weighed, whether the Church would give away so much of their privilege, as
that any Letters directed to them should be questioned by any person, without
their consent at least. After this our Brother Carry (one of the six) said, It
was somewhat strange to him that he could so considently assert an untruth, (to
wit) That we should lie under the Admonition of the Church, when there was
never any Admonition from those Brethren and Sisters from whom we were
withdrawn, much less from the Church: Which the said Brother further made out
thus; That himself with some other Brethren were appointed in the Name of the
Whole to go to the other part of the Congregation from whom We were withdrawn,
who went to Allhallows, and met with a considerable number of those Brethren in
the Vestrey, to know of them, Whether, those Words spoken by Mr. Sympson that
day our Paper was debated, (to wit, That the Holy Spirit had set a mark upon us
for such as had made division) were the sense of the whole with them? To which
they answered, It was not theirs; and Mr. Sympson also said, They were his own
words. After this our Brother Carry was silent, and then our Brothers, Brethren
of the other part of the Congregation.
Marsh, Shrimpton, and Powell, being present as aforsaid, said, They never
remembered any such Admonition. Mr. Sympson said, It was so; which he
endeavored to make out thus: That the Brethren who were entrusted with the
Government of the Church, did agree that we should be admonished, as having
sinned in leaving the Congregation, and turning out backs upon the Ordinances
of Christ, and that they had committed it to him to declare the same, which he
did at that time when brought in our paper containing the grounds of our
withdrawing, through at that time we were not admitted to read them;and the
Church not disowning of it, he looked upon it as an admonition of the Church.
After this other of our Brethren spoke in few Words to this purpose; That they
were come as brethren, and they hoped in much love and singleness of heart to
discourse with him, and to have laid down wherein we judged he had missed of
the Will of God, and declined the Cause of our Lord Christ, comparing the
present frame of heart he is in, with what it was when he lay a prisoner in
Windsor Castle, when they could not but look upon him as having an excellent
spirit for Christ; but since he did refuse, they would turn unto the Lord (who
would hear) and mourn for him:

And so those Brethren departed, returning the said account unto us. Being thus
unkindly, yea, may We not say unchristianly entertained by Mr. Sympson, We
still continued waiting upon the Lord in our estate of vvithdrawing, our
spirits being grieved by this carriage of his; And after some time seeking the
Lord, and enquiring into his mind and Will, We came to this conclusion as a
present duty lying before us, That in regard We did find no repentance in the
Soldiers, but rather hardness of heart, as also Mr. Sympson hardened in his
evil, in excusing and abetting of them, which encouraged others to do the
like; and the rest who were some what sensible of the evil amongst them,
much darkened in their understandings by reason thereof, We should unanimously
go unto them, and lay before the Soldiers their own evil, and the evil of the
rest as abetting of them in their degree, and to admonish them in the Name of
our Lord Jesus Christ, with as much brotherly love as the Lord should help us.
And that We might have the greater awe of the Lord upon our souls, and be more
orderly in this Work, we did agree to send unto the Brethren hereafter
mentioned, to entreat them in brotherly love, and for the glory of God, to
accompany us as Witnesses therein; which was accordingly done, and persons
chosen from amongst us to speak unto them. The Names of the brethren sent unto,
are these: Mr. Cann, Mr. Clark, Col. Danvers, Mr. Bland, Mr. Barbone; Mr.
Waters, Mr. Squibb, Mr. Luxford, Mr. Barret, Mr. Ireten,


Having given notice to the other part of the Congregation the Week before our
coming. That we intended upon the next first day after to come and offer
something to them. All these brethren (except Mr. Barbone, who was not well)
being members of other Congregations and Societies, came according to our
request, and accompanied us to Lodon house upon the said first day of the Week
in the Afternoon; where being come; the said brethren were not willingly
admitted; but after our coming in with them, one of our brethren stood up to
acquaint them with the occasion of our coming at this time; but Mr. Sympson and
two or three more speaking together very confusedly cried out, No, no, we
should not speak except those Brethren that came along with us would depart.
To which answer was made, That we desired their company to testify to the
Truth of what we had to say. And then the brother which spoke first would
have gone on; but several of them cried out together very confusedly, as
before; to which we replied, That having sought the Lord therein before our
coming, we could not give way thereunto; but since they did refuse to hear, we
would depart. And in a short time after we sent them the substance in
VVriting of what was then intended to be spoken. A Copy whereof is as follows.

Dear Brethren and Sisters in our Lord Jesus Christ,
SInce your unkindness toward us the last

l We mean that time wherein we intended to deliver this Admonicion by word of
mouth, and had testified thereunto according to the Rule of the Gospel, Math.
18 16, 17.

time we were with you; and after some seeking unto the Lord what might be
our duty yet further; this is gathered to be his mind and will, That the
substance of what was then upon our hearts to have delivered by word of mouth,
should be done in vvriting as well for your sakes, as in discharge of our own
duty according to the Rule of the Gospel; and therefore we entreat that you
will suffer us hereby to plead a little with you for truths sake; and we hope
it is unfeignedly upon our hearts to lay your great sin before you from some
sense of the great dishonor brought unto the Name of the Lord by you; and let
these lines be patiently read through, before you judge you poor unvvorthy
brethren and sisters; for we can truly say that we disire to mourn and groan in
secret for you, as well as for our own weaknesses; and this is some part of
our joy, That in simplicity and godly sincerity many of us have been by the
space of two years and upwards endeavoring to get your feet (as well as our
own) out of the Snare of the apostasy of this day, having compassion of you, as
of our own souls; for we are in some measure persuaded, that some eminent hand
of the Lord will be manifested in due time to distinguish, between those that
serve him faithfully, and those that serve him not. In the first place
therefore we pray you to consider the six great and scandalous sins laid to the
char^g of the brethren amongst you wearing the Sword, which for brevity sake we
shall here only mention, referring you to our paper already given in for a
more particular knowledge thereof, wherein We desire the Scriptures in the
margent may be diligently perused, and some remembrance had of what the Lord
did enable us to speak from them when our Paper was debated in the Church,
although it is very well known so much liberty was hardly obtained.

First, Treason against Christ as King and Prophet of his people, and King of
Nations also; for the latter part of the late War did run in that Channel.
Likewise against the faithful and vvell-affected in this Nation, whose
Liberties and they are made bondslaves to their brethren, though some blood
was spilt, and treasure spent to obtain it our of the hands of the late Tyrant.

Secondly, Convenant-breaking, and false swearing, having engaged before the
Lord and his People to perform the good promised on the behalf of Christ, his
People, and the Nation, which are now broken in the face of the Sun.

Thirdly, Oppression by The man in Powerbid Mr. Jessey and others call him
Iugler if tithes were not taken away by the third of Septem. 1654.
Tithes, Taxes, etc. upon the bodies and consciences of the Lords People, and
the well-affected the Nation at this day.

Fourthly, Persecution of Saints, many of the Lords people having been, and
some are still imprisoned for their testimony on the behalf of the Lord, his
Cause, and the Nations liberty; and therein the Soldiers are altogether
active, there being no rule, not so much as according to the Law of the Land,
to justify their practice by Civil Officers.

Fifthly, Maintaining Antichristian Laws, Statutes and Customs, contrary to
former Engagements and Declarations; by which the Saints of old have suffered,
and some do now suffer at this very day.

Sixthly, Hereby the hearts of the righteous are greatly grieved: for that
brethren (at least professing themselves so to be) should be active in abetting
and supporting so great vvikedness,

That these sins were plainly proved against our brethren wearing the Svvord
now amongst you, is very manifest, not only in general, but also in a great
measure particularly, and therefore shall leave it unto the Lord who judges
righteously. Yet we do hereby humbly admonish them of their evil, as being
very great and scandalous. After this there is laid down several Queries how
we were in duty bound to withdraw from them, and by the same Rule to admonish
and withdraw from your selves, as being partakers with them, having made your
selves

m Guilty; for they are hereby encouraged to keep their places, whereby the Man
in Power is encouraged to go on in his apostasy, and to judge himself (in
pretense at least) to be in a good condition; for when he has been told, That
he had not the love of good people as formerly; and that many were grieved at
his present actions; he replied, They were but a few inconsiderable people who
were dissatisfied, for the greatest part of honest men in the Army and Churches
were for him, and approved of what he had done; which approhensions are
begotten by members of Churches, and other professors holding places under him;
for whilst they do so, their tongues are tied, that they dare not openly speak
their minds, though they really apprehend, yea, and will to some confess, That
the present state of things are out of course, and are not so honest as in the
day of their straits they declared they should be. Wherefore does is not
concern the Churches to take heed how they encourage those (by continuing them
among them) who abet and uphold the present apostasy, lest they become guilty
thereof themselves, and incur the Lords displeasure for so doing.

guilty of their iniquity by your vote of communion with them: And this we do
in obedience to our Lord Jesus Christ, who has commanded us to withdraw from
every brother that walks disorderly, though herein we would distinguish between
such of our Brethren and Sisters as do plead for, encourage, and support them
in their evil; and others who for want of a true knowledge and understanding
thereof, together with the overawing of some amongst you (as we fear) are
notwithstanding in their degree also become partakers with them in their evil.

And here desire so far to digress as to answer one objection, namely, That our
brethren the Soldiers desired leave to go off from us before we procceded so
far as now we have, but we would not.

To which we answer, That it is to be considered their sins are very
scandalous, and if so, such a practice would be contrary to the Rule directing
in such cases, That if a brother, or brethren offend, to admonish them
particularly, then more publicly, as he or they are found to persevere in
their sin, that if the Lord will, they may see their evil and repent, and not
suffer them to go off without knowledge of their evil, for if they should, it
may prove to the hardening of their hearts, and consequently to the ruin of
their souls. Indeed, to have let them gone off, would have been much more easy
to us, and pleasing to the flesh; for we did in some measure foresee how hard
it would be in this rough path to follow the Lord fully, yet we take comfort in
this, That our Cause is of God, and our hearts we trust (in the main) upright
therein.

Now we shall proceed to give you a short account how the Lord has led us
since our said withdrawing, wherein it will be manifest (if the Lord give you a
spirit of discerning) that we have to this day been patiently waiting upon the
Lord and you, to the end that if it had pleased our heavenly Father, it might
have put you upon inquiry how far you are become guilty of the great iniquity
of this day, which has brought so great reproach unto the Name of the Lord,
even through the World; but instead of inquiring and smiting upon the thigh,
saying, What have I done? your practice does demonstrate that you say, You have
well done. Further, We desire you to remember, That the same Evening after the
debate our Paper, the whole Church being there, We desired their result, to
wit, Whether our brethren the Soldiers by what was offered, were not in a
great measure guilty of she evil laid to their charge? Whereupon our Brother
Sympson spoke to this purpose, That the holy spirit had set a mark upon us for
such as had made division; and therefore declared, that we were not persons fit
to have a vote amongst them; neither should there by any vote had there unless
we would depart. Which words, though we cannot say he spoke in the Name of the
Church, yet we are sure the major part were

n It is the great fault of Church Members and other professors in this day,
and much discovers their darkness, that they approve their hearts no more to
God, but are so much led (whether right or wrong) as their Pastor or some
eminent member or person among them, steers their course; which low, carnal
frame of spirit, (the more the spirit of the Lord is poured forth) will not
only stink in the Nostrils of his faithful people, but be condemned and dye;
for the true spirit does so redeem those who have it, from the fear and favor
of man to God, as they will follow no man nor things (let their pretense be
never so high and glorious) further then they follow, and are for Christ,
according to the Scriptures. 1 Cor. 1^.1.

so silent, that notwithstanding he spoke so unadvisedly, there was little
spoken against it: so that for peace sake it was judge meet to depart at that
time without the result of the Congregation.

Next after this several Brethren in the Name of the whole (withdrawn from you)
were sent to London-house to desire, That since you would not admit us to have
a vote with you, we might by your selves have the sense of Paper, (to wit, that
which was first given in) but you wholly refused to give us a hearing of what
we had to say. Since which several Brethren in the Name of the Whole, were sent
to Allhallows upon a first day in the Afternoon, after breaking of bread, to
know your sense Whether those Words spoken by our Brother Sympson, (to wit,
That we were marked by the holy spirit for such as had made a rent in the
Church, and that he admonished us of our evil therein, in their namo. Likewise
whether by their vote of communion with the Soldiers, this were not to be
taken into the vote, to wit, notwithstanding the evil laid to their charge, to
the former they said, They did not remember any admention; but to the latter
your Brother Sympson said, That we might know their mind by their practice; to
which they were generally silent, none contradicting what our Brother Sympson
had spoken; whereupon those brethren took their leave, and departed out of the
Vestrey; for the Message was only delivered to the brethren, being fifty or
sixty in number, or thereabouts, it not being thought meet so speak in public;
first, because many strangers were present. Secondly, We did desire to order it
as might make most for peace.

After this, upon further inquiry what our duty was yet to do, notwithstanding
so much means used to provoke you to jeanlousie, and no fruit of it but
hardness of heart, and a further closing in with the present evil by your
continued practice. There were several Letters of our brother Sympsons
presented to us, Dated from Windsor Castle. when he was a prisoner there, it
being judged that the Lord was eminently present with him, as by the said
Letters will appear; Which Letters being read among us, the Lord was pleased so
generally to melt out hearts in the sense of that spirit of truth We judged
then to be breathing in him; but his present frame of heart compared with what
it was then, seeming to us as contrary as light to darkness: It was thereupon
concluded as a duty incumbent upon us to appoint several brethren in the Name
of the Whole, to take those Letters, and in love and meekness to read them to
our said brother, to the end, that if the Lord so please he might thereby
consider from whence he is fallen, and do his first works, hoping also that he
might thereby be brought to consider whether he had not missed of the Will of
God in endeavoring not only to excuse, but (as We judge) to countenance our
brethren the Soldiers in their evil Way. But oh! that which We desire to
mention with grief and sorrow of heart, instead of receiving us in love, as We
came unto him, and giving us leave to open our hearts before him, he absolutely
refused not only to pray with those brethren sent by us, but also to entertain
them in our Name as brethren, or to admit any conference with them upon that
account, in regard that we were by him admonished in the Name of the Church of
our evil in making a rent and division, as he said. And since that (he said)
they had waited upon us to see if we would return and repent; but we not
returing, they looked upon us as Heathens and Publicant, and that he did so
look upon us also. And for the letters they were directed to the Church,
(meaning your selves without us) and that if they had any thing to question him
about'them, he would make answer unto them. Unto which this Answer in general
was made, That We humbly thought he spoke an untruth, in that We could not
remember there was ever any such Admonition given us as yet, much less had We
any account that We were esteemed no other then Heathens and Publicans. After
the Brethren (sent by us to him) departed, being much grieved that our love
should be so returned upon us, (but so it was, the Lord lay it not to his
charge if it be his Will) upon further seeking to the Lord what was our next
Work, it was thought meet, That as We had been a long time waiting upon you by
patience and much long-suffering, as We judge, (our Weakness excepted) having
laid the sin of our Brethren before you by our selves, and of your own evil in
abetting them; (some more, and some less) but instead of returning from your
evil, you have fallen in with it more directly in

o It seems they were not contented with their first vote in declaring
communion with the Soldiers notwithstanding their evil, though at our first
coming off, they disowned that by saying, That they did only declare a
continuance of communion with them as Soldiers, without respect to the evil
laid no their charge. But by revoteing communion with them, they have plainly
declared the evil laid to their charge to be no evil; and so have directly
justified them therein. And that their evil who approve of, and uphold the
present Apostasy, may more plainly appear, see the following Scriptures, Numb.
27.3. to 7. The Daughter of Zelophead to clear their title to a portion of
Land they claimed in right of their deceased father in the Land of Canaan,
pleaded, That he dyed in the wilderness in his own sin, and was not in the
company of Korah (and those with him) who gathered themselves together against
the Lord; implying, that if he had been among them, and standing on their side
when they opposed Moses, and Aaron, etc. who were going to possess the Land of
Canaan, (a type of the work of our day) was greater then any other of his sins,
and that which, would have cut him and them off from such a portion of Land as
was allotted to those who followed the Lord to his foot in the work of that
day: And is not the Soldiers Sin the same?

revoting communion with them; so that your practice is no less to us then
adding sin to sin: And particularly our brother Kelzey, who confessed more, as
having a hand in the Government at its first rise, then We could prove, though
at first he denied it: Likewise, That he had summoned some persons to show
cause why they would not pay tithes, from whence did follow further trouble to
those persons by his Deputy so far as they were taken into custody, til they
had made their composition. We ought now according to Mal: 18: 16:
Rule, to take with us several brethren full of Grace and godliness, faithful
to the Lord and his Cause in this day, and spotless in their lives and
conversations, who might go along with us as Witnesses in our further
Testimony against so great evil, that out of the mouth of two or three
Witnesses every word may be established; and accordingly We did present our
selves with the said brethren, intending to have laid the evil before you, and
thereof in brotherly love to have admonished you, as We now do by these lines
in VVriting, because you would not vouchsafe us to do it otherwise. Likewise to
this further end, That none of our brethren and sisters may plead ignorance of
the end of our coming at that time, having ground to fear that many are, whose
conditions We desire to tender as our own souls, were We in their estate. But
it may be objected, That we might have had liberty to have spoken what was upon
our hearts when we were last with you, had those friends, which came with us
departed according to your desire. To which We answer, That our coming there at
that time was in obedience to a command of our Lord Jesus Christ, to wit, That
when a Brother or Brethren will not hear, so as to return from his, or their
evil, being privately admonished, We are then to take other Brethren with us as
VVitnesses to what we should say, so that had we given way to such a motion,
we must have made void that Ordinance of Christ; moreover we our selves had
been with you several times by our selves, as is already mentioned, besides the
sins laid before you are public, and not private sins, and therefore needed
not so much secrecy. Thus desiring you will receive this Admonition in love,
being done (we hope) for Christ's sake, and in tender regard to your souls: We
subscribe our selves

Your poor unworthy brethren and Sisters, who do apprehend that as truth is
with us, so the power of the Church rests in us. John Proud, Tho. Carry, Caleb
Ingold, James Chadwick,
Signed in the Name and by the appointment of the whole, none contradicting
Dated the fourth of the 11. Month, 1656.
AFter the delivery of the said Admonition in writing, we continued waiting
upon the Lord to see what good would be wrought up on their hearts thereby, but
instead thereof in some short time after they send unto the several Churches in
the City without our knowledge or consent (as they did when we sent in our
first Paper) to the end they might send chosen men from amongst them to hear
and determine the matter in difference between us, which we did a little wonder
at, hoping rather, the sense of their evil laid before them might have provoked
them to a godly jealousy; but so it was, that the Pastors and Elders, with
chief men amongst the Brethren in the Churches, were sent according to their
request the 26 of the 11th. Month, 1656. But before we give an account of what
passed that day, we shall crave leave to hint thus much, That after our
knowledge of their intention to send to the Churches as aforesaid, and before
the day of their coming abovesaid, not knowing under what trial we might come
thereby, we set our selves to seek the Lord by fasting and prayer, to know what
might be our duty therein; and as the result of our waiting upon him came to
this conclusion, That it would be most for the glory of God to choose out
several brethren from amongst us to give in our Reasons unto the Pastors and
Elders of the Churches, (when they were met with the other part of the
Congregation) why we could not admit they should hear the matter in difference
between us. And accordingly five Reasons were draw up, and committed to fix
brethren to deliver in writing, or by word of mouth, as they should see cause.
The Reasons should be here inserted, but because they will be most proper for
perusal when given in to the Pastors and Elders at their meeting, we shall
refer the Reader thereunto, page 38. and so proceed to give an account of that
days meeting. When the Pastors and Elders, etc. of the Churches were met, the
six brethren chosen by us, according to appointment were there present, and
when they came first into London-House, (the place of their meeting) they found
Mr. Sympson in prayer, and after he had ended prayer, he proceeded to give a
Narrative of what had passed between us and them to that day; but with how much
partiallity in many things, and in some things direct

p Mr. Sympson asserted these three things in his Narrative; first, That he
admonished us in the Name of the Congregation. Secondly, That we had nothing
against our Brethren the soldiers but merely their places in the Army.
Thirdly, That we went from House to House to get away numbers from them. How
far the two first are untrue, we think the Reader by what has been already
laid down, may be able to judge. For the third we can clearly acquit our
selves, having been so far from any such practice, that those of us whose wives
are members of the Congregation, have not been provoked by us, but have wholly
left them to be guided by the Lord therein.

untruths the brethren then present by our appointment can testify. After he
had ended his Narrative, Mr. Nigh (chief speaker of the Pastors and Elders,
etc.) stood up, and spoke to this purpose to Mr. Sympson, That he had given in
a large Narrative of the matter in difference, which containing many things,
would require some time to be searching, into; but before any entrance be made
thereupon, he desired to know whether any of the other part gone off from them,
were there; if they were, he did desire to hear something from them in this
case, and did hope that the Pastors and Elders there present would be very
careful how they did It being as he said, so great a case of, Conscience; And
which indeed is so to us.
intermiddle therewith, for if what he had heard herein were true, it was a
mavelous good separation, and upon good grounds, or to this effect. After
this a Brother of ours stood up, and spoke to this purpose; That after solemn
waiting upon the Lord, several Brethren in the Name of the Whole withdrawn from
that part of the Congregation, were there present, being chosen to present unto
them in love and humility, the Reasons why We could not admit of their hearing
the matter in difference between us; but before that, they desired the liberty
of three Questions if it might be granted; and then the Brother which spoke
kept silence to hear their Answer. Upon which Mr. Nigh stood up again, and said,
It was but reasonable that we should have our liberty. Hereupon the Brother
which began, stood up, and proceeded with the following questions, two to the
Brethren and Sisters from whom We were withdrawn, and one to the Pastors and
Elders, etc.

Quest. 1. Whether they did look upon us as part of the Congregation. To which
Mr. Sympson made answer, That sure we were; for he knew not when we were dealt
with, to the best of his remembrance.

Q. 2. We humbly propose to the Pastors. Elders, and Brethren of the Churches
now present, Whether they were all of them sent and chosen by their respective
Congregations.

Here there was a great silence, but afterward several of them spoke, some
saying, That they were chosen by their respective Congregations; others, That
they were sent unto as particular persons; Whereby it was plain there was a
disorder in their choice, which was in love acknowledged by them.

Q. 3. Whether the Pastors, Elders and Brethren of the respective Congregations
then present, were invited and sent unto in the name of the whole Church?

Here several of them were at a stand, not knowning well what to say; but they
generally gave in at the last, That they were sent unto in the Name of the
Church; Which was not so, for that themselves in answer to our first question
acknowledge us to be a part, and what was done in sending for them, was without
our knowledge or consent.

After this one of our Brethren stood up, and desired liberty to give their
Reasons in our Name, Why they could not condescend to the hearing the matter in
difference by the Pastors, Elders, and Brethren of several Congregations then
present; Which are as follows.

1. We conceive it to be contrary to the practice of the Churches of Christ in
the New Testament, that brethren of other Churches (though chosen by consent of
their respective Congregations, should hear a Church-controversie without the
consent of both parties amongst whom the difference is; see Act. 15.1, 2, 3.
the whole Church at Antioch sent to Jerusalem about Circumcision, as well those
that were against it, as those that were for it. Upon this Mr. Nigh stood up,
and did acknowledge that there was a plain disorder and miscarriage in their
choice every way; but desired to know whether notwithstanding such
miscarriages, the Brethren in our Name had power to enter: upon the debate. To
which one of the brethren spoke to this purpose, 'That they had several Reasons
more to urge, and then they should make further answer. And liberty being
granted, the brother who began proceeded to the next reason, viz.

2. That it seems contrary to Morality, much more of Christianity, for members
of other Churches to enter into the debate of a Church-difference, when that
part of the Congregation with whom the difference was, did not choose any of
them; neither had they knowledge of the matter till the other part resolved
upon it, and had sent their messengers to invite them thereunto. To this Mr.
Nigh stood up and said, That it was indeed contrary to the principles of
Morality, and then was silent, whereupon the brother proceeded to the third
Reason.

3. That We should betray the cause our Lord Jesus Christ, to give it up unto
the Judgment of the Pastors, Elders, and Brethren then present; First, In
regard they came not with our consent. Secondly, For that against some of whom
We might have just grounds of exceptions if it were meet to speak of it at this
time. 4. It seems to us preposterous to enter upon such a Work till We had the
result of the whole Congregation about the matter in question, or of that part
at least from whom We are withdrawn, which We have not had, though We often
entreated, and sent to them about it. 5. The foregoing Reasons being true, we
humbly conceive that if a debate of the matter in difference should at this
time be admitted, we should walk out of Gods way, and so not obtain the
promised Isa. 64.5.
blessing in matters of that nature.
These Reasons were no sooner given in, but the Pastors, Elders, and Brethren
of the several Churches there met together, rose up suddenly, to go away;
which Mr. Sympson observing, he asked them before they were gone, Whether they
would give them no advice in the present business: To which Mr. Nigh made
answer, That they were not in a capacity, as things stood, to give any advice.
To which Mr. Sympson said, What? no advice! VVhereupon Mr. Nigh replied, That
the least they could do was to make a tender unto us whether we would join with
them in sending to the Churches; and this was all the advice they could give;
and so they departed; and presently after those brethren sent by us came away
also; but as they were going, one of the other part that sat in the
speaking-place, asked the brethren sent by us, whether they would embrace the
advice given? To which answer was made, That they were no more then six
brethren entrusted by us to give in our dislike of what they had done, but were
not empowered to meddle with any thing else; but if they had any thing to offer,
they knew our time and place of meeting, when, and where the whole being
present, they might if they pleased tender any thing they thought meet, and so
those brethren came away. But the same day in the Afternoon being our time of
meeting to edefie, and build up one another in our most holy faith, two
brethren came to us from them with the same Message, which was received in
love, and this only given in answer, That we should consider of it, and return
an answer so soon as conveniently we could. And accordingly either the same
day, on the next first day following we concluded upon a day to spread their
Message before the Lord, which when done, we sent them a return within a
fortnight after by messengers of our own; the answer to their message should be
here inserted; but being contained in our next Paper, we shall here omit it.
Now the Reason why our Answer was given in writing was, for that those our
brethren who declared the same verbally, brought return unto us, That they
desired it should be so, pretending that they did not understand it, or rather
(as we may say) it not suting with their desire, they would not understand it;
but however upon this report unto us by those brethren who were sent in our
Name, some from amongst us were appointed to draw it up in VVriting, and
present it to the whole for their approbation, which was accordingly done; but
the same day it should have been brought in to us, we received another message
from the other part of the Congregation, which should be here inserted; but it
being also contained in our next Paper, with our Answer thereunto, we shall
purposely omit it, and refer the READER to the same.

Our Answer about sending to the Churches in the the City, to hear the matter
in difference between us; Together with another Message from the other part of
the Congregation, wherein they desire us to join with them in keeping a day of
fasting and prayer, with our Answer thereunto.
Dear Brethren and Sisters in our Lord Jesus Christ,
UNderstanding by the brethren who were sent in our Name unto you, to give a
return unto your last Message, that our Answer was very ill resented; and
because it was not in full compliance with and according to your expectation,
they were not suffered to speak out what was upon their hearts, without much
interruption by some amongst you, as it has been customary for the most part
since our withdrawing from you, which We cannot but look upon as arbitrary
amongst men, much more unsavory among Saints, though you seldom received such
unkindness from us, as we can remember; and not only so, but We our selves are
looked upon as such who act in hypocrisy which We hope the Lord has; and will
preseve us from, for such shall be sure to find the weight of his indignation
at this day, Isaiah 33.14.

The consideration whereof, together with that invitation We received from some
amongst you, not opposed by any, has engaged us to send the same in Writing,
that so there might be no mistakes or still interpretations of what was then
spoken, or advantage taken through our weakness to blemish so blessed a Cause;
and we trust, that upon looking back into our own hearts, there is found a root
of uprightness in the management thereof, and that it is not wilfully in our
hearts to speak or act hypocritically, whatever some amongst you do says or
apprehend. But before we come to the Answer it self, being the chief drift and
scope of these lines, we humbly apprehend it necessary to lay before you the
several Reasons last given in, when without our consent desired, you were
pleased in the Name of the Church to send for several brethren to determine and
udge of the matter in difference between us.

The Reasons as they were laid down in this Paper, being already inserted in
the Viz page 38. of this Book.
foregoing Leaf, we do here purposely omit them, as being a needless
repetition.

These Reasons you very well know the Lord did make so convincing to those
brethren who came at your request, that upon knowledge thereof they absolutely
refused to meddle therein til such time as you had advised with us, or the
least asked our consent: Now We hoped, that before you had made any further
progress, you would have laid before the Lord those

r The Readen may remember that in page 22. several Brethren of other Churches
were sent for by them to hear the matter in difference, which they resused till
our first Paper given in, was debated in the Church; likewise the other time
mentioned in this Paper, which are the two disappointments spoken of.

two disappointments you had received, and in a due fence thereof, enquired
into his mind and will; but instead thereof at the same time, without so much
as the leastlying low before his face the same, did forth with send your
Messengers unto us, to know whether we would join with you in sending to the
several Churches for hearing of the matter in difference, Who were some what
pressing upon us to have a present return one way or other which We durst not
adventure upon for two Reasons; First, in respect of our own weakness and
insufficiency, being poor foolish creatures. Secondly, In respect of the weight
of such a Work, not being to be done without solemn seeking to the Lord, that
being the Way he has appointed to lead, advise, and instruct his people about
any business they are dark in; and accordingly We did send Answer by your
Messengers to that effect. The next first day being a full meeting of the
Congregation withdrawn from you, We did spread your desire before the Lord, and
sought of him a right Way, how far We might comply with you therein; and in the
close of the day after much discourse course about it, judging likewise that We
had the Mind and Will of God, came to this result, That before We could give a
direct answer to you desire, that you would be pleased to give us your positive
judgment, Whether those Brethren of the Army were guilty of those sins laid to
their charge by us, or no; which We have often desired, entreated, and sent to
you about, but could not obtain it to this day, as is expressed in our fourth
Reason before mentioned, to which We then received this return, That you were
not in a capacity to answer us therein, because you were divided into three
parts, some judging they were under those sins; others, that they were not; and
a third party could not tell whether they were, or not.

This Answer thus returned, with some other circumstances not considerable
here, to be inserted, We did spread it before the Lord, together with your
former desire, and in the end came to this conclusion, That We were wholly
dis-satisfied with your Answer to our last request, apprehending it somewhat
strange that you should be unanimous in revoting communion with them after so
plain proof of their sin laid to their charge, especially some of them, and yet
not be united in your judgments whether they were under those sins or not: And
though We might hereupon wave any return to your desire, till We had your plain
answer thereunto, yet least it should be judged that We were unwilling, or
fearful the Cause of Christ We are engaged in, should have the hearing amongst
other brethren, We did thereupon for the Name and Honor of God, and clearing
up our integrity herein, and for the further manifestation of truth, with a due
saving to those Those two Admonitions are contained in our first and second
paper delivered in unto them
two Admonitions, already given, conclude, That We were, and are very willing,
and shall rejoice therein for Truths sake, to comply with your desire with this
limitation, That We might according to our Christian liberty in this
extraordinary case, choose on our part faithful Brethren, many of which had
hazarded their lives for the Name and Cause of our Lord Jesus Christ, so openly
betrayed at this day, against whom We trust there shall be no just grounds of
exceptions as to their lives and conversations; and you may proceed to send
unto the Churches on your part, as you shall think meet: Now least the
objection you made when the Brethren were last with you by our appointment, to
wit, That by this Answer we do wave that our sleves which we have pressed upon
you, about sending to the neighboring Congregations, when we were not willing
to join therein; Which we do plainly deny; for we never moved it unto you, much
less pressed it upon you; but your proceeding herein has been your own
voluntary act without us, though indeed we excepted against your practice as it
was by yourselves without our consent, therewith also apprehending your present
estate to be no less then the plain fruit of open backsliding from the Cause of
our Lord Jesus Christ, though we desire to mention it with fear and trembling
and due respect unto some amongst you, as not so guilty herein as others are;
likewise we have ground to fear, that most of the Churches of Christ in this
City are more or less tainted with the sore Apostasy of this day; not that we
delight in such reflections, but desire to speak it with humility, grief, and
sorrow of heart, and should be glad there were no just ground for such a
jealousy. This pre-considered, it seems more obliging unto you to follow that
practice, then unto us at this time, and may excuse the formality of the
practice on our pare, and the rather, when you proceeded in such a Work not
only without the consent, but without so much as a tender thereof unto your
brethren and sisters, jointly concerned therein, until this last time, which
was not so much of your selves, as seemingly necessitated thereunto by those
Brethren of other Churches, who refused to advise you in, or hear any thing of
the matter in difference till at least you had asked our consent and
approbation thereof; and therein you may please to remember the stress of
their, refusal did lie to hear ought you had to say; and if so, we humbly
apprehend it will take off that scandal of hypocrisy and changedness of mind,
laid to our charge by some amongst you. Thus having given you a brief account
of our last Message, together with what has passed between us and you since
our last Paper was given in, having therein unfeignedly, and in all plainness
opened our hearts unto you, we shall not add more, only desiring, That in case
you do not think meet to receive our tender herein, but proceed as formerly yon
have done that then you will favor us so far (or rather the Truth) as to let
this Paper be read unto the Brethren you shall send for before any proceeding
be, and afterward the other two in their order, as your intention was the last
time the Messengers of other Churches were with you.

Intending here to conclude, not having ought considerable to add, some of our
Brethren inform us of a Message received from you the last sixth day was a
seven night, to be communicated to us in words to this purpose, That you did
think meet to offer unto us, that there might be a day of solemn fasting and
prayer unto the Lord, wherein you desire our conjunction, the chief end of the
duty being upon these three accounts; First, That both you and we might be
deeply humbled before the Lord, and be made sensible of all our evils and
miscaerriages, especially as they do relate to the present difference between
you and us. Secondly, To enquire of the Lord a right way, what you and we ought
to do for the healing of it. Thirdly, That if there were any other thing we:
bought necessary to be put in, we had our freedom to add thereto. The
consideration whereof has put us upon a further enlargement in writing by way
of answer, and to which we desire to give this humble Reply, That as to the
Work of humiliation it self, and a day to be appointed in order thereunto, we
do fully approve of, as being not only a Gospel Ordinance, but also incumbent
on the Lords People in this day of sore affliction, and time of Jacobs Trouble,
not only as it may relate to our miscarriages and evils committed since our
first withdrawing, wherein we desire to acknowledge before the Lord and you,
that herein we have ground sufficient to lie low before him, and cover our
Faces with shame in the sense thereof, so far as it may not eclipse the riches
of Grace in our Lord Jesus Christ, but also in respect of the crying evils,
through the backsliding of professors under so great light, which we fear does
fore-run some sore judgment upon this Nation in general, and upon professors
in particular; but how to join with you as the case now stands between us, we
can see no Scripture-bottom, or rational ground for the same, it being
pre-supposed, first; That you have amongst you those that are guilty of gross
and scandalous sins, upon which account. We are withdrawn from you: Secondly,
that you have not only voted communion with such persons, notwithstanding
their sins, but by a second Vote, and continued practice, justify them in
their evil; and so many of you are become greatly partakers with them of their
evil deeds, and the rest also, though less guilty. Thirdly, That you have so
far owned and approved of them, as to forget their evil, and charge us your
poor brethren and sisters with making a rent and division for doing our duty,
when they indeed are the persons from whom the offense first came, and some
chief among you as greatly guilty as they, by pleading for, and excusing of
them, and so properly to be charged with making a rent and division in the
Church. Fourthly, You have endeavored to carry it on against us, so as to take
upon you the power of the Church without us, and thereby would have proceeded
to admonish us son making air out (as you say) in the Church, had not the Lord
wonderfully frustrated you in all your endeavors that Way, though We should
have rejoiced therein, being comfortably satisfied that it would have been for
his Namesake, because We are contending for truth against the great iniquity
among you, and so the persons offending, with their Abettors, (though the
greater number) to be admonished, and withdrawn from by the lesser, which if
true, then the power of the Church resides in the Lesser number; and this in
effect is no more then according to the Note.
practice of all the Congregational Churches in their withdrawing from the
Parochial Churches.

Dear Brethren and Sisters, these things are plain and true, and therefore bear
with us, for We have yet longings of heart after you, and desire to mourn and
grieve for you, that if it were the Will of our heavenly Father you might be
recovered out of the Snare, and do trust many of you will; but in case We
should join with you before the least acknowledgement of your evil, should not
we return to you before you return unto the Lord? and so come under the reproof
of that. Scripture, Jer. 15.17. and that also in 2 Cor. 6 17, 18. Yea, Would it
not rather be a grieving of the Spirit, and making light of so precious an
Ordinance as Prayer is? Have We not some sad experience hereof already, in that
dya of Prayer kept with you when our first Paper was to be debated? What
contrariety of spirits did then appoar? Were We not in the duty deeply judged
and censured by one of the chief amongst you, when We came to lay the matter in
difference before the Lord? If so little confort then, sure less now; Can two
pray together except they be agreed? We do therefore humbly apprehend before
any such conjuction be, that you will first inquire into the great evil amongst
you, and not to eat with such persons, but in brotherly love to admonish them,
and then to wait and see whether the Lord will humble them in the sense
thereof; if this were done, We know that the consequence on your part would be
to lie low before the Lord for complying with them to this day; and when you
shall minifest repentance by such a Work, then We should have joy and confort
in joining with you, to be further humbled before the Lord, and also to lie at
the Lords and your feet, as to any other thing you should desire of us for his
Name sake; for We hope it is not in our hearts to be lifted up above our
Brethren, but only to be faithful unto the Lord in a day of so great Apostasy.

Now as to the second thing, about seeking to the Lord for a right way what you
and we ought to do for the healing of the breach between us; This seems to turn
the goodness of the Lord upon himself, and to forget his loving kindness, yea,
to deny that We have been in a right Way, after so much seeking unto, and
waiting upon him for direction and counsel from time to time; yea, give us
leave to say, That we humbly judge the Lord has led us in a right path to this
day, and has made darkness light, and crooked things straight before, as well
as since our first withdrawing. Moreover, wholly to question the ground of our
proceedings to this day, would be also of great reproach and dishonor to the
Name and Cause of our Lord Jesus Christ, and pre-declare to any discerning eye,
that We are returned from whence We were withdrawn, upon no solid substantial
grounds.

To the third, namely, That if there were any other thing necessary to be
added, we might have our freedom. This we conceive needs little return, respect
being had in our answer to the two former propositions. Thus desiring a tender
construction (if it may be) of what is here laid down, as to your last Message,
and chiefly to eye the first part, as it relates to the choice of persons for
clearing of the difference between us, We remain.

Dated the first day of the first Month, 1657. Your poor unworthy Brethren and
Sisters mourning for you, yet apprehending, that as truth is with us, so the
Power of the Church rests in us. Signed in the Name and by the appointment of
the whole, none contradicting John Proud, Tho, Carry, Caleb Ingold, John Sealey.


AFter the delivery of this Paper; We continued waiting upon the Lord as
formerly, expecting a return, as to the contents of the first part thereof,
relating to the choice of persons by us and them to hear the matter in
difference, which many of us did the more earnestly desire, not only for the
further manifestation of truth, but also to take off that scandal laid by them
upon us, That we were altogether Judges of our own cause, and would not admit
of the hearing of it by others; but three months time expiring since the
delivery of our said Paper, or thereabouts, and no return given unto us one Way
or other, it seemed to many of us that their silence was a flat denial to our
render to the first part of our said Paper, which put us upon further inquiry
into our duty; and to that end a day was set apart to seek the Lord for advice
and counsl, and the greatest part whereof being spend upon that account, we
then came to enquire of each other what the Lord had set upon our hearts as our
further duty; and after some discourse about it, came to this result, That
having made so many tenders unto those from whom we were withdrawn with so
little effect, we had hopes to obtain our reasonable desire from them, and
therefore judged it our duty to proceed to the work of separation. And
accordingly some Brethren were chosen out from amongst us, to make a draught
thereof as the Lord should direct them, and yet hereby not to exclude any
Message that might come in the mean time from the other part, neither to be too
sudden about it, so that it was about five or six Weeks before the draught of
separation was brought in; but after it was presented and agreed upon, it was
questioned by some whether it should yet be given in for some reasons urged by
them, unto which it was answered by others, That they conceived the Lord would
be much glorified in the delivering of it in as the unanimous consent of the
whole. But some again stood up and said, That they conceived this would most
glorify God at present, (to wit) that we should revive the tender make in our
foregoing Paper, notwithstanding their by their practiso to this day. But this
was opposed again by others, judging that it would be little effectual,
considering how we had been dealt withal from the first day of our
withdrawing, until now; however it was ^udged meet this being our last step
toward those from whom we were withdrawn, to be very diligent and watchful,
least Satan should take advantage upon us at the last, and the Lord thereby be
dishonor; to take the advice of some upright and grave brethren who were
faithful unto the Lord in this day of apostasy, and present our Paper of
Separation unto them for advice and counsel, so far as the Lord should
administer unto them, Which was accordingly concluded bernard upon, and the
Brethren aforementioned, (to wit, Mr. Cann, Coll. Danvers, Mr. Squibb, etc) who
accompanied us as Witnesses when we gave in our Admonition at London-House,
were sent unto, and upon their Meeting the Paper of Separation was delivered
unto them, who received it, and in brotherly love took the matter into
consideration, taking their times and seasons of meeting together, spreading it
several times before the Lord in prayer, as we have been credibly informed;
upon their desire we did also diliver in to them all our Papers, containing the
sum and substance of what had been done by us, as to those from whom we were
vvithdrawn; that so they might have the clearest knowledge of things as we were
able to give them; and after some VVeeks we received this return from them, viz.

That according to our request they had been meeting together, and waiting
several times upon the Lord, that they might be able to give us such advice as
they might judge to be of the Lord; and that as to what we had already done,
they did conceive we had been graciously led by the Lord, and could not but own
and approve of our proceedings hitherto but withal, did apprehend before any
further proceeding should be by us, (wherein they were very unanimous) namely,
That we should yet once more make a further tender unto those from whom we were
withdrawn, about hearing the matter in difference between us, as formerly we
had done, for these following Reasons, viz.

1. To the end that those Brethren and Sisters of whom we write so tenderly in
our Papers, might thereby be brought off from those disorderly persons, or else
be the more without excuse, if after such a tender made (though refused) they
shall yet continue with them. 2. In case such a debate be granted, it is
conceived, that Truth of the one hand, and Iniquity on the other, will be
thereby discovered, and the eyes of many opened, to whom the knowledge thereof
shall come, or else we thereby the more vindicated, as to any further
proceedings, if such a tender should be refused. 3. That those Brethren whose
advice had been desired, will be the more cleared and justified in any further
proceedings, whether a debate be granted, or not. 4. That the Messengers of the
Churches called in by the other part of the Congregation, were so tender, as
not to proceed without the consent of both parties; therefore those brethren
whose advice we have desired, could do no less then make such a proposal unto
us, that if possible, a debate of the matter in difference my be obtained. 5.
That though it is believed what is contained in our Papers be true, yet by such
a debate truth will be made more plain unto those Brethren whose advice we have
desired for their further proceeding, and justification before others. 6. That
this Work being of Concernment unto all the Congregations in the Nation, ought
therefore to be done with as much consideration as may be, in regard the issue
of it (if done in the spirit of the Lord) will be much for his glory, and the
advantage of his despised and reproached Cause and People at this day.
After these Reasons laid before us, a Brother stood up in the Name of the
whole, and gave them a kind acknowledgement of their brotherly love, That there
were any who would own and stand by the truth in such an evil day as this is;
and for what they had offered concerning another tender to be made unto those
from whom we were withdrawn, we should consider of it, with their Reasons
inducing thereto, and according as we should be directed by the Lord, so we
hoped it was in our hearts to preceed, and no otherwise. And so those Brethren
departed, after which a little time was spent together, and a day concluded
upon to seek the Lord by prayer, as to what they had offered unto us; and
accordingly at the time appointed we met, and in the conclusion of the day came
to this result, That it would be much for the glory of God, respect being had
to the foregoing Reasons, to make another tender unto those from whom we were
withdrawn, and that two brethren be forthwith chosen to acquaint them therewith.

The substance of the Message delivered to the other part of the Congregation
at Allhallovvs, the sixteenth day of the fifth Month, 1657, by the two Brethren
appointed thereunto.
That they were sent in the Name, and by the appointment of the Brethren and
Sisters withdrawn from them to present a Message unto them after seeking the
Lord, as being that which they judge to be his mind and will concerning them,
and is to this purpose.

Notwithstanding we had two several times already offered unto them for the
further manifestation of truth, and clearing up our integrity in the matter and
ground of our withdrawing, we did hereby once more make this further tender
unto them, that according to the tenure of our last Paper given in, we might,
according to our Gospel-liberty in this extraordinary case, choose on our part
men fearing God, and working righteousness, and faithful to the Cause of
Christ, in this evil day, and such who have hazarded their lives for the same
whether in Churches, or out, to hear the matter in difference between us, and
they might on their parts take the like liberty if they thought meet, there
being no command, forbidding, or injoyning us to send unto Churches only, in
matters of Church difference, though we conceive it be a very equitable way, to
send unto Churches, did it not appear the generality of Churches are either
silent under, or complying with the Apostasy of this day, and in regard we had
already waited about three, or four months, since our first tender in this
kind without any return, we judged it meet to offer, that we might receive
your answer one way or other, by this day fortnight. And so the two Brethren
entrusted with the delivery of the said message came away, leaving it to their
consideration. About twelve days after, Master Jessey accompanied with Brother
Palmer, and Brother Marsh brought us an answer to the said Message, which is
inserted in our next paper, it being thought meet to be given in writing that
they might the more plainly judge of our Reasons; why we could not condescend
thereunto, and likewise that it might either be a witness for, or against us
for the time come. And is as follows.

A paper Containing our Reasons why we could not condescend, unto the message,
brought by Master Jessey, accompanied with Brother Palmer, and Brother Marsh.
Dear Brethren, and Sisters in our Lord Jesus Christ,
Upon the 28th. of the Last month, we received a return to our last message by
Master Jessey accompanied with brother Palmer, and Brother Marsh, and was in
words to this effect. That himself with Master Knowles, and Master Barebone,
were by you acquainted with a message, received from us, being the same we had
formerly delivered. And in regard the matter in difference, was by you referred
to the members of several Churches, to do therein, as they think meet of whom
they were a part, they did thereupon give notice to the rest of their Brethren;
entrusted with this business, who meeting together came to this result, to
which they had also received your consent, to wit, That they thought it but
reasonable; we should have the liberty of our choice, provided those we sent
unto be Church Members, chosen by the consent of their respective
Congregations; if so, they were to have the like liberty, with those chosen by
you, to speak what might be upon their hearts, as to the matter in difference.
But in case they were not so chosen, although they might be Church Members, yet
they might not have liberty to speak any thing as to the matter in difference,
yet he said it was very likely that upon our request some liberty might be
given in that kind. But in case any chosen by us should not be actual
Church Members, though it may be granted for them to hear what was
Controverted; yet no liberty for them to speak any thing at all. Likewise such
persons, so chosen, their names should be given in to you, for approbation, as
to their Principles, and Conversations.

Now the Reasons why we cannot condescend hereunto, are these following.
1. As being directly contrary to the end of our message more at large
contained in our last paper, not having therein exceeded our Gospel-liberty. 2.
It is altogether needless to make choice of persons to hear a matter in
controversy, and deny them liberty to speak unto it, if they have any thing
upon their hearts to say. 3. To bind us up not only to Church Members, but
also in a great measure to the Churches for their choice, when it is very plain
that the Apostasy of this day has reached to the generallity of the Churches,
whereby there are few Zealous in the cause of Christ, though many faithful ones
in other things, is to exalt the form above the power of Godliness. 4. That it
seems to us directly contrary to the Principle of the Congregation, you so
much pretend unto, which is, To receive Saints, as Saints, and not as bound up
to this, or that form. 5. To condescend hereunto, is to undervalue the Spirit
of the Lord breathing in several of his servants, who are not enemies but
friends to Church Communion, though not formal Church Members, by reason of the
foulness of the waters, of the Sanctuary at this day, and whom we desire to
esteem far better then our selves. 6. As there is no command in joining us to
Churches alone in this Case, neither is there any against it, therefore we
humbly conceive our Gospel Liberty cannot be denied us. Moreover there is but
one example in all the New Testament as we can remember which was in the Church
at Autioch sending to the Church at Jerusalem, Asts 15. About the matter of
Circumcision, neither was there any visible Apostasy among the Churches at that
day, as now is, else we conceive that the Church at Antioch would not have sent
unto them about it.
These Reasons being premised, and the substance of our last paper relating
hereunto considered, we do humbly declare, That we can in no wise condescend to
a debate upon those conditions received from you, neither upon any other terms,
then is mentioned in our last paper, and upon which account we refused at
first, not that we desire to stand upon terms of advantage for our selves, were
we not groundedly persuaded, the name and cause of Christ we are engaged in,
would very much suffer thereby. Thus desiring to hear a return from you, if a
debate of the matter in difference be really intended. And that we may have our
free choice, without any bonds imposed upon us, or them, we shall choose,
provided they be men fearing God, and working Righteousness, any more then we
desire to impose bonds on you, or whom you shall choose, for which we shall wait
14. days from the date hereof, and in case of no return by that time, we shall
be in no longer expectation thereof. We remain,

Your unworthy Brethren and Sisters, mourning, and praying for your return, yet
apprehending that as truth is with us, so the power of the Church rests in us.
Dated the 4. of the 6. Month. 1657. Signed in the Name, and by the
Appointment of the whole, John Proud. Caleb Ingold


ACcording to our promise we waited for a return till the expiration of the
time mentioned in the said paper, but having no Answer, neither any intention
thereof, so far as we could understand, but rather an aversness thereunto,
considering that they had committed our said paper, to the perusal of the
Pastors, and Elders, of several Congregations, to whom, they said, they had
given up our business, and to be directed according to their advice; Who upon
perusal thereof, apprehended our desire and tender therein, to be but
reasonable. Yet was their advice, and proposition refused also.

A copy of the agreement of the messengers of the Churches met at Allhallowes
the II. of the 6. Month, 1657. At the request of those from whom we are
withdrawn about our paper, Dated the 4. of the 6. Month, 1657.
1 1. That Persons of approved Godliness may be endowed with wisdom, to advise,
and to help to heal breaches, as well as others.

2 2. That the Persons that the dissenting Brethren had chosen which were not
Church Members were well approved of for Godliness

3 3. For peace sake, which we are to follow after, we judge it not unlawful,
but convenient, that such Godly, and approved persons, as are mentioned in the
last paper, Dated the 4. of this Month, may freely be admitted, to hear, and
advise, in the matter propounded, with the like number of such, as the Church
with Mr. Sympson did choose.

4 4. Our advice is, that the number of Persons so chosen should not be many,
not exceeding ten of a side at the most.

Now it being so obvious that they not only refused our tender, but theirs
also to whom (as on their parts) they had committed the matter in difference,
we judged it our duty to wait no longer upon them, being without hope after so
many denialls, and therefore the Brethren to whom the orderring, and managing
the affairs of the Congregation, was committed were appointed to perfect the
draught of Separation, intended, and present it unto us, with all expedition:
which was accordingly done, a Copy whereof is as follows,

Our last Testimony, or separation from the Soldiers of the Army, being guilty
to six scandalous sins; likewise, from Mr. John Sympson, their chief Abettor,
and others with him; As also from the rest of those Brethren, and Sisters, we
formerly walked withal, whom we desire to mourn for, yet, as they hold
Communion with those scandalous sins, and Persons, must separate from them.
IT is we trust some grief, and trouble of heart unto your poor unworthy
Brethren and Sisters, that notwithstanding the Lord has cast us into days of
so great light, and profession, wherein he calls upon all to repent, without
excuse, or pretense of Ignorance, you should to this day not only hold
Communion with, but be justifiers of several persons amongst you, that are
guilty of such sins, as are not commonly named amongst men: which is the more
considerable, in regard they are the sins of the last times into which we are
fallen; yea your continuance therein, seems to speak unto us, as if the custom
of sin, had taken away the conscience thereof, in many of you: Indeed we have
ground to fear, that many of you are so far become guilty, as to call their
evil good, and our withdrawing from them, and you, upon this account evil; And
although we have been now one whole year and half, or thereabouts, waiting upon
you in the Lords way, by our withdrawing from you, wherein we have been
desirous to exercise patience and much longsuffering, and as we hope, with
yearning bowels toward you in some measure, willing to have compassion, of
you, as of our own souls, left we should also be tempted; Likewise a year and
half before our withdrawing, bearing our Testimony against the evil amongst
you, so that had there been any heart in you to purge out the old leaven you
might have become a new lump unto the Lord in so long time, and thereby have
been a vessel of honor, meet for the Masters use in your generation; but
notwithstanding their sin has been so often laid before you by us, since, as
well as before our first withdrawing; and having we hope out of love to your
souls, as well as for the glory of God, in discharge of our own duty,
admonished the Soldiers of their evil, and your selves, as their Abettors,
according to the Rule of the Gospel, that if it had pleased our heavenly
Father, you might thereby have been duly humbled, under his mighty hand, by
smiting upon the thigh, saying, What have I done? and each one have considered,
from whence you are fallen and done your first works, Moreover in regard it was
imputed to us, That we would have none to Judge of, or hear the ground of our
withdrawing but our selves; we did thereupon offer unto you, that we were
willing others should have the hearing of our Cause, or rather the Cause of our
Lord Jesus Christ, wherein such poor worthless worms as we are engaged;
Provided we might have Liberty on our part, to choose Persons of known
Integrity, and Godliness, of whose faithfulness to the cause of Christ, we
might have good ground of Assurance in such an evil day, as this is; which by
your practice you have absolutely denied us, and in stead thereof have sent a
third time to the several Congregations, in, and about the City, without our
consent, or approbation, that they might by their messengers, hear, and judge
of the Matter in difference between us, though they have refused to meddle with
it; And Oh, that the consideration thereof, might yet at the last, put you upon
some serious inquiry, what should be the mind, and will of the Lord concerning
you therein, and whether a third denial of this kind, does not speak that you
have so often gone out of the Lords way about that work, and have refused susch
equal ways, as might tend to the further discovery of truth as we humbly
apprehend. Likewise about 7. or 8. weeks since, after seeking the Lord, and
receiving advice from such as were faithful to the cause of Christ in this
day, we did judge it our duty, notwithstanding your refusal to this day, yet
once more to make the same tender unto you, as we had done formerly; That the
matter in difference might be debated, in the presence of a certain number of
godly persons, one half chosen by you, and the rest by us, and all of them
having equal liberty of speaking, as occasion might require. To which we
received Answer, being little less then a plain denial of our tender, however
we make a speedy reply in writing, that our willingness to such a work might
appear, for answer whereunto we have been about four weeks in expectation, but
having no return, we do discern that the Lord has shut up your hearts from it;
which does the more plainly appear; for that we are informed, those Members of
Churches, to whom you have committed the perusal of our last paper, did give in
their Judgment, That our desire therein was but reasonable, and ought to be
condesscended unto, Now we could wish that the sense of your great evil might
lie more upon our hearts, wherein we would also not be unsensible of our own
miscarriages in the management thereof, desiring we hope to mourn before the
Lord for the same; yea we desire not only in the words, but Spirit of the
Prophet Jeremiah, to say, Oh, that our heads were water, and our eyes a
fountain of tears that we might weep night and day, for our own sins and
iniquities, as well as for the great abominations of this time,(being an open
Apostasy, from the Cause of Christ, and this Nations freedom sealed unto in the
late Wars, by the Faith, Prayers, Blond, Tea's, and Estates of many thousands,
of whom not a few were Saints) whereinto you are so greatly fallen; and it is
upon the hearts of some of us, that if the Lord shall not mercifully, yet at
the last send his Angel, and pull you out from amongst this Apostatizing
generation, this may probably be your portion; That Partaking of their sins,
you may partake of their Judgments. An therefore that we might be remiss in
nothing, so far as the Lord has discovered it to be his mind and will unto
us; It is after seeking of his face, for Council and direction, and some
searching of our own hearts, judged to be our duty to leave this paper with you
as our last Testimony, against the crying evils, and abominations amongst you,
and cleaved unto by you, some more, some less, as is hereafter mentioned,

First, As to our Brethren the Soldiers, We humbly declare, and testify, in
the Name, and fear of the Lord, who is the searcher of all hearts, they do
appear unto us very manifestly guilty of those several sins laid to their
charge by us, as being principal Abetters unto, and Supporters of the Apostasy
of this day, headed by the Person now in Power, by whom our Brethen stand, and
so stiffly, contend for, as if they would justify him in all his Oppressions,
wherein he arises, and higher, to the great reproach of the Gospel. The sin we
shall only name being more largely set down in our first paper.

First, Treason having betrayed the Cause, and Intrest of our Lord Jesus,
Christ, and the Nations Liberty, contended for in the late Wars, which did
maniselt it self. First, In pulling down all Antichristian laws, Statutes

Having before proved that there is an Apostasy, we now come to show the rise
of it; and is as follows, When the War was ended at Worcester, the Lords
people expected that the good things the Army declared for, and promised should
be brought forth. Also, the man in Power, and the Army appeared in words to do
so to; And do blame, and pretend they dissolved the old Parliament, for not
doing those good things, and likewise to call the Little Parliament, as men
fearing God, and Principled to bring them forth, as also to Act for the
Advancement of Christ's Kingdom. And go on to say, that something was at the
door, and that we were at the edge and threshold of the Promises and
Prophesies, and therefore should lift up our hears and rejoice, however, if
there were neither promise for this nor prophecy, we should covet, and
endeavor after the best things, and do speak as to purity, in Magistracy, and
Governments; as if none but who had the Spirit were fit to Act upon Christ's
account at this day. And likewise hint, as if themselves were a part, or at
least had the Spirit of the Stone, which shall break and consume all other
Kingdoms, etc. And as if the Call of the Little Parliament was a fruit of the
Stones smiting, ( quoting Dan. 2.44.) With many other excellent good words
relating to the Calling of the Jews, and the glory that will be in that day;
See his speech, to them, either by it self, or in page 56. to 63. of book
called the Looking-glass. Now what did this hold forth, but that they would
endeavor to bring things as near as might be, before Christ comes, to what
they shall be when he is come, Isa. 32.1, 2. Mich. 4.1, 2. Psalm. 72. But all
this as we have too just ground to fear, and by what has since appeared, was
but to cover the design of self Advancement. For when those who were faithful
in the Little Parliament, came to do those good things, and to take away all
Antichristian, and Oppressive Laws, and Customs that were, and are yet
remaining among us; Several self intrested men among them, and others easily
led by them, perceiving that if they went on, it would go ill with be Lawyers,
Clergy, and other Corrupt Intrests, took Counsel together how they might
dissolve that Parliament and in Order thereunto, came to the Parliament. House
in a morning two hours sooner then usually, and moved tho, resigning their
Power, But some of the other party coming in, opposing it, they durst not
venture to put it to the vote, but with the Speaker rose up and went away,
leaving a considerable number behind them, who were soon after turned out by
Colonel Goff, Lieunant Colonel White, and Musquetteers, thereby putting a
stop to the Work of God; and the aforementioned Persons going to White Hall,
and signing a Paper, whereby they pretended to resign their Power to the Man
who is now in Power; Is the foundation of this present Government, and so of
the Apostasy.

and Customs any ways intrenching upon the Consciences of the Lords people in
their public Worship. Secondly, To prevent making any such Laws for the time
to come. Thirdly, To pull down all laws in any measure oppressing the bodies
of the Lords people, or any others, that violence may be no more heard in our
Land. Fourthly to deliver the Spiritual Church of Christ from the like
oppression of Body, or Spirit, in any of the Dominions of Antichrist. Fifthly,
To execute the Judgments written upon the great Whore who is drunk with the
blood of the Saints. Sixthly, That Christ might be King in these Nations, and
his Laws our Rule to walk by. Seventhly, that Monarchy, or the power in one
single Person might be extirpated, because opposing Christ's Dominion, and
utterly inconsistent with Common Freedom. Eighthly, That men fearing God, and
hateing Covetousness might be in Authority, and no other. Now whether Treason
be not committed in all these respects at this day, and our Brethren thereby
become Traitors in abetting thereto with their swords in their hands, we shall
leave unto the Lord who judges Righteously, and one day will make it known,
when the thoughts of all men shall be revealed.

Secondly, Covenant breaking, and false Swearing, there being many Engagements
and Declarations of the Army, (whereof, our Brethren were, and now are Actual
Members,) for removing the evil, and establishing the good mentioned in the
foregoing Head.

Thirdly, Oppression of the Bodies and Consciences of the Lords People, and
others well affected in this Nation, by Tithes, Taxes, and Illegal
Imprisonments. The Latter of which the Army formerly. Declared so much against,
as being very Oppressive, that any man should suffer Imprisonment without any
Legal cause

See Looking-glass, page 7. (Say they,) that no man be kept in Prison above a
month, but in that space to be brought to Trial, by a lawful jury of his
equals, or else be discarged of Course. There are many the like expressions in
other of their Declarations.

showed for it, and keeping them there at will, and pleasure, and how
frequently this has been practiced since this last Apostasy, and is still
continued, we leave to all unbyassed persons to judge.

Fourthly, Persecution of Saints, two Captain Harrison, kept Master Sympson.
Major Strange, kept Major General Harrisou.
of them having been jaylors to their Brethren, and the rest standing by, in
the day of their Brothers Calamity and Justifying the Persecutors, by saying,
It is possible a Saint may suffer for evil doing.

Fifthly, Maintaining Antichristian Laws, by which the Saints of old have
suffered, and do now suffer, though so much blood and treasure, has been
spent, for the abolishing of them.

Sixthly, Hereby they are the cause, of sadning, and grieving the hearts of the
Righteous, whom the Lord would, not have sadned, though our Brother Kelzey was,
and herein is more particularly guilty above any of the rest, as has been
plainly proved, which at first he denied, yet afterward confessed, at Brother
Sampsons house, much more then could be proved against him, not with any sense
of his evil therein, but said, It was his Judgment and Conscience to do what
he had done.

And, Notwithstanding that many of us, had been laboring to Convince them,
(and inform the Brethren, to whom the ruling part of the Congregation was
committed) of their evils upwards of a year and half, before our withdrawing,
who at first joined with us, and were more ready to be active herein, then our
selves, yet afterward declined for no other reason (as we know) but because
their sin being of a public nature, was like to receive more then an ordinary
countenance, and so the more difficult and hazardous, if they, with us should
be found doing our duty impartially, and not fearing the faces of men, but it
being to our labor proved fruitless, and those who before were forward in the
work of the Lord, now became backward and not only so, but many of them
excusers, and Abettors, in a very great measure, to the grief of many of our
hearts: However that we might keep in the Lords way, it was, after solemn
waiting; upon him, judged our duty to bring their evils before the Church, that
so if possible they might thereby have been brought to the acknowledgement
thereof. And here we hoped that iniquity should have bad it is mouth stopped, and
truth have had the pre-eminence, in such a Congregation as this had been, for
so many years, being like a Beacon on the top of a Mountain, but instead
thereof, the greater part votes Communion with them, notwithstanding their evil
laid before them; which is to be mentioned, not with joy, but with grief, and
sorrow of heart, though we conceive that vote was chiefly occasioned by our
Brother Sympson, through his constant pleading for; and excusing of them; and by
his sudden starting such a question, of Non-communion, without serious
consideration, whereby many Brethren, and Sisters were ensnared, as they
afterward confessed; and notwithstanding that truth had such hard usage from
the beginning, almost to that time, yet we have since our withdrawing, been
waiting upon the Lord, almost one whole year and half, thereby bearing a more
particular Testimony against their evil, also by admonishing them twice,
according to the rule of the Gospel, but no repentance (as we can discern)
apprearing, but rather hardness of heart, and their sin every day more and more
manifesting it self, to the great dishonor of God, and reproach of his Name.
We do therefore hereby declare, That we can have no more fellowship and
Communion with them, then with Heathens, and Publicans, till the Lord shall
give repentance unto life, by acknowledging, and forsaking their iniquity, and
do hereby humbly Testify our separation from the accordingly.

Secondly, That our Brother Sympson, whose condition we desire to mourn for,
yet can but humbly testify, that he has been for many months, a secret
opposer of those Brethren that prosecuted the cause of Christ, against the
evils of those Brethren of the Army: and every day more and more, did, and does
stand by, maintain, and plead for them. Nay more, he is not afraid, nor
ashamed, to plead for those very evils, which he himself has declared against
openly, and for which, he for sometime suffered very boldly, so that we can do
no less then declare, before the Lord, Angels, and men, that he is now become
guilty with the other Apostates, to build again the things, which he and they
formerly destroyed, and is become very skilful, to cover the iniquity of this
day, which appears to all unbyast persons, But least any should think that we
had neglected our duty in not admonishing him privately, before this public
testimony against him; we answer, That several Brethren had been with him
privately upon that account. Moreover, we did at another time by several
Brethren in the name of the whole, apply our selves unto him, intending
particularly in love, and due respects, to have opened our hearts concerning
his evil, but in stead thereof, he absolutely refused to give the least
entertainment unto us, as Brethren, and Sisters, or to hear any thing we should
say unto him, upon that account, but looked upon us, as Heathens, and
Publicans, and thereupon refused so much as to pray with the Brethren who were
sent by us. Adding hereunto, that through his pleading for, and excusing of
them, he has been the Instrumental Cause of this breach, and separation, and
hardening the hearts of the Soldiers, when some of them, were in some measure
convinced of their evil, (as we thought) saying, That if it were a sin to have
Communion with them, let it be charged upon himself, and such as were satisfied
with them, as they should answer it, at the day of the Lord Jesus. For which,
and much more, (if needful at this time to declare.) We can have no more
fellowship with him, nor scarce so much, as with those Brethren among you, that
wear the sword, whose wickedness we have been so long contending against, only
leaving him unto the Lord, who can when he pleases, convince him of his evil,
and give him grace to do his first works.

Thirdly, That several other Brethren whom we could Name if need require, have
likewise much abetted, excused, and pleaded for this iniquity, and particularly
one of them, who was formerly so convinced, of the Soldiers evil, as being the
first person, that put pen to paper, to draw up Articles against them, who
said, It was true but he thought it would not come to this. And therefore we do
judge it our duty, also humbly to Testify against them, and separate from
them, as such, who are greatly partakers of the Soldiers evil, though it is
possible, that they may be much oversway'd in there judgments by our Brother
Sympson, and cannot have Communion with them till such time that the Lord does
convince them of their evil, and cause them to return from whence they are
fallen, and do their first works.

Fourthly, That many other Brethren, and Sisters, though they have little to
plead for the Soldiers, as under those sins laid to their charge, yet care not
for inquiring into truth, neither considering that Scripture, 1 Cor. 5.6. Know
ye not that a little leaven, leaveneth the whole lump, purge out therefore the
old leaven, that you may become a new lump: But are willing to have their
judgments biased, through affection to our Brother Sympson, and so are
willing, to stand, or fall in his bottom, as we have just ground to fear, and
thereby become partakers of their evil deeds; and if the Lord do not in time
graciously awaken them out of this drowsy, sleepy frame of Spirit, we fear
they may in time feel the sorrow of that Scripture, Isa. 9.16. For the Leaders
of this people cause them to err, and they that are led of them, are
destroyed. And therefore hereby testify, and declare, that we cannot hold
Communion with them, till the Lord shall discover unto them their evil therein.

Fifthly, As for those Brethren and Sisters amongst you, that groan, and mourn
under the sense of those crying abominations, that our Brethren the Soldiers
with their Abettors, are guilty of, we do desire to open our hearts to them
with all bowels of tenderness, and compassion, declaring that although we can
see no Scripture ground, or bottom for their present practice, and the rather
when the Lord has enabled their poor unworthy Brethren and Sisters, though but
a remnant, to withdraw, and separate from the evil doers, whereby the decission
is made; And that Scripture, Psalm. 26.4, 5.6. Seems unto us a plain word of
Instruction for them in these words: I have not sat with vain persons, neither
will I go in with dissemblers. I will wash my hands in innocence, and so will I
compass ^^^e Altar. Whence the Spirit of the Lord seems to hint himself not
innocent, had he not refused Communion with dissemblers, and vain persons,
without having respect whether they were the greater, or the lesser number. And
how they can call that part of the Body a Church, when those they join with,
are only the disorderly walkers; for those who bear the Testimony, are
withdrawn, we do not well understand: which is the more considerable, when they
are commanded to withdraw from every Brother that walks disorderly. However, we
judge it our duty to continue our prayers for them, and to spread their
condition before the Lord in secret, as if it were out own; that he would
enlighten, and inform them in their duty, and give them obedient hearts
thereunto, that the Lord would deliver their feet out of the snare, and do
hereby entreat, exhort, and desire them, as they tender the glory of God, and
the comfort of their own Souls in the time of Trial, and Temptation, to come
out from amongst them, and separate from them, trusting that the promise of
grace, mentioned 2 Cor. 6.17, 18. In these words, Wherefore come out from
amongst them, and be ye separate, says the Lord, and touch not the unclean
thing, and I will receive you, and be a Father unto you, and you shall be my
Sons and Daughters, says the Lord Almighty. We desire also, for their and our
encouragement, to leave with them that Scripture, Psalm. 9.4. Hos. 11.12. to be
theirs, and our portion also; But till then, we do also hereby humbly testify,
and declare, that as they now stand, we cannot have Communion with them, as
otherwise in the uprightness of our hearts we desire to have, and should much
rejoice in, were they clear from the evil of this day, and withdrawn from
amongst those disorderly persons till then, we have just ground to believe they
are in their degree partakers of their evil, according to that Scripture, 1 Timothy 5.22. Be not partakers of others men's sins; keep thy self pure.

Now to conclude and end this our Testimony, we do in the General, and to each
one say, and humbly declare, That we cannot discern the power of the Church
rests in you, as under those sins you are now guilty of, and fallen in with
each one in their degree, but

Only Moses, Aaron, Caleb and Joshua etc. Who followed the Lord and had truth
on their side, and separated from Corah, the Princes and famous men of the
Congregation, were owned by him, and had the power with them, as also to
prevail, that the greater part of the Congregation might not wholly be
destroyed, Number. 14.19, 20. compare ch^. 16 41. to 50 ca. 262 which notably
agrees with Matt. 18.18, 19. Whatsoever ye shall bind on earth, shall be bound
in heaven, etc. Again, if two of you, ( viz. having the truth) shall agree on
earth as touching any thing they shall ask, it shall be done unto them, etc.
And upon this account (chiefly) it was that they had the power, and this
presence with them, and not so much because the one was the Leader, and the
other as it were the Pastor of the Congregation; for if with the others they
would have made a Captain to return to Egpt, as also have stoned Caleb, and
Joshua in all likelihood they had perished with them; yea, we find that
because the did contrary to the mind of the Lord at the waters of Meribah,
they must die by the way, and not go into the good land, and the power they had
delivered unto others, and only Joshua, and Calch, etc. who followed the Lord
fully, have the power, and his presence with them, Numb. 20.12, 24, 26. Deuteronomy.
3.27. compare Chap. 34.4. By which it plainly appears the Lord would have the
power to reside with those who follow him, and have truth on their side, though
the lesser number, and not with the greater, though the Pastor be with them
that are declined, and so have not the truth with them. We also find, Revel.
2.7, 9, 10. Revel. 3.4, to 10. That only the Churches of Smyrna, and
Philadelphia, and the few names in the Church of Sardis who followed the Lord
fully, and kept close to truth, and had not desiled their garments, and such as
overcome and keep close to truth to the end, are owned by Jusus Christ, and
shall inherit the promises; but he threatens to remove the Candlestick from the
Church of Ephesus, and to come upon all those of the Churches of Pergamus,
Thyatira, Sardis, (though the greater number) as a Thief, and to fight against
them, and kill them with death, unless they repent and return from the evil
among them; And the Church of Laodicea the worst of them all, are for their
Lukewarmness threatened to be wholly spued out of his Mouth, Revel. 2.5, 16, 23.
Revel. 3. 3. Which things are not written as only belonging to that time, but
are also a prohesie of what shall be among the Churches a little before, or
about the time the promises, and prophesies relating to the Kingdom of Christ
and Zion shall be fusilled, See Revel. 2.26, 27. Revel. 3.10, 12, 21.

in your poor, unworthy Brethren, and Sisters, in whose name this comes, though
the lesser number. Which we desire to mention with all Humillty, and not in
vainglory, knowing that we have no cause to be high minded, but fear, that
such poor shrubs as we, should stand, when so many tall Cedars fall; It, being
no where recorded in Scripture that the power of the Church, rests in the
greater number, (as under that Denomination,) but in those, who according to
the command of our Lord Jesus Christ, do withdraw from every Brother that walks
disorderly, be they the less, or the greater number, for where truth is, there
is the true-Church power, according to that in Matt. 16.18, 19. in these words,
Thou art Poter and upon this Rock will I build my Church, and I will give unto
thee the Keys of the Kingdom of Heaven, etc. Whence we desire to observe, that
although our Lord Jesus speaks to Peter as a single person, yet lays the
weight of the Church upon him, not as Peter, but upon the truth, whereof he
made so upright a Confession; whereby it seems plain unto us; That where truth
is, not only in the judgment, but practice, there is the Church, with the
Keys, to wit it is power. And this our Brother Sympson has formerly declared,
saying, That he should judge it his duty, to join with a little number, were
they but 30 or 40. in number, against 500. being persuaded that the Keys of the
Church were truly there, where the truth appears, not only in the doctrine,
but practice. And yet we would say, That where the greater number oppose the
truth more caution is to be used, more humility, and brokenness of Spirit
manifested, and much looking up unto the Lord to be guided aright, by the
seffer number, wherein we must acknowledge we have been too remiss, and desire
to be humbled before the Lord for the same, in the face of Jesus Christ. Thus
desiring that this out last Testimony may be received in love and be of that
use; and weight, as to provoke you to a godly jealousy, as Paul's Epistle did
the Corinthians, about the Incestuous Person, that we may have cause to rejoice
upon the same account, as he had, which could we once see, we should willingly
lie at your feet for truths sake, and be more glad thereof, then of our daily
food; till then, we desire to mourn, and pray for your return.

Signed in the Name, and by the Appointment of the whole, John Proud. Tho.
Carry. Caleb Ingold. James Chadwick. Humphry Hathorn. John Portmans.

Dated the 1. of the 7. Month, 1657. THis Paper was committed to the custody
of six Brethren chosen from amongst us, to present, and deliver it according to
direction; and if it might be obtained, that some one of the six might have
liberty to read it in the presence of them all, but when they came, they were
denied the liberty of reading it, some of the Chief amongst them, saying, That
is ought first to be perused, by the Brethren amongst them at their usual
meeting, and if they thought meet then to have read it, otherwise not, or else
if we would stay till the next fourth day of the week, it was possible we might
have liberty to read it our selves. But this was not thought meet to be
embraced; but since they denied us the present reading of it, to leave it with
them, to do therein as they should think fit, onley a Brother stood up, and
declared, It was our last testimony of Separation, against those scandalous
sins and evils which many amongst them are guilty of; and that it was our
prayer, that the Lord would please to sanctify it unto them. After this the
Brethren took their leave, and departed. And so ends this Narrative,

Signed in the Name, and by the Appoinment of the greater Number of the
Congregation, who have separated from those now walking with Master John
Sympson. Humphry Hathorn. John Seely. John Portmans. Caleb Ingold.




A Preambulatory Epistle to seven of the Letters, which Master Sympson wrote to
the Congregation whilst he was a Prisoner for Truth in Windsor Castle.
IT does much concern every true Believer in such a day as this, When darkness
covers the earth, and gross darkness the people, to be watching narrowly to
their paths, lest they turn aside from the holy Commandment delivered to them,
as many have sadly done in this day, which is to be bewailed, with a bitter
Lamentation, had we a suitable Spirit thereunto, when the Father is dishonored,
Christ reproached, and the Spirit blasphemed, and all under a form of
godliness; were we Baptized into Jeremiahs Spirit, we should in the sense of
the back-stiding of Professors, say. Oh, That I had in the wilderness a lodging
place of wayfaring men, that I might leave my people, and go from them, for
they be all adulterous, an assembly of Treacherous men, they bend their tongues
like a bow for lies, but they are not valiant for the truth upon the earth!
Jer. 9.2, 3.

Many of us have had no small Wrestling in our own Spirits, whether these
Letters of Mr. Sympsons should be published or no, choosing rather to have
silently Mourned over him, in the sense of the loss of that Spirit, he seemed
to be anointed with, whiles he Continued in Windsor Castle, as by his following
Letters dated from thence will appear; But considering what a Noble, and
Honorable Testimony he has born against the iniquity of this day, and that
from the Spirit of God, (as he professed) and since that to be as highly
professing on the other hand, saying, That it was his error, and evil, drying
down all his former professions, and visions, as delusions, and of flesh. Which
has staggerd some, as to the very Principles of Godliness; Likewise
considering, how he is fallen in with the present Abominations he has formerly
so witnessed against. Adding hereunto, that he has been the instrumental
cause, of our Breach, and Separation, by falling in with, and pleading for the
Soldiers, and present Power; Which had he not done, for ought as we know, they
might have turned from their evil way, and thereby the Congregation, having
purged out their old Leaven might have become a new; and pure Lump, to the
glory of God, and comfort of each other in this evil day. Likewise his owning
of the Tryers by sending to them, as well as others, for advice, how there
might be a proceeding against us for our withdrawing. Also to take a Commission
from the Person in Power to Preach at All-gate, though he has formerly
declared very highly, as well against the Tryers, with their Practice, as the
present Power, we humbly, apprehend, may so far silence any Persons, as not to
Judge any thing before the time, lest they be found Judging their Brethren, or
the work they are upon, without a through knowledge of the cause, or Spirit
leading thereunto. Yea, give us leave humbly to say, That the sense of the
former Courage, Life, and Zeal which was in him for the truth, (wherein we
cannot but Judge, that the Spirit of the Lord, was eminently manifest in him,
as to the matter of his Testimony, though as to the manner most of us in many
things were not so well satisfied with it) seems unto us to be rather a
provocation, then a discouragement in this work, for we do not hereby publish
his failings, but only by his naked Letters, without paraphrasing upon them,
give a taste of that Spirit which formerly appeared in him, for Christ, against
Antichrist, and all evil doers, Psalm. 94.16. And let the Reader Judge though it
seemed unto us, much like that Spirit the Church is found in, Rev. 12.1. Which
every true member ought to be Clothed with, being Clothed with the Sun, and the
Moon under her feer. All sublunary Creatures appeared nothing to him, he seemed
unto us like unto Paul, Acts 20.24. Tell him of troubles, likely to fall through
his faithfulness to Christ, and his despised Cause, and none of these things
move him. Moreover we are provoked hereunto, considering how much Life, and
Courage, was Administered unto us in the hearing of them read, which we trust,
upon perusal of them by others, may be useful unto them, as well, as unto us.
And shall truth die, for fear of displeasing, a man, or men, that are gone off
from the work of Christ in their generation? surtly no; yea, we trust that the
publishing of them, may be to the reviving of his Spirit again, that he may
consider from whence he is fallen; and do his first works, and then we shall
rejoice it may appear, that he is in the number of those mentioned, Dan. 11.35.
Some of them of understanding shall fall, to try them, etc. And we should much
rejoice if the Lord should make this way, in any measure Instrumental, to eat
out that core of Apostasy, which more gentle means though applied would not
do, or deliver the feet of any out of the snare, who by reason of him, are
fallen from their own stedfastness; however this is our rejoicing, the
Testimony of a good Conscience, that in simplicity, and godly sincerity, we
have been exercised herein, and not out of malice, strife, or vain glory.

Signed in the Name, and by the appointment of the greater Number of the
Congregation, who have separated from those now walking with Mr. John Sympson.
Humphry Hathorn. John Portmans. John Seely. Caleb Ingold.



Here follows the Letters themselves.

JOhn a Prisoner not of Cromwell, and his Council, but of the Lord Jesus Christ,
unto the Saints, and faithful Brethren, which meet at the place, which is known
by the name of Great All-hallows, London. Grace be to you, and peace from God
our Father, and from the Lord Jesus Christ; Blessed be the Name of the God and
Father of our Lord Jesus, who daily loads you with his loving kindness, and
tender mercies in Christ, and for ever let his glorious goodness be honored,
who at all times, and in all ages, has, does, and will hear, the prayers of
his faithful ones in Christ, we have cause mutually to rejoice that God has
heard your prayers for my To wit Mr Ecak at that time a Prisoner there for the
same cause of Christ with him.
fellow Prisoner, and me, and that God has heard our prayers, for you. At my
meeting with you I shall see more of God in some of you then ever I saw, though
some may wither away, and come to nothing, and I am confident that you shall
behold the Image of Christ more plainly in me, then ever formerly you beheld
it, God does still, notwithstanding many infirmities in me, shine upon the Soul
of his unworthy Servant, in the face of Jesus Christ. I shall grow in grace, my
faith is quickened, my repentance shall be increased, my love will abound, to
you, and to all Saints, my hope shall be lively, and my joy shall be full; And
I shall never be ashamed, that I have given you an Alarm, of Christ's coming in
the Spirit among his People. I do yet by free grace, glory, that I shall
receive more of the Spirit, in gifts, and graces, then yet is given unto me.
Isa. 45.11. God has commanded me to ask him of things to come, Christ has
persuaded me, that this Prison, is a Jerusalem, where I must wait for the
promise of the Father, Acts 1.4. Pray therefore for me, for your selves, and
for all Saints, that they, and we may be Baptized with the holy Spirit, not
many days hence. The Spirit will return again unto believing Saints, and the
Churches of Christ, according to the New Testament institution shall be the
Schools of the Prophets. Universities as now they stand upon an Antichristian
foundation must be tumbled down, Antichrist has set up those Cages of unclean
Birds, that they who go thither may learn to sing the whores songs, but not the
songs of Zyon; what the Spirit shall be to the Spiritual Church, those places
have been to the Carnal Church, when Antichrist forced the Woman into the
wilderness, and taught men to believe that the Spirit was not to be expected
any more, but that was to cease in his gifts, and to supply the want of the
Spirit, which was in the true Church, he laid the foundation of Universities;
and from them, and not from the Churches, and Spirit of Christ, he taught Men
to expect a Ministry. But these Monastries must down, Down with them sweet
Jesus, and lift up thy self in thy Spirit, among the Congregations of thy
Saints. The Ministry likewise must down which stands upon a Popish The Man in
Power judged the Ministry of England stood upon a Popish Bottom, and none to be
Christ's Ministers, but those who had received the Spirit for that use, See his
speech to little Parliament, in Looking-glass Page 60.
foot and Antichrists foundation, yea the best of Ministers must be thrown
down, so far as they stand upon an Antichristian Bottom, though God will own
what is of his own Spirit in them; And God will most eminently appear against
those sons of Hophnye, and Phineas, as he did against their fathers the
Archbishops, and Bishops, 1 Samuel 2.16. Who say unto the People, as they did, Nay
but ye shall give it me now, and if not, I will take it by force. The Judgment
is gone forth from the Mouth of the Lord against them, and all the Babylonish
Protectors in the world, shall not be able to defend them, and to maintain
them, in the enjoyment of their Antichristian maintenance. But Jehovah shall
Arise, and have mercy upon Zyon. Psalm. 103.13. For the time to favor her, yea
the set time is come, for thy servants take pleasure in her stones, and favor
the dust thereof. The Spiritual Saints which are the stones of this Zyon, begin
to delight in one, another, and as they do abhor what is most glorious and
seemingly Spiritual in Babylon, so there is nothing so mean, no outward
Ordinance of Zyon so base, and contemptible, but they do honor it, and thus
they favor the Dust thereof. Wherefore my Brethren if you are persuaded, that
this will be the work of God in this Generation, night, and day pray down those
things, Persons, and Places, which are Antichristian, Note.
and yet standing in England; Come out, and be separated from the wisdom, and
Spirit of the world, and come up with me into the Spirit of the Lord Jesus;
Labor to practice the Lesson, of self denial, in opposing those Errors, and
sins, which are pleaded for by the world, and some Saints, in these times, as
truths, and virtues, and so with Noah, you shall be upright in your
Generations; Endeavor to know, what are those truths which God will now bring
forth to Light, and not suffer them any longer to lie under the Cloud of
Antichrist, and resolve to overcome your enemies, either by doing or suffering,
And not loving your lives unto the death; Note.
give all diligence that you may be Christians in power, and not in form only;
disclaim your own strength every day; value not a faith, repentance, love, or
hope, of your own working, it is not worth a rush; But look up unto Jehovah, to
work all grace in you, by the operation of God. Pray for me that I may have a
more glorious Mission and Commission from Christ, to Baptize and Preach the
Gospel; Isaiah had a more glorious Call, at the second time, then he had at his
first calling, Isai. 6.1. though to the glory of grace I do acknowledge that I
have had a sufficient call, yet for the exaltation of grace I beg a more
glorious Call to Preach the Gospel; Oh, that I might Preach as one having
Authority, and not as University men! Oh, that I might have more of the Spirit,
that I might serve you better, then ever I have done, and might in some measure
be enabled to requite you for those pledges, and expenses, of love, which I
have received from you. I am for many favors in the Spirit engaged unto you,
Particularly for your great gift of love which you sent the last week by some
of our Brethren, you have obliged me unto you, beyond my desires, and
expectations. The Lord knows that I sought no such thing from you, directly,
or indirectly, I was very well content to spend only out of my own purse in
this Prison, but seeing God has drawn you forth to express your love this way,
I am bound thankfully to accept your gift, and do profess, that if I know my
own heart, I am more taken with your love then with your gift, or should be
taken with it, if it were a hundred thousand times more then it is, and shall
pray that my God may supply all your need, according to his riches in glory by
Christ Jesus. The grace of our Lord Jesus Christ, be with you all Amen.

Windsor the 12th. Month. 4th. day 1653. This is a true Copy of the Original.

examined by us Tho. Carry. John Clements.




Brethren of the Lord Jesus,
SInce I did write unto you, as the Lord did move Elijah to write unto Jehoram,
so I do apprehend that the Lord did stir me up to write unto the Lord General,
and contrary to my own resolutions, the Lord did press me to put my life into
his hands, by dealing faithfully, and plainly with him, in setting his sins
before him. The Lord is still very gracious, and favorable unto me, Oh, bless
the Lord with me for his unspeakable grace to me, in accounting me worthy to
suffer any thing for Christ, in bearing witness against the sins of men, which
fight against his glory, and interest; when I consider what a base vil'd filthy
Creature the Lord has honored, in calling him to suffer any thing for him, my
soul is melted, and humbled within me, I do plainly perceive a plot of Divine
Love, in bringing me unto this place; Jehovah is here fitting me for some other
service I have not had such a constant uninterrupted Communion with God, in
glorious light, love, and joys all the days of my life: (as I can remember) as
I have had since I came hither. Oh, how sweet is Communion with Christ in a
prison, I should be viler then the vildest upon earth, if I did not prefer
these Spiritual enjoyments, before all the pleasures, riches, and honors, of a
thousand worlds. I am now wrestling with God, night, and day for his Spirit,
for my self, and all Saints. O help me in your Prayers that I may not be
ashamed for waiting upon him for his Spirit. Of a truth; the Spirit is at the
The Man in Power was of this mind also. See his Speech to Little Parliament.
Looking-glass. p. 62.
door, I shall receive him more gloriously then yet I have received him; for
the present the word of the Lord is precious, there is no open vission, 1 Samuel
3.4. God calls to us, as he did unto Samuel but we know not infallibly, and
in the Demonstration of the Spirit, who it is that speaks, unless it be
concerning our Salvations, but he will speak, and we shall know that it is he
that speaks in us, Isa. 52.6. He has spoken unto us, in as it were parables,
but he is showing us plainly of the Father, John 16.25. The Spirit will show us
things to come, John 16.13. I am persuaded particularly concerning my self that
I shall receive some gifts of the Spirit, which I have not yet received. If you
shall desire to know the grounds of this persuasion, I shall lay them down, I
am not afraid that they should be tried First, I have a Spirit in this thing to
teach me self denial, I do plainly see that no strength, or endeavors of my
own, will do any thing, I must be dead unto them; a faith of my own working
will not remove a molehill, power must be given in by Jesus Christ, for the
gloryfying of his Name, Mark 6.7. Secondly, I do expect Spiritual gifts, by the
Gospel, and not by the Law, Gal. 3.2. Though I have been a vile Creature, yet
the Lord Jesus Ascended, that he might give gifts to the Rebellious. Thirdly,
the grace of God will shine more gloriously in giving gifts unto me by so much
as I have been vilder, then other Saints, before, and since my Conversion, Romans
5.20. Fourthly, I have faith according to the Scriptures, that the word of the
Lord will come unto Note.
some Saints, to inform them concerning the work of their Generation, as it did
unto Isaiah, Jeremiah, Agabus, and others, Because God will do nothing, but he
will reveal it unto his Servants the Prophets, Amos 3.6. Fifthly, Many Saints
do pray that God would fill me with his Spirit, and do believe that God will
hear their prayers, for me, and I do not doubt, but it shall be unto me
according to my Faith. Sixthly, I am commanded to Covet earnestly the best
gifts, which by grace I do, and shall do by the help of your prayers, 1 Cor.
12.31. Seventhly, I am humbled for anything of flesh which might move me to
desire the Spirit, and I desire gifts in the Spirit upon this Account, 1 Cor.
10.31. That the Father may be glorified in the Son. Eighthly, I look upon Christ
as powerful, so that he is able, as gracious, so that he is willing, as true,
so that he will be faithful in making good that promise, John 14.13, 14. Which
I have by grace applied in this particular case; Whatsoever ye shall ask in my
Name that will I do, that the Father may be glorified in the Son, If ye shall
ask any thing in my name I will do it, Christ cannot be unfaithful, John
14.15.16. Ninthly, Christ says, If you love me keep my Commandments and I will
pray the Father, and he shall give you another Comforter, that he may abide
with you for ever, I believe therefore have I spoken says the Psalmist, Psalm.
116.10. So say I, I do believe, therefore have I written these things unto you,
And the God of bowels will never cover me with shame, for making this
profession of my faith, in the bosoms of the Saints. I have been sensibly
present with you in the Spirit, though I am in body absent from you; And I hope
that when God shall bring me again unto you, that I shall come in the blessing
of the fullness of the Gospel; in the mean while I shall in the Spirit of grace
make my supplications for you at the throne of grace, that you may flourish in
faith, grow in love, abound in lively hope, and that the peace which Christ
has bequeathed his Disciples, may be with you, and shall beg your prayers, for
me night, and day, that the Father of lights from whom every good, and perfect
gift comes, may give the gifts, and graces of the Spirit, which I expect, who
by grace may subscribe my self.

Your Servant in Christ, and a waiter in the Spirit, for the Spirit. John
Sympson.
From Windsor the place of my great liberty, and Imprisonment, the 9th day of
the 12th. Month. 1653. This is a true Copy of the Original,

examined by us, Tho. Carry. John Clements.




Dear Brethren,
WHen I resolved to write unto you, I was thinking with my self unto what
Churches of the seven Churches of Asia I might compare you. If I had compared
you to Smyrna and Philadelphia, which are not reproved, but commended by Jesus
Christ, you might have concluded that I did flatter you. If I had compared you
to Laodicea, some might have thought that I had wronged them; and therefore I
think that I cannot more truly speak of you as a Church of Christ, then by
acknowledging that some of the good things, for which some of those Churches
are commended, may be found amongst you, and that some of the bad things, for
which some of those churches are blamed, may be found among some of you: I am
persuaded that Christ has somewhat against some of you, Rev. 2.4 Because you
have left, and in part lost your first love, which you had to Christ, his
Gospel and people; The Lord awaken you, and help you to recover that unfeigned
repentance, lively faith, flaming affections, and soul-ravishing hopes, which
once you had; what have you found in the ways of sin; and the world which can
countervail the loss of those sweet and heavenly enjoyments, which once you had
in God: Return unto your first husband, for then was it better with you then
now, Hosea 2.7. Secondly, I know that Christ knows the poverty of some of
you, but you are rich, Rev. 2.9. The Lord has left in the midst of you an
afflicted and poor people, and they shall trust in the name of the Lord, Zeph.
3.12. Woe be unto the full, for they are empty, blessed be the empty, for they
are full. Woe be to the rich for they are poor. Blessed are the poor in spirit,
for theirs is the kingdom of God. Labor therefore to be poor, that you may be
rich, And if any man seem to be wise among you, let him become a fool, that he
may be wise. He that will be nothing, shall be something, and he that will be
something, shall be nothing, He that has ears to hear, let him hear what
Christ says unto his Church. Thirdly, some of you live where Satan's seat is,
and yet hold fast the Name of Christ, and do not deny the faith of your King,
Rev. 2.13. Some are laboring in spirit to help Christ to the throne of
England. Others, if you can but give them some comfortable hopes of a Note.
place, or preferment, or some other worldly thing, they care not whether the
interest of Christ sink or swim; they are contented that Satan shall keep his
seat and the throne, if he will but gratify their lusts. But the Kingdom of
England shall be the Kingdom of Christ, let Soldiers, and Devils, and carnal
Policy do what they can to hinder it: For the Kingdoms of this world are become
already to out says, Kingdoms of our Lord, and his Christ, and he shall reign
for ever and ever, Rev. 11.15. Fourthly, There may be some among you, (though
very few) of whom Christ may say, I know thy works, and love, and service, and
faith, and patience, and thy works, and the last to be more then the first,
Rev. 2.19. Hold fast this Crown, the Lord Jesus does lay none other burden
upon you, and therefore I will not. That which you have already hold fast til
he come, Rev. 2.24, 25. But fifthly, I am afraid that Christ may say to some of
you, as to the Angel of the Church of Sardis, Thou have a name that thou
live, but thou art dead, Rev. 3. There may be dead sinners in a congregation
of Saints, Oh! What will it advantage you to be in Church Communion with Saints
here, when you shall keep company with Fiends, and Devils and Note.
Judases in hell to all eternity. Externel privileges, and common gifts in the
kingdom of heaven here, will but agrivate our condemnation in hell hereafter,
unless. Christ's finds burning oil in our Lamps, internal and unfeigned graces
in our souls. Lay a carcass in the midst of a congregation of living men, and
will the carcass be enlivened by it? so the presence of living members in a
Church; cannot quicken Church members, who are dead in sins and trespasses;
strive therefore rather to be, then to be accounted living Christians. Sixthly,
There are some of you, concerning whom Christ in the spirit does inwardly give
this testimony, that they have a little strength, Rev. 3.8. As Christ gave the
same testimony concerning Philadelphia's Angel. To you that have grace in
truth, more grace shall be given, the weak shall be made strong, grow therefore
in grace, and in the knowledge of the mystery of the Father, Son, and Spirit.
And while the lusty youths who are strong in their own strength, shall faint,
and be weary, and utterly fall, They who have no might shall increase their
strength. And they who wait upon the Lord shall renew their strength, they
shall mount up with wings, as Eagles, they shall run, and not be weary, they
shall walk, and not faint, Isa. 40.29.30. Seventhly, I would that I had no
ground to fear that there are some lukewarm Laodiceans among you, whom the Lord
will spue out of his mouth, Rev. 3.16. One end of our redemption by Christ, is
zeal in good works, Titus 2.14. He who is a professor in these days without
zeal, Note.
will not be a professor long. The Lord will suddenly bring his furnace to Zyon
to burn up the hypocrites, and refine the true Saints. I do beg this at the
hand of my God, that you may all in this Looking-glass behold the graces and
spots of your souls and behold your several conditions I shall reminde you of
that which I moved, when I last spoke among you, That our Brother Wise may be
called forth from among you, to be a teaching Elder. I apprehend, that by the
grace of God, it may be to Gods glory, your edification and confirmation in
faith, and love, and my great comfort, and refreshment. And likewise desire,
that you will endeavor to walk in the order of the gospel, as becomes the
Churches of Christ. A City may as well be without Government, an Army without
Military Discipline, as a Church of Christ without discipline and government;
the Lord complete you in graces, gifts, and officers in the knowledge, and
practice of all the ordinances of Christ our Savior, and in the fullness of his
Spirit; which in the Spirit is, and shall be the prayer of him, who by grace am
made,

Your Companion, and Brother in the kingdom, and patience of Jesus Christ. John
Sympson.
16th. day. 12th. Month, 1653. from my Prison in Windsor Castle. This is a
True Copy of the Original,

Examined by us. Tho. Carry. John Clements.




Brethren in Christ,
GRace Wisdom, Discretion, Valor, Gentleness, Meekness, Zeal, and Peace be
multiplied upon you, through the Knowledge of God, and our Father, who is God,
Blessed for ever. Amen, Romans 9.5. The word which I have from the Lord unto you
at this present, is to direct you in the right manner of doing that which is
good, unto the glory of the Father. When we seriously consider how many in
these times have held forth most glorious truths, and done many righteous
things, and afterward have Note.
apostatized from the way of truth, and righteousness; we cannot but conclude,
that they never did any of them well: the heart of foolish man does not deceive
him more in any thing, then in holding forth truth, and in doing that which is
good in it self: if we are for truth, and do that which is good, our deceitful
hearts are ready presently to canonize us for Saints, when in the mean while we
may be rotten hearted Hypocrites. It is not enough to do that which is right,
and just, but that which is good must be well done; any defect, though never so
small in an action, may make it evil; but there must be a joint concurrence of
all Causes and Ingredients to make an action really good. There is a broad way
to hell in doing that which is materially good, Praying, Preaching, Fasing,
meeting with the Saints, breaking of Bread with them, and to them, may be a
stage, upon which a man with the approbation of the Saints may act his lusts,
and the truths of God in all ages have never suffered more sadly, then by some
zealous and religious Stage players, who for a time have acted their parts with
applause upon this stage. How bravely did Judas act his part in praying,
preaching, working of miracles by Christ, and afterward Note.
betrayed his Master? How well did Demas manage his business before he
embraced this present world. Alexander the Copper-Smith, who did much wrong
unto Paul, and against whom he prayed in the Spirit of the Gospel, that God
would reward him according unto his works, had almost suffered death as a
Martyr for Jesus Christ, Acts 19.33. May we go so far in paths of light and
righteousness, and afterward prove like the Renegado Turks, the greatest
Persecutors of Christians in the world. Oh! Then how ought we to examine our
works, our prayers, our hearing, our speaking of the things of God, lest there
should be any root of bitterness in them, which at length springing up, should
discover us to be Liars, Impostures Mamonists, Hypocrites before God, Angels,
Saints, and sinners. My Letters unto you as yet have been as suits of clothes
made up, but not fitted for any particular person, if they fit any Men, and
their guilty Conscience, do apply particularly unto themselves, the things
spoken and prophesied of in them in general, I shall begin to be persuaded that
I do not drop Ink upon paper in vain; give me leave therefore to come home into
your bosoms, hearts and consciences, in a word of Trial of your works, gifts,
duties, actions, professions, performances, and the like.

First, try the original of your Actions, if the spring of your Actions be
poisoned, the streams cannot be healthy: if flesh be the fountain, whatsoever
proceeds from it is fleshly, If the tree be evil, the fruit cannot be good. Ask
thy soul this question, do thou pray and speak of spiritual things, by a
gift, or by the Spirit of regeneration, the prayers of the Formalists, though
never so well gilded, are abominable unto Jehovah, because they are not from
the spirit of the New Creation. Secondly, Try the rule of thy Actions,
Christians are to walk exactly by rule, and by line, dare thou bring thy
heart, and thy Actions to be tried by the good light of the word of God.
Thirdly, Try thy ways by the good example of Saints, and prophets, Take my
brethren the prophets for an example, Jam. 5.10. Not the court Chaplains, Note.
and Temporizing Demases of this backsliding generation. Fourthly, Try thy
Actions by thy faith, two men may do the same thing, Abel; and Cain, the one
does the will of same thing, it is not the same thing which they do. One man
Preaches Free Grace, and the Interest of Christ, and Saints, in the flesh, Note.
and then abhors his own Preaching, the other does Preach the same things in
faith and has the smile of God, for the present, and his Crown of glory
hereafter for a reward. Fifthly, Try thy ways by the sincerity, and
uprightness of thy heart, upright walking is sure walking; Let Jehu say, Come
see my Zeal for the Lord of hosts. But be thou able to say with Hezekiah, Lord
thou know that I have walked uprightly before thee.

Sixthly, Try thy Actions by thy affectionate willingness, to do, or suffer for
God, Gods people are a willing People in the day of his power, Psalm. 110.
Christ loves cheerful, and obedient Servants. Seventhly, Try thy Actions, by
the Testimony of a pure, and enlightened Conscience; Beloved if our hearts
condemn us not, then have we confidence toward God, and whatsoever we ask we
receive of him because we keep his Commandments, and do those things, that are
pleasing in his sight, 1 John 3.21, 22. Lastly, that my Letters may not be
burden some, try, and search your ways by your aims, and ends, do nothing as
to man, or to your selves, but all as to God, and the glory of God, 1 Cor.
10.31. I put you not to a harder task, then by the help of Christ I have done
many times since I came into this place; And after my most exact scrutiny, and
search into my own heart, the Spirit of truth bearing me witness. To me it is
given not only to believe, but to suffer as a Prisoner for Jesus Christ. By
the light of the Spirit I do like my Cause in which I suffer every day better,
and better; I do rise higher in my faith for obtaining promises, Heb. 11.33.
That God will bring down Tyrants, and Persecutors, new, and old. I do not
repent, but rejoice in the things, which I have delivered and am confident that
within a few years, not to say months, I shall be found, without Cromwells
timely repentance, Note.
as true a Prophet unto him, as I was to the long sitting Parliament. In the
mean while abstain from all appearance of evil, abhor Jezabels Fasts, pray down
the Antichristian Clergy, and their Nasty Nests the Universities; Believe down
Antichrists High Commissioners, with Patrons, Parsons, Vicars, Curates,
Lecturers, and their Tithes, and all things belonging to that New Hierarchy;
wait for the pouring forth of the Spirit in grace, and gifes, and the power of
God, and the grace of Christ shall be with you, and him who is

Christ's Prisoner, John Sympson.
Windsor the last day, 1. Month. 1654. This is a true Copy of the Original,

examined by us, Tho. Carry. John Clementa




Brethren in Christ,
GOd has brought you upon the stage of this world, to live in such times in
which the hearts of many Hypocritical Professors shall be Note.
discovered, and the inward parts of all Saints shall be very much tried; And
thereofre it does concern you all, to be much in Trying, and Examining your
base deceitful hearts, lest any of you having walked a great way hand in hand
with the Saints, should at Lengt Note.
shamefully, and wrectchedly forsake them, and with Demas embrace this present
world. If ever the Devil had an advantage against Professors, he has an
advantage against them in these times; He comes unto them, as he did unto
Christ, with his last, and strongest temptation, Matthew. 4. 9. Note.
These things will I give you. How many eminent Professors, does the Devil
swallow down his wide throat, and does bury them alive in the belly of this
world? Secondly, How evident does that truth of Christ shine forth at this
time? Ye cannot serve God, and Mammon. Your gilded Mamonists in London, will
not be able to hold long their profession without wavering, but will basely,
and unworthily, desert the Cause, and Interest of Christ, and his People. for a
morsel of Bread. You will find that many who were very Zealous for the
interest of Christ when it was calm, will not be able to hold it out in a
storm. They that pleaded for Christ, and his Interest in the Sunshine day,
will in the clouldy, rainy, and stormy day Note, who does so now?
plead against him, and his People: such Christians who have not learned to
deny themselves daily, and to take up their Gross, and follow him, will forsake
him. The whole world will wonder after the Beast, and his horns. Rev. 13.3. If
God does not put you among the Lambs company upon Mount Zion, you will never be
able to follow the Lamb whithersoever he goes, Rev. 14.4. The very noise, and
rumout that Christ is going unto a Prison, and that we shall not be able to
keep Company with him, and mind his Interest vigorously, unless we are made
willing to follow him into a Prison will make some recant, and rather
blasphemously, Father the Issues, Who does so now?
and births of the Spirit in them upon the flesh, then run the hazard of
suffering persecution, for the Truths, concerning Christ, and his Interest,
which they have declared; But you will say, Why do you send these lines unto
us? are we not all for Christ, and his People? their Cause, and Interest? I
answer, with Paul to Agrippa I wish that you were not almost, but altogether
all of you such as I am, Note.
except those bonds. I wish that you were all as really for the Cause of
Christ, and his people, against all Antichristian Spirits whatsoever, as you
seemed to be when the Churches at the first met at All-hallows. But know, that
men do easily deceive themselves in generals: In general, Papists, carnal
Protestants, all Professors of Christianity, are against Babylon, and
Antichrist; the man of sin, who professes himself to be Christ's Vicar, will
say that he were not worthy, to live, if he were not against every
Antichristian Spirit. And therefore come to particulars if you will not be
deceived, and deluded, by your own hearts. Again, if you will not be deceived
by the great Cheaters, Jugglers, Impostures your own hearts, do not only try
your selves, in particulars, in which all men, Saints, and sinners agree, and
which you may agree with them in, without suffering persecution, but come to
particulars, in the profession of which you may suffer persecution; Note.
The word of Christ in our generation may be a word for a while, for which we
may suffer. Christ had never had any Martyrs, if there had not been some raised
in Spirit, to hold forth something in opposition to the judgment of the powers
of the world under which they lived; It is an easy thing to Preach, and
maintain a thousand truths without suffering. And it may be that Christ would
have one Note.
truth preached, and witnessed unto, which will certainly bring persecution at
the heels of it. You may Preach, and speak against ten thousand sins, and not
suffer the loss of one hair by it; And yet there is one sin which Christ will
have his People speak against, which may cost them their lives, which I could
easily demonstrate; but the messengers departure does enforce me to break off
abruptly. The Lord preserve you in ways of truth, and peace, and make you more
willing to suffer with the Interest of Christ, then to reign with a base,
beggarly, and proud Interest of men, which shall be the prayer of him, who in
the Spirit of truth can subscribe himself,

Your Brother, and Christ's Prisoner, John Sympson.
Windsor, 1. Month, 25. day, 1654. This is a true Copy of the Original.

examined by us, Tho. Carry. John Clements.




Brethren in the Lord,
IF I am not mistaken concerning the time, in which we live, the next eminent
work of God, which will appear upon the stage, will be the filling of his
Temple with smoke from the glory of God, and his power, Rev. 15.19. And
therefore it will not be an unseasonable word to stir you up to pray for the
Accomplishing of it; there will not be any great thing done, beyond what you
have seen with your eyes, until the Angel of the Covenant, come into his
Temple, to fill it with the glory of his Spirit, surely the Spirit is upon his
return to the Churches of Jesus Christ. During the reign of the man of sin, the
Learned Impostures of the world, with their Accademical Anointings have
ecclipsed the glory of the Saints, but when the promised Spirit of glory in
Graces, and gifts, shall dwell among Sions Congregations, the learned wisdom,
and policy of the carnal Church will be confounded. As yet, as I humbly
conceive, one vial has not been poured forth, But suddenly a great voice will
be heard out of the Temple saying to the seven Angels, Go your ways, and pour
out the vials of the wrath of God upon the earth, Rev. 16.1. As when the Temple
of Solomon was Consecrated fire came down from Heaven, and the glory of the
Lord filled the house, and the Priests could not enter into the Temple, 2 Chronicles. 7.1, 2. So Christ of whom Solomon was a Type, is about to Consecrate his
New Testament Temple, which Antichrist has profaned, and polluted. And
suddenly the glory of Jehovah will fill his Churches, fire will come down from
heaven upon his beloved ones. The Angel will fly through the midst of. Heaven
preaching the everlasting Gospel, and the earth will be enlightened with his
glory. Hitherto only some of Antichrists body has been destroyed, but then
his Spirit will be confounded, and destroyed. It was the speech of Luther
concerning King Harry the 8th. that he hated the body of Antichrist, but loved,
and lived in his Spirit. Note.
So there are many in these times who hate the body, but love, and live in the
Spirit of the Whore. The Spirit of the Whore is exalted in England, and though
few can see Spirits, yet blessed be God there are some who have Eagles eyes,
and behold the Spirit of Christ, and Antichrist, combating upon the stage of
England. As blind as I am, who am not worthy to be accounted a spiritual
Saint, from Windsor Castle I descry and behold the Spirit of Babylon, gotten
upon the throne in England; yea, I behold a Beast risen in England, with two
horns like a Lamb, but he speaks like a Dragon. It was the speech of a Pope
concerning an Archbishop of Canter bury, That he was a Pope of another world:
Alterius orbis Papa. Meaning of England. I tell you the truth, there is not
only a Pope of Rome, but there is a Pope of another world, but by faith I do
behold his horns dropped off. And I pray to my God, that that may happen unto
him, which befell the Caldean Lion, Dan. 7.4. That his wings may be plucked, and
he made to stand upon his feet, and that a man's heart may be given unto him.
Oh, that he might cease to be a beast, and become a man. If the Spirit of
Antichrist be in the Pope, and his Cardinals, he is in this Beast, and his
Delegates; The Lord Jesus has set in his Church, first Apostles, secondarily
Prophets, thirdly Teachers; after that Miracles, then gifts of healing, Helps,
Governments, diversity of Tongues. But this Beast by his Ecclesiastical,
Antichristian power, has set up Commissioners, Patrons, Parsons, Vicars
Curates, and Lecturers. Who is a Lecturer now.
The Lord Jesus does make Ministers by the Unction of the Spirit: But this
Beast does make Ministers by a Sealed Instrument. The Lord Jesus has appointed
that his Ministers should live by the free contribution of the People: But this
Beast will maintain them in the enjoyment of a maintenance which by the Mother
of Harlots, is enforced, and compelled from the People. Sweet Jesus open the
eyes of the People of England, that they may see themselves in the midst of
Babylon. Dear Brethren be not offended with the subject of this Letter, I am
bound as a Watchman to give you notice of the approaching of the Beast, and be
not offended, with my manner of expressing of my self. It is best to speak of
Christian, and Antichristian things, and persons, Note.
in the language of the Scripture, or Scripture like words. What I write, I
write with a good conscience, without doubting, or wavering, blessed be Jehovah
for it, and therefore receive it in love, learn to love every truth of God, if
any of you be otherwise minded, concerning this matter, God shall reveal even
this unto you, in the mean while whereunto you have already attained, walk by
the same Rule of Christ, and mind the same things. Pray to God that he may
keep you sound in the Faith, which I hope you have received from Jesus Christ;
and take heed of those deceitful workers, who overthrow the plain, and simple
gospel of Christ. Do not hazard your own souls, endamage the souls of others,
not encourage them by lending an ear unto their Sermons and discourses, beware
of familistical, and notional wolves in sheeps clothing; remember that victory
over false Teachers, is part of that victory which we have by Christ. Ye are of
God little Children, and have overcome them, John 4.4. Because greater is he
that is in you, then he that is in the world. If any therefore come into your
City, and bring not the plain Doctrine of Faith, according to Godliness, bid
them not God speed, for he that bids them God speed, is partaker of their
evil deeds, 2 John 10.11. Do not murder Souls, by encouraging
Soul-murtherers, by hearing of them, but beware lest being led away by the
error of the wicked, you fall from your own stedfastness, 2 Pet. 3.16.17. But
grow in grace, and in the knowledge of our Lord Jesus Christ, To him be glory
both now, and for ever. Amen.

Your Brother in the Spirit of Jesus, John Sympson.
Windsor the 2. Month the 8th. day 1654. This is a true Copy of the Original,

examined by us Tho. Carry. John Clements.




Dear Brethren,
I Have through mercy a whole week together tasted the sweetness of God in close
Imprisonment, it is nothing to be alone, if it be for many years together,
where there is a gracious presence of God: he that with Enoch walks with God,
can never be alone. It was the speech of an heathen, I am never less alone,
then when I am alone, how much more may a Christian say, who in truth can say.
Truly my fellowship is with the Father, and with his Son Jesus. Unless the New
Courtiers, did love me very well, they would not deal with me as they do. If
they knew what an Advantage close Imprisonment were unto me; That my Faith,
Joys, Hope, Sanctification, might arise higher, my Father gave forth his
Orders that the under Gaolers, should keep me close Prisoner, Father if thou will be so sweet in all thy dispensations to thy worthless and vile Creature
(though by grace thy Son) it shall not be grievous unto me; If it shall please
thee to suffer them to deal more roughly, and barbarously with me, God is so
sweet that I cannot but glory in Tribulations. I have my wife and children
about me, while I am alone, because my Jesus is with me: My personal Communion
is so sweet with God, that were it not that I would not live only to my self,
and my own comforts in glorifying God, but do desire to be useful unto others
in glorifying God, I should never desire more external Liberty. God does smile
upon me, yea that you may wax confident by my Imprisonment, and not be ashamed
of my reproach: I must tell you the cause for which I suffer does smile upon
me. Who am I, that God has so highly honored me, in thinking me worthy to
suffer for Righteousness sake, in bearing witness against the Note.
Covetousness, Lies, Perjuries, Hypocrisies and Tyranicall Practices of Men, I
would not change my Imprisoned condition with the highest condition of my
persecutors and oppressors. How much is it better to be a persecuted Saint,
then a Persecutor? The Lord will succor, and relieve the oppressed, but will
break in pieces the oppressor. I begin to be persuaded that there is some truth
in the things which formerly I spoke doubtfully of. About at twelve month
since in Martins fields, I was transported into a Spirit beyond my own, and in
it the downfall of great O. was revealed unto me. About the dissolution of the
Parliament, I saw great O. four several Mornings Intellectually. In the first,
he was hastily running toward a Crown; In the second, he sat in a Chair of
State, In the third, he was presented with a part of Horns upon his head; and
in the fourth, he was shamefully tumbled from his Pomp, and Glory. I have seen
the three first come to pass, and for the third I do now more fully understand
it then ever I did. His two Horns are his Tyrannical Power, by which he does
push at, and persecute the poor Saints; and his Antichristian power, by which
in things Spiritual and Ecclesiastical, he does oppose Christ in his Royal
Prerogatives, as he is King of Saints, and an appointer, and ordainer of
Preachers according to his own Laws. I pity the man in the place in which he
is now seated; If he were an Angel in his present place, and feat, he could not
but be a persecutor of the Saints, Note.
for he is one of the ten horns of the Beast which must make war with the Lamb;
but he shall overcome him, for he is Lord of lords, and King of kings, and they
that are with him, are called, chosen, and faithful; Rev. 17.14. I had an
impulse of Spirit, in which I was strongly carried to believe, that that
Bastardly Government, in the setting up of which, the mouths of Gods enemies
were opened to blaspheme, should die, and not live, though in it self it might
be good enough, and too good for us, unless we did walk more worthy of our
mercies; yet considering it, as set up by them, who declared so much for the
Liberty of the free born people of England, and the Interest of Christ, it is a
bastard begotten, and conceived in a night of Hypocrisy, and brought forth in
a day of bold faced impiety, and the Lord will make a grave for it, for it is
vild. I did apprehend that great O. was set up by God permissively, by the
Dragon voluntarily, by himself ambitiously, by the Army cowardly, by Is not
Kelzye, Strange, Harrison, Ducker, Sumner, whom we have charged with this, And
others the willing Traitors, according to his own words.
willing Saints Traitorously, and by unwilling Saints passively, and
mournfully. I do repeat these things that you may know I am confirmed and not
weakened in my persuasions, and that you may know what comfortable ground I have
to wait for the accomplishment of what is behind. It is sweet to me now in this
confinement to consider, that I had a hint of these things, by Intellectual
vision, or dreams before they came to pass. In a slumber, about Worcester
Business, I saw great O, lying upon the ground, with most of his great
Officers, and their mouths stopped with clay, by which I was persuaded, that
they should not be able to act any more for Christ, or fetch breath in his
cause, which is come to pass. Before the dissolution of the long sitting
Parliament. In a dream I beheld some lusty fellows binding an old man, who
when he was bound, his cords did break, but he was so feeble that he could not
rise again, and presently after they had left him; they caught hold of me, and
apprehended me. It was given in, that the Parliament was the Old man, and that
after they had dissolved the Parliament, they should persecute me; which I
charged upon the memories of some friends to remember. I scarce know how to
speak of these things, because some may think that I speak in wrath, when I
speak upon a more noble account, for the glory of God. But let truth be spoken
though I suffer in the opinions of some Saints. I shall conclude with desiring
your Prayers, for these things, first, that I may oppose the enemies of Christ,
as his, not mine, hating their ways yet loving their persons as my own.
Secondly, That I may pray in faith with the Psalmist, Psalm. 119.134. Deliver me
from the oppression of man, so will I keep thy precepts. Thirdly, That God
might strike my strongest corruptions under the fifth rib by this imprisonment.
Fourthly, That God would anoint me with fresh oil, to Preach and Baptize,
Fifthly, That God would teach me to see how far my suffering may be accounted a
Martyrdom, in relation to Christ's good cause, and a Judgment, in relation to
my unprofitable walking before God and his people; for the same suffering may
be a Martyrdom for Christ, and a judgment to our flesh, 1. Pet. 4.16, 17. The
Lord enable you to ask these things in faith, and thoroughly enable you to
every good work, through Christ, to whom be glory everlastingly. Amen.

J.S.
From the old Steeple 4th Month, 3d. day. 1654. This a true Copy of the
Original, examined by us,

Tho. Carry. John Clements.




Several Objections against the Printing and Publishing of the aforementioned
Transactions, relating to our withdrawing and separation from the Soldiers,
and Mr. Simpson, etc. As also Mr. Simpsons Letters weighed, scanned, and
answered.
WE find a certain rule in Scripture, that where a Brother or Brethren walk
disorderly they are to be adminished and withdrawn from, 2 These. 3.6. And in
case of perseverance in their evil, after admonition, to he saparated from;
and all Church relation disowned with them, according to Mat. 18.15, 16, 17,
18. Cor. 5 5.2 Cor. 6.17.2 Tim. 3.5. And when this is done, they are to be unto
us as those that are without: but we see no Scripture warrant leading us to
publish the sins, and evil practices of such persons, but rather to leave them
unto the Lord to be converted, or otherwise, as he in his secret will has
determined: yea, it seems to us rather to savor of malice and revenge, then of
a Gospel frame of Spirit.

Answ. There are two things to be considered for the making a righ answer to
this objection, which we desire may be weighed. First, the nature of the sin
such persons are guilty of, that is to say, whether it be of u private or
public concernment; for accordingly the Lord is either more or less
dishonored, and therefore the Apostle speaks concerning some in this kind, I
Tim. 5.20., in these words, Them that sin, rebuke before all, that others may
fear: painly intimating, that if persons, who are called brethren have such
foreheads of brass, as to commit sin in the face of the sun, whereby God is
not only dishonored in respect of the sin it self, but others undone thereby,
as the sin of the Soldiers is by Treason, False-swearing, Oppression, etc, And
that not to the ruin of a few, but the whole Nation: yea, to the crucifying
and destroying of the Cause and Interest Christ contended for in the late.
Wars, with the loss of so much precious blood, we do then conceive that they
ought to be rebuked before all, that the Nation, against whom they have sinned,
may know that we disown such wicked practices, being contrary to the light of
nature, much more of grace, which is also the more to be weighed in regard that
Public Sins, brings Public Judgments; so did the sins of the Among other
Scriprures, see 2 Kings 21.11, 12. Jer, 15.4. Hos. 1.4.
Rulers in Israel upon the whole mation: And therefore Pilate himself being
forewarned by his wife, not to have a hand in the death of our Lord Jesus,
being an innocent person, without doubt did foresee how sad it would be with
the Nation upon that account; and therefore Mar. 27.19, 24
took water in the presence of the whole Court, and published before them all,
that he would have no hand in his death; and what a Judgment has there been
upon the Jews ever since for that public sin? And how did the Apostles
afterward, testify against the Rulers publicly for their sin in so doing?
And if lawful to speak in that manner against them, then certainly it cannot
but be as lawful to write. In the next place, as the sin is to be considered,
so the Estate, Quality, and Officer of such persons who commits it: And herein
also sin is the more aggravated, for when Soldiers or Magistrates have
professed before God, Angels, and Men, what they would As by their Declarations
does appear.
do for Christ, his glory, and poor afflicted people, in administering of
Justice, and Righteousness, relieving the oppressed and breaking yokes, as also
to improve all their Military, and civil power for the same whereunto they were
called and entrusted both by God and man, shall instead thereof, take the Crown
from off Christ's head and put it upon their own, and make use of their Power,
and Force to oppress a Nation, and do violence to all that will not bow down
to their Lusts; Also maintaining Antichristian Laws, to force the consciences
of the Lords People; and all this contrary to their professed, and declared
light, which is the more considerable, in regard they have been Instruments in
the Lords hand, to pull down the late King, with his Son, and other abettors,
for the like abominations now committed by themselves; we then do humbly
apprehend, that not only a Personal, but National reproof, is to be given them
according to the nature of their offense, and the capacity wherein they stand,
so that it seems to us not only to be our Gospel Liberty, but our Gospel Duty,
to publish by whriting the sin of the Soldiers with their abettors.

Objection, The aforesaid Scripture although it speaks full as to their being
rebuked before all according to the nature of their offense, with the capacity
wherein they stand which we must confess does weigh in the ballane of truth,
yet this does not prove that we ought to publish their sins by writing, and
therefore we would gladly hear what Scripture you have for the same.

Answer, In case it appears, that according to the nature of their sin, and the
capacity they stand in, they cannot be rebuked before all, but by publishing
them by writing, then we think it cannot be supposed, but that it is our Gospel
liberty so to do, or otherwise, as may most answer the end of the Scripture,
that their folly being manifest to all, they may proceed no further; else how
came Paul's epistle about the Incestuous Person to be published; surely none
will Judge that the Apostle did write out of malice, or revenge; But further we
desire more particularly that that Scripture in Isa. 30.1, 2. and 8. verses,
Isa, 31.1. Hos.8.3, 4 Hab. 2.6, 9, 15. Amos 6.1, 3, 4, 5, 12, 13. Hos. 5.7.
Isa, 19.15, 21. Isa, 30.9, 10, 11, 12, 16. 2 Chr. 36.16. Mat. 2.24, 48, 49.
together with the Scriptures in the margent may be compared, and it will
appear, that the sin of Israel in that day runs parallel, as face answers to
face in a glass with the sin of our day, as if it were the very time he
prophesied of. In the first and second verses, after he has laid down their
sin, with the aggravations of it, he is commanded in the eigh verse to write it
in a table; and note it in a book that it may be for the time to come for ever
and ever. And the sin of the Soldiers in this day seems to run in a line with
the sin of Israel in that day; and without doubt the Propher by the Spirit of
the Lord was directed to foresee our very day, that what he then writ might be
a word of Instruction for after ages. For whatsoever things were written
aforetime, were written for our learning, etc. Romans 5.4.

Object. The end of Paul's writing about the Incestuous person, was not so much
about publishing by writing the sin of such a person, or persons, in the like
manner guilty, but rather for direction unto the Churches, how they ought to
proceed against persons guilty of such gross sins, Because a little leaven
leaveneth the whole lump. And for that Scripture in Isa. though it be full unto
the purpose for which it is urged, yet we conceive he had an extraordinary
command for it. Also the Church of the Jews being National, it was no more then
a publishing their sin in the Church.

Answ. We do grant, as is laid down in the objection, that one end of the
Apostle, was to give direction, how brethren, in Church relation, guilty of
gross sins, ought to be proceeded against; yet this does no ways weaken the
other end the Apostle might have, in leaving this Epistle upon record, that, if
God may be glorified by it, to publish by writing the sins of such persons for
generations to come, which being compared with that in the 30. of Isa.
aforementioned, seems unto us strongly to warrant such a practice. And
although it is urged in the Objection, that what Isaiah writ, was by an
extraordinary Spirit, and unto the Jews, as a National Church: So was all the
Scripture writ with an extraordinary Spirit, wherein are some things for our
positive Rule, and the rest, as words of Instruction, for the people of God in
after ages; that they might with that ordinary portion of the Spirit given
forth unto them, with the help of the Scripture, be thoroughly furnished to
every good work. And for what is further urged, That it was a Church Act, they
being a National Church; That we conceive is a mistake, or at least much
shortning the scope of the Spirit thereby intended; for in the 9. verse of that
Chapter, the Prophet is directed to write down their transgression, not only
as a Church, but as a The Judgments against Judah, were written in a Roll, and
published, in the Lords house, and abroad to the people. And their fins,
likewise, the cause of those Judgments were there with declared, see Jer.
36.2, 4, 6, 28, 31 32 comp. with chap. 35.13.15, 17.
Nation, in these words, This is a rebellious people; there is their national
state: and in the next words, lying Children, there is their Church State; so
that we conceive this Scripture stands firm and unanswerable.

Object. Was not Ham, Noah's son, reproved for uncovering his fathers nakedness,
though guilty of the sin of drunkenness, Genesis 9.22. And if they should be
published, this Scripture would reprove us, for has not Mr. Sympson been as a
father unto us.

Answ. Noah's sin was private, committed in his cent; Noah's sin was not Wilful,
but Ignorantly; for he being the first that planted a vine, (as we read of,)
was Genesis 9.21, 22.
drunk with the wine, not knowing the strength thereof. Also Ham uncovered his
fathers nakedness, before fore he had humbly laid his evil before his father,
for else we conceive, that if Noah had persevered to justify himself after
admonition, once and again, (as the Soldiers and Mr. Sympson do, and continue
in their evil,) Ham would not then have been charged with uncovering his
fathers nakedness. Now the sin of the Soldiers is a National sin, in turning
aside to the old Abominations after many outgoings of God to the pulling them
down, and solemn Declarations, Engagements and Promises to the Contrary. And
for Master Sympson; We conceive that in publishing his Letters; we rather
cover, then uncover him; by holding forth to the view of all, what and
excellent Spirit was formerly in him for Christ, and his Glory. But further we
meddle not neither in the Narrative preceding, otherwise then in our proceeding
against the Sonldiers he comes in as their Abettor.

Object. Was not the sin of Judas in betraying Christ a public sin yet we do
not read that the Disciples ever made mention of him, except it were in the
choice of another Apostle to take his place; and therefore we do conceive that
although their sin be public, and they in a public capacity, yet it ought
not to be published.

Answ. This Objection seems unto us to have no weight in it, in case it were so
as you assert: For Judas went and confessed his sin to the Chief Priests, and
Rulers and then destroyed himself, as the just Judgment of God upon him for his
great iniquity, in Betraying our Lord Jesus; And therefore not so needful to
testify against a person who was taken out of the world by so eminent a
Judgment. But yet we find that as the Lord by his Spirit in his faithful ones,
has Recorded, and published the sins, of Asa, Jehu, Hazael, and other Rulers,
as also the sins of his own people in the old Testament: So by the same Spirit
has the Disciples Matthew. 26.15, 16, 25, 47, 48, 49. Mark 14.10, 11, 43, 44,
45. Luke 6.16 Chap. 22.47, 48. John 18.2, 3. 2 Timothy 4.10, 14.
Recorded the sins of Judas in the New, and to his perpetual infamy, published
him to the world as a covetous, and treacherous person, in betraying our Lord
Jesus. As also, the sins of Acts 7.51, 52.
Demas, and Alexander. Likewise have the Apostles persevered in their public
testimony against the Scribes, and Pharisees, etc. for continuing in, and
justifying of the sin of their forefathers in shedding of innocent blood. And
do not the Soldiers by their sin in upholding the Oppression, Tyranny, and
Persecution of this day, also justify the former Oppressors, Tyrants, and
Persecutors in their sin, adding thereunto more and more to the shame of
Profession, not only in this, but other Nations also? Wherefore it is much
upon the hearts of some of us, That if our Transactions in this kind had not
been published, we should not have been able to free our selves from the guilt
of the blood shed in the late Wars; In regard we have hereby a price put into
our hands, and so are called to serve the Lord there with.

Object. Notwithstanding what has been spoken, we are not satisfied as to the
Printing and publishing of the said papers, for it seems to us to savor of
vainglory at the least, and therefore were desire that, 2 Samuel 1.20. concerning
the death of Saul may be considered, where David makes use of these words
concerning him; Tell it not in Gath, publish it not in the streets of Askelon,
lest the daughters of the Philistines rejoice, lest the daughters of the
uncircumcised triumph, Now if Saul's iniquity ought not to be published, who had
so foully, backslidden from the Lord, lest the enemies of the Lord should
triumph, then surely the Soldiers evil ought not to be published, which we
think does not exceed Saul's, though we are satisfied that the Lord is greatly
dishonored by them.

Answ. For a right understanding of this Scripture, and thereby a due answer
unto this objection, we desire, that 1 Samuel 31.8, and 9, verses may be weighed;
Where it will appear, that the Philistines the next day after the battle,
finding Saul among the slain of Israel, out off his head and sent it into the
Land of the Philistines round about, to publish it in the house of their Idol
Gods, and among the people, so that Saul's death was alreadly published all over
the land of the Philistimes; and therefore as it ought not, so it needed not to
be published by Israel, for he had not sinned against the Philistines. But the
Soldiers have sinned not only against the people of God, but the whole
Nation; and in this wickedness, keep the Nation under their oppressive power;
and not only so, but cover their evil to many Godly as well as Carnal men,
saying, They have done no evil, and therefore their iniquity ought to be
published to undeceive the people, and many gracious hearts, who still follow
them, as some did Absalom that rebelled against David. In the next place,
though Saul had back-slidden in a particular command about saving Agag alive,
and preserving the Cattle of the Amalekites to offer Sacrifice with, yet still
he fought the Lords battles, and ruled by the same Lams as before; so that
though his sin was known in the Nation where he dwelt, yet it was not, as we
can read known to any other Nation, for Israel held correspondency then with no
Nation, but were a distinct people separate from them all; so that it would
indeed have savoured of vainglory to publish his evil to such. But the
Soldiers have engaged to stand by the grand Apostate, who has sworn to
maintain the body of the old Beastly Antichristian Laws, contrary to the end of
the Lord and his people in the late War, and their own Declarations and
Engagement so solemnly made in the day of their straits. Also, they fight Rev,
17.13, 14. compared Jer. 51.56, 57.
Antichrists battles, and not the battle of our Lord Christ, and so their sin
exceeds Saul's; and if they persist therein, so also will they Judgment. And
therefore may, and ought to be published within the bounds of our own Nation,
against whom they have sinned. Moreover Saul was Gods anointed, and therefore
he was engaged to stand by him against his enemies, had he not back-slidden, so
that had they published his death, it was in a manner to have disowned the
Lords Anointed; upon which account it was (as we conceive) that David mourned
for him after his death, as being the glory of Israel; but we hope there is
none will be so void of understanding as to make such a comparison between the
Soldiers and Saul. Adding hereunto also, that Saul by his death (as the just
hand of the Lord upon him) was removed from any further dishonouring of his
Name by his Apostasy. And so there needed no testifying against him, which was
not in being, no more then against Judas after the just hand of the Lord had
reached him for his inquity. But the Soldiers have the Power of the Nation in
their hands, and stout it out against the Lord and his People, persevering in
their evil, and adding more and more to the dishonor, etc reproach they have
already brought to the name of the Lord, by covering their iniquity, under a 2 Timothy 3.1, 2, 3, 4, 5.
Form of Godliness and therefore their iniquity ought to be published to
unvaile their hypocrisy, and discharge a good conscience by a suitable
testimony against them.

FINIS.

