REMAINS OF Mr. John Oldham IN VERSE and PROSE.

LONDON: Printed for Jo. Hindmarsh, at the Golden Ball over against the Royal
Exchange in Cornhil. 1687.

ADVERTISEMENT.
THE Author of these following Poems being dead, the Publisher thought fit to
acquaint the World, that the reason why he exposed them now in Print, was not
so much for his own Interest (tho a Bookseller that disclaims Interest for a
pretense, will no more be believed now adays, than a thorough paced Fanatic,
that pretends he makes a journey to New England purely for Conscience sake) but
for securing the reputation of Mr. Oldham; which might otherwise have suffered
from worse hands, and out of a desire he has to Print the last Remains of his
friend since he had the good fortune to publish his first Pieces.

He confesses that it is the greatest piece of injustice to publish the
posthumous Works of Authors, especially such, that we may suppose they had
brought to the File and sent out with more advantages into the World, had they
not been prevented by untimely death; and therefore assures you he had never
presumed to Print these following Miscellanies, had they not already been
countenanced by men of unquestionable repute and esteem.

He is not of the same persuasion with several others of his own profession,
that never care how much they lessen the reputation of the Poet, if they can
but inhance the value of the Book; that ransack the Studies of the deceased,
and Print all that passed under the Author's hands, from Fifteen to Forty, and
upwards: and (as the incomparable Mr. Cowley has expressed it) think a rude heap
of ill placed Stones a better Monument than a neat Tomb of Marble.

To the MEMORY of Mr. OLDHAM.
Farewell, too little and too lately known,
Whom I began to think and call my own;
For sure our Souls were near allied; and thine
Cast in the same Poetic mould with mine.
One common Note on either Lyre did strike,
And Knaves and Fools we both abhorred alike:
To the same Goal did both our Studies drive,
The last set out the soonest did arrive.
Thus Nisus fell upon the slippery place,
While his young Friend performed and won the Race.
O early ripe! to thy abundant store
What could advancing Age have added more?
It might (what Nature never gives the young)
Have taught the numbers of thy native Tongue.
But Satyr needs not those, and Wit will shine
Through the harsh cadence of a rugged line.
A noble Error, and but seldom made,
When Poets are by too much force betrayed,
Thy generous fruits, though gathered ere their prime
Still showed a quickness; and maturing time
But mellows what we write to the dull sweets of Rhyme.
Once more, hail and farewell; farewell thou young,
But ah too short, Marcellus of our Tongue;
Thy Brows with Ivy, and with Laurels bound;
But Fate and gloomy Night encompass thee around.
John Dryden.

Authori Epitaphium.
HOC, o Viator, marmore conditoe
Charoe recumbunt Exuviae brevem
Viventis (oh! sors dura) vitam,
Praecoce coelum anima petentis.
Nec praepedita est Men's celeris diu,
Quin Pustularum mill tumoribus
Effloruit, portisque mill
Praepes iter patefecit altum.
Musarum Alumnus jam fuit, artibus
Instructus almis, quas, studio pio,
Atque aure quam fida repostas,
Oxonii coluit Parentis.
Hic quadriennis proemia Filii
Dignus recepi, Vellera candida,
Collati Honoris signa, necnon
Innocui simulacra cordis.
Sed mane montis summa cacumina
Ascendit ardens, Pierio jugo
Insedit, atque errore multo
Ipsum Helicona scatere vidit.
Nunc pura very Flumina perspicit,
Nunc mira Mundi semina concipit,
Pulchrasque primoevi figuras,
In speculo species creante.
At Tu, Viator, Numina poscito,
Vt dissolutis reliquits, vaga
Dum men's remigret, detur -- ah! sit
Terra levis, placidusque somnus.
On the Death of Mr. John Oldham, A Pindarique Pastoral Ode.
Stanza I.
UNdoubtedly it is thy peculiar Fate,
Ah, miserable Astragon!
Thou art condemned alone
To bear the Burden of a wretched Life,
Still in this howling Wilderness to roam,
While all thy Bosom-friends unkindly go,
And leave thee to lament them here below.
Thy dear Alexis would not stay,
Joy of thy Life, and Pleasure of thine Eyes,
Dear Alexis went away
With an invincible Surprise;
The Angel-like Youth early disliked this State,
And cheerfully submitted to his Fate.
Never did Soul of a Celestial Birth
Inform a purer piece of Earth.
O that 'twere not in vain
To wish what is past might be retrieved again!
Thy Dotage, thy Alexis, then
Had answered all thy Vows and Prayers,
And Crowned with pregnant Joys thy silver Hairs,
Loved to this day among the living Sons of Men.
II.
And thou, my Friend, have left me too,
Menalcas! poor Menalcas! even thou,
Of whom so loudly Fame has spoke
In the Records of her immortal Book,
Whose disregarded Worth Ages to come
Shall wail with Indignation over thy Tomb.
Worthy were thou to live, as long as Vice
Should need a Satyr, that the frantic Age
Might tremble at the Lash of thy poetic Rage.
The untutored World in after Times
May live uncensur'd for their Crimes,
Freed from the Dreads of thy reforming Pen,
Turn to old Chaos once again.
Of all the instructive Bards, whose more than Theban Lyre.
Could savage Souls with manly Thoughts inspire,
Menalcas worthy was to live.
Say, you his Fellow-Shepherds that survive,
Tell me, you mournful Swains,
Has my adored Menalcas left behind;
In all these pensive Plains
A gentler Shepherd with a braver mind:
Which of you all did more Majestic Show,
Or wore the Garland on a sweeter Brow?
III.
-- But wayward Astragon resolves no more
The Loss of his Menalcas to deplore:
The place to which he wisely is withdrawn
Is altogether blessed;
There no Clouds overwhelm his Breast,
No Midnight Cares can break his Rest;
For all is everlasting cheerful Dawn.
The Poet's Bliss there shall he long possess,
Perfect Ease and soft Recess;
The treacherous World no more shall him deceive,
Of Hope and Fortune he has taken Leave:
And now in mighty Triumph does he reign,
(His Head adorned with Beams of Light)
Over the unthinking Rabble's Spire,
And the dull wealthy Fool's disdain.
Thrice happy he that dies the Muses Friend,
He needs no Obelisque, no Pyramid
His sacred Dust to hide;
He needs not for his Memory to provide;
For he might well foresee his Praise can never end.
Thomas Flatman.

In Memory of the Author.
TAke this short summoned loose unfinisht Verse
Cold as thy Tomb, and sudden as thy Hearse;
From my sick Thoughts thou can no better crave,
Who scarce drag Life, and envy thee thy Grave.
Me Phoebus always faintly did inspire,
And gave my narrow Breast more scanty Fire.
My Hybla Muse through humble Meads sought Spoil,
Collecting little Sweets with mighty Toil;
Yet when some Friend's just Fame did Theme afford,
Her Voice amongst the towering Swans was heard.
In vain for such Attendance now I call,
My Ink overflows with Spleen, my Blood with Gall;
Yet, sweet Alexis, my Esteem of thee
Was equal to thy Worth and Love for me.
Death is thy Gain -- that Thought affects me most,
I care not what the ill-natured World has lost.
For Wit with thee expired, how shall I grieve?
Who grudge the ungrateful Age what thou did leave,
The Tribute of their Verse let others send,
And mourn the Poet gone, I mourn the Friend.
Enjoy thy Fate -- thy Predecessors come,
Cowley and Butler to conduct thee home.
Who would not ( Butler cries) like me engage
New Worlds of Wit to serve a grateful Age?
For such Rewards what Task will Authors shun?
I pray, Sir, is my Monument begun?
Enjoy thy Fate, thy Voice in Anthems raise;
So well tuned here on Earth to our Apollo's Praise:
Let me retire, while some sublimer Pen
Performs for thee what thou have done for Homer and for Ben.
N.T.

On the ensuing Poems of Mr. John Oldham, and the Death of his good Friend the
ingenious Author.
OBscure and cloudy did the day appear,
As Heaven designed to blot it from the year;
The Elements all seemed to disagree,
At least, I Am sure, they were at strife in me:
Possessed with Spleen, which Melancholy bred,
When Rumor told me that my Friend was dead,
That Oldham honored for his early Worth,
Was cropped, like a sweet Blossom from the Earth,
Where late he grew, delighting every Eye
In his rare Garden of Philosophy.
The fatal Sound new Sorrows did infuse,
And all my Griefs were doubled at the News:
For we with mutual Arms of Friendship strove,
Friendship the true and solid part of Love;
And he so many Graces had in store,
That Fame or Beauty could not bind me more.
His Wit in his immortal Verse appears,
Many his Virtues were, though few his Years;
Which were so spent as if by Heaven contrived,
To lash the Vices of the longer lived.
None was more skilful, none more learned than he,
A Poet in its sacred Quality:
Inspired above, and could command each Passion,
Had all the Wit without the Affectation.
A Calm of Nature still possessed his Soul,
No cankered Envy did his Breast control:
Modest as Virgins that have never known
The jilting Breeding of the nauseous Town;
And easy as his Numbers that sublime
His lofty Strains, and beautify his Rhyme,
Till the Time's Ignomy inspired his Pen,
And rowz'd the drowsy Satyr from his Den;
Then fluttering Fops were his Aversion still,
And felt the Power of his Satyrick Quill.
The Spark whose Noise proclaims his empty Pate,
That struts along the Mall with antic Gate;
And all the Phyllis and the Chloris Fools
Were damned by his invective Muse in Shoals.
Who on the Age looked with impartial Eyes,
And aimed not at the Person, but the Vice.
To all true Wit he was a constant Friend,
And as he well could judge, could well commend
The mighty Homer he with Care perused,
And that great Genius to the World infused;
Immortal Virgil, and Lucretius too,
And all the Seeds of the Soul his Reason knew:
Like Ovid, could the Ladies Hearts assail,
With Horace sing, and lash with Juvenal.
Unskilled in naught that did with Learning dwell,
But Pride to know he understood it well.
Adieu thou modest Type of perfect Man;
Ah, had not thy Perfections that began
In Life's bright Morning been eclipsed so soon,
We all had bask'd and wantoned in thy Noon;
But Fate grew envious of thy growing Fame,
And knowing Heaven from whence thy Genius came,
Assigned thee by immutable Decree
A glorious Crown of Immortality,
Snatched thee from all thy mourning Friends below,
Just as the Bays were planting on thy Brow.
Thus worldly Merit has the Worlds Regard;
But Poets in the next have their Reward;
And Heaven in Oldham's Fortune seemed to show,
No Recompense was good enough below:
So to prevent the Worlds ungrateful Crimes,
Enriched his Mind, and bid him die betimes.
T. Durfey.

On the Death of Mr. John Oldham.
Hark! is it only my prophetic Fear,
Or some Death's sad Alarm that I hear?
By all my Doubts it is Oldham's fatal Knell;
It rings aloud, eternally farewell:
Farewell thou mighty Genius of our Isle,
Whose forward Parts made all our Nation smile,
In whom both Wit and Knowledge did conspire,
And Nature gazed as if she did admire
How such few years such Learning could acquire:
Nay seemed concerned that we should hardly find
So sharp a Pen, and so serene a Mind.
Oh then lament; let each distracted Breast
With universal Sorrow be possessed.
Mourn, mourn, ye Muses, and your Songs give over;
For now your loved Adonis is no more.
He whom ye tutored from his Infant-years,
Cold, pale and ghastly as the Grave appears:
He whom ye bathed in your loved murmuring Stream,
Your daily pleasure, and your mighty Theme
Is now no more; the Youth, the Youth is dead,
The mighty Soul of Poetry is fled;
Fled ere his Worth or Merit was half known;
No sooner seen, but in a Moment gone:
Like to some tender Plant, which reared with Care,
At length becomes most fragrant, and most fair;
Long does it thrive, and long its Pride maintain,
Esteemed secure from Thunder, Storm or Rain;
Then comes a Blast, and all the Work is vain.
But Oh! my Friend, must we no more rehearse
Thy equal Numbers in thy pleasing Verse?
In Love how soft, in Satyr how severe?
In Passion moving, and in Rage austere!
Virgil in Judgment, Ovid in Delight,
An easy Thought with a Meonian Flight;
Horace in Sweetness, Juvenal in Rage,
And even Biblis must each Heart engage!
Just in his Praises, and what most desire,
Would flatter none for Greatness, Love or Hire;
Humble, though courted, and what is rare to see,
Of wondrous Worth, yet wondrous Modesty.
So far from Oftentation he did seem,
That he was meanest in his own Esteem.
Alas, young man, why were thou made to be
At once our Glory and our Misery?
Our Misery in losing thee is more
Than could thy Life our Glory be before:
For should a Soul celestial Joys possess,
And straight be banished from that Happiness,
Oh, where would be its Pleasure? where its Gain?
The Bliss once tasted but augments the Pain:
So having once so great a Prize in thee,
How much the heavier must our Sorrows be?
For if such Flights were in thy younger Days,
What if thou would lived, O what had been thy Praise?
Eternal Wreaths of never-dying Bays:
But those are due already to thy Name,
Which stands enrolled in the Records of Fame;
And though thy great Remains to Ashes turn,
With lasting Praises we'll supply thy Urn,
Which like Sepulchral Lamps shall ever burn.
But hold! methinks, great Shade, I see thee rove
Through the smooth Path of Plenty, Peace and Love;
Where Ben. salutes the first, o'erjoy'd to see
The Youth that sung his Fame and Memory:
Great Spencer next, with all the learned Train,
Do greet thee in a Panegyric Strain:
Adonis is the Joy of all the Plain.
Tho. Andrews.

DAMON, an ECLOGUE On the untimely Death of Mr. Oldham.
Corydon. Alexis. BEneath a dismal Yew the Shepherds sat,
And talked of Damon's Muse and Damon's Fate:
Their mutual Lamentations gave them Ease;
For sometimes Melancholy it self does please:
Like Philomel abandoned to distress,
Yet even their Griefs in Music they express.
Cor. I Will sing no more since Verses want a Charm,
The Muses could not their own Damon arm:
At least I Will touch this useless Pipe no more,
Unless, like Orpheus, I could Shades restore.

A. Rather, like Orpheus, celebrate your Friend,
And with your Music Hell it self suspend:
Tax Proserpine of Cruelty and Hate,
And sing of Damon's Muse, and Damon's Fate.

C. When Damon sung, he sung with such a Grace,
Lord, how the very London-brutes did gaze!
Sharp was his Satyr, nor allayed with Gall;
'Twas Rage, 'twas generous Indignation all.

A. Oh had he lived, and to Perfection grown,
Not like Marcellus, only to be shown;
He would have charmed their Sense a nobler way,
Taught Virgins how to sigh, and Priests to pray.

C. Let Priests and Virgins then to him address,
And in their Songs their Gratitude express,
While we that know the Worth of easy Verse,
Secure the Laurel to adorn his Hearse.

A. Codrus, you know, that sacred Badge does wear,
And 'twere injurious not to leave it there;
But since no Merit can strike Envy dumb,
Do you with Baccar, guard and grace his Tomb.

C. While you (dear Swain) with unaffected Rhyme,
Majestic, sad, and suited to the Time,
His Name to future Ages consecrate,
By praising of his Muse, and mourning of his Fate.

A. Alas, I never must pretend to this,
My Pipe scarce knows a Tune but what is his:
Let future Ages then for Damon's sake,
From his own Works a just Idaea take.
Yet then, but like Alcides he will be shown,
And from his meanest part his Size be known.

C. 'Twill be your Duty then to set it down.

A. Once and but once (so Heaven and Fate ordain)
I met the gentle Youth upon the Plain,
Kindly, cries he, if You Alexis be,
And though I know you not you must he be;
Too long already we have Strangers been,
This Day, at least, our Friendship must begin.
Let Business, that perverse Intruder, wait,
To be above it is poetical and great.
Then with Assyrian Nard our Heads did shine,
While rich Sabaean Spice exalts the Wine;
Which to a just Degree our Spirits fired;
But he was by a greater God inspired:
Wit was the Theme, which he did well describe,
With Modesty unusual to his Tribe.
But as with ominous Doubts, and aching Heart,
When Lovers after first Enjoyment part,
Not half content; for this was but a Taste,
And wondering how the Minutes flew so fast,
They vow a Friendship that shall ever last.
So we -- but oh how much am I accursed!
To think that this last Office is my first.

Occasioned by the present Edition of the ensuing Poems, and the Death of the
ingenious Author.
Cursed be the day when first this Godly Isle
Vile Books, and useless thinking did defile.
In Greek and Latin-Bogs our Time we waste,
When all is Pain and Weariness at best:
Mountains of Whims and Doubts we travel over,
While treacherous Fancy dances on before:
Pleased with our Danger still we stumble on,
Too late repent, and are too soon undone.
Let Bodley now in its own ruins lie,
By the common Hangman burnt for Heresy.
Avoid the nasty learned dust, 'twill breed
More Plagues than ever Jakes or Dunghils did.
The want of Dullness will the World undo,
It Is Learning makes us mad and Rebels too.
Learning, a Jilt which while we do enjoy,
Slily our Rest and Quiet steals away;
That greedily the Blood of Youth receives,
And naught but Blindness and a Dotage gives.
Worse than the Pox, or scolding Woman fly
The awkward Madness of Philosophy.
That Bedlam Bess, Religion never more
Fantastic, pie-ball'd, antic Dresses wore:
Opinion, Pride, Moroseness gives a Fame;
It Is Folly, christened with a modish Name.
Let dull Divinity no more delight;
It spoils the Man, and makes an Hypocrite.
The chief Professors to Preferment fly,
By Cringe and Scrape, the basest Simony.
The humble Clown will best the Gospel teach,
And inspired Ignorance sounder Doctrines preach.
A way to Heaven mere Nature well does show,
Which reasoning and Disputes can never know.
Yet still proud Tyrant Sense in Pomp appears,
And claims a Tribute of full threescore Years.
Sewed in a Sack, with Darkness circl'd round,
Each man must be with Snakes and Monkeys drowned.
Laborious Folly, and compendious Art,
To waste that Life whose longest Date's too short.
Laborious Folly, to wind up with Pain
What Death unravels soon, and renders vain.
We blindly hurry on in Mystic ways,
Nor wisely tread the Paths of solid Praise.
There Is naught deserves one precious drop of sweat,
But Poetry, the noblest Gift of Fate,
Which after Death does a more lasting Life beget.
Not that which sudden, frantic Heats produce,
Where Wine and Pride, not Heaven, shall raise the Muse.
Not that small Stock which does Translators make;
That Trade poor Bankrupt-Poetasters take:
But such, when God his Fiat did express,
And powerful Numbers wrought an Universe.
With such great David tuned his charming Lyre,
That even Saul and Madness could admire.
With such Great Oldham bravely did excel,
That David's Lamentation sung so well.
Oldham! the Man that could with Judgment write,
Our Oxford's Glory, and the World's Delight.
Sometimes in boundless keenest Satyr bold,
Sometimes as soft as those Love-tales he told.
That Vice could praise, and Virtue too disgrace;
The first Excess of Wit that ever did please.
Scarce Cowley such Pindarique soaring knew,
Yet by his Reader still was kept in view.
His Fancy, like Jove's Eagle lived above,
And bearing Thunder still would upward move.
Oh noble Kingston! had thy lovely Guest
With a large stock of Youth and Life been blessed;
Not all thy Greatness, or thy Virtues store
Had surer Comforts been, or pleased thee more.
But Oh! the date is short of mighty Worth,
And Angels never tarry long on Earth.
His soul, the bright, the pure Etherial Flame
To those loved Regions flew, from whence it came.
And spite of what Mankind had long believed,
My Creed says only Poets can be saved.
That God has only for a number staid,
To stop the breach, which Rebel Angels made.
For none their absence can so well supply;
They are all o'r Scraphick Harmony.
Then, and not that till then the World shall burn
And its base Dross, Mankind their fortune mourn,
While all to their old nothing quick return.
The peevish Critic then shall be ashamed,
And for his Sins of Vanity be damned.
T. Wood.
Oxon, May the 26th. 1684.
On the Death of Mr. Oldham, A PASTORAL.
On the Remains of an old blasted Oak
Unmindful of himself Menalcas leaned;
He sought not now in heat the shades of Trees,
But shunned the flowing Rivers pleasing bank.
His Pipe and Hook lay scattered on the Grass:
Nor fed his Sheep together on the Plain,
Left to themselves they wandered out at large.
In this Lamenting state Young Corydon
(His Friend and Dear Companion of his Hour)
Finding Menalcas, asks him thus the Cause.
Corydon. Thee have I sought in every shady Grove,
By purling Streams, and in each private Place,
Where we have used to sit and talk of Love.
Why do I find thee leaning on an Oak,
By Lightning blasted and by Thunder rent?
What cursed Chance has turned thy cheerful Mind?
And why will thou have woes unknown to me?
But I would Comfort and not chide my Friend:
Tell me thy Grief, and let me bear a Part.

Menalcas. Young Astrophel is dead, Dear Astrophel,
He that could Tune so well his charming Pipe:
To hear whose Lays Nymphs left their Crystal Spring,
The Fawns and Dryades forsook the Woods,
And hearing, all were ravished: Swiftest Streams
withheld their Course to hear the Heavenly Sound,
And murmured, when by following Waves pressed on,
The following Waves forcing their Way to hear.
Often the Fierce wolf pursuing of the Lamb,
Hungry and wildly certain of his Prey,
Left the Pursuit rather than lose the Sound
Of his alluring Pipe: The Harmless Lamb
Forgot his Nature and forsook his Fear,
Stood by the Wolf and listened to the Sound.
He could command a general Peace and Nature would obey.
This Youth, this Youth is dead, the same Disease,
That carried sweet Orinda from the World,
Seized upon Astrophel: Oh Let these Tears
Be offered to the Memory of my Friend,
And Let my Speech give way a while to Sighs.

Corydon. Weep on Menalcas, for his Fate requires
The Tears of all Mankind: General the Loss,
And General be the Grief, except by Fame
I knew him not but surely this is he,
Who Sung learned Spencer and Johnson.
Collin's, or great Spencer and Johnson.
Aegon's Praise?
Dead ere he lived, yet have new Life from him.
Did he not mourn lamented Rochester.
Bion's Death;
In Verse equal to what Bion wrote?

Menalcas. Yes this was he (oh that I say he was)
He that could sing the Shepherds deeds so well,
Whether to praise the Good he turned his Pen,
Or lasht the egregious Folly of the Bad,
In both he did excel. --
His happy genius bid him take the Pen,
And dictated more fast than he could write,
Sometimes becoming Negligence adorned
His Verse, and Nature showed they were her own,
Yet Art he used, where Art could useful be,
But sweated not to be correctly dull.

Corydon. Had Fate allowed his Life a longer thread,
Adding Experience to that wondrous Fraught
of Youthful Vigor, how would he have wrote!

Menalcas. We wish for Life, not thinking of its Cares,
I mourn his Death, the loss of such a Friend:
But for himself he dyed in the best Hour,
And carried with him every man's Applause.
Youth meets not with Detractions blotting hand,
Nor suffers ought from Envy's cankered Mind.
Had he known Age, he would have seen the World,
Put on its ugliest but its truest Face:
Malice had watched the Droppings of his Pen,
And ignorant Youths, who would for Critics pass,
Had thrown their scornful Jests upon his Vene,
And censured what they did not understand.
Such was not my Dear Astrophel: he is dead,
And I shall quickly follow him, what is Death,
But an eternal Sleep without a Dream?
Wrapped in a lasting Darkness, and exempt
From Hope and Fear, and every idle Passion.

Corydon. See thy Complaints have moved the pitying Skies,
They mourn the Death of Astrophel in Tears.
Thy Sheep returned from straying, round they gaze,
And wonder at thy mourning: Drive them Home,
And tempt thy troubled mind with easing Sleep.
To Morrow cheerful Light may give thee Comfort.

To the MEMORY of Mr. JOHN OLDHAM.
BUT that it is dangerous for Man to be
Too busy with Immutable Decree,
I could, dear Friend, even blame thy cruel Doom,
That lent so much, to be required so soon:
The Flowers, in which the Meads are dressed so gay,
Although they are short lived, they live a Day;
Thou, in the Noon of Life were snatched away:
Though not before thy Verse had Wonders shown,
And bravely made the Age to come thine own!
The Company of Beauty, Wealth, and Wine,
Were not so charming, not so sweet as thine;
They quickly perish; yours was still the same,
An Everlasting, but a Lambent Flame;
Which something so resistless did impart,
It still through every Ear, won every Heart:
Unlike the Wretch that strives to get Esteem,
Nay, thinks it fine and Janty to blaspheme,
And can be witty on no other Theme:
Ah Foolish men, (whom thou did still despise)
That must be wicked to be counted wise!
But thy Converse was from this Error free;
And yet, 'twas every thing true Wit can be:
None had it, but, even with a Tear, does own,
The Soul of dear Society is gone.
But while we thus thy Native Sweetness sing,
We ought not to forget thy Native Sting:
Thy Satyr spared no Follies, nor no Crimes;
Satyr! the best Reformer of the Times!
How wide shoot they, that strive to blast thy Fame,
By saying, that thy Verse was rough and lame?
They would have Satyr their Compassion move,
And writ so plyant, nicely, and so smooth,
As if the Muse were in a Flux of Love:
But who of Knaves, and Fops, and Fools would sing,
Must Force, and Fire, and Indignation bring;
For it is no Satyr, if it has no Sting:
In short, who in that Field would Famous be,
Must think, and write like Juvenal and Thee.
Let others boast of all the Mighty Nine,
To make their Labors with more Luster shine;
I never had no other Muse but Thee;
Even thou were all the Mighty Nine to me:
'Twas thy dear Friendship did my Breast inspire,
And warmed it first with a Poetic Fire;
But it is a warmth that does with Thee expire:
For when the Sun is set that guides the Day,
The Traveller must stop, or lose his way.
Robert Gould.

CONTENTS.
COunterpart to the Satyr against Virtue, Page 1 Virg. Eclogue VIII. The
Enchantment 13 Upon the Marriage of the Prince of Orange with the Lady Mary 35
An Ode for an Annversary of Music on Caecilia's Day 43 To Madam L. E. upon her
Recovery from a fit of Sickness 46 On the Death of Mrs. Katharine Kingscourt, a
Child of excellent Parts and Piety 55 A Sunday-thought in Sickness 59 To the
Memory of Mr. Charles Morwent 71 To the Memory of that worthy Gentleman Mr.
Harman Atwood. 115
COUNTERPART TO THE SATYR against VERTVE. In Person of the Author.
I.
PArdon me, Virtue, whatsoever thou art
(For sure thou of the Godhead art a part,
And all that is of him must be
The very Deity.)
Pardon, if I in ought did thee blaspheme,
Or injure thy pure Sacred Name:
Accept unfeigned Repentance, Prayers and Vows,
The best Atonement of my penitent humble Muse,
The best that Heaven requires, or Mankind can produce.
All my Attempts hereafter shall at thy Devotion be,
Ready to consecrate my Ink and very Blood to thee.
Forgive me, ye blessed Souls that dwell above,
Where you by its reward the worth of Virtue prove
Forgive (if you can do it) who know no Passion now but Love
And you unhappy happy few,
Who strive with Life, and Humane Miseries below
Forgive me too,
If I in ought disparaged them, or else discouraged you
II.
Blessed Virtue! whose Almighty Power
Does to our fallen Race restore
All that in Paradise we lost, and more,
Lifts us to Heaven, and makes us be
The Heirs and Image of the Deity.
Soft gentle Yoke! which none but resty Fools refuse,
Which before freedom I would ever choose.
Easy are all the Bonds that are imposed by thee;
Easy as those of Lovers are,
(If I with ought less pure may thee compare)
Nor do they force, but only guide our Liberty:
By such soft Ties are Spirits above confined;
So gentle is the Chain which them to Good does bind.
Sure Card, whereby this frail and tottering Bark we steer
Through Life's tempestuous Ocean here;
Through all the tossing Waves of Fear,
And dangerous Rocks of black Despair.
Safe in thy Conduct unconcerned we move,
Secure from all the threatening Storms that blow,
From all Attacks of Chance below,
And reach the certain Haven of Felicity above.
III.
Best Mistress of our Souls! whose Charms and Beauties last,
And are by very Age increast,
By which all other Glories are defaced.
You Are thy own Dowry, and a greater far
Than All the Race of Womankind ever brought,
Though each of them like the first Wife were fraught,
And half the Universe did for her Portion share.
That tawdry Sex, which giddy senseless we
Through Ignorance so vainly Deifie,
Are all but glorious Brutes when un-endowed with thee
It Is Vice alone, the truer Jilt, and worse.
In whose Enjoyment though we find
A flitting Pleasure, yet it leaves behind
A Pain and Torture in the Mind,
And claps the wounded Conscience with incurable Remorse,
Or else betrays us to the great Trepans of Humane Kind.
IV.
It Is Vice, the greater Thraldom, harder Drudgery,
Whereby deposing Reason from its gentle Sway,
(That rightful Sovereign which we should obey)
We undergo a various Tyranny,
And to un-number'd servile Passions Homage pay.
These with Egyptian Rigor us enslave,
And govern with unlimited command;
They make us endless Toil pursue,
And still their doubled Tasks renew,
To push on our too hasty Fate, and build our Grave,
Or which is worse, to keep us from the Promised Land.
Nor may we think our Freedom to retrieve,
We struggle with our heavy Yoke in vain:
In vain we strive to break that Chain,
Unless a Miracle relieve;
Unless the Almighty Wand enlargement give,
We never must expect Delivery,
Till Death, the universal Writ of Ease, does set us free.
V.
Some sordid Avarice in Vassallage confines,
Like Roman Slaves condemned to the Mines;
These are in its harsh Bridewel lashed and punished,
And with hard Labor scarce can earn their Bread.
Others Ambition, that Imperious Dame,
Exposes cruelly, like Gladiators, here
Upon the World's Great Theater.
Through Dangers and through Blood they wade to Fame,
To purchase grinning Honor and an empty Name,
And some by Tyrant-Lust are Captive led,
And with false Hopes of Pleasure fed;
'Till tired with Slavery to their own Desires,
Life's o'er-charg'd Lamp goes out, and in a Snuff expires.
VI.
Consider we the little Arts of Vice,
The Stratagems and Artifice
Whereby she does attract her Votaries:
All those Allurements and those Charms
Which pimp Transgressors to her Arms,
Are but foul Paint, and counterfeit Disguise,
To palliate her own concealed Deformities,
And for false empty Joys betray us to true solid Harms.
In vain she would her Dowry boast,
Which clogged with Legacies we never gain,
But with unvaluable Cost;
Which got we never can retain;
But must the greatest part be lost,
To the great Bubbles, Age or Chance, again.
It Is vastly over-balanc'd by the Jointure which we make,
In which our lives, our souls, our All is set at stake.
Like silly Indians, foolish we
With a known Cheat, a losing Traffic hold,
Whilst led by an ill-judging Eye,
W' admire a trifling Pageantry,
And merchandise our Jewels and our Gold,
For worthless Glass and Beads, or an Exchange's Frippery.
If we a while maintain the expensive Trade,
Such mighty Impost on the Cargo's laid,
Such a vast Custom to be paid,
We Are forced at last like wretched Bankrupts to give out,
Clapped up by Death, and in Eternal Durance shut.
VII.
What art thou, Fame, for which so eagerly we strive?
What art thou but an empty Shade
By the Reflection of our Actions made?
Thou, unlike others, never follow'st us alive;
But, like a Ghost, walk'st only after we are dead.
Posthumous Toy! vain after-Legacy!
Which only ours can be,
When we our selves no more are we!
Fickle as vain! who do on vulgar Breath depend,
Which we by dear Experience find
More changeable, more veering than the unconstant Wind.
What art thou, Gold, that cheat'st the Miser's eyes?
Which he does so devoutly idolize;
For whom he all his Rest and Ease does sacrifice.
It Is Use alone can all thy Value give,
And he from that no Benefit can ever receive.
Cursed Mineral! near Neighboring Hell begot,
Which all the Infection of thy damned Neighborhood have brought.
Thou Bawd to Murders, Rapes and Treachery,
And every greater Name of Villainy;
From thee they all derive their Stock and Pedigree.
Thou the lewd World with all its crying Crimes do store,
hardly wilt allow the Devil the cause of more.
And what is Pleasure which does most beguile?
That Siren which betrays us with a flattering Smile.
We listen to the treacherous Harmony,
Which sings but our own Obsequy.
The Danger unperceived till Death draw nigh;
Till drowning we want Power to 'scape the fatal Enemy.
VIII.
How frantic is the wanton Epicure!
Who a perpetual Surfeit will endure?
Who places all his chiefest Happiness
In the Extravagancies of Excess,
Which wise Sobriety esteems but a Disease?
O mighty envied Happiness to eat!
Which fond mistaken Sots call Great!
Poor Frailty of our Flesh! which we each day
Must thus repair for fear of ruinous decay!
Degrading of our Nature, where vile Brutes are fain
To make and keep up Man!
Which, when the Paradise above we gain,
Heaven thinks too great an Imperfection to retain!
By each Disease the sickly Joy's destroyed;
At every Meal it is nauseous and cloyed,
Empty at best, as when in Dream enjoyed;
When, cheated by a slumbering Imposture, we
Fancy a Feast, and great Regalio's by;
And think we taste, and think we see,
And riot on imaginary Luxury.
IX.
Grant me, O Virtue, thy more solid lasting Joy;
Grant me the better Pleasures of the Mind,
Pleasures, which only in pursuit of thee we find,
Which Fortune cannot mar, nor Chance destroy.
One Moment in thy blessed Enjoyment is
Worth an Eternity of that tumultuous Bliss,
Which we derive from Sense,
Which often cloys, and must resign to Impotence.
Grant me but this, how will I triumph in my happy State?
Above the Changes and Reverse of Fate;
Above her Favors and her Hate.
I Will scorn the worthless Treasures of Peru,
And those of to other Indies too.
I Will pity Caesar's self with all his Trophies and his Fame,
And the vile brutish Herd of Epicures contemn,
And all the Under-shrievalties of Life not worth a Name.
Nor will I only owe my Bliss,
Like others, to a Multitude,
Where Company keeps up a forced Happiness;
Should all Mankind surcease to live,
And none but individual I survive,
Alone I would be happy, and enjoy my Solitude.
Thus shall my Life in pleasant Minutes wear,
Calm as the Minutes of the Evening are,
And gentle as the motions of the upper Air;
Soft as my Muse, and unconfined as she,
When flowing in the numbers of Pindarique liberty.
And when I see pale ghastly Death appear,
That grand inevitable Test which all must bear,
Which best distinguishes the blessed and wretched here;
I Will smile at all its Horrors, court my welcome Destiny,
And yield my willing Soul up in an easy Sigh;
And Epicures that see shall envy and confess,
That I, and those who dare like me be good, the chiefest Good possess.
Virg. ECLOGUE VIII. The Enchantment.
Poet, Damon, Alpheus, Speakers.
DAmon and Alpheus, the two Shepherds Strains
I mean to tell, and how they charmed the Plains.
I Will tell their charming Numbers which the Herd,
Unmindful of their Grass, in Throngs admired.
At which fierce Savages astonished stood,
And every River stopped its listening Flood.
For you, Great Sir, whether with Cannons Roar
You spread your Terror to the Holland Shore,
Or with a gentle and a steady hand
In Peace and Plenty rule your Native Land.
Shall ever that auspicious Day appear,
When I your glorious Actions shall declare?
It shall, and I throughout the World rehearse
Their Fame, fit only for a Spencer's Verse.
With you my Muse began, with you shall end:
Accept my Verse that waits on your Command;
And deign this Ivy Wreath a place may find
Among the Laurels which your Temples bind.
'Twas at the time that Night's cool shades with drew
And left the Grass all hung with pearly Dew;
When Damon, leaning on his Oaken Wand,
Thus to his Pipe in gentle Lays complained.
D. Arise, thou Morning, and drive on the Day
While wretched I with fruitless words inveigh
Against false Nisa, while the Gods I call
With my last Breath, though hopeless to avail,
Though they regard not my Complaints at all.
Strike up my Pipe, play me in tuneful Strains
What I heard sung on the Maenalian Plains.
Menalus ever has its warbling Groves,
And talking Pines, it ever hears the Loves
Of Shepherds, and the Notes of Mighty Pan,
The first that would not let the Reeds untuned remain.
Strike up my Pipe, play me in tuneful Strains
What I heard sung on the Maenalian Plains.
Mopsus weds Nisa, Gods! what Lover ever
Need after this have reason to despair?
Griffins shall now leap Mares, and the next Age
The Deer and Hounds in Friendship shall engage.
Go, Mopsus, get the Torches ready soon;
Thou, happy Man, must have the Bride anon.
Go, Bridegroom, quickly, the Nut-scramble make,
The Evening-star quits Oeta for thy sake.
Strike up my Pipe, play me in tuneful Strains
What I heard sung on the Maenalian Plains.
How fitly art thou matched who wast so nice!
Thou haughty Nymph who did all else despise!
Who slight'st so scornfully my Pipe, my Herd,
My rough-grown Eyebrows, and unshaven Beard,
And think no God does mortal things regard,
Strike up my Pipe, play me in tuneful Strains
What I heard sung on the Maenalian Plains.
I saw thee young, and in thy Beauty's Bloom,
To gather Apples with thy Mother, come,
'Twas in our Hedge-rows, I was there with Pride,
To show you to the best, and be your Guide.
Then I just entering my twelfth Year was found,
I then could reach the tender Boughs from ground.
Heavens! when I saw, how soon was I undone!
How to my heart did the quick Poison run!
Strike up my Pipe, play me in tuneful Strains
What I heard sung on the Maenalian Plains.
Now I Am convinced what Love is; the cold North
Sure in its craggy Mountains brought him forth,
Or Africk's wildest Deserts gave him Birth,
Amongst the Cannibals and Savage Race;
He never of our Kind, or Country was.
Strike up my Pipe, play me in tuneful Strains
What I heard sung on the Maenalian Plains.
Dire Love did once a Mother's Hand embrue
In Childrens Blood; a cruel Mother, thou;
Hard it is to say of both which is the worst,
The cruel Mother, or the Boy accursed.
He a cursed Boy, a cruel Mother thou;
The Devil a whit to choose betwixt the two.
Strike up my Pipe, play me in tuneful Strains
What I heard sung on the Maenalian Plains.
Let Wolves by Nature shun the Sheep-folds now:
On the rough Oaks let Oranges now grow:
Let the coarse Alders bear the Daffadill,
And costly Amber from the Thorn distill:
Let Owls match Swans, let Tyt'rus Orpheus be,
In the Woods Orpheus, and Arion on the Sea.
Strike up my Pipe, play me in tuneful Strains
What I heard sung on the Maenalian Plains.
Let all the World turn Sea, ye Woods adieu!
To some high Mountain's top I Will get me now,
And thence my self into the Waters throw.
There quench my Flames, and let the cruel She
Accept this my last dying Will and Legacy.
Cease now my Pipe, cease now those warbling Strains
Which I heard sung on the Maenalian Plains.
This Damon's Song; relate ye Muses now
Alpheus Reply: All cannot all things do.
A. Bring Holy Water, sprinkle all around,
And see these Altars with soft Fillets bound:
Male-Frankincense, and juicy Vervain burn,
I Will try if I by Magic force can turn
My stubborn Love: I Will try if I can fire
His frozen Breast: Nothing but Charms are wanting here.
Bring Daphnis from the Town, ye Magic Charms;
Bring home loved Daphnis to my longing Arms.
Charms in her wonted Course can stop the Moon,
And from her well-fix'd Orb can call her down.
By Charms the mighty Circe (we are told)
Ulysses famed Companions changed of old.
Snakes, by the Virtue of Enchantment forced,
Often in the Meads with their own Poison burst.
Bring Daphnis from the Town, ye Magic Charms;
Bring home loved Daphnis to my longing Arms.
First, these three several Threads I compass round
Thy Image, thus in Magic Fetters bound:
Then round these Altars thrice thy Image bear:
Odd Numbers to the Gods delightful are.
Bring Daphnis from the Town, ye Magic Charms,
Bring home loved Daphnis to my longing Arms.
Go tie me in three knots three Ribands now,
And let the Ribands be of different Hue:
Go, Amaryllis, tie them strait, and cry,
At the same time, "They Are true-love-knots, I tie.
Bring Daphnis from the Town, ye Magic Charms,
Bring home loved Daphnis to my longing Arms.
Look how this Clay grows harder, and look how
With the same Fire this Wax does softer grow;
So Daphnis, let him with my Love do so.
Strew Meal and Salt (for so these Rites require)
And set the crackling Laurel Boughs on fire:
This naughty Daphnis sets my Breast on flame.
And I this Laurel burn in Daphnis Name.
Bring Daphnis from the Town, ye Magic Charms
Bring home loved Daphnis to my longing Arms.
As a poor Heifer, wearied in the Chase,
Of seeking her loved Steer from place to place.
Through Woods, through Groves, through Arable, and Wast,
On some green River's bank lies down at last:
There Lows her Moan, despairing, and forlorn,
And, though belated, minds not to return:
Let Daphnis's Case be such, and let not me
Take any Care to give a Remedy.
Bring Daphnis from the Town, ye Magic Charms,
Bring home loved Daphnis to my longing Arms
These Garments erst the faithless Traitor left,
Dear Pledges of his Love, of which I Am reft:
Beneath the Threshold these I bury now,
In thee, O Earth; these Pledges Daphnis owe.
Bring Daphnis from the Town, ye Magic Charms,
Bring home loved Daphnis to my longing Arms.
Of Maeris I these Herbs and Poisons had,
From Pontus brought: in Pontus store are bred:
With these I Have often seen Maeris Wonders do,
Turn himself Wolf, and to the Forest go:
I Have often seen him Fields of Corn displace,
From whence they grew, and Ghosts in Churchyards raise.
Bring Daphnis from the Town, ye Magic Charms,
Bring home loved Daphnis to my longing Arms.
Go, Maid, go, bear the Ashes out at door,
And them forthwith into the neighboring current pour,
Over thy Head, and don't look back be sure:
I Will try, what these on Daphnis will prevail,
The Gods he minds not, nor my Charms at all.
Bring Daphnis from the Town, ye Magic Charms.
Bring home loved Daphnis to my longing Arms.
Behold! the Ashes while we lingering stay,
While we neglect to carry them away,
Have reached the Altar, and have fired the Wood;
That lies upon it: Heaven send it be for good!
Something I know not what is the matter: Hark!
I hear our Lightfoot in the Entry bark.
Shall I believe, or is it only Dream,
Which Lovers fancies are too apt to frame?
Cease now ye Magic Charms, behold him come!
Cease needless Charms, my Daphnis is at home!
UPON THE MARRIAGE OF THE Prince of ORANGE WITH THE Lady MARY.
I.
AS when of old some bright and Heavenly Dame
A God of equal Majesty did Wed;
Strait through the Court above the Tidings spread,
Strait at the News the immortal Offspring came,
And all the Deities did the High Nuptials grace;
With no less Pomp, no less of Grandeur we
Behold this glad Solemnity,
And all confess an equal Joy,
And all expect as God-like and as great a Race:
Hark how united Shouts our Joys proclaim,
Which rise in Gratitude to Heaven from whence they came;
Gladsome next those which brought our Royal Exile home,
When he resumed his long usurped Throne:
Hark how the mighty Vollies rend the Air,
And shake at once the Earth and utmost Sphere;
Hark how the Bell's harmonious Noise
Bear Consort too with humane Joys;
Behold those numerous Fires, which up and down
Threaten almost new Conflagration to the Town.
Well do these Emblems, mighty Orange, speak thy Fame,
Whose Loudness, Music, Brightness, all express the same;
'Twas thus great Jove his Semele did Wed,
In Thunder and in Lightning so approached her bed.
II.
Hail happy Pair! kind Heavens great Hostages!
Sure Pledges of a firm and lasting Peace!
Called not a Match, we that low Style disdain,
Nor will degrade it with a Term so mean;
A League it must be said,
Where Countries thus Espouse, and Nations Wed:
Our Thanks, propitious Destiny!
Never did yet thy Power dispense
A more Plenipotentiary Influence,
Nor Heaven more sure a Treaty ratify:
To YOU, our great and gracious Monarch, too
An equal share of Thanks is due,
Naught could this mighty Work produce, but
Heaven and You.
Let others boast
Of Leagues, which Wars and Slaughter cost;
This Union by no Blood Cemented is,
Nor did its Harmony from Jars and Discords rise.
Not more to your great Ancestor we owe,
By whom two Realms into one Kingdom grow,
He joined but what Nature had joined before,
Lands disunited by no parting Shore:
By You to Foreign Countries we are Allied,
You make Us Continent whom Seas and Waves divide.
III.
How well, Brave Prince, do you by prudent Conduct prove
What was denied to mighty Jove,
Together to be Wise and Love?
In this you highest Skill of Choice and Judgment show,
It Is here displayed, and here rewarded too;
Others move only by unbridled guideless Heat,
But you mix Love with Policy, Passion with State:
You scorned the Painters Hands your Hearts should tie,
Which often (and here they must) the Original belie,
(For how should Art that Beauty undertake,
Which Heaven would strive in vain again to make?)
Taught by Religion you did better Methods try,
And worshipped not the Image, but the Deity:
Go, envied Prince, your glorious BRIDE receive,
Too great for ought but mighty YORK to give:
She, whom if none must Wed, but those who merit Her,
Monarchs might cease Pretense, and flighted Gods despair:
Think You in Her far greater Conquests gain,
Than all the Powers of France have from your Country taken.
In her fair Arms let your Ambition bounded lie,
And fancy there an Universal Monarchy!
IV.
And you fair Princess, who could thus subdue,
What France with all its Forces could not do,
Enjoy your glorious Prize,
Enjoy the Triumphs of your conquering Eyes:
From Him, and the Height of your great Mind look down,
And with neglect despise a Throne,
And think it as great to Merit, as to wear a Crown:
Nassau is all which your Desires or Thoughts can frame,
All Titles lodge within that single Name;
A Name, which Mars himself would with Ambition bear,
Prouder in that, than to be called the God of War:
To you, great Madam, (if your Joys admit Increase,
If Heaven has not already set your Happiness
Above its Power to raise)
To You the zealous humble Muse
These solemn Wishes Consecrates and Vows,
And begs you will not her Offering refuse,
Which not your Want, but her Devotion shows.
V.
May your great Consort still successful prove,
In all his high Attempts, as in your Love;
May he through all Attacks of Chance appear
As free from Danger, as he is from Fear;
May neither Sense of Grief, or Trouble know,
But what in Pity you to others show:
May you be fruitful in as numerous Store
Of Princely Births, as She who your great Father bore:
May Heaven to your just Merits kind
Repeal the ancient Curse on Womankind;
Easy and gentle, as the Labors of the Brain
May yours all prove, and just so free from Pain:
May no rude Noise of War approach your Bed,
But Peace her downy Wings about you spread,
Calm as the Season, when fair Halcyons breed.
May you, and the just owner of your Breast,
Both in as full Content and Happiness be blessed,
As the first sinless Pair of old enjoyed:
Ere Guilt their Innocence and that destroyed:
Till nothing but Continuance to your Bliss can add,
And you by Heaven alone be happier made;
Till future Poets who your Lives review,
When they would their utmost Pitch of Flattery show,
Shall pray their Patrons may become like you;
Nor know to frame a skilful Wish more great,
Nor think a higher Blessing in the Gift of Fate.
AN ODE For an Anniversary of MUSIC on S. Cecilia's Day.
I.
BEgin the Song, your Instruments advance,
Tune the Voice, and Tune the Flute,
Touch the silent sleeping Lute,
And make the Strings to their own Measures dance.
Bring gentlest Thoughts that into Language glide,
Bring softest Words that into Numbers slide:
Let every Hand and every Tongue
To make the Noble Consort throng.
Let all in one harmonious Note agree
To frame the mighty Song,
For this is Musicks sacred Jubilee.
II.
Hark how the wak'ned Strings resound,
And break the yielding Air,
The ravished Sense how pleasingly they wound,
And call the listening Soul into the Ear;
Each Pulse beats time, and every Heart,
With Tongue and Fingers bears a part.
By Harmonies entrancing Power,
When we are thus wound up to Ecstasie;
Methinks we mount, methinks we tower,
And seem to antedate our future Bliss on high.
III.
How dull were Life, how hardly worth our care,
But for the Charms that Music lends!
How faint its Pleasures would appear,
But for the Pleasure which our Art attends!
Without the Sweets of Melody,
To tune our vital Breath,
Who would not give it up to Death,
And in the silent Grave contented lie?
IV.
Musick's the Cordial of a troubled Breast,
The softest Remedy that Grief can find;
The gentle Spell that charms our Care to rest,
And calms the ruffled Passions of the Mind.
Music does all our Joy refine,
It gives the Relish to our Wine,
It Is that gives Rapture to our Love,
And Wings Devotion to a pitch Divine;
It Is our chief Bliss on Earth, and half our Heaven above.
Chorus.
Come then with tuneful Throat and String
The Praises of our Art let us sing;
Let Us sing to Blessed CECILIA's Fame,
That graced this Art, and gave this Day its Name;
With Music, Wine, and Mirth conspire
To bear a Consort, and make up the Choir.
TO MADAM L. E. Upon her Recovery from a late Sickness.
Madam,
PArdon, that with slow Gladness we so late
Your wished return of Health congratulate:
Our Joys at first so thronged to get abroad,
They hindered one another in the crowd;
And now such haste to tell their Message make,
They only stammer what they meant to speak.
You the fair Subject which I am to sing,
To whose kind Hands this humble joy I bring:
Aid me, I beg, while I this Theme pursue,
For I invoke no other Muse but you.
Long time had you here brightly shone below
With all the Rays kind Heaven could bestow.
No envious Cloud e're offered to invade
Your Luster, or compel it to a Shade:
Nor did it yet by any Sign appear,
But that you thoroughout Immortal were.
Till Heaven (if Heaven could prove so cruel) sent
To interrupt the Growth of your content,
As if it grudged those Gifts you did enjoy,
And would that Bounty which it gave, destroy:
'Twas since your Excellence did envy move
In those high Powers and made them jealous prove.
They thought these Glories should they still have shined
Unsullied, were too much for Womankind.
Which might they write as lasting as they are Fair,
Too great for ought but Deities appear:
But Heaven (it may be) was not yet complete,
And lackt you there to fill your empty Seat.
And when it could not fairly woo you hence,
Turned Ravisher, and offered Violence.
Sickness did first a formal siege begin,
And by sure slowness tried your Life to win.
As if by lingering methods Heaven meant
To chase you hence and tire you to consent.
But, thus in vain, Fate did to force resort,
And next by Storm strove to attack the Fort,
A Sleep, dull as your last, did you Arrest,
And all their Magazines of Life possessed.
No more the Blood its circling course did run,
But in the Veins, like Isicles, it hung.
No more the Heart (now void of quickening heat)
The tuneful March of vital Motion beat.
Stiffness did into all the Sinews climb,
And a short Death crept cold through every Limb.
All Signs of Life from sight so far withdrew,
'Twas now thought Popery to pray for you.
There might you (were not that sense lost) have seen
How your true Death would have resented been:
A Lethargy, like yours, each Breast did seize,
And all by Sympathy caught your Disease.
Around you silent Imagery appears,
And naught in the Spectators moves, but Tears.
They pay what Grief were to your Funeral due,
And yet dare hope Heaven would your Life renew.
Mean while, all means, all Drugs prescribed are,
Which the decays of Health, or Strength repair,
Medicines so powerful they new Souls would save,
And Life in long-dead Carcasses retrieve:
But these in vain, they rougher Methods try,
And now you're Martyred that you may not die;
Sad Scene of Fate! when Tortures were your gain:
And 'twas a kindness thought to wish you pain!
As if the slackned string of Life run down,
Could only by the Rack be screwed in tune.
But Heaven at last (grown conscious that its power
Could scarce what was to die with you restore,)
And loath to see such Glories overcome,
Sent a Post-Angel to repeal your doom;
Strait Fate obeyed the Charge which Heaven sent,
And gave this first dear Proof, it could Repent:
Triumphant Charms! what may not you subdue,
When Fate's your Slave, and thus submits to you!
It now again the new-broke Thread does knit,
And for another Clew her Spindle fit:
And life's hid spark which did unquencht remain,
Caught the fled light and brought it back again:
Thus you revived, and all our Joy with you,
Revived and found their Resurrection too:
Some only grieved, that what was deathless thought
They saw so near to Fatal ruin brought:
Now crowds of Blessings on that happy hand,
Whose skill could eager Destiny withstand;
Whose learned Power has rescued from the Grave,
That Life which 'twas a Miracle to save;
That Life which were it thus untimely lost,
Had been the fairest Spoil Death ever could boast:
May he henceforth be God of Healing thought,
By whom such good to you and us was brought:
Altars and Shrines to him are justly due,
Who showed himself a God by raising you.
But say, fair Saint, for you alone can know,
Whither your Soul in this short flight did go;
Went it to antidate that Happiness,
You must at last (tho late we hope) possess?
Inform us lest we should your Fate belie,
And call that Death which was but Ecstasie,
The Queen of Love (we are told) once let us see:
That Goddesses from Wounds could not be free;
And you by this unwish'd Occasion show
That they like Mortal us can Sickness know:
Pity! that Heaven should all its Titles give,
And yet not let you with them ever live.
You Would lack no point that makes a Deity,
If you could like it too Immortal be.
And so you are; half boasts a Deathless State;
Although your frailer Part must yield to Fate.
By every breach in that fair lodging made,
Its blessed Inhabitant is more displaid:
In that white Snow which over-spreads your Skin,
We trace the whiter Soul which dwells within;
Which while you through this shining Hue display
Looks like a Star placed in the milky way:
Such the bright Bodies of the Blessed are,
When they for Raiment clothed with Light appear,
And should you visit now the Seats of Bliss,
You need not wear another form but this.
Never did Sickness in such Pomp appear,
As when it thus your Livery did wear,
Disease it self looked amiable here.
So Clouds which would obscure the Sun often gilded be,
And Shades are taught to shine as bright as he.
Grieve not fair Nymph, when in your Glass you trace
The marring Footsteps of a pale Disease.
Regret not that your Cheeks their Roses want,
Which a few Days shall in full store replant,
Which, whilst your Blood withdraws its guilty Red,
Tells that you own no Faults that Blushes need:
The Sun whose Bounty does each Spring restore
What Winter from the rifled Meadows tore,
Which every Morning with an early Ray
Paints the young blushing Cheeks of instant Day:
Whose skill (inimitable here below,)
Limns those gay Clouds which form Heavens colored Bow,
That Sun shall soon with Interest repay,
All the lost Beauty Sickness snatched away.
Your Beams like his shall hourly now advance,
And every Minute their swift Growth enhance.
Mean while (that you no helps of Healths refuse)
Accept these humble Wishes of the Muse:
Which shall not of their just Petition fail,
If she (and she is a Goddess) ought prevail.
May no profane Disease henceforth approach,
This sacred Temple with unhallowed touch,
Or with rude sacrilege its frame debauch.
May these fair Members always happy be
In as full Strength and well-set Harmony,
As the new Foundress of your Sex could boast,
Ere she by Sin her first Perfection lost:
May Destiny, just to your Merits, twine
All your smooth Fortunes in a Silken Line.
And that you may at Heaven late arrive,
May it to you its largest Bottom give.
May Heaven with still repeated Favors bless,
Till it its Power below its Will confess;
Till Wishes can no more exalt your Fate,
Nor Poets fancy you more fortunate.
ON THE DEATH OF Mrs Katharine Kingscourt, A Child of Excellent Parts and Piety.
SHE did, She did -- I saw her mount the Sky,
And with new Whiteness paint the Galaxy.
Heaven her methought with all its Eyes did view,
And yet acknowledged all its Eyes too few.
Methought I saw in Crowds blessed Spirits meet,
And with loud Welcomes her Arrival greet;
Which could they grieve, had gone with grief away
To see a Soul more white, more pure than they.
Earth was unworthy such a Prize as this,
Only a while Heaven let us share the Bliss:
In vain her stay with fruitless Tears we'd woo,
In vain we'd Court, when that our Rival grew.
Thanks, ye kind Powers! who did so long dispense,
(Since you so wished her) with her absence thence:
We now resign, to you alone we grant
The sweet Monopoly of such a Saint;
So pure a Saint, I scarce dare call her so,
For fear to wrong her with a Name too low:
Such a Scraphick brightness in her shined,
I hardly can believe her Womankind.
'Twas sure some noble Being left the Sphere,
Which deigned a little to inhabit here,
And cannot be said to die, but disappear.
Or if she Mortal was and meant to show
The greater skill by being made below;
Sure Heaven preserved her by the fall uncurst,
To tell how all the Sex were formed at first:
Never did yet so much Divinity
In such a small Compendium crowded lie.
By her we credit what the Learned tell,
That many Angels in one Point can dwell.
More damned Fiends did not in Mary rest,
Than lodged of Blessed Spirits in her Breast;
Religion dawned so early in her mind,
You Would think her Saint, whilst in the Womb enshrined,
Nay, that bright ray which did her Temples paint,
Proclaimed her clearly, while alive, a Saint.
Scarce had she learnt to lisp Religion's Name,
Ever she by her Example preached the same,
And taught her Cradle like the Pulpit to reclaim.
No Action did within her Practice fall
Which for the Atonement of a Blush could call:
No word of hers ever greeted any Ear,
But what a dying Saint confessed might hear.
Her Thoughts had scarcely ever fully'd been
By the least Footsteps of Original Sin.
Her Life did still as much Devotion breath
As others do at their last Gasp in Death.
Hence on her Tomb of her let not be said,
So long she lived; but thus, so long she prayed.
A SUNDAY-THOUGHT In Sickness.
LOrd, how dreadful is the Prospect of Death at the remotest Distance! How the
smallest Apprehension of it can pall the most gay, airy and brisk Spirits! Even
I, who thought I could have been merry in sight of my Coffin, and drink a
Health with the Sexton in my own Grave, now tremble at the least Envoy of the
King of Terrors. To see but the shaking of my Glass makes me turn pale, and
fear is like to prevent and do the Work of my Distemper. All the Jollity of my
Humor and Conversation is turned on a sudden into shagrin and melancholy, black
as Despair, and dark as the Grave. My Soul and Body seem at once laid out, and
I fancy all the Plummets of Eternal Night already hanging upon my Temples. But
whence proceed these Fears? Certainty they are not idle Dreams, nor the
accidental Product of my Disease, which disorders the Brains, and fills 'em
with odd Chimaera's. Why should my Soul be averse to its Enlargement? Why
should it be content to be knit up in two Yards of Skin, when it may have all
the World for its Purliew? It Is not that I Am unwilling to leave my Relations
and present Friends: I Am parted from the first already, and could be severed
from both the length of the whole Map, and live with my Body as far distant
from them as my Soul must when I Am dead. Neither is it that I Am loath to leave
the Delights and Pleasures of the World; some of them I have tried, and found
empty, the others covet not, because unknown. I Am confident I could despise 'em
all by a Greatness of Soul, did not the Bible oblige me, and Divines tell me,
it is my Duty. It is not neither that I Am unwilling to go hence before I Have
Established a Reputation, and something to make me survive my self. I could
have been content to be Still-born, and have no more than the Register, or
Sexton to tell that I Have ever been in the Land of the Living. In Fine, it is not
from a Principle of Cowardice, which the Schools have called Self-preservation,
the poor Effect of Instinct and dull pretense of a Brute as well as me. This
Unwillingness therefore, and Aversion to undergo the general Fate, must have a
juster Original, and flow from a more important Cause. I Am well satisfied that
this other Being within, that moves and actuates my Frame of Flesh and Blood,
has a Life beyond it and the Grave; and something in it prompts me to believe
its immortality. A Residence it must have somewhere else, when it has left this
Carcass, and another State to pass into, unchangeable and everlasting as it
self after its Separation. This Condition must be good or bad according to its
Actions and Deserts in this Life; for as it owes its Being to some Infinite
Power that created it, I well suppose it his Vassal, and obliged to live by his
Law; and as certainly conclude, that according to the keeping or breaking of
that Law, it is to be rewarded or punished hereafter. This Diversity of Rewards
and Punishments, makes the two Places, Heaven and Hell, so often mentioned in
Scripture, and talked of in Pulpits: Of the later my Fears too cruelly convince
me, and the Anticipation of its Torment, which I already feel in my own
Conscience. There is, there is a Hell, and damned Fiends, and a never-dying
Worm, and that Sceptick that doubts of it, may find 'em all within my single
Breast. I dare not any longer with the Atheist disbelieve them, or think 'em
the Clergy's Bugbears, invented as Nurses do frightful Names for their
Children, to scare 'em into Quietness and Obedience. How often have I triumphed
in my unconcerned and seared insensibility? How often boasted of that unhappy
suspected Calm, which, like that of the dead Sea, proved only my Curse, and a
treacherous Ambush to those Storms, which at present (and will for ever I
dread) shipwreck my Quiet and Hopes? How often have I rejected the Advice of that
Bosom-Friend, and drowned its Alarms in the Noise of a tumultuous Debauch, or
by stupifying Wine (like some condemned Malefactor) armed my self against the
Apprehensions of my certain Doom? Now, now the Tyrant awakes, and comes to pay
at once all Arrears of Cruelty. At last, but too late (like drowning Mariners)
I see the gay Monsters, which inveigled me into my Death and Destruction. Oh
the gnawing Remorse of a rash unguarded, unconsidering Sinner! Oh how the
Ghosts of former Crimes affright my haunted Imagination, and make me suffer a
thousand Racks and Martyrdoms! I see, methinks, the Jaws of Destruction gaping
wide to swallow me; and I, (like one sliding on Ice) tho I see the Danger,
cannot stop from running into it. My Fancy represents to me a whole Legion of
Devils, ready to tear me in pieces, numberless as my Sins or Fears; and
whither, Alas! whither shall I fly for Refuge? Where shall I retreat and take
Sanctuary? Shall I call the Rocks and Mountains to cover me; or bid the Earth
yawn wide to its Center, and take me in? Poor shift of escaping Almighty
Justice! Distracting Frenzy! that would make me believe Contradictions, and
hope to fly out of the reach of him whose Presence is every where, not excluded
Hell it self; for he is there in the effects of his Vengeance. Shall I invoke
some Power infinite as that that created me, to reduce me to nothing again, and
rid me at once of my Being and all that tortures it? Oh no, it is in vain, I
must be forced into Being, to keep me fresh for Torment, and retain Sense only
to feel Pain. I must be adying to all Eternity, and live ever, to live ever
wretched. Oh that Nature had placed me in the Rank of things that have only a
bare Existence, or at best, an Animal Life, and never given me a Soul and
Reason, which now must contribute to my Misery, and make me envy Brutes and
Vegetables! Would the Womb that bare me had been my Prison till now, or I stepped
out of 't it into my Grave, and saved the Expenses and Toil of a long and
tedious Journey, where Life affords nothing of Accommodations to invite ones
stay. Happy had I been if I had expired with my first Breath, and entered the
Bill of Mortality as soon as the World: Happy if I had been drowned in my Font,
and that Water which was to Regenerate, and give me New Life, had proved Mortal
in another Sense! I had then died without any Guilt of my own, but what I
brought into the World with me, and that too atton'd for; I mean that which I
contracted from my first Parents, my unhappiness rather than Fault, inasmuch as
I was fain to be born of a Sinning Race: Then I had never enhaunc'd it with
acquired Guilt, never added those innumerable Crimes which must make up my
Indictment at the Grand Audit. Ungrateful Wretch! I Have made my Sins as numerous
as those Blessings and Mercies the Almighty Bounty has conferred upon me, to
oblige and lead me to Repentance. How have I abused and misimployed those Parts
and Talents which might have rendered me serviceable to Mankind, and repaid an
Interest of Glory to their Donor? How ill do they turn to account which I have
made the Patrons of Debauchery, and Pimps and Panders to Vice? How often have I
broke my Vows to my Great Creator, which I would be conscientious of keeping to
a silly Woman, a Creature beneath my self? What has all my Religion been but an
empty Parade and Show? Either an useful Hypocrisy taken up for Interest, or a
gay specious Formality worn in Complaisance to Custom and the Mode, and as
changeable as my Clothes and their Fashion. How often have I gone to Church (the
place where we are to pay him Homage and Duty) as to an Assignation or Play,
only for Diversion; or at best, as I must ere long (for ought I know) with my
Soul severed from my Body? How I tremble at the Remembrance! as if I could put
the Sham upon Heaven, or a God were to be imposed on like my Fellow Creature:
And dare I, convicted of these High Treasons against the King of Glory, dare I
expect a Reprieve or Pardon? Has he Thunder, and are not all his Bolts levelled
at my Head, to strike me through the very Center? Yes, I dare appeal to thee,
boundless Pity and Compassion! My own Instances already tells me, that thy
Mercy is infinite; for I Have done enough to shock Long-sufferance it self, and
weary out an Eternal Patience. I beseech thee by thy soft and gentle Attributes
of Mercy and Forgiveness, by the last dying Accents of my suffering Deity, have
Pity on a poor, humble, prostrate and confessing Sinner: And thou great Ransom
of lost Mankind, who offered'st thy self a Sacrifice to atone our Guilt, and
redeem our mortgaged Happiness, do thou be my Advocate, and intercede for me
with the Angry Judge.

My Prayers are heard, a glorious Light now shone,
And (lo!) An Angel-Post comes hastening down:
From Heaven I see him cut the yielding Air;
So swift, he seems at once both there and here;
So quick, my sight in the pursuit was slow,
And Thought could scarce so soon the Journey go.
No angry Message in his Look appears,
His Face no signs of threatening Vengeance wears.
Comely his shape, of Heavenly Mien and Air,
Kinder than Smiles of beauteous Virgins are.
Such he was seen by the blessed Maid of old
When he the Almighty Infant's Birth foretold.
A mighty Volume in one hand is born,
Whose opened Leaves the other seems to turn:
Vast Annals of my Sins in Scarlet writ,
But now eras'd, blot our, and cancelled quite.
Hark how the Heavenly Whisper strikes mine Ear,
Mortal, behold thy Crimes all pardoned here!
Hail Sacred Envoy of the Eternal King!
Welcome as the blessed Tidings thou do bring.
Welcome as Heaven from whence thou came but now,
Thus low to thy great God and mine I bow,
And might I here, O might I ever grow,
Fixed an unmoved and endless Monument
Of Gratitude to my Creator sent.
TO THE MEMORY OF Mr. Charles Morwent.

A PINDARIQUE.

Ignis utique quo clarius effulsit, citius extinguitur, eripit se aufertque ex
oculis subito perfecta virtus: quicquid est absoluti facilius transfluit, and
optimi neutiquam diurnant. Cambden. de Phil. Syd.

O celeres hominum bonorum dies. Apul.

LONDON: Printed in the Year 1687.

To the Memory of my Dear Friend, Mr. CHARLES MORWENT: A PINDARIQUE.
Ostendunt terris hunc tantum fata, nec ultra
Esse sinunt. --
Virg.
I.
BEst Friend! could my unbounded Grief but rate
With due proportion thy too cruel Fate;
Could I some happy Miracle bring forth,
Great as my Wishes and thy greater Worth,
All Helicon should soon be thine,
And pay a Tribute to thy Shrine.
The learned Sisters all transformed should be,
No longer nine, but one Melpomene:
Each should into a Niobe relent,
At once thy Mourner and thy Monument,
Each should become
Like the famed Memnon's speaking Tomb,
To sing thy well-tuned Praise;
Nor should we fear their being dumb,
Thou still would make 'em vocal with thy Rays.
II.
O that I could distill my vital Juice in Tears!
Or wast away my Soul in sobbing Airs!
Were I all Eyes,
To flow in liquid Elegies:
That every Limb might grieve,
And dying Sorrow still retrieve;
My Life should be but one long mourning day,
And like moist Vapors melt in Tears away.
I Would soon dissolve in one great Sigh,
And upwards fly,
Glad so to be exhaled to Heaven and thee.
A Sigh which might well-nigh reverse thy death,
And hope to animate thee with new Breath;
Powerful as that which heretofore did give
A Soul to well-form'd Clay, and made it live.
III.
Adieu, blessed Soul! whose hasty Flight away
Tells Heaven did never display
Such Happiness to bless the World with stay.
Death in thy Fall betrayed her utmost spite,
And showed her shafts most times are levelled at the white.
She saw thy blooming Ripeness time prevent;
She saw, and envious grew, and straight her arrow sent.
So Buds appearing ever the Frosts are past,
Nip'd by some unkind Blast,
Wither in Penance for their forward haste.
Thus have I seen a Morn so bright,
So decked with all the Robes of Light,
As if it scorned to think of Night,
Which a rude Storm ever Noon did shroud,
And buried all its early Glories in a Cloud.
The day in funeral Blackness mourned,
And all to Sighs, and all to Tears it turned.
IV.
But why do we thy Death untimely deem;
Or Fate blaspheme?
We should thy full ripe Virtues wrong,
To think thee young.
Fate, when she did thy vigorous Growth behold,
And all thy forward Glories told,
Forgot thy tale of Years, and thought thee old.
The brisk Endowments of thy Mind
Scorning in the Bud to be confined,
Out-ran thy Age, and left slow Time behind;
Which made thee reach Maturity so soon,
And at first Dawn present a full-spread Noon.
So thy Perfections with thy Soul agree,
Both knew no Nonage, knew no Infancy.
Thus the first Pattern of our Race began
His Life in middle-age, at's Birth a perfect Man.
V.
So well thou acted'st in thy Span of Days,
As calls at once for Wonder and for Praise.
Thy prudent Conduct had so learnt to measure
The different whiles of Toil and Leisure,
No time did Action want, no Action wanted Pleasure.
Thy busy Industry could Time dilate,
And stretch the Thread of Fate:
Thy careful Thrift could only boast the Power
To lengthen Minutes, and extend an Hour.
No single Sand could ever slip by
Without its Wonder, sweet as high:
And every teeming Moment still brought forth
A thousand Rarities of Worth.
While some no other Cause for Life can give,
But a dull Habitude to live:
Thou scorn'dst such Laziness while here beneath,
And Liv'dst that time which others only Breath.
VI.
Next our just Wonder does commence,
How so small Room could hold such Excellence.
Nature was proud when she contrived thy Frame,
In thee she labored for a Name:
Hence 'twas she lavished all her Store,
As if she meant hereafter to be poor,
And, like a Bankrupt, run of the Score.
Her curious Hand here drew in Straights and joined
All the Perfections lodge in Humane kind;
Teaching her numerous Gifts to lie
Crampt in a short Epitome.
So Stars contracted in a Diamond shine,
And Jewels in a narrow Point confine
The Riches of an Indian Mine.
Thus subtle Artists can
Draw Nature's larger self within a Span:
A small Frame holds the World, Earth, Heavens and all
Shrunk to the scant Dimensions of a Ball.
VII.
Those Parts which never in one Subject dwell,
But some uncommon Excellence foretell,
Like Stars did all constellate here,
And met together in one Sphere.
Thy Judgment, Wit and Memory conspired
To make themselves and thee admired:
And could thy growing Height a longer Stay have known,
Thou had all other Glories, and thy self outdone.
While some to Knowledge by degrees arrive,
Through tedious Industry improved,
Thine scorned by such pedantick Rules to thrive;
But swift as that of Angels moved,
And made us think it was intuitive.
Thy pregnant Mind never struggled in its Birth,
But quick, and while it did conceive, brought forth;
The gentle Throes of thy prolifick Brain
Were all unstrain'd, and without Pain.
Thus when Great Jove the Queen of Wisdom bare
So easy and so mild his Travels were.
VIII.
Nor were these Fruits in a rough Soil bestown
As Gems are thick'st in rugged Quarries sown.
Good Nature and good parts so shared thy mind,
A Muse and Grace were so combined,
'Twas hard to guess which with most Luster shined,
A Genius did thy whole Comportment act,
Whose charming Complaisance did so attract,
As every Heart attacked.
Such a soft Air thy well-tuned Sweetness swayed,
As told thy Soul of Harmony was made;
All rude Affections that Disturbers be,
That mar or disunite Society,
Were Foreiners to thee.
Love only in their stead took up its Rest;
Nature made that thy constant Guest,
And seemed to form no other Passion for thy Breast.
IX.
This made thy Courteousness to all extend,
And thee to the whole Universe a Friend.
Those which were Strangers to thy native Soil and thee
No Strangers to thy Love could be,
Whose Bounds were wide as all Mortality.
Thy Heart no Island was, disjoined
(Like thy own Nation) from all human kind;
But 'twas a Continent to other Countries fixed
As firm by Love, as they by Earth annexed.
Thou scorn'dst the Map should thy Affection guide,
Like theirs who love by dull Geography,
Friends but to whom by Soil they are allied:
Thine reached to all beside,
To every Member of the World's great Family.
Heavens Kindness only claims a Name more general,
Which we the nobler call,
Because it is common, and vouchsafed to all.
X.
Such thy Ambition of obliging was,
Thou seem'dst corrupted with the very Power to please.
Only to let thee gratify,
At once did bribe and pay thy Courtesy.
Thy Kindness by Acceptance might be bought,
It for no other Wages sought,
But would its own be thought.
No Suitors went unsatisfied away;
But left thee more unsatisfied than they.
Brave Titus! thou might here thy true Portraicture find,
And view thy Rival in a private mind.
Thou heretofore deserv'dst such Praise,
When Acts of Goodness did compute thy days,
Measured not by the Sun's, but thine own kinder Rays.
Thou thought each hour out of Life's Journal lost,
Which could not some fresh Favor boast,
And reckon'dst Bounties thy best Clepsydras.
XI.
Some Fools who the great Art of giving want,
Deflower their Largess with too slow a Grant:
Where the deluded Suitor dearly buys
What hardly can defray
The Expense of Importunities,
Or the Suspense of torturing Delay.
Here was no need of tedious Prayers to sue,
Or thy too backward Kindness woo.
It moved with no formal State,
Like theirs whose Pomp does for entreaty wait:
But met the swift'st Desires half way;
And Wishes did well-nigh anticipate;
And then as modestly withdrew,
Nor for its due Reward of Thanks would stay.
XII.
Yet might this Goodness to the happy most accrue;
Somewhat was to the miserable due,
Which they might justly challenge too.
Whatever Mishap did a known Heart oppress,
The same did thine as wretched make;
Like yielding Wax thine did the Impressions take,
And paint its Sadness in as lively Dress.
Thou could afflictions from another Breast translate,
And foreign Grief impropriate;
Oft-times our Sorrows thine so much have grown,
They scarce were more our own;
Who seemed exempt, thou suffer'dst all alone.
XIII.
Our small'st Misfortunes scarce could reach thy Ear,
But made thee give in Alms a Tear;
And when our Hearts breathed their regret in sighs,
As a just Tribute to their Miseries,
Thine with their mournful Airs did symbolize.
Like Throngs of Sighs did for its Fibers crowd,
And told thy Grief from our each Grief aloud:
Such is the secret Sympathy
We may betwixt two neighboring Lutes descry,
If either by unskilful hand too rudely bent
Its soft Complaint in pensive murmurs vent,
As if it did that Injury resent:
Untoucht the other strait returns the Moan,
And gives an Echo to each Groan.
From its sweet Bowels a sad Note's conveyed,
Like those which to condole are made,
As if its Bowels too a kind Compassion had.
XIV.
Nor was thy goodness bounded with so small extent,
Or in such narrow Limits pent.
Let Female Frailty in fond Tears distill,
Who think that Moisture which they spill
Can yield Relief,
Or shrink the Current of another Grief,
Who hope that Breath which they in sighs convey,
Should blow Calamities away.
Thine did a manlier Form express,
And scorned to whine at an Unhappiness;
Thou thought it still the noblest Pity to redress.
So friendly Angels their Relief bestow
On the unfortunate below,
For whom those purer minds no Passion know:
Such Nature in that generous Plant is found,
Whose every Breach does with a Salve abound,
And wounds it self to cure another's Wound.
In pity to Mankind it sheds its Juice,
Glad with expense of Blood to serve their Use:
First with kind Tears our Maladies bewails,
And after heals;
And makes those very Tears the remedy produce.
XV.
Nor did thou to thy Foes less generous appear,
(If there were any durst that Title wear.)
They could not offer Wrongs so fast,
But what were pardoned with like haste;
And by thy acts of Amnesty defaced.
Had he who wished the Art how to forget,
Discovered its new Worth in thee,
He had a double Value on it set,
And justly scorned the ignobler Art of Memory.
No Wrongs could thy great Soul to Grief expose,
'Twas placed as much out of the reach of those,
As of material Blows.
No Injuries could thee provoke,
Thy Softness always dampt the stroke:
As Flints on Feather-beds are easiest broke.
Affronts could never thy cool Complexion heat,
Or chafe thy temper from its settled State:
But still thou stoodst unshockt by all,
As if thou had unlearnt the Power to hate,
Or, like the Dove, were born without a Gall.
XVI.
Vain Stoics who disclaim all Human Sense,
And own no Passions to resent Offense,
May pass it by with unconcerned Neglect,
And Virtue on those Principles erect,
Where it is not a Perfection, but Defect.
Let these themselves in a dull Patience please,
Which their own Statues may possess,
And they themselves when Carcasses.
Thou only could to that high pitch arrive,
To court Abuses, that thou might forgive:
Wrongs thus in thy Esteem seemed Courtesy,
And thou the first was ever obliged by Injury.
XVII.
Nor may we think these God-like Qualities
Could stand in need of Votaries,
Which heretofore had challenged Sacrifice.
Each Assignation, each Converse
Gained thee some new Idolaters.
Thy sweet Obligingness could supple Hate,
And out of it its Contrary create.
Its powerful Influence made Quarrels cease,
And Fewds dissolved into a calmer Peace.
Envy resigned her Force, and vanquished Spite
Became thy speedy Proselyte.
Malice could cherish Enmity no more;
And those which were thy Foes before,
Now wished they might adore,
Caesar may tell of Nations took,
And Troops by Force subjected to his Yoke:
We read as great a Conqueror in thee,
Who could by milder ways all Hearts subdue,
The nobler Conquest of the two;
Thus thou whole Legions made thy Captives be,
And like him too could look, and speak thy Victory.
XVIII.
Hence may we Calculate the Tenderness
Thou did Express
To all, whom thou did with thy Friendship bless:
To think of Passion by new Mothers bore
To the young Offspring of their Womb,
Or that of Lovers to what they Adore,
Ere Duty it become:
We should too mean Ideas frame,
Of that which thine might justly claim,
And injure it by a degrading Name:
Conceive the tender Care,
Of guardian Angels to their Charge assigned,
Or think how dear
To Heaven Expiring Martyrs are;
These are the Emblems of thy mind,
The only Types to show how thou wast kind.
XIX.
On whomsoe'er thou did confer this Tie
'Twas lasting as Eternity,
And firm as the unbroken Chain of Destiny,
Embraces would faint shadows of your Union show,
Unless you could together grow.
That Union which is from Alliance bred,
Does not so fastly wed,
Tho it with Blood be cemented:
That Link wherewith the Soul and Body's joined,
Which twists the double Nature in Mankind
Only so close can bind.
That holy Fire which Romans to their Vesta paid,
Which they immortal as the Goddess made,
Thy noble Flames most fitly parallel;
For thine were just so pure, and just so durable.
Those feigned Pairs of Faithfulness which claim
So high a place in ancient Fame,
Had they thy better Pattern seen,
They Would made their Friendship more divine
And strove to mend their Characters by thine.
XX.
Yet had this Friendship no advantage been,
Unless 'twere exercised within;
What did thy Love to other Objects tie,
The same made thy own Powers agree,
And reconciled thy self to thee.
No Discord in thy Soul did rest,
Save what its Harmony increast.
Thy mind did with such regular Calmness move,
As held resemblance with the greater Mind above.
Reason there fixed its peaceful Throne,
And reigned alone.
The Will its easy Neck to Bondage gave,
And to the ruling Faculty became a Slave.
The Passions raised no Civil Wars,
Nor discomposed thee with intestine Jars:
All did obey,
And paid Allegiance to its rightful Sway.
All threw their resty Tempers by,
And gentler Figures drew,
Gentle as Nature in its Infancy,
As when themselves in their first Beings grew.
XXI.
Thy Soul within such silent Pomp did keep.
As if Humanity were lulled asleep.
So gentle was thy Pilgrimage beneath,
Time's unheard Feet scarce makeless noise,
Or the soft Journey which a Planet goes.
Life seemed all calm as its last Breath.
A still Tranquillity so hushed thy Breast,
As if some Halcyon were its Guest,
And there had built her Nest;
It hardly now enjoys a greater Rest.
As that smooth Sea which wears the Name of Peace,
Still with one even Face appears,
And feels no Tides to change it from its place,
No Waves to alter the fair Form it bears:
As that unspotted Sky,
Where Nile does want of Rain supply,
Is free from Clouds, from Storms is ever free.
So thy unvary'd mind was always one,
And with such clear Serenity still shone,
As caused thy little World to seem all temperate Zone.
XXII.
Let Fools their high Extraction boast,
And Greatness, which no Travel, but their Mothers, cost.
Let 'em extol a swelling Name,
Which theirs by Will and Testament became;
At best but mere Inheritance,
As often the Spoils as Gift of Chance.
Let some ill-plac't Repute on Scutcheons rear
As fading as the Colors which those bear;
And prize a painted Field,
Which Wealth as soon as Fame can yield.
Thou scorn'dst at such low Rates to purchase Worth,
Nor could thou owe it only to thy Birth.
Thy self-born Greatness was above the Power
Of Parents to entail, or Fortune to deflower.
Thy Soul, which like the Sun, Heaven molded bright,
Disdained to shine with borrowed Light.
Thus from himself the Eternal Being grew,
And from no other Cause his Grandeur drew.
XXIII.
However if true Nobility
Rather in Souls than in the Blood does lie:
If from thy better part we Measures take,
And that the Standard of our Value make,
Jewels and Stars become low Heraldry
To blazon thee.
Thy Soul was big enough to pity Kings,
And looked on Empires as poor humble things.
Great as his boundless Mind,
Who thought himself in one wide Globe confined,
And for another pined.
Great as that Spirit whose large Powers roll
Through the vast Fabric of this spacious Bowl,
And tell the World as well as Man can boast a Soul.
XXIV.
Yet could not this an Haughtiness beget,
Or thee above the common Level set.
Pride, whose Alloy does best Endowments mar,
(As things most lofty smaller still appear)
With thee did no Alliance bear.
Low Merits often are by too high Esteem belied,
Whose Owners lessen while they raise their Price;
Thine were above the very Guilt of Pride,
Above all others, and thy own Hyperbole:
In thee the wid'st Extremes were joined
The loftiest, and the lowliest Mind.
Thus tho some part of Heavens vast Round
Appear but low, and seem to touch the Ground,
Yet it is well known almost to bound the Spheres,
It Is truly held to be above the Stars.
XXV.
While thy brave Mind preserved this noble Frame,
Thou stoodst at once secure
From all the Flattery and Obloquy of Fame,
Its rough and gentler Breath were both to thee the same:
Nor this could thee exalt, nor that depress thee lower;
But thou from thy great Soul on both look'dst down
Without the small concernment of a Smile or Frown.
Heaven less dreads that it should fired be
By the weak flitting Sparks that upwards fly,
Less the bright Goddess of the Night
Fears those loud howlings that revile her Light
Than thou Malignant Tongues thy Worth should blast,
Which was too great for Envy's Cloud to overcast.
'Twas thy brave Method to despise Contempt,
And make what was the Fault the Punishment,
What more Assaults could weak Detraction raise,
When thou could Saint disgrace,
And turn Reproach to Praise.
So Clouds which would obscure the Sun, often gilded be,
And Shades are taught to shine as bright as he.
So Diamonds, when envious Night
Would shroud their Splendour, look most bright,
And from its Darkness seem to borrow Light.
XXVI.
Had Heaven composed thy mortal Frame,
Free from Contagion as thy Soul or Fame:
Could Virtue been but Proof against Death's Arms,
Thou Had stood unvanquisht by these Harms,
Safe in a Circle made by thy own Charms.
Fond Pleasure, whose soft Magic often beguiles
Raw unexperienced Souls,
And with smooth Flattery cajoles,
Could never ensnare thee with her Wiles,
Or make thee Captive to her soothing Smiles.
In vain that Pimp of Vice assayed to please,
In hope to draw thee to its rude Embrace.
Thy Prudence still that Siren past
Without being pinioned to the Mast:
All its Attempts were ineffectual found;
Heaven fenced thy heart with its own Mound,
And forced the Tempter still from that forbidden Ground.
XXVII.
The mad Capricio's of the doting Age
Could never in the same Frenzy thee engage;
But moved thee rather with a generous Rage.
Gallants, who their high Breeding prize,
Known only by their Gallanture and Vice,
Whose Talent is to court a fashionable Sin,
And act some fine Transgression with a janty Mien,
May by such Methods hope the Vogue to win.
Let those gay Fops who deem
Their Infamies Accomplishment,
Grow scandalous to get Esteem;
And by Disgrace strive to be eminent.
Here thou disdainst the common Road,
Nor would by ought be wooed
To wear the vain Iniquities of the Mode.
Vice with thy Practice did so disagree,
Thou scarce could bear it in thy Theory.
Thou did such Ignorance 'bove Knowledge prize,
And here to be unskilled, is to be wise.
Such the first Founders of our Blood,
While yet untempted, stood
Contented only to know Good.
XXVIII.
Virtue alone did guide thy Actions here,
Thou by no other Card thy Life did steer:
No sly Decoy would serve,
To make thee from its rigid Dictates swerve,
Thy Love never thought her worse
Because thou had so few Competitors.
Thou could adore her when adored by none
Content to be her Votary alone:
When 'twas proscribed the unkind World
And to blind Cells, and Grotto's hurled,
When thought the Fantom of some crazy Brain,
Fit for grave Anchorets to entertain,
A thin Chimaera, whom dull Gown-Men frame
To gull deluded Mortals with an empty Name.
XXIX.
Thou own'dst no Crimes that shunned the Light,
Whose Horror might thy Blood affright,
And force it to its known Retreat.
While the pale Cheeks do Penance in their White,
And tell that Blushes are too weak to expiate:
Thy Faults might all be on thy Forehead wore,
And the whole World thy Confessor.
Conscience within still kept Assize,
To punish and deter Impieties:
That inbred Judge, such strict Inspection bore,
So traversed all thy Actions ore;
The Eternal Judge could scarce do more:
Those little Escapades of Vice,
Which pass the Cognizance of most
In The Crowd of following Sins forgot and lost,
Could never its Sentence or Arraignment miss:
Thou did prevent the young desires of ill,
And them in their first Motions kill:
The very thoughts in others unconfined
And lawless as the Wind,
Thou could to Rule and Order bind.
They durst not any Stamp, but that of Virtue bear,
And free from stain as thy most public Actions were.
Let wild Debauchees hug their darling Vice,
And court no other Paradise,
Till want of Power
Bids 'em discard the stale Amor,
And when disabled Strength shall force
A short Divorce,
Miscall that weak forbearance Abstinence,
Which wise Morality and better Sense
Styles but at best a sneaking Impotence.
Thine far a Nobler Pitch did fly
'Twas all free choice, naught of Necessity.
Thou did that puny Soul disdain
Whose half strain Virtue only can restrain;
Nor would that empty Being own,
Which springs from Negatives alone,
But truly thoughtst it always Virtues Skeleton.
XXX.
Nor did thou those mean Spirits more approve,
Who Virtue, only for its Dowry love,
Unbrib'd thou did her sterling self espouse:
Nor would a better Mistress choose.
Thou could Affection to her bare Idoea pay,
The first that ever caressed her the Platonic way.
To see her in her own Attractions dressed,
Did all thy Love arrest,
Nor lacked there new Efforts to storm thy Breast.
Thy generous Loyalty
Would never a Mercenary be,
But chose to serve her still without a Livery.
Yet wast thou not of Recompense debarred,
But countedst Honesty its own Reward;
Thou did not wish a greater Bliss to accrue,
For to be good to thee was to be happy too,
That secret Triumph of thy Mind,
Which always thou in doing well did find,
Were Heaven enough, were there no other Heaven designed.
XXXI.
What Virtues few possess but by Retail
In gross could thee their Owner call;
They all did in thy single Circle fall.
Thou wast a living System where were wrote
All those high Morals which in Books are sought.
Thy Practice did more Virtues share
Than heretofore the learned Porch ever knew,
Or in the Stagyrites scant Ethics grew:
Devout thou wast as holy Hermits are,
Which share their time 'twixt Ecstasie and Prayer.
Modest as Infant Roses in their bloom,
Which in a Blush their Lives consume,
So Chaste the Dead are only more,
Who lie divorced from Objects, and from Power.
So pure, that if blessed Saints could be
Taught Innocence, they would gladly learn of thee.
Thy Virtues height in Heaven alone could grow
Nor to ought else would for Accession owe:
It only now is more perfect than it was below.
XXXII.
Hence, though at once thy Soul lived here and there,
Yet Heaven alone its Thoughts did share;
It owned no home, but in the active Sphere.
Its Motions always did to that bright Center roll,
And seemed to inform thee only on Parole.
Look how the Needle does to its dear North incline,
As were not fixed 't would to that Region climb;
Or mark what hidden force
Bids the Flame upwards take its course,
And makes it with that Swiftness rise,
As if'twere winged by the Air through which it flies.
Such a strong Virtue did thy Inclinations bend,
And made 'em still to the blessed Mansions tend.
That mighty Slave whom the proud Victor's Rage
Shut Prisoner in a golden Cage,
Condemned to glorious Vassalage,
Never longed for dear Enlargement more,
Nor his gay Bondage with less patience bore,
Than this great Spirit brookt its tedious Stay,
While fettered here in brittle Clay,
And wished to disengage and fly away.
It vexed and chafed, and still desired to be
Released to the sweet Freedom of Eternity.
XXXIII.
Nor were its Wishes long unheard,
Fate soon at its desire appeared.
And strait for an Assault prepared.
A sudden and a swift Disease
First on thy Heart Life's chiefest Fort does seize,
And then on all the Suburb-vitals preys:
Next it corrupts thy tainted Blood,
And scatters Poison through its purple Flood.
Sharp Aches in thick Troops it sends,
And Pain, which like a Rack the Nerves extends.
Anguish through every Member flies,
And all those inward Gemonies
Whereby frail Flesh in Torture dies.
All the staid Glories of thy Face,
Where sprightly Youth lay checked with manly Grace,
Are now impaired,
And quite by the rude hand of Sickness marred.
Thy Body where due Symmetry
In just proportions once did lie,
Now hardly could be known,
Its very Figure out of Fashion grown;
And should thy Soul to its old Seat return,
And Life once more adjourn,
'Twould stand amazed to see its altered Frame,
And doubt (almost) whether its own Carcass were the same.
XXXIV.
And here thy Sickness does new matter raise
Both for thy Virtue and our Praise;
'Twas here thy Picture looked most neat,
When deep'st in Shades 'twas set,
Thy Virtues only thus could fairer be
Advantaged by the Foil of Misery.
Thy Soul which hastened now to be enlarged,
And of its grosser Load discharged,
Began to act above its wonted rate,
And gave a Praelude of its next unbody'd State.
So dying Tapers near their Fall,
When their own Luster lights their Funeral,
Contract their Strength into one brighter Fire,
And in that Blaze triumphantly expire,
So the bright Globe that rules the Skies,
Though he gild Heaven with a glorious Rise,
Reserves his choicest Beams to grace his Set;
And then he looks most great,
And then in greatest Splendour dies.
XXXVI.
Thou sharpest Pains did with that Courage bear,
And still thy Looks so unconcerned did wear:
Beholders seemed more indisposed than thee;
For they were sick in Effigy.
Like some well-fashion'd Arch thy Patience stood,
And purchased Firmness from its greater Load.
Those Shapes of Torture, which to view in Paint
Would make another faint;
Thou could endure in true Reality,
And feel what some could hardly bear to see.
Those Indians who their Kings by Tortures chose,
Subjecting all the Royal Issue to that Test
Could never thy Sway refuse,
If he deserves to reign that suffers best.
Had those fierce Savages thy Patience viewed,
Thou Would claimed their Choice alone;
They with a Crown had paid thy Fortitude,
And turned thy Deathbed to a Throne.
XXVII.
All those Heroic Pieties,
Whose Zeal to Truth made them its Sacrifice:
Those nobler Scaevola's, whose holy Rage
Did their whole selves in cruel Flames engage,
Who did amidst their Force unmoved appear,
As if those Fires but lambent were;
Or they had found their Empyreum there.
Might these repeat again their Days beneath,
They Would seen their Fates out-acted by a natural Death,
And each of them to thee resign his Wreath.
In spite of Weakness and harsh Destiny,
To relish Torment, and enjoy a Misery:
So to caress a Doom,
As make its Sufferings Delights become:
So to triumph over Sense and thy Disease,
As amongst Pains to revel in soft Ease:
These Wonders did thy Virtues worth enhance,
And Sickness to dry Martyrdom advance.
XXXVIII.
Yet could not all these Miracles stern Fate avert,
Or make it without the Dart.
Only she paused a while with Wonder struck,
A while she doubted if that Destiny was thine,
And turned over again the dreadful Book,
And hoped she had mistook;
And wished she might have cut another Line.
But dire Necessity
Soon cried 'twas thee,
And bad her give the fatal Blow.
Strait she obeys, and strait the vital Powers grow
Too weak to grapple with a stronger Foe,
And now the feeble Strife forgo.
Life's sap'd Foundation every Moment sinks,
And every Breath to lesser compass shrinks;
Last panting Gasps grow weaker each Rebound,
Like the faint Tremblings of a dying Sound:
And doubtful Twilight hovers over the Light,
Ready to usher in Eternal Night.
XXXIX.
Yet here thy Courage taught thee to out-brave
All the slight Horrors of the Grave:
Pale Death's Arrest
Never shocked thy Breast;
Nor could it in the dreadfulst Figure dressed.
That ugly Skeleton may guilty Spirits daunt,
When the dire Ghosts of Crimes departed haunt,
Armed with bold Innocence thou could that Mormo dare,
And on the barefaced King of Terrors stare,
As free from all Effects as from the cause of Fear.
Thy Soul so willing from thy Body went,
As if both parted by Consent.
No Murmur, no Complaining, no Delay,
Only a Sigh, a Groan, and so away.
Death seemed to glide with Pleasure in,
As if in this Sense too 't had lost her Sting.
Like some well-acted Comedy Life swiftly past,
And ended just so still and sweet at last.
Thou like its Actors, seem'dst in borrowed Habit here beneath,
And could, as easily
As they do that, put off Mortality.
Thou Breathedst out thy Soul as free as common Breath,
As unconcerned as they are in a feigned Death.
XL.
Go happy Soul, ascend the joyful Sky,
Joyful to shine with thy bright Company:
Go mount the spangled Sphere,
And make it brighter by another Star:
Yet stop not there, till thou advance yet higher,
Till thou art swallowed quite
In the vast unexhausted Ocean of Delight:
Delight, which there alone in its true Essence is,
Where Saints keep an eternal Carnival of Bliss:
Where the Regalio's of refined Joy,
Which fill, but never cloy,
Where Pleasures ever growing, ever new,
Immortal as thy self, and boundless too.
There may thou learned by Compendium grow;
For which in vain below
We so much time, and so much pains bestow.
There may thou all Idea's see,
All wonders which in Knowledge be
In that fair beatifick mirror of the Deity.
XLI.
Mean while thy Body mourns in its own Dust,
And puts on Sables for its tender Trust.
Though dead, it yet retains some untoucht Grace,
Wherein we may thy Soul's fair Footsteps trace;
Which no Disease can frighten from its wonted place:
Even its Deformities do thee become,
And only serve to consecrate thy Doom.
Those marks of Death which did its Surface stain
Now hallow, not profane.
Each Spot does to a Ruby turn;
What soiled but now, would now adorn.
Those Asterisks placed in the Margin of thy Skin
Point out the nobler Soul that dwelt within:
Thy lesser, like the greater World appears
All over bright, all over stuck with Stars.
So Indian Luxury when it would be trim,
Hangs Pearls on every Limb.
Thus amongst ancient Picts Nobility
In Blemishes did lie;
Each by his Spots more honorable grew,
And from their Store a greater Value drew:
Their Kings were known by the Royal Stains they bore,
And in their Skins their Ermin wore.
XLII.
Thy Blood where Death triumphed in greatest State,
Whose Purple seemed the Badge of Tyrant-Fate,
And all thy Body over
Its ruling Colors bore:
That which infected with the noxious Ill
But lately helped to kill,
Whose Circulation fatal grew.
And through each part a swifter Ruin threw.
Now conscious, its own Murder would arraign,
And throngs to sally out at every Vein.
Each Drop a fedder than its native Dye puts on,
As if in its own Blushes 'twould its Guilt atone.
A sacred Rubric does thy Carcass paint,
And Death in every Member writes the Saint.
So Phoebus clothes his dying Rays each Night,
And blushes he can live no longer to give Light.
LXIII.
Let Fools, whose dying Fame requires to have
Like their own Carcasses a Grave,
Let them with vain Expense adorn
Some costly Urn,
Which shortly, like themselves, to Dust shall turn.
Here lacks no Carian Sepulcher,
Which Ruin shall ere long in its own Tomb interr.
No fond Egyptian Fabric built so high
As if 'twould climb the Sky,
And thence reach Immortality.
Thy Virtues shall embalm thy Name,
And make it lasting as the Breath of Fame.
When frailer Brass
Shall moulder by a quick Decrease;
When brittle Marble shall decay,
And to the Jaws of Time become a Prey.
Thy Praise shall live, when Graves shall buried lie,
Till Time it self shall die,
And yield its triple Empire to Eternity.
To the Memory of that worthy Gentleman, Mr. Harman Atwood. PINDARIQUE.
I.
NO, I Will no more repine at Destiny,
Now we poor common Mortals are content to die,
When thee, blessed Saint, we cold and breathless see,
Thee, who if ought that is great and brave,
Ought that is excellent might save,
Had justly claimed Exemption from the Grave,
And cancelled the black-irreversible Decree.
Thou did alone such Worth, such Goodness share
As well deserved to be immortal here;
Deserve a Life as lasting as the Fame thou art to wear.
At least, why went thy Soul without its Mate?
Why did they not together undivided go?
So went (we are told) the famed Illustrious Two.
(Nor could they greater Merits show,
Although the best of Patriarchs that,
And this the best of Prophets was)
Heaven did alive the blessed Pair translate;
Alive they launched into Life's boundless Happiness,
And never past Death's Straights and narrow Seas;
Never entered the dark gloomy Thorowfare of Fate.
II.
Long time had the Profession under Scandal lain,
And felt a general though unjust Disdain,
An upright Lawyer Contradiction seemed,
And was at least a Prodigy esteemed.
If one perhaps did in an Age appear,
He was recorded like some Blazing Star;
And Statues were erected to the wondrous Man,
As heretofore to the strange honest Publican.
To thee the numerous Calling all its thanks should give,
To thee who could alone its lost Repute retrieve.
Thou the vast wide extremes did reconcile,
The first, almost, ever taught it was not to beguile.
To each thou did distribute Right so equally,
Even Justice might herself correct her Scales by thee.
And none did now regret
Her once bewailed Retreat,
Since all enjoyed her better Deputy.
Henceforth succeeding Time shall bear in mind,
And Chronicle the best of all the kind:
The best ever since the man that gave
Our suffering God a Grave;
(That God who living no Abode could find,
Though he the World had made, and was to save)
Embalming him, he did embalm his Memory,
And make it from Corruption free:
Those Odors kindly lent perfumed the Breath of Fame,
And fixed a lasting Fragrancy upon his Name;
And raised it with his Savior to an Immortality.
III.
Hence the stale musty Paradox of equal Souls,
That ancient vulgar Error of the Schools,
Avowed by dull Philosophers and thinking Fools,
Here might they find their feeble Arguments overthrown:
Here might the grave Disputers find
Themselves all baffled by a single Mind,
And see one vastly larger than their own,
Tho all of theirs were mixed in one.
A Soul as great as ever vouchsafed to be
Inhabiter in low Mortality;
As ever the Almighty Artist labored to infuse,
Through all his Mint he did the brightest choose;
With his own Image stamped it fair,
And bid it ever the Divine Impression wear;
And so it did, so pure, so well,
We hardly could believe him of the Race that fell:
So spotless still, and still so good,
As if it never lodged in Flesh and Blood.
Hence conscious too, how high, how nobly born:
It never did reproach its Birth,
By valuing ought of base or meaner worth,
But looked on earthly Grandeur with Contempt and Scorn.
IV.
Like his All-great Creator, who
Can only by diffusing greater grow:
He made his chiefest Glory to communicate,
And chose the fairest Attribute to imitate.
So kind, so generous, and so free,
As if he only lived in Courtesy.
To be unhappy did his Pity claim,
Only to want it did deserve the same:
Nor lacked there other Rhetoric than Innocence and Misery.
His unconfined unhoarded Store
Was still the vast Exchequer of the poor;
And whatsoever in pious Acts went out
He did in his own Inventory put:
For well the wise and prudent Banker knew
His Gracious Sovereign above would all repay,
And all the expenses of his Charity defray;
And so he did, both Principal and Interest too,
And he by holy Prodigality more wealthy grew.
Such, and so universal is the Influence
Which the kind bounteous Sun does here dispense:
With an unwearied indefatigable Race,
He travels round the World each day,
And visits all Mankind, and every place,
And scatters Light and Blessings all the way.
Though he each hour new Beams expend,
Yet does he not like wasting Tapers spend.
Though he ten thousand years disburse in Light,
The boundless Stock can never be exhausted quite.
V.
Nor was his Bounty stinted or designed,
As theirs who only partially are kind;
Or give where they Return expect to find:
But like his Soul, its fair Original:
'Twas all in all,
And all in every part,
Silent as his Devotion, open as his Heart.
Bribed with the Pleasure to oblige and gratify,
As Air and Sunshine he disposed his Kindness free,
Yet scorned Requitals, and worse hated Flattery,
And all obsequious Pomp of vain formality.
Thus the Almighty Bounty does bestow
Its Favors on our undeserving Race below;
Conferred on all its loyal Votaries;
Conferred alike on its rebellious Enemies.
To it alone our All we owe,
All that we are and are to be,
Each Art and Science to its Liberality,
And this same trifling jingling thing called Poetry.
Yet the great Donor does no costly Gratitude require,
No Charge of Sacrifice desire;
Nor are w' expensive Hecatombs to raise,
As heretofore,
To make his Altars float with reeking Gore.
A small Return the mighty Debt and Duty pays,
Even the cheap humble Offering of worthless Thanks and Praise.
IV.
But how, blessed Saint, shall I thy numerous Virtues sum,
If one or two take up this room?
To what vast Bulk must the full Audit come?
As that bold Hand that drew the fairest Deity,
Had many naked Beauties by,
And took from each a several Grace, and Air, and Line,
And all in one Epitome did join
To paint his bright Immortal in a Form Divine:
So must I do to frame thy Character.
I Will think whatever Men can good and lovely call,
And then abridge it all,
And crowd, and mix the various Idaea's there;
And yet at last of a just Praise despair,
Whatever ancient Worthies boast,
Which made themselves and Poets their Describers great,
From whence old Zeal did Gods and Shrines create;
Thou had thy self alone engrost,
And all their scattered Glories in thy Soul did meet:
And future Ages, when they eminent Virtues see,
(If any after thee
Dare the Pretense of Virtue own,
Without the Fear of being far outdone)
Shall count 'em all but Legacy,
Which from the Strength of thy Example flow,
And thy fair Copy in a less correct Edition show.
VII.
Religion over all did a just Conduct claim,
No false Religion which from Custom came,
Which to its Font and Country only owed its Name:
No Issue of devout and zealous Ignorance,
Or the more dull Effect of Chance;
But 'twas a firm well-grounded Piety,
That knew all that it did believe, and why;
And for the glorious Cause durst die,
And durst out-suffer ancient Martyrology.
So knit and interwoven with its being so,
Most thought it did not from his Duty, but his Nature flow.
Exalted far above the vain small Attacks of Wit,
And all that vile gay lewd Buffoons can bring,
Who try by little Railleries to ruin it,
And jeer't into an unreguarded poor defenseless thing,
The Men of Sense who in Confederacy join
To damn Religion, had they viewed but thine,
They Would have confessed it pure, confessed it all divine,
And free from all Pretenses of Imposture or Design.
Powerful enough to counter-act lewd Poets and the Stage,
And Proselyte as fast as they debauch the Age;
So good, it might alone a guilty condemned World reprieve,
Should a destroying Angel stand
With brandished Thunder in his Hand,
Ready the bidden Stroke to give;
Or a new Deluge threaten this and every Land.
VIII.
Religion once a quiet and a peaceful Name,
Which all the Epithets of Gentleness did claim,
Late proved the Source of Faction and intestine Jars:
Like the Fair teeming Hebrew, she
Did travel with a wrangling Progeny,
And harbor'd in her Bowels Fewds and Civil Wars.
Surly, uncomplaisant, and rough she grew,
And of a soft and easy Mistress turned a Shrew.
Passion and Anger went for marks of Grace,
And looks deformed and sullen sanctified a Face.
Thou first its meek and primitive Temper did restore,
First shew'dst how men were pious heretofore:
The gall-less Dove, which otherwhere could find no Rest,
Early retreated to its Ark, thy Breast,
And straight the swelling Waves decreast
And straight tempestuous Passions ceast,
Like Winds and Storms where some fair Halcyon builds her Nest.
No overheating Zeal did thee inspire,
But 'twas a kindly gentle Fire,
To warm, but not devour,
And only did refine, and make more pure:
Such is that Fire that makes thy present blessed Abode
The Residence and Palace of our God.
And such was that bright unconsuming Flame,
So mild, so harmless and so tame,
Which heretofore in the Bush to Moses came:
At first the Vision did the wondering Prophet scare,
But when the voice had checked his needless Fear,
He bowed and worshipped and confessed the Deity was there.
IX.
Hail Saint Triumphant! hail Heavens happy Guest.
Hail new Inhabitant amongst the blessed!
Methinks I see kind Spirits in convoy meet,
And with loud Welcomes thy Arrival greet.
Who, could they grieve, would go with Grief away
To see a Soul more white, more pure than they:
By them you are led on high
To the vast glorious Apartment of the Deity.
Where circulating Pleasures make an endless Round
To which scant Time or Measure sets no Bound,
Perfect unmixt Delights without Alloy,
And whatsoever does earthly Bliss annoy,
Which often does in Fruition Pall and oft'ner Cloy:
Where Being is no longer Life but Ecstasy,
But one long Transport of unutterable Joy.
A Joy above the boldest flights of daring verse,
And all a Muse unglorifyed can fancy or rehearse:
There happy Thou
From Troubles and the bustling toil of Business free,
From noise and tracas of tumultuous Life below,
Enjoy'st the still and calm Vacation of Eternity.
FINIS.

