A true and particular RELATION OF THE LATE VICTORY OBTAINED

By Colonel Horton and Colonel Okey,

Against the Welsh Forces UNDER Major General Langhorn.

Expressed in a Letter from Colonel Okey to a Friend of his in LONDON.

London, Printed by Matthew Simmons, for Henry Overton, in Popes-head-Alley.
1648.

A True and particular relation of the late victory obtained by Colonel Horton
and Col: Okey against the Welsh Forces under Major General LANGHORN.
SIR,
HITHRTO, till this day I could not give you a good account of our Welsh
Expedition, we have had so many obstructions through unseasonable weather,
rugged ways, want of necessaries, and other inconveniences, that we may well
say these things; Except the Lord had been with us, they had swallowed us up
quick. But besides this we had attending on us a numerous Army before us, and
behind us a great party. We diverse ways sought an opportunity to fight with
them, which till this instant we could never do, they before taking always
the advantage of their Welsh ways, hills, and Rivers.

This posture they continued in, till diverse of our Soldiers were wearied out,
and both Foot and Horse so far spent, as the Enemy himself knew his great
advantage over us: and out of that consideration, having mightily increased his
Army, and we through all these inconveniences somewhat decreased ours, he
upon the eighth of this instant about 8. of the clock in the forenoone
proffered us the Battle. We seeing his number, and he being upon us before we
were well aware of him, quitted our present station, which was at Saint Fagons,
the Enemy drew into the place of our Guards: but we being very loath to
retreat, upon a little hill near Saint Fagons, made good our ground, drew up
our Army, faced the Enemy, a for-lorne Hope of Horse and Dragoons were drawn
up under the command of Lieutenant Godfrey: And another forlorn Hope of Foot
under the command of a Lieutenant of Foot. Next them marched 160. fire-lockes
under the command of Captain Garland. In the right wing marched Colonel Okey
with three troops of horse and three troops of Dragoones. In the Body marched
Colonel Horton Commander in chief. In the left Flank marched the Horse under
the command of Major Barton, with some Dragoones. The body being thus drawn
up, our forlorn hope of Horse advanced and fell immediately into a ground
where ^oo. of the Enemies Foot with some Horse lined the hedges, Lieutenant
Godfrey with a forlorn hope of Horse immediately charged them, routed them,
and killed some of them. Colonel Okey upon this taking the advantage of the
Enemies running, commanded presently Captain Garland with the firelocks,
Captain Mercer with a commanded party of Dragoones and some Horse to second the
forlorn Hope. These falling on into another ground where the Enemy was a
lining the hedges, drove them from hedge to hedge and pursued them. The Enemy
in this retreat having so many reserves of Foot at every hedge, he makes a
stay with a new party: Still Colonel Okey commanded the party both of
Firelocks, Dragoons and Horse to advance; The Enemy having a numerous Army
of Foot, still ever and anon sends fresh reserves: but at the end he was
beat by this party of Foot and Horse to a water, and from thence over a
River, where again he made good his ground. There the dispute lasted a long
while, till our body of Horse and Foot advanced, where the Horse with the
Foot making way, and charging with the Foot upon their Musketeers, through
the goodness of God after an hours dispute they were put to the rout. We
pursued, took diverse prisoners, the number as yet unknown, and the quality;
we hear of some men of quality both killed and taken; this for present in
brief. We can give you an account that there were far more prisoners taken
than the number of our Army was: so that we can well say, God has done great
things for us in mightily stirring up the spirits of Officers and Soldiers so
as courageously each one in his place in this business doing his part. We can
truly say that this was the hand of God, we being but a handful in comparison
to their great Army which might have been a sufficient motive to have caused
us to have refused to fight; Yet the confidegatio^ of the great disadvantage
the Retreat would have been to us in our future proceedings. These were
motives notwithstanding all the former difficulties, to induce us to fight,
where through the Lord we had an answerable success; in which let the glory be
given to God, and not to man. Our victory being an absolute rout of them, with
very little loss to our selves, some few by-men we had killed; the smalnesse
of the number causing great admiration both to us and the Enemy; diverse of the
Enemy were killed, forty to one, and about 2500. taken. The chief of them
that we can hear of was Major-Generall Stradling, but none of our party either
killed or wounded. Captain Nicholets and Cornet Okey were both shot through
their hats, but free from any other hurt; there have been a few men of my
troop killed, and some hurt, but not many. For which and all other mercies I
desire God may have the glory: by the next Post you shall hear more. This being
done in haft in the field; in the mean time I refer you to Captain Mercer,
who can fully resolve you. No more for present; I take my leave, and remain

Your servant to command, John Okey.
From the field by St. Fagons this 8. of May, 1648.
FINIS.

