AN OFFERTORY, Presented at the FVNERALS of the Right Honorable, EDWARD
POPHAM, Admiral, etc.
BE dumb, ye Brats of Poetry; and no more
Profane those Orgies which you ought to adore;
It Is not the Sock or Buskin can become
These Tragic Rites, or Personate the Tomb
Of Noble POPHAM, whose sublimer Hearse
Admits no Rival with a slow-pac't Verse.
The Quire is too narrow, and the whole Nine
Too few, to warble Anthem's at this Shrine:
Though they could out-weepe Niobe, and Baptize
Fresh sorrows in the Cisternes of their Eyes.
Should we design His Tomb? all Britain must
Subscribe to be the Exchequer of His Dust,
Nor is it less then a due Debt which she
Should pay to Him, who fought to make her Free.
Let those that trace the Series, and the truth
Of Navall Victories, define his Youth,
Heithen'd with the Honors of command, where He
Commenc't at Sea, and took his first Degree.
Nor can succeeding times forget to cite,
And quote the story of that dismal Fight.
Where those proud Argosies with spreading Ships,
Shadowed the Maine, and menac't an Eclipse;
And frighted Nature, in a palsy stood,
To see whole Forests floating on the Flood.
The Slaughter-breathing- Brass grew hot and spoke
In flames of Lightning, and in clouds of Smoke,
Till the discolored Billows died in grain
Blushed to behold such shambles of the slain;
And the pale Tritons stood like heartlesse Elves,
Trembling to see Men do more then themselves.
These Tragic Triumphs did Great POPHAM view,
And from their fatal observation drew
Such Warlike Maxims as did thence translate
Life to His Honors, safety to the STATE:
But who can write his Noble Acts, who stood
The grand Example of His Birth, and Blood?
And as some stately Cedar, by His growth
And fruitfulnes, rependeth what she ow'th
To her first Planter; so Great POPHAMS Name,
Great in the Cradle, greater in the Fame
Of growing Acts, does His SIRES Trophies raise,
And interweave His Laurel with their Bays.
Survey His Zeal, and Faithfulness, you'lim
And copy Old Themistocles by Him:
Those brave Philaeni, who fell to restore,
And enlarge Carthage Bonds, could not do more
Then He, whose aims in Peace and War were known
^
Survey His Noble temperance; you will find
Fabricius, though before, an Age behind;
Who where He might command, prescribed a Law,
And taught His governed Passions to obey.
Survey His Justice, Aristides shall
Henceforth be namelesse, and Apocryphal:
So punctual were His Actions, and betwixt
Candor, and Innocence, so poised, so fixed,
That chaste, untoucht Astraea may be said
In Him to have lived a Nun, and died a Maid.
But why do I contract? What cannot be scanned
In Characters, or taken in short hand?
Since in the transcript of His soul we read
All that for Worth or Honor can be sed:
Whilst His just Actions shall His Fame dilate,
Beyond the reach of Envy, or of Fate.
Thus lived, thus died blessed POPHAM; to express,
Or speak Him larger, were to speak Him less:
For as choice Pictures, where Invention fades,
Are best portray'd in Umbrages and Shades:
So silence here best suits, since it is more meet
He should have rather Volumes, then a Sheet:
And 'twere a Crime to cram a copious Theme
In a poor Schedule, which deserves a Reame.

