THE Old Maid Mad for a Husband Or, The Journey-man Shooe-maker's Favors
turned to Misfortunes.
At first she showed him much Respect,
likewise Silver and Gold;
At length she did him quite Neglect,
because he Kissed and Told.
To the Tune of, A Touch of the Times.
This may be Printed, R. P.







ALL you that are willing right Merry to be,
I p^ay you come hither and listen to me;
While I by this Dirty in brief will unfold,
As pleasant a Fancy as ever was told,
It Is of an Old Maid who had Money great store,
But wanting a Husband it troubled her sore:
O would I was happily Married said she,
A Husband is better then Money to me.
A Journey man Shoemaker hearing this News,
He threw by his Stirrup, his Awls and his Shoes,
And to this Old Maiden he hastened with speed,
No sooner she saw him, but both was agreed;
But that the young Spark he some Money did lack,
In order to buy him new Clothes to his back:
I Will furnish thy Pockets with Treasure, said she,
A Husband is better then Money to me.
Therefore she no longer disputing did stand,
But lays him down thirty good Shillings in hand;
Take this at the present, but more thou shall have,
What ever thy heart can require or crave,
I Will give it, if thou in thy promise never fail,
And make thee as Trim and as N^at as my N^^il;
I value not Silver and Treasure, said she,
A Husband is better then Money to me.
This Money the Journey-man Shoemaker took,
And presently gave her a sweet merry look;
Said he, i will go buy me a new Suit of Clothes,
New Castor, new Cravat, and likewise new Hose:
This saying did please the old Maid to the heart,
She freely with more of her Treasure did part,
For why, my dear Honey, I love thee, said she,
A Husband, etc.
This Damsel she straight to a Coffer did go,
And called the Shoemaker to see a Rich Show,
Which was a whole Bag full of Silver and Gold,
And said to the Shoemaker, dearest behold!
All this shall be thine when thou make me thy Bride
And I have got something will please thee beside:
What ever is mine I will give it thee free,
A Husband, etc.
At this worthy proffer the Shoemaker Smiled,
But said, I Am afraid I shall not get thee with Child,
Because thou art Old, and one foot in the Grave;
Said she, I pray feel here what plump Flesh I have;
What Is wanting in Youthfulness, I Will make appear,
I have it in perfect true Judgment, my dear;
and thou shall be Lord of my Treasure, said she,
A Husband, etc.
Then straightways this Damsel did tempt him to bed
Where she did surrender up her Maidenhead;
For, said she, I scorn it should ever be spoke,
That Crispin did buy here a Pig in Poke:
Not many days after he told it about,
How kind she had been, so the Mischief came out:
Now of the Shoemaker she takes her farewell,
Because, like a Rascal, he did Kiss and tell.
The Shoemaker came thither, as heretofore,
But straightway she tumbled him out of the door;
I Will send you hence with St. Hugh's at your Back,
And straight with a Cudgel his Crown she did crack:
And now the poor Shoemaker does Fret and Fume
Because a brave Stone-Cutter's got in his room:
Of this pimping Crispin she takes her Farewell,
Because, like a Rascal, he did Kiss and Tell.
And now the Old Damsel is pleased to the heart,
So well the Stone-Cutter has acted his part;
For though in her Lodgings he often does sleep,
Yet he is resolved her Counsel to keep:
He swears that by him never Tale shall he to^d,
Therefore he enjoys the Old Maid and ^e^ Gold:
The Pimp of St. Crispin she bids him farewell.
Because, like a Rascal, he did Kiss and Tell.
Printed for J. Blare on London Brid^e.


