THE ENTERTAINMENT OF His Most Excellent MAJESTY CHARLES II, IN His PASSAGE
through the CITY of LONDON TO HIS CORONATION: Containing an exact Account of
the whole Solemnity; the Triumphal Arches, and Cavalcade, delineated in
Sculpture; the Speeches and Impresses illustrated from Antiquity.

TO THESE IS ADDED, A Brief Narrative of His MAJESTY'S Solemn CORONATION: WITH
His Magnificent PROCEEDING, and ROYAL FEAST IN WESTMINSTER HALL.

By JOHN OGILBY.

LONDON, Printed by THO: ROYCROFT, and are to be had at the Authors House in
King's Head Court within Shoe-Lane, MDCLXII.

I Have perused a brief Narrative of His MAJESTY'S Solemn CORONATION, printed
by Mr. OGILBY, together with his Description of His MAJESTY'S Entertainment
passing through the City of LONDON to His Coronation, etc. and, in pursuance of
His MAJESTY'S Order unto me directed, have examined, and do approve thereof; so
as the said Mr. OGILBY may freely publish the same.

From the HERALDS-COLLEDG this thirteenth of June, 1662. EDWARD WALKER, Garter
Principal King of Arms.

TO THE SACRED MAJESTY OF CHARLES II, King of ENGLAND, SCOTLAND, FRANCE, and
IRELAND, etc.
This DESCRIPTION of the SOLEMNITY of His Blessed INAUGURATION

Is humbly Dedicated By His most Obedient, Dutiful, and Loyal Servant, J.
OGILBY.

1 THE CAVALCADE or HIS MAJESTY'S PASSING THROVGH THE CITY OF LONDON TOWARD
HIS CORONATION The Duke of York's Horse Guard, Consisting of Wenceslaus Hollar
Bohemus delineavit, et aqva forti ari insculpsit. Ao i66i.


2 Monday the 22 of April. Ao M.D.C.LXI. four such Squadrons, and each
Squadron containing fifty men, Messengers of the Chambers, forty in number.


3 Esquires to the knights of the Bath, in number a hundred and forty.


4. Knight Harbinger Sergeant Porter Sewers of the Chamber and Gentlemen
Vshers, Quarter Waiters Clerks of the Chancery: C of the Signet, C: of the
Privy Seal,: C: of the Council; C: of the Parliament: C: of the Crown,


5 Chaplains having dignities, 10. The King's Advocate The King's Remembrancer
Masters of the Chancery. The Kings Learned Council at Law, The King's puisne
Sergeants. The Kings Attorney, The Kings Sollicitour The King's Eldest
Sergeants.


6 Secretaries of the French and Latin Tongues. Gentlemen Vshers, daily
Waiters, Sewers, Carvers, Cupbearers, in Ordinary, Esqvires of the Body,
Masters of standing Offices, viz. Tents, Revels, Ceremonies, Armourie,
Wardrobe, Ordinance, Masters of the Reqvests


7 Chamberlains of the Exchequer, Gentlemen of the Privy-Chamber


8 Knights of the Bath Knights of the Bath 68


9 Knights of the Bath, The Knight Marshal. Master of the Iewel-House Barons
younger Sons, many Viscounts Younger-Sons, many Treasurer of the Chamber


10 Barons of the Exchequer 3 Justices of the King's Bench and Common Pleas ^
Lord Chief Justice of the Common Pleas Lord Chief Justice of the King's Bench,
Lord Chief Baron of the Exchequer, Master of the Bells. Barons eld


11 est-Sons, many Earls Younger Sons, many Viscounts eldest Sons many The
Kings Trumpets


12 The Sergeant Trumpeter Pursuants at Arms Barons consisting of fifty one in
number.


Marquesses younger sons Earls Eldest sons Two Pursuants at Arms Visecounts


Dukes younger sons Marquesses Eldest Sons Two Herauldes Earls in number 31


Lord Chamberlain of the Kings Household Dukes Eldest sons Two Herauldes
Marquess of Worcester Marquess of Dorchester Two Heralds:


The Duke of Buckingham Clarencieux king of arms. Norroy king of arms. Lord
Chancellor. Lord Treasurer The Lord high Steward


17 Sergants at Arms Two Persons representing The Duke of Normandy, and The
Duke of Aquitaine Garter principal king of Arms The Gentleman Usher with the
Black Rod. The Lord Mayor of London


18 The Duke of York Sergants at Arms


19 The Earl of Lindsey Lord great Chamberlain of England The Earl of
Northumberland Lord high Constable of England The Earl of Suffolk, E^^l
Marshal, of E^gland Footmen Pages Gentlemen Pensioners and Equeries


20 THE RING Gentlemen Pensioners and Equeries Yeomen of the Guard The D^^e of
Albemarle Master of the Horse; Leading a Horse of Estate The Vice-Chamberlaine
Captain of the Pensioners Captain of the Guard,


His MAJESTY'S ENTERTAINMENTS Passing through the City of LONDON TO HIS
CORONATION; WITH A Description of the Triumphal ARCHES, and SOLEMNITY.
THE City of LONDON, participating the greatest share of that inexpressible
Happiness, which these Kingdoms have received by the glorious Restoration of
our Sovereign to His Throne, and of us His Subjects to our Laws, Liberties, and
Religion, after a dismal Night of Usurpation, and Oppression, and
proportionably exceeding in their Loyalty, took the occasion of His MAJESTY'S
Coronation, to express their Joy with the greatest Magnificence imaginable:
imitating therein the ancient Romans, who, at the return of their Emperors,
erected Arches of Marble, which though we, by reason of the shortness of Time,
could not equal in Materials, yet do ours far exceed theirs in Number, and
stupendous Proportions.

THE Custom of erecting Triumphal Arches among the Romans (a thing altogether
unknown to the Graecians, till their acquaintance with them) most certainly was
not coaeval with their Triumphs, which were within four years as long-lived as
Rome it self. For among the Greek, and Latin Authors of the Roman History, who
have been so accurate in enumerating all their Solemnities, especially which
concerned their Splendor, and Magnificence, we find not any mention of them
till the time of the Roman Emperors. Indeed of Triumphs, as of all other
things, the Beginnings seem to have been but rude. At first nothing more then
the Spoils hung up at the house of the Conqueror.

Aeneid. VII.
Virgil, speaking of the Palace of King Picus, Multaque praeterea sacris in
postibus arma,
Captivi pendent currus, curvaeque secures,
Et Cristae capitum, and portarum ingentia claustra,
Spiculaque, clypeique, ereptaque rostra carinis.
"Besides, on sacred Pillars all along,
"A World of Arms, Axes, and Chariots hung,
"Crests, and huge Bars of Gates the Ports adorn,
"And Spears, and Shields, and Prows from Galleys torn.


This rudeness of the first Triumphs, even among the Romans, will sufficiently
appear, if we compare the Triumph of Romulus, mentioned by Livy, Lib. I. Lib.
II.
Dionysius Halicarnassensis, and in Romulo.
Plutarch, with the excessive Pomp, and Magnificence of the latter, of which we
shall give an instance in this Discourse. The greatest Monument of which
Magnificence, the Triumphal Arches, as we have said, was not heard of before
Julius Caesar. It Is true, there is still retained at Rome the memory of Arcus
Romuli, and Camilli. But it is certain, it appears not whether they were
Triumphal Arches, or no; and it is very questionable, whether they bear their
true Titles. Not. Hist. Lib. xxxviii. cap. vi.
For Pliny, who flourished in the time of Vespasian the Emperor, calls them
novitium inventum, a new invention: whose Authority much out-weighs those empty
Titles of Arcus Romuli, and Camilli, of which there is no ancient Record. Yet,
that they were in use before Julius Caesar almost one Century of years, has
been conjectured out of these words of Asconius Pedianus, an Author, against
whom there is no exception, and who lived some years before Pliny; Fornix
Fabianus, arcus est juxta Regiam in Sacra via, a Fabio Censore constructus,
qui, a devictis Allobrogibus, Allobrox cognominatus est, ibique statua ejus
posita propterea est; The Fabian Arch is nigh the Palace of Romulus in the
Sacred way, built by Fabius the Censor, who, from his Victory over the
Allobroges, had the surname of Allobrox; for which his Statue was placed there.
That he triumphed upon this Victory, we have ample testimony from the Marbles
not long since dug up at Rome, formerly preserved in the Capitol.
Nevertheless, those words of Asconius do evidently conclude the contrary: for
he says expressly built by Fabius Censour. His Censourship is referred by
Sigonius and Pighius to the Year U.C. DCXLV. his Triumph happened anno
DCXXXIII. as appears from the Marbles now mentioned, Q. FABIUS Q. AEMILIANI
F.Q.N. AN. DCXXXIII.

Whence it is clear the Arch was built long after his Triumph. And I conceive
his Statue was placed there rather in regard of his expenses, then of his
Victory so long before obtained. Neither is it strange after the space of above
seven hundred years, to find this alteration. We may observe many other, but
shall only take notice of two. First, The ancient Romans granted not the
honor of Triumph to any, who had not slain in one pitched Field five thousand
of their Enemies. Jus triumphi datur ei, qui quinque millia hostium una acie
ceciderit. Secondly, They allowed not Triumph for a Victory over their
Fellow-Citizens; as Q. Catulus triumphed not over M. Lepidus, Valor Maximus,
Lib II. cap. viii,
or L. Antony over Catilin, or Sylla over Marius, or Cinna over Carbo, or
Caesar over Pompey.

Claudian, De vi. Consulatu Honorii.
-- cum Gallica vulgo
Praelia jactaret, tacuit Pharsalica Caesar.
Namque inter socias acies, cognataque signa,
Vt vinci miserum, nunquam vicisse decorum.
-- Of Gallick Fights often at his Board
Boasts Caesar, of Pharsalia not a word.
Though sad the case to fall in Civil War,
Yet it is no honor to the Conqueror.
which he means too in these Verses, De Bello Getico.
Semperab his famae petiere insignia bellis,
Quae diversa, procultuto, trans aequora virtus
Exercere dabat: currus, Regumque catenae
Inter abundantis fati ludibria ductae.
They by such Wars sought Fame in Fields remote,
Beyond Seas Victory by their Valor got:
Hence Kings in Chains and Chariots march in state,
Amongst various Sports of their abundant Fate.
De civibus triumphare nefas, Ibid.
says the same Valerius Maximus. In both which particulars the Romans History
affords exceptions. Live. Lib. xl.
In the first, in the Triumph without a War, anno Vrbis Cond. DLXXIII. In the
second, in the Triumphal Arch, yet almost entirely standing, of Constantine the
Great, which the Senate, and People of Rome dedicated to him upon his Victory
over Maxentius, a General of part of the Imperial Forces. The Inscription this,
IMP. CAES. FL. CONSTANTINO.



Three Triumphs, of the same nature, in one Century of years, De vi. Consulatu
Honorii.
are reckoned by Claudian, who makes Rome to speak thus, His annis, qui lustra
mihi bis dena recensent,
Nostra ter Augustos intra pomaeria vidi,
Temporibus variis: eadem sed causa Tropaeis,
Civilis dissensus erat --
Lustres twice ten, with annual Springs, and Falls,
Passed, since I saw three Emp'rours in our Walls,
At several times: each, on sad Scores, did boast
Triumphs for Civil Broils --
Both which particulars comprehend this Triumph of His most Sacred Majesty,
which was upon a Victory over the Enemies of His Country without a Battle.

These Arches generally bore the name of him, that rid in Triumph, and had a
Title insculp'd, to testify for what Victory they were erected: both which
appear from this Speech of the City of Rome to Honorius the Emperor, Ast ego
fraenabam geminos, quibus altior ires, Claudian ib.

Electi candoris equos, and nominis Arcum
Jam molita tui, per quem radiante decorus
Ingrederere toga, pugnae monumenta dicabam
Defensam titulo Libyam testata perenni.
But I put in your Steeds more white then Snow,
And of your Name designed a stately Arch,
Through which you might in Regal Purple march.
The Battle too, and lasting claim engraved
Attesting Monuments that you Libya saved.


They were always adorned with some Spoils of the Conquered Enemy. Claudian, --
Spoliisque micantes Paneg. iv.

Innumeros arcus --
Innum'rous Arches rich with glittering Spoils,


Prudentius, Frustra igitur currus summo miramur in Arcu
Quadrijugos, stantesque Duces in curribus altis,
Sub pedibusque Ducum captivos poplite flexo
Ad juga depressos, manibus que in terga retortis,
Et suspensa gravi telorum fragmina trunco.
We Chariots on the Arch admire in vain,
In them their haughty Leaders standing see,
And Captives stooping with low-bended knee,
Their hands behind them ti'd; of ponderous Oak
Huge Truncheons hanging of strong Jav'lins broke.


Sometimes they bore insculp'd the Battle, in which the Conqueror had merited
his Triumph, as those of Septimius Severus, and Constantine. In others, the
whole pomp of the Triumph was represented; as in that of Vespasian and Titus,
where are still to be seen led in Triumph the Spoils of the Temple of
Jerusalem, the Ark of the Covenant, the Candlestick with seven Branches, the
Table of the Shewbread, the Tables of the Decalogue, with the Vessels of pure
Gold for the use of the Temple, the Captives chained, the Emperor riding in
his Triumphal Chariot, etc. The order, and method of a Triumph, among the
Romans, we will here briefly, but distinctly deliver, chiefly out of Plutarch,
in the Life of P. Aemilius.

The captivated Statues, Pictures, and Colossusses, lead the Van. Plutarch, In
Romulo.
of the Triumph of P. Aemilius, The first day (for this Triumph lasted three)
scarce sufficed for the passing of the Statues, Pictures, and Colosses, lead in
two hundred and fifty Carriages. Appian says, that Pompey carried the Statues
of the Foreign Gods in Triumph.

The next followed the choicest Arms and Spoils of the Enemy. Plutarch, The
next day were carried the fairest and richest of the Macedonian Weapons upon
several Carriages, glistering with the Brass and Iron new scowr'd: artificially
placed, (yet that they seemed to have been thrown together promiscuously
without any order) the Head-pieces upon the Shields, the Corslets upon the
Buskins, etc. which striking constantly against each other, made so terrible a
noise, that the sight of them, though now overcome, was a terror to the
Spectatours. Statius, Ante Ducem spolia, and duri Mavortis imago, Lib. xii.

Virginei currus, cumulataque fercula cristis,
Et tristes ducuntur equi. --
The General, Spoils, and Mars dire Shape precedes
Chariots and Chargers heaped with Crests, and Steeds
Mourning are led


Ovid, Scuta sed and galea gemmis radientur and auro, De Pento, Lib. iii. Eleg.
iv.

Stentque super victos trunca tropaea viros.
But Gems, and Gold their Shields, and Helms adorn,
The Trophies on the vanquished Shoulders born.


Next, the Images of the Cities, Towns, Castles, Mountains, and Rivers, taken.
Ovid, De Tristib. Lib. iv. Eleg. ii.
Cumque Ducum titulis oppida capta leget:
Hic lacus, hi montes, haec tot castella, tot urbes,
Plena ferae caedis, plena cruoris erant.
There taken Towns, and Princes Titles read:
There Lakes, there Mountains, Forts, and Cities stood;
Full with dire Slaughter, full of Purple Blood.
Protinus, argento veros imitantia muros,
Barbara cum victis oppida lata viris:
Fluminaque in montes, and in altas proflua sylvas,
Armaque cum telis in strue juncta suis.
Next, Barbarous Cities with the Captives past
True Walls resembling in pure Silver cast:
And Rivers that amongst Woods and Mountains glide,
And Arms, and Weapons, raised like Trophies, ride.


Livy Lib. xxxviii.
says, that Scipio Asiaticus carried in Triumph the Images of an hundred and
thirty four Towns. Pliny Not. Hist. Lib. v. Cap. v.
reckons up twenty seven Cities, Towns, Nations, Mountains, etc, led before
Cornelius Balbus. Silius Italicus, of the Triumph of Scipio Africanus over
Carthage.

Mox victas tendens Carthago ad sidera palmas
Ibat, and effigies orae jam lenis Iberae,
Terrarum finis Gades, ac laudibus olim
Terminus Herculeis Calpe, Baetisque lavare
Solis equos dulci consuetus fluminis unda,
Frondosumque apicem subigens ad sidera matter
Bellorum fera Pyrene, nec mitis Iberus,
Cum simul illidit Ponto quos attulit amnes.
-- Next, lifting to
The Stars her Conquered hands, did Carthage go,
Then the Effigies of the Iberian Land,
Now Peaceable; with Gades, that does stand
The Period of the Earth; and Calpe, that,
Of old, Alcides praise did terminate:
With Baetis, which the Horses of the Sun
Is wont to bathe in Streams that gently run:
And high Pyrene, which gives Birth to Wars,
And lifts her heavy Head unto the Stars:
With rude Iberus, that with Fury flings
Against the Sea the Rivers, that he brings.
Mr. ROSS. Then followed the Moneys of Silver, Vessels, Garments, etc.
Plutarch, Ibid.
After which, three thousand men carrying the Moneys of Silver in seven hundred
and fifty Silver Vessels; each of them weighing three Talents, four men to a
Vessel.

Ibid.
Next the Trumpeters. Plutarch, The next day betimes in the Morning went the
Trumpeters sounding a Charge. After whom were led the Oxen ordained for
Sacrifice. Lib. xlv.
Livy, The Victimes, which go before, are not the least part of the Triumph.
These were white, taken out of the Medows of the River Clitumnus. Virgil, Hinc
albi, Clitumne, greges, Georg. i.
and maxima taurus
Victima, saepe tuo perfusi flumine sacro,
Romanos ad Templa Deum duxere Triumphos.
This snowy Flocks, and Bulls prime Offerings yields,
Which bathed, Clitumnus, in thy Sacred Floods,
Rome's Triumphs draw to Temples of the Gods.


Upon which place Servius, Clitumnus is a River in Menavia, which is a part of
Umbria, as Umbria is of Tuscia, whence whatsoever Beasts drink, they bring
forth their young ones white. Claudian, Quin and Clitumni sacras victoribus
undas, Panegyr. iv.

Candida quae Latiis praebent armenta Triumphis.
Clitumnus sacred Streams, whose Snow-white Breed
The conquering Romans in their Triumphs need.


Ovid, Candidaque adducta collum percussa securi De Tristibus, lib. iv. Eleg.
ii.

Victima purpureo sanguine tingit humum.
Struck with an Axe the pure white Sacrifice
Earth with a purple River dies.


Next the Gold, and Golden Vessels, taken from the Enemy. Plutarch, After the
Sacrifices went those that carried the Gold, divided, as the Silver was, into
Vessels, weighing each three Talents, the number of the Vessels, seventy seven:
with those that carried the Sacred Cup, which Aemilius had caused to be made of
ten Talents of Gold, adorned with several precious Stones, etc.

Then followed the Arms of the Conquered Prince. After which he sent the
Chariot of Perseus, and his Arms, and his Crown placed upon his Arms.

Next the Captives, richly clad, but laden with Chains; the Captive Prince with
Chains of Gold, the rest according to their quality. Silius Italicus, Ante
Siphax feretro residens captiva premebat Lib. xvii.

Lumina, and auratae servabant colla catenae.
Hic Hanno, clarique genus Phoenissa juventa,
Et Macedum primi, atque incocti corpora Mauri,
Tum Nomades, notusque sacro, cum lustrat arenas,
Hammoni Garamas: etc.
Sed non ulla magis mentesque oculosque tenebat,
Quam visa Hannibalis campis fugientis imago.
-- Before him Siphax, Captivate,
Upon a Beer, his Eyes dejected, sat,
His Neck in Golden Chains preserved. And here
Hanno, and young Phaenician Nobles were;
Then Macedonian Princes; next to these
The Moors with parched Skins; then Nomades
And Garamantians known to Horned Jove,
Where they the Sands survey, etc.
Yet nothing more delights their Mind, and Eyes,
Then Hannibal, as in the Field he flies,
Mr. ROSS.

Propertius, Lib. xi. Eleg. i.
Aut Regum auratis circumdata colla catenis,
Actiaque in Sacra currere rostra via.
Or else their Kings in Golden Fetters bound;
The Sacred way with Actian Wheels resound.


Ovid, De art Am.
Ibant ante duces onerati colla catenis.
Before, the Princes went in Golden Chains.


Trebellius, speaking of Queen Zenobia, Jam primum ornata gemmis ingentibus,
ita ut ornamentorum onere laboraret: vincti erant pedes auro, manus etiam
catenis aureis, nec collo aureum vinculum deerat. She was now so decked with
great Gems, that she was oppressed with the weight of her Ornaments: her Feet,
Hands, and Neck were bound with Chains. But this was not constant: for in a
Triumph of Pompey's Appian mentions a great number of Captives, (...), but none
bound.

Next followed the Crowns, which the Cities, Friends of the Romans, had
presented to the General. Virgil, Ipse sedens niveo candentis limine Phoebi
Dona recognoscit sociorum, aptatque superbis
Postibus. --
He in bright Porches of great Phoebus sits,
And gifts of Nations to proud Pillars fits.


Plutarch, After which were carried 400. Golden Crown's, which the Cities had
sent to Paulus Aemilius by their Ambassadors, as a reward of his Victory.

Next, he that rid in Triumph, in his Triumphal habit, elegantly described by
Juvenal. Satex.


Quid si vidisset Praetorem in curribus altis
Exstantem, and medio sublimem in pulvere Circi
In tunica Jovis, and pictae Sarrana ferentem
Ex humeris aulaea togae, magnaeque Coronae
Tantum orbem quanto cervix non sufficit ulla?
Quippe tenet sudans hanc publicus, and sibi Consul
Ne placeat, curru servus portatur eodem.
Da nunc and volucrem sceptro quae surgit eburno,
Illinc Cornicines, hinc praecedentia longi
Agminis officia, and niveos ad fraena Quirites,
Defossa in loculis quos sportula fecit amicos.
Had he the Praetor in his Chariot spied
Amidst the dusty Circque in Triumph ride,
In Joves bright Vest, in an imbroider'd Gown
Of Tyrian Purple, and a mighty Crown,
For any Head too weighty, and too large,
That is forsooth a sweating Servants charge:
Least that the Consul in such pomp should pride,
The Slave and he both in one Chariot ride.
On the Ivory Scepter the Eagle seen displayed,
Here Cornets, there his friendly Cavalcade;
Romans in white march near the Horses Reins,
Friends by the Basket and their Belly-gains.
The Army followed the Chariot of their General. Plutarch, The whole Army was
crowned with Laurel, following the Chariot of their General in their ranks, and
orders. Who usually sang Io TRIUMPH. Ovid, speaking of the Triumph of Drusus
Germanicus; Tempora Phoebea lauro cingentur, Ioque
Miles, Io magna voce TRIUMPH, canet.
Io the Army with fresh Laurel Crowned
Io TRIUMPH as they march resound.
Claudian, De laud. Stiliconis.
Ipse albis veheretur equis, currumque secutus,
Laurigerum festo fremuisset carmine miles.
Drawn with white Steeds; with Wreaths his Chariot hung,
The Army followed with a joyful song.
as by the Spectators also. Lib. iv. Od. iii.
Horace, of Augustus, Tuque dum procedis, Io TRIUMPH,
Non semel dicemus, Io TRIUMPH.
Io TRIUMPH whilst you march in state,
Io TRIUMPH we reiterate.


Thus having briefly touched upon the Antiquity, and use of Triumphal Arches,
we shall descend to the illustration of the Descriptions in particular.

archway The first ARCH.
MONDAY, April the two and twentieth, His MAJESTY went from the Tower, through
the City, to Whitehall.

In his passage through Crouched Friars, He was entertained with Music, a Band
of eight Waits, placed on a Stage.

Near Algate, another Band of six Waits entertained him in like manner with
Music, from a Balcony, built to that purpose.

In Leaden Hall- Street, near Lime- Street End, was erected the first Triumphal
Arch, after the Dorick order. On the North-side, on a Pedestal before the Arch,
was a Woman personating REBELLION, mounted on an Hydra, in a Crimson Robe,
torn, Snakes crawling on her Habit, and begirt with Serpents, her Hair snaky, a
Crown of Fire on her Head, a bloody Sword in one Hand, a charming Rod in the
other. Her Attendant CONFVSION, in a deformed Shape, a Garment of several
ill-matched Colors, and put on the wrong way; on her Head, Ruins of Castles;
torn Crowns, and broken Scepters in each Hand.

THere was no War in the Roman, or Greek Commonwealths called by any name
properly answering to Rebellion, which comprehends only the violation of that
Natural duty, which the Subject owes to the supreme Governor: for though we
find Rebellio in Tacitus, of Subjects that rise against their Prince, and
Rebellis too in Claudian, speaking of Africa a Subject to Rome, but then in
Arms against the Roman Emperor under Gildo, as -- segetes mirantur Iberas In
Eutropium Lib. i.

Horrea: nec Libyae senserunt damna rebellis
Jam Transalpina contenti mess Quirites.
The Roman Grange Iberian Corn admires,
Nor did rebellious Libya's loss resent,
But with Transalpine Harvests was content.
and in another place, speaking of the Moors, De bello Gildonico.
Nonne meam fugiet Maurus, cum viderit, umbram?
Quid dubitas? exsurge toris: invade rebellem:
Captivum mihi read meum --
Will not the Moor fly when he sees my Ghost?
Why doubt'st Thou? rise: storm that Rebellious Coast;
My Captive me restore. --


Yet we find that word attributed also to Alarick, and his Army, no Subjects of
the Roman Empire, but only Confederates, by the same Author, De VI. Consulat.
Honorii.
Oblatum Stilico violato foedere Martem
Omnibus arripuit votis, ubi Roma peric'lo
Jam procul, and belli medius Padus arbiter ibat:
Jamque opportunam motu strepuisse rebelli
Gaudet perfidiam.
He freely undertook so just a War,
The League being broke, and Rome from danger far,
While the Armies Poe divides; Stilico Arms:
Glad of the occasion those Rebellious swarms
In such a place conjoined.


Wherefore we must look for its Description under Civil Discord, and Sedition,
which Petronius Arbiter, in the Civil War betwixt Caesar and Pompey, has very
elegantly delivered.

Infremuere tubae, ac scisso DISCORDIA crine
Extulit ad Superos Stygium caput. Hujus in ore
Concretus sanguis, contusaque lumina flebant.
Stabant atrati scabra rubigine dentes;
Tabo lingua fluens; obsessa draconibus ora:
Atque intertorto laceratam pectore vestem,
Saguineam tremula quatiebat lampada dextra.
The Trumpets sound, and Discord, with torn hair,
Her Stygian front advances to the air.
Over her smeared Visage clotted blood lies spread,
Her blubbered Eyes are beat into her Head,
Her iron Teeth rough with a rusty scale,
Her Tongue drops gore, Serpents her Brows impale:
Rending her pleited Vest, and red Attire,
Her trembling Hand brandisheth bloody Fire.
But we cannot better take a view of Sedition, and Discord, then in the
Description of the Authors of it, feigned to be the Furies: as Virgil, Tu
potes unanimes armare in praelia fratres,
Atque odiis versare domos: tu verbera tectis,
Funereasque infer faces: tibi nomina mill,
Mill nocendi arts: foecundum concute pectus.
Disjice compositam pacem, sere crimina belli:
Arma velit, poscatque simul, rapiatque juventus.
Unanimous Brothers thou can arm to fight,
And settled Courts destroy with deadly spite:
Storm Palaces with Steel, and Pitchy Flames,
Thou have a thousand wicked Arts, and Names:
Thy Bosom disembogue, with Mischief full,
And Articles concluding Peace annull.
Then raise a War, and with bewitching Charms
Make the mad People rage to take up Arms.


Statius gives a Description of one of them very correspondent to ours,
Thebaid. Lib. i.
Centum illi stantes umbrabant ora Cerastae:
Turba minor diri capitis; Sedet intus abactis
Ferrea lux oculis, qualis per nubila Phoebes
Atracia rubet art labor: Suffusa veneno
Tenditur, ac sanie gliscit cutis, igneus atro
Ore vapor, quo longa sitis, morbique, famesque,
Et populis mors una venit, riget horrida tergo
Palla, and caerulei redeunt in pectora nodi.
Tum geminas quatit illa manus: haec igne rogali
Fulminat, haec vivo manus era verberat hydro.
An hundred Snakes up in a Party made
From her dire Head, her horrid Temples shade,
Her fixed Eyes sunk, their Brazen Gleamings shroud,
So charmed bright Phaebe blusheth through a Cloud:
Poisoned her swollen Skin shines with gore, her Breath
Ushers in Flame, Thirst, Famine, Plague, and Death:
Her dreadful Robes rough on her Shoulders sit,
Which on her Bosom Crimson Ribbans knit:
Then both her hands she shakes; with Funeral Fire
This thunders, that jerks Air with Serpents dire.


Of Tisiphone Virgil, Aen. vi.
Continuo sontes ultrix accincta flagello
Tisiphone quatit insultans, torvosque sinistra
Intentans angues, vocat agmina saeva sororum.
Cruel Tisiphone insulting shakes
Her dreadful Whip, and armed with twisted Snakes
In her left hand, straight on the guilty falls,
And Troops of unrelenting Furies calls.
Pindar calls Sedition (...), a bad Nurse for Children. The reason may be taken
from these Verses of Homer describing the consequents of it; Iliad. xxii.
(...)
(...)
(...),
(...).
My slaughtered Sons, my Daughters ravished, see,
My Court destroyed, and from the Nurses knee
Their tender Babes snatched by the cruel Foe,
And in one Sea their Bloods commixed flow.


The HYDRA, on which Rebellion is mounted, the Ancients have very variously
represented. In Corinthiacis.
Pausanias attributes but one Head to it, Pisander Camirensis Ibid.
many, Alcaeus nine, Simonides fifty, (...), whom Virgil follows, Quinquaginta
atris immanis hiatibus Hydra Aen. vi.

Savior intus habet sedem --
Hydra with fifty ugly Jaws, one more
Cruel then this by half, 's within the door.


On the South Pedestal is a Representation of BRITTAIN'S MONARCHY, supported by
LOYALTY, both Women; Monarchy, in a large Purple Robe, adorned with Diadems,
and Scepters, over which a loose Mantle, edged with blue and silver Fringe,
resembling Water, the Map of Great Britain drawn on it, on her Head London, in
her right Hand, Edinburgh; in her left, Dublin: Loyalty all in White, three
Scepters in her right Hand, three Crowns in her left.

Purple is called by Tertullian Regiae dignitatis insigne, De Idololat.
a Badg of Royal Dignity. Lactantius, Lib. iv. cap. vii. In Rufinum, Lib. ii.
Et sicuti nunc Romany indumentum Purpurae insigne est Regiae dignitatis
assumptae, sic illis, etc. Claudian of Rufinus, Imperii cerius; tegeret ceu
Purpura dudum
Corpus, and ardentes ambirent tempora gemmae.
Certain of Empire, as if Purple now
Had clothed his Limbs, and Gems impaled his Brow.
So Strabo says, that the Posterity of Androclus, Son of Codrus King of Athens,
had at Ephesus, besides many other Honors granted them, a Purple Robe in token
of their Royal descent. According to which, we find in Sidonius Apollinaris,
Purpuratus to be equivalent with Imperator, Epist. lib. ii. Qui videbatur in
jugulum Purpurati jamjam ruiturus; Epist. xiii.
Who seemed ready to murder the Emperor: and, Sero cognoscunt, possereum
Majestatis pronunciari etiam eum, qui non adfectasset habitum Purpuratorum;
They too late understand, that even he, that affected not the Habit of the
Emperors, might be found guilty of Treason. From whence the Civilians observe,
that it was Treason to assume the Royal Robes. And Ammianus Marcellinus speaks
of a Woman, who had suborned several to accuse her Husband of High Treason, for
having stolen the Emperor Diocletian's Purple Vest out of his Sepulcher, and
hiding it. Eusebius; He (Diocletian) first beautified his Shoes with Gold, and
Pearls, and precious Stones. For the Kings before him were honored in the same
manner with the Consuls, having only a Purple Vest for a badge of their
Royalty, The same says Paeanius, who translated Eutropius; The Royal Robe
before was distinguished only by its Purple color. Wherefore, when any
resolved Tyrannically to sieze upon the Royal Dignity, they immediately usurped
a Purple Robe; which they sometimes forced from a Standard, In Gordianis.
as Trebellius reports of Saturninus. The same Author; Gordianum Proconsulem
reclamantem, and se terrae affligentem, opertum Purpura imperare coegerunt and
primo quidem invitus Gordianus Purpuram sumpserat: postea vero, quum vidit
neque filio, neque familiae id latam esse, volens suscepit Imperium; They
forced Gordian the Proconsul, who denied, and cast himself upon the ground, to
be vested in Purple, and receive the Title of Emperor: at first he was very
unwilling to receive the Purple Robe, but, when he saw, that that was unsafe
for his Son, and Family, he received the Empire willingly. Where Purpurant
sumere, and sumere Imperium, are the same. Sometimes they committed Sacrilege
upon the Statues of the Gods. In Saturnino.
Vopiscus; Deposita Purpura ex simulachro Veneris, cum cyclade uxoria, a
militibus circumstantibus amictus, and adoratus est; Taking a Purple Robe from
the Statue of Venus, and his Wife's inner Vest of Gold, he was invested, and
adored by the Soldiers as Emperor. Trebellius; Celsum Imperatorem
appellaverunt peplo Deae Coelestis ornatum; They put on Celsus the Vest of the
Goddess of Heaven, and called him Emperor. Wherefore, when we read of the
Consular Purple Robes under the Roman Emperors, as in that of Latinus
Pacatus, Quorum alter, post amplissimos Magistratus, and purpuras Consulares;
and of Sidonius, -- Te picta Togatum
Purpura plus capiat; quia res est semper ab aevo
Rara frequens Consul: --
Purple should rather thee affect, since we
One often made a Consul seldom see:
it must be understood either of the Senatorian Segments added to their
Consular Robes, or of a Purple mixed with some other Dye; which is mentioned in
Theodosius's Code: as a Warp of Purple, the Woof of another color, or the
like. For the Imperial Interdict comprehends all of whatsoever degree;
Temperent universi, cujuscunque sint sexus, dignitatis, artis, professionis,
and generis, ab hujusmodi speciei possessione, quae soli Principi, ejusque
domui dedicatur; Let every one, of what Sex, Dignity, Art, Profession, and
Birth they be, forbear the possession of this sort of Purple, which is
appropriated to the Prince alone, and his house. The first Imperial Edict of
this nature is conceived to be in the time of the Emperor Nero: which is to be
understood de holoveris, of pure unmixed Purple.

Neither was Purple peculiar to the Imperial Robes only, but to their Pens
too. The Emperor Leo forbad, that any Rescripts of his should bear other then
a Purple Inscription. So Nicetas, in the Life of Manuel the Emperor, says,
That, at his entrance upon the Empire, he sent Letters to Constantinople,
written with Purple. Constantinus Manasses in his Annals, The Emperor granted
the request of his Sister, and taking a Pen in his hand confirmed the Paper in
Purple Letters. Epitome Chron. Werweronis.
And Palaeologus the Emperor, swearing subjection to the Roman See in the
Church of Santo Spirito at Rome, subscribed in Letters of Purple.

The art of making this Purple, both for Robes, and Ink, L. Sacri, C. de diver.
Rescr.
is still preserved, but we meet not with the materials; though we have left us
both the place, and manner of taking, preparing, and whatsoever is necessary
for that purpose.

Monarchy is said to be supported by Loyalty; because the Love of the Subject
is the securest Guard of the Prince. Seneca, in a Discourse betwixt Nero and
Seneca the Philosopher, NE. Ferrum tuetur Principem. SE. Melius Fides.
NE. Decet timeri Caesarem. SE. At plus diligi.
NE. Arms Caesar guard. SE. But better Loyalty.
NE. Kings should be feared. SE. They rather loved should be.


We find not any name for Loyalty in the time of the Roman Emperors, except
Fides, or Fidelitas: as in the Coyns of the Emperor Philippus, Choul. Page
xxxi.
coin FIDES EXERCI TVVM

which was signified by the extension of the hand. Lucan speaking of the Army,
promising Fealty to Julius Caesar, -- His cunctis simul assensere cohortes,
Elatasque alte, quaecunque ad bella vocaret,
Promisere manus --
All raised their hands with joint consent, that they
Would fight for him, and his Commands obey
Against whomsoe're --
Isidorus Hispal. Mos erat Militaris, ut, quoties consentiret exercitus, quia
voce non potest, manu promittat; It was the Military Custom, that as often as
the Army consented, because they could not with their voice, they should
promise with their hand.

Which Posture is represented in these Medaigles of the Emperors Trajan, and
Hadrian,

Croyiac. Tab. xxxiii, and xxxviii.
coin Number: T^AIANI Aug.
SPOR OPTIMO PRINCIPI

coin Number: HADRIANT Aug:
^ C



Claudian, speaking of a Rebellion in the Western parts of the Empire, Interea
turbata FIDES, civilia rursus
Bella tonant, dubiumque quatit Discordia mundum.
Mean while the Peace was broke, Ensigns unfurled,
And Discord thundering shook the stagg'ring World.


Loyalty is clothed in white, to signify its purity, and innocence, Color
albus praecipue decorus Deo est, tum in caeteris, tum maxim in textili,
Cicero. Horace.

Lib. i. Od. xxxv.
Te Spes, and albo rara Fides colit
Velata panno --
Thee Hope, and Faith embrace
Clothed in white.
The first Painting on the South Side is a Prospect of His Majesty's landing
at Dover-Castle, Ships at Sea, great Guns going off, one kneeling, and kissing
the King's Hand, Soldiers, Horse, and Foot, and many People gazing; above,
ADVENTUS AUG.

"Beneath the Painting this Motto, IN SOLIDO RURSUS FORTUNA LOCAVIT.

This Inscription ADVENTUS AUGUSTI is often found among the Coyns of the Roman
Emperors upon a peaceable return; Institut. Lib. xi. cap. iii.
which is signified by the extension of the right hand: for says Quintilian,
Fit and ille habitus, qui esse in Statuis Pacificator solet, qui protenso
brachio manum inflexo pollice extendit; That Gesture is used too, which in
Statues is a token of Peace, which extends the Arm, and Hand, inflecting the
Thumb. In which Posture there is extant at Rome the Statue of the Emperor M.
Aurelius Antoninus: and another before the Laterane, mentioned in the Additions
to Pierius. The same we find in the Coyns of M. Julius Philippus, and Fl.
Jovianus, with the same Inscription, ADVENTUS AUGUSTI. Croyiac. Tab. lviii.
Baron. Tom. iv. Annal.


coin Number: PHILIPPI Aug:
ADVENTVS AVGVSTI

coin Number: P.L. IOVIANI Aug:
ADVENTVS AVGVSTI



The Painting on the North-side, opposite to this, is a Trophy with decollated
Heads, having over it, ULTOR A TERGO DEUS.

"Taken out of Horace, -- sequitur Rebels
Vltor a tergo Deus --


"God's Vengeance Rebels at the Heels pursues. The Motto beneath,
AUSI IMMANE NEFAS, AUS OQUE POTITI.


A Trophy amongst the ancient Romans was ordinarily a Trunk of a Tree, fitted
with the Arms of the Conquered Enemy, according to that of Virgil, Aen. Lib. xi.
Ingentem quercum, decisis undique ramis,
Constituit tumulo, fulgentiaque induit arma,
Mezenti Ducis exuvias, tibi magne tropaeum
Bellipotens: aptat rorantes sanguine cristas,
Telaque trunca viri, and bis sex thoraca petitum
Perfossumque locis, clypeumque ex aere finistrae
Subligat, atque ensem collo suspendit eburnum.
A stately Oak on Rising-Ground he placed,
And Boughs disrobed, with glorious Armor graced;
With King Mezentius Spoils the Trunks he loads,
Great Mars, thy Trophy, Warlik'st of the Gods;
His Breast Plate, run twice six times through, rears,
And Plumes bedewed with Blood, and broken Spears.
His Brazen Shield on the left Shoulder tied,
Hanging his Sword in Ivory by th'side.
And in the same Book, Da nunc, Tybri pater, ferro, quod missile libro,
Fortunam, atque viam duri per pectus Halesi,
Haec arma, exuviasque viri tua quercus habebit.
Grant, Father Tyber, Fortune to this Lance,
And that this Javelin, which I now advance,
May through Halesus Bosom passage make,
And let thy Oak his Spoils, and Armor take*
Statius, Thebaid. Lib. ii.
Quercus erat, tenerae jamdudum oblita juventae,
Huic laves galeas, perfossaque vulnere crebro
Inserit arma ferens, huic truncos ictibus enses
Subligat, and fractas membris spirantibus bastas.
There was an aged Oak, on which he put
Bruised Casks, and Corslets, thrust-through, hacked, and cut:
Next Swords in Battle broken guirds upon,
And splinter'd Spears from dying Bodies drawn.


The Trophie of Jupiter over the Giants is at large, and elegantly described by
Claudian, -- Phlegraeis sylva superbit De rapta Proserp. Lib. iii.

Exuviis, totumque nemus victoria vestit.
Hic patuli rictus, hic prodigiosa Gigantum
Tergora dependent, and adhuc crudele minantur
Affixae facies truncis: immaniaque ossa
Serpentum passim tumulis exsanguibus albent,
Et rigidae multo suspirant fulmine pelles,
Nullaque non magni jactat se nominis arbor.
Haec centum-gemini strictos Aegeonis enses
Curvata vix fronde levat; liventibus illa
Exultat Cori spoliis: haec arma Mimantis
Sustinet; hos onerat ramos exutus Ophion.
Altior and cunctis abies, umbrosaque late,
Ipsius Enceladi fumantia gestat opima
Summi Terrigenum regis, caderetque gravata
Pondere, ni lapsum fulciret proxima quercus.
Inde timor, numenque loco, nemorisque senectae
Parcitur, aethereisque nefas nocuisse Tropaeis.
-- The Woods in Spoils Phlegraean pride,
The whole Grove Victory clothed. Here Gapings wide
Of horrid Jaws; there Backs of hideous size
Hung, and staked faces threatening still the Skies:
Huge Serpents Skeletons in bloodless Piles
There bleaching white lay in voluminous Coyls,
Whose scaly Sloughs smell with Sulphurous Flame:
No Tree but boasts some mighty Giant's Name.
This, laden, under stern Aegaeon yields,
Who used an hundred Swords, as many Shields;
That brags bold Corus bloody Spoils: this bears
The Arms of Mimas; that Ophion's wears.
But higher then the rest, with spreading shade,
A Firr Enceladus Crest and Corslet lade,
The Giants King; which with its weight had broke,
If not supported by a neighboring Oak.
Hence a Religious Aw preserves the Woods,
And none dares wrong the Trophies of the Gods.


Lib. iii. cap. ii.
But when the City of Rome grew greater in power, the Trophies were more
magnificent. L. Florus, How acceptable those two Victories were, may be
conjectured from hence, that Domitius Ahenobarbus, and Fabius Maximus erected
in the same place where the Battles were fought Turrets of Stone, upon which
were Trophies, adorned with the Arms of the Enemy, a Custom not in use before
amongst us. For the people of Rome never upbraided their Conquered Enemies with
their Victories.

On these Trophies was inscribed both the Name of the Conqueror, Lib. ii.
and the People conquered. Tacitus, Laudatis pro concione victoribus, Caesar
congeriem armorum struxit superbo cum titulo; debellatis inter Rhenum Albimque
nationibus, exercitum Tiberii Caesaris ea Monimenta Marti, and Jovi, and
Augusto sacravisse: Caesar, having commended the Victors, raised an heap of
Arms with this proud Inscription, The Army of Tiberius Caesar, having
vanquished the People between the River Rhene, and the Albe, consecrates these
Monuments to Mars, Jupiter, and Augustus. And, to the same purpose, Miles in
loco praelii Tiberium Imperatorem salutavit (absentem) struxitque aggerem, and
in modum Tropaeorum arma, subscriptis victarum gentium nominibus, imposuit.
There are two Trophies of Marius's still remaining at Rome, one of which has a
Breast Plate with Military Ornaments, and Shields, before it a young man
captive, with his hands bound behind him; on each side of it two Winged
Victories. So Pliny tells us of a Trophie erected to the honor statue front
TROPHEA MARII DE BELLO CYMBR: PVTAT: AD AED. D CVSEBROM.
statue back TROPHEA MARII DE BELLO CIMBR: PVTAT. AD AED. D: CVSEBROM ROMAE.
of Augustus in the Alps with this Inscription, Not. Hist. Lib. iii. cap. xx.
IMPERATORI CAESARI DIVI F. AUG. PONTIF. MAX. IMPERATORI XIV. TRIBUNITIAE
POTESTATIS. S. P. Q. R. QUOD EIUS DUCTU AUSPICUSQVE GENTES ALPIUM OMNES, QVAE A
MARI SUPERO AD INFIMUM PERTINEBANT, SUB IMPERIUM P. R. SUNT REDACTAE. Tit. De
Fortuna.
Stobaeus says, that Othryades, taking the Spoils of some of his Enemies,
erected a Trophy, and writ this Title with the Blood of the wounded, THE
LACEDAEMONIANS OVER THE ARGIVES.

These Trophies were consecrated to the Gods, and therefore could not be
demolished without Sacrilege. So Dio says of Caesar, that, Lib. xlii.
after his Pontick Victory, he durst not deface the Trophy of Mithridates,
(...), because sacred to the Gods of War. So, when his Friends had given order,
that a Sword, which hung up in a Temple of the Arubeni, as a Spoil from Caesar,
should be taken down, (...), he would not suffer it, accounting it sacred.
Vitruvius, Lib. ii.
Postea autem Rhodii, religione impediti, quod nefas esset Tropaea dicata
removere, circa locum eum aedificium struxerunt; But afterward the Rhodians,
out of a religious fear, because it was unlawful to remove the dedicated
Trophies, erected a Building about the place. The Gods, to whom the Romans
consecrated their Trophies, we find in Livy: Omnis generis arma, Lib. xlv.
cumulata in ingentem acervum, precatus Martem, Minervamque, Luamque Matrem,
and caeteros Deos, quibus spolia dicare jus fasque est.

The Motto ULTOR A TERGO DEUS, over the Trophie, is in reference to the Coin of
the Emperor Claudius, which represents Martem Vltorem with a Trophie on his
Shoulder,

coin CIAVDII Aug.
MARS VLTOR



but more particularly to that History of Augustus, who, after the War was
ended, which he undertook for the revenge of his Father's blood, murdered by
some Commonwealth's men in the Senate House, Dio, lib. live.
consecrated a Suetonius.
Temple MARTI VLTORI, which he had vowed during the War. Ovid, Fast. Lib. v.
Mars ades, and satia scelerato sanguine ferrum,
Stetque Favor causa pro meliore tuus:
Templa feres; and, me Victore, vocaberis ULTOR.
Voverat, and fuso laetus ab host redit.
Glut Steel, O Mars, with impious Blood; incline
To my just Cause, a Temple shall be thine:
I Conqu'rour, Thou shall be REVENGER styled.
He vowed, and glad returned, his Enemy foiled.


The Form of the TEMPLE we have in this Coin of Augustus,

Choul, Page 225.
Number: OCTAVII Aug:

coin Number OCTAVIT Aug
^AR^IS VL^^^^



So when he had re-taken the Colors from the Parthians, which Crassus had
lost, Fast. ibid.
he gave him the Title of BIS-VLTOR. Ovid, Rite Deo Templumque datum, nomenque
BIS-ULTOR,
Emeritus voti debita solvit honor.
The God BIS-ULTOR styled, his Temple made,
So he his Vows devoutly paid.


We find also mention of MARS VLTOR in an ancient Inscription in Gruter. Page
cccxvii. 8.


D. M. The Motto beneath the Trophy is taken out of Virgil who spoke it of
those, who were, for the like Crimes, condemned to the Pains of Erebus, as he
closes the Description of it in the Sixth of his Aeneis, Hic quibus invisi
fratres, dum vita manebat,
Pulsatusve parens, and fraus innexa clienti;
Aut qui divitiis soli incubuere repertis,
Nec partem posuere suis; (quae maxima turba est;)
Quique ob adulterium caesi, quique arma sequuti
Impia, nec veriti dominorum fallere dextras;
Inclusi poenam expectant: ne quaere doceri,
Quam poenam; aut quae forma viros, fortunave mersit.
Saxum ingens volvunt alii, radiisque rotarum
Districti pendent: sedet, aeternumque sedebit
Infelix Theseus: Phlegyasque miserrimus omnes
Admonet, and magna testatur voce per umbras,
"Discite justitiam moniti, and non temnere Divos.
Vendidit hic auro patriam, dominumque potentem
Imposuit; fixit leges pretio, atque refixit;
Hic thalamum invasit natae, vetitosque Hymenaeos:
Ausi omnes immane nefas, ausoque potiti.
Here Brother-haters are with Pains repai'd,
Who slew their Parents, or their Friends betrayed;
Or brooding lay on Golden Heaps alone,
These thousands are, which did impart to none;
Those in Adult'ry slain; or those rebel,
And did their native Prince to Traitors sell,
Here meet their Dooms; seek not these Woes to sound,
Nor by what way Fate did their Souls confound:
These roll huge Stones, and stretched on Wheels do lie;
There Theseus sits, and shall eternally;
Aloud, through Shades, sad Phlegyas mourning cries,
Admonished, Justice learn, nor Gods despise.
This to a potent Prince his Country sold,
And Laws enacted, and repealed for Gold;
That beds his Daughter, and no Incest spared:
All dared bold Crimes, and thrived in what they dared.


The Painting over the Middle Arch represents the King, mounted in calm Motion,
USURPATION flying before him, a Figure with many ill-favored Heads, some
bigger, some lesser, and one particularly shooting out of his Shoulder, like
CROMWELL'S; Another Head upon his Rump, or Tail; Two Harpies with a Crown,
chased by an Angel; Hell's Jaws opening. Under the said Representation of the
King pursuing Usurpation is this Motto,

VOLVENDA DIES EN ATTULIT ULTRO, Taken out of the Ninth Book of the Aeneis,

Turn, quod optanti Divum promittere nemo
Auderet, volvenda dies, en! attulit ultro.
What none of all the Gods durst grant, implored,
Successive Time does of its own accord.
The Harpies were described by the Ancients with the Faces of Virgins. Hesiod,
(...), In Theogonia.

(...),
(...).
Aello, and Ocupet, Harpyes, who,
Fair-hair'd, the Winds, and nimble Birds pursue,
Born on swift Wings. --
and Virgil, Aeneid. iii.
-- Quas dira Celaeno, See Rhodiginus, lib. xvi, cap. xxvi.

Harpyiaeque colunt aliae, Phineia postquam
Clausa domus, mensasque metu liquere priores.
Tristius haud illis monstrum, nec saevior ulla
Pestis, and ira Deum, Stygiis sese extulit undis.
Virginei volucrum vultus, foedissima ventris
Proluvies, uncaeque manus, and pallida semper
Ora fame.
Where dire Celaeno other Harpyies led,
When frighted they from Phineas Table fled.
No Monster like to these, no Plague more fell,
Nor sharper Vengeance Heaven e're called from Hell.
The Fowl have Virgin Faces, and hooked Claws,
Still purging Bellies, always greedy Maws,
With Hunger pale. --


The Form of these Harpyies is to be seen in Sculpture in the Church of Saint
Martin at Venice, frequented, as a Masterpiece to draw these Monsters by, both
by Carvers, and Painters; says Erythraeus on this place of Virgil. They were
expressed also with crooked Claws, from whence they were called (...)

Apollonius, (...) Argenaut. Lib. ii.

(...)
(...). --
But Harpyies, hurried swiftly through the Air,
From Mouth, and Hands, with griping Talons tear
Still all away. --


Rutilius Numantianus, in his Itinerary, Harpyiae, quarum discerpitur unguibus
Orbis,
Quae pede glutineo quae tetigere trahunt.
Harpyies, who rend the World, whose Bird-lime Feet,
And Talons, bear away whatever they meet.


There is a Coin yet extant of L. Valerius, where we have an Harpye thus
represented, coin L. VAL^^IVS



In Eumenid.
That they had Wings, we find in Aeschylus, who, mentioning the Furies asleep
about Orestes, doubting what they should be, says, they could not be Harpyies
(for he had seen them often painted robbing Phineus's Table) because they had
no Wings.

Above the Arch, on two Pedestals, Southward, and Northward, stand the
Statues of King JAMES, and King CHARLES the First. In the middle somewhat
higher, just over the Arch, the Statue of His Sacred Majesty. Under that of
King JAMES,

DIVO JACOBO. Under that of King CHARLES the First, DIVO CAROLO.

Under that of His Majesty this following Inscription, D. N. CAROLO II.

The Title of DIVVS was constantly attributed by the Romans to their Emperors
after their Consecration, or (...). Ovid, of Julius Caesar, Hanc animam
interea, caeso de corpore raptam,
Fac Jubar, ut semper Capitolia nostra, Forumque,
DIVUS ab excelsa prospectet Julius aede.
Mean while from his slain Corpse his Soul convay
Up to the Stars, and give it a clear Ray:
That he, now DIVVS, may with influence
Shine on our Capitol, and Court from thence.
Aelius Spartianus; Hadrianus, rogante Antonino, DIVVS a Senatu appellatus est:
Hadrian, at the request of Antoninus his Successor, had the Title of DIVUS
granted him by the Senate. So Claudian feigns the Emperor Theodosius to assume
that Title immediately upon his death, -- Cum DIVUS abirem,
Res incompositas, fateor, tumidasque reliqui.
When I a GOD went hence, I left, it is true,
The business hard, and much unsettled too.


After which Consecration they had Temples dedicated to them, (which Augustus
admitted, while he was yet alive) Flamens, and Vnder-Priests. Seneca of
Augustus, In Octavia.
Pietate gnati factus eximia Deus,
Post fata consecratus, and Templis datus.
Made by his Son's great Piety a God,
Temples he built for him, and Altars had.
Ibid.
Sic ille patriae primus Augustus parens
Complexus astra est, colitur and Templis Deus.
Thus the first Father of his Country had
In Heaven a place, and worshipped as a God.


Spartian, Qui Templum ei pro Sepulchro apud Puteolos constituit, and
Quinquennale certamen, and Flamen, and Sodales, and multa alia, quae ad honorem
quasi Numinis pertinerent. The Senate erected him (Hadrian) a Temple for a
Sepulcher at Puzzolo, with a Quinquennial Game, a Flamen, and Sodales, and many
other things belonging to the Honor of a God. The Flamen, and Sodales of the
deceased Emperor, we often meet with in ancient Inscriptions, as of Caesar's
Flamen, M. PUBLICIO and of Hadrian's Sodales, L. FABIO. M. F. GAL. CILONI

The manner, and solemnity of their Consecrations is at large delivered by Lib.
iv.
Herodian. There was a apiece Pile built of several Stories, filled with
combustible matter; in the second was laid the Body of the deceased Emperor:
in the uppermost, and least of the Stories was held an Eagle. As soon as the
Pile was set on fire, the Eagle was let fly: which the Romans think carries the
Emperor 's Soul from Earth to Heaven. From which time he is worshipped with the
rest of the Gods. The Form of the Funeral Pile, and the manner of their
Translation into Heaven, we find in many Coyns of the Emperors: as in these
of Antoninus Pius, and L. Verus, coin obverse DIVVS ANTONIUS

coin reverse CONSECRATIO SC

coin obverse DIVVS VERVS

coin reverse CONSECRATIO



Claudian has presumed to tell us the way they went thither, speaking of the
Death of THEODOSIUS, De iii. Consulatu Honorii.
-- nec plura loquutus,
Sicut erat, liquido signavit tramite nubes,
Ingrediturque globum Lunae, lumenque reliquit
Arcadis, and Veneris clementes pervolat auras.
Hinc Phoebi permensus iter, flammamque nocentem
Gradivi, placidumque Jovem, stetit arce suprema,
Algenti quo zona riget Saturnia tractu.
Machina laxatur coeli, rutilaeque patescunt
Sponte fores. Arctoa parat convexa Boots,
Australes reserat portas succinctus Orion,
Invitantque novum sidus, pendentque vicissim,
Quas parts velit ille sequi, quibus esse sodalis
Dignetur stellis, aut qua regione moveri.
-- nor more he said,
But through the yielding Clouds his passage made,
And reached the Moon, then Mercury forsakes,
And to the milder Sphere of Venus makes:
Thence to the Sun, and Mars malignant fire,
And milder Jove; then mounts the highest Sphere;
Where in a colder Circle Saturn lords.
Heaven's Purple Gates open of their own accords.
Him to his Northern Car Boots courts,
Orion girt unlocks the Southern Ports,
And the new Star invite: both him entreat
He would vouchsafe to nominate his Seat;
What Stars for his Associates he approved,
And in which Constellation would be moved.


They questioned not the (...) even of the worst of their Emperors; as we see
in these Verses of Lucan on Nero, that Prodigy of Nature, -- Te, cum, statione
peracta,
Astra petes serus, praelati regia coeli
Excipiet gaudente polo: seu sceptra tenere,
Seu te flammiferos Phoebi transcendere currus,
Telluremque, nihil mutato Sole timentem,
Igne vago lustrare juvat: tibi Numine ab omni
Cedetur, jurique tuo Natura relinquet,
Quis Deus esse velis ubi regnum ponere mundi.
Sed neque in Arctoo sedem tibi legeris orb;
Nec polus adversi calidus qua vergitur Austri;
Vnde tuam videas obliquo sidere Romam.
Aetheris immensi partem si presseris unam,
Sentiet axis onus: librati pondera coeli
Orb tene medio: pars aetheris illa sereni
Tota vacet, nullaeque obstent a Caesare nubes.
-- Thee, ah! when, late, thou us shall leave,
Courts paved with Stars shall joyfully receive,
Inviting thee to govern, or to sway
In Phoebus Chariot, and command the day:
Earth will not fear to see a newer Sun
With brighter Rays through the old Eclipticks run.
Thee those, whom Heaven's Apartiments enclose,
And Nature leaves unto thy own dispose,
To be what God thou will, and where to reign:
But not thy Palace near the Northern Wain;
Nor Southern Stars intemperate Heat, erect,
Rome to behold with an oblique Aspect:
Sit in the middle, lest the Pole should crack
Under thy weight; poise the bright Zodiac,
Clear a Celestial House, where never Cloud
Shall Caesar's Star with duskie Vapors shroud.


We find like expressions to those in the Inscription under His present
Majesty, in several of the old ones collected by Gruter; as Page CLII. 8.

DN. GLORIOSISS. ADQ. IN TRIF. SEMPER. AUG. BONO REIP. And Page CCXLVII. 3.

IMP. CAES. NER. TRAIANO Behind the said Figure of CHARLES the Second, in a
large Table is deciphered the ROYAL OAK bearing Crowns, and Scepters, instead
of Acorns; amongst the Leaves, in a Label,

MIRATURQVE NOVAS FRONDES ET NON SUA POMA. -- "Leaves unknown
"Admiring, and strange Apples not her Own.
As designing its Reward for the Shelter afforded His Majesty after the Fight
at Worcester: an expression of Virgil's, speaking of the Advancement of Fruits
by the Art of Graffing.

The upper Paintings on the East Side are Ruinous, representing the Disorder
the Kingdom was in, during His Majesty's Absence; with this Motto, EN QVO
DISCORDIA CIVES!

But on the West Side they are finished, to represent the Restoration of our
Happiness by His Majesty's Arrival; the Motto, FELIX TEMPORUM REPARATIO.

On the Royal Oak in a Label, ROBUR BRITANNICUM.

In allusion to His Majesty's Royal Navy, those Floating Garrisons made of
Oak. For Themistocles has observed, that Tull. ad Attic. Lib. i. Ep. vii.
Whosoever desires a secure Dominion by Land, must first get the Dominion of
the Sea. And therefore, when the Oracle, in the Median War, wished the
Athenians to provide a Wall of Wood for their Defense, he Plutarch. in vita
Themistoclis, and De vitando are alieno.
interpreted it a Navy.

Over the Great Table, REDEUNT SATURNIA REGNA. Which are at large described by
Metam, Lib. i.
Ovid, Aurea prima sata est aetas; quae, vindice nullo,
Sponte sua, sine lege, fidem, rectumque colebat, etc.
The Golden Age was first; which, uncompel'd,
And without rule, in Faith, and Truth excelled,
As then, there was nor Punishment, nor Fear,
Nor threatening Laws in Brass prescribed were.
Nor suppliant crouching Prisoners shook to see
Their angry Judge: but all was safe, and free.
To visit other Worlds no wounded Pine
Did yet from Hills to faithless Seas decline.
Then unambitious Mortals knew no more,
But their own Countrie's Nature-bounded Shore.
Nor Swords, nor Arms were yet: no Trenches round
Besieged Towns, nor strifeful Trumpet's sound.
The Soldier of no use. In firm content,
And harmless ease, their happy days were spent.
The yet-free Earth did of her own accord
(Vntorn with Ploughs) all sorts of Fruit afford.
'Twas always Spring: warm Zephyrus sweetly blew
On smiling Flowers, which without setting grew.
Forthwith the Earth Corn, unmanured, bears;
And every year renews her Golden Ears.
With Milk, and Nectar, were the Rivers filled,
And Honey from green Holly-Oaks distilled.
Mr. SANDYS.

Under King CHARLES the Second, RESTITUTOR URBIS.

The Painting on the South-west side represents the Lord Mayor; delivering to
the King the Keys of the City.

In the Niches are four Figures. The first on the South Side, a Woman in
pleasant Colors; the Emblem on her Shield, a Terrestrial Globe; the Sun
rising, Bats, and Owls flying to the Shadovv: the Word, EXCOECAT CANDOR.

The Second has on her Escutcheon a Swarm of Bees, whetting their Stings: the
Word, PRO REGE EXACUUNT.

Pliny has observed, that of Animals none, but a Be, has a King. Their
Loyalty to him he has at large described. Not. Hist. lib. xi. cap. xvii.
The Obedience of the Communalty is to be admired. Whenever the KING goes
forth, the whole Hive accompany him, gather round about him, encompass him,
protect him, and suffer him not to be seen. Whenever the Communalty is at
work, he oversees them, and is alone free from the labor. About him there is
constantly a certain Guard, the daily preservers of his authority. When they go
forth, every one desires to be next the King, and rejoices to be seen in his
duty. When he is weary, they ease him with their shoulders: when he is
altogether tired, they carry him.

Claudian says, that they reverence their Prince at his Birth; -- sic mollibus
olim
Stridula ducturum pratis examina Regem
Nascentem venerantur apes. --
So for their newborn King the Bees take Arms,
Who Is through the Meads to lead their humming swarms.


From whence the Egyptians made a BE the Hieroglyphick of a Loyal People.

The Third, on the North side, has on her Shield a Mountain burning, Cities,
and Vine-yards destroyed, and ruined: the Word, IMPIA FOEDERA. The Covenant: in
abhorrence of which villainous Combination, according to this Order of both
Houses, it was burnt by the Common Hangman.

Die Lunae 20. Maii 1661.
THE Lords in Parliament assembled, having considered of a Paper sent unto them
from the House of Commons, for burning of the Instrument, or Writing, called
The Solemn League, or Covenant, by the Hands of the Common Hangman; Do Order,
that the said Instrument, or Writing, called The Solemn League, and Covenant,
be burned by the Hand of the Common Hangman in the New-Palace at Westminster,
in Cheapside, and before the Old-Exchange on Wednesday the Twenty second of
this instant May. And that the said Covenant be forthwith taken off the Record
in the House of Peers, and in all other Courts, and Places, where the same is
recorded; And that all Copies thereof be taken down out of all Churches,
Chapels, and other public places in England, and Wales, and in the Town of
Barwick upon Twede, where the same are set up.

JO. BROWN Cleric. Parliamentorum.

The Fourth has on her Escutcheon an Arm, as it were out of the Clouds; in the
Hand a naked Sword: the Motto, DISCITE JUSTITIAM MONITI. Eight Mutes above, on
Pedestals; four in White, four in Crimson.

The Music of this Fabric is ten Drummers, flanking REBELLION; twelve
Trumpets flanking MONARCHY.

Aloft under the two Devastations, twelve Trumpets, four Drums.

Within the Arch, on two Balconies, six Trumpets, four Drums.

While the Train passes along, the Drums beat the Marches of several
Countries, and the Trumpets sound several Levets. At which Time His Majesty
drawing near, the Drums turn their March to a Battle, the Trumpets sound a
Charge, and on a sudden REBELLION rowseth up her Self, at which, Drums, and
Trumpets ceasing, REBELLION addresses to His Majesty the following Speech.

Stand! Stand! who 'ere You are! this Stage is Ours,
The Names of Princes are inscribed on Flowers,
And wither with them! Stand! You must Me know,
To Kings, and Monarchy a deadly Fo;
Me, who dare bid You 'midst Your Triumphs stand,
In the great City of Your Native Land:
I am Hell's Daughter, Satan's Eldest Child,
When I first cried, the Powers of Darkness smiled,
And my Glad Father, Thundering at my Birth,
Vnhing'd the Poles, and shook the fixed Earth.
My dear Rebellion (that shall be thy Name,
Said He) Thou Emperors, and Kings shall tame,
No Right so good, Succession none so long,
But thou shall vanquish by the Popular Throng,
Those Legions, which t'enlarge our Power we send
Throughout the World, shall Thee (my Dear) attend.
Our mighty Champions, the Sev'n Deadly Sins,
By Malice, Profit, Pleasure, all their Gins,
Bring to our Kingdom some few spotted Souls;
Thou shall by Treason hurry them in Shoals.
Would You now know what Interest I have here?
Hydra I ride: great Cities are my Sphere:
I Sorc'ry use, and hang Men in their Beds,
With Commonwealths, and Rotas fill their Heads,
Making the Vulgar in Fanatique Swarms
Court Civil War, and dote on Horrid Arms;
'Twas I, who, in the late unnatural Broils,
Engaged three Kingdoms, and two Wealthy Isles:
I hope, at last, to march with Flags unfurled,
And tread down Monarchy through all the World.
At which Words, Monarchy, and Loyalty, unveiling themselves, Rebellion starts
as affrighted, but, recollecting her self, concludes her Speech thus.

Ah! Britain, Ah! stand'st thou Triumphant there,
Monarchick Isle? I shake with horrid Fear.
Are thy Wounds whole? Upon thy Cheek fresh Smiles?
Is Joy restored to these late mournful Isles?
Ah! must He enter, and a King be Crowned?
Then, as He rises, sink we under Ground.
Rebellion having ended her Speech, Monarchy entertains His Majesty with the
following.

To Hell, foul Fiend, shrink from this glorious Light,
And hide thy Head in everlasting Night.
Enter in Safety, Royal Sir, this Arch,
And through your joyful Streets in Triumph march;
Enter our Sun, our Comfort, and our Life.
No more these Walls shall breed Intestine Strife:
Henceforth Your People only shall contend
In Loyalty each other to transcend.
May Your Great Actions, and immortal Name,
Be the whole Business, and Delight of Fame.
May You, and Yours, in a Perpetual Calm
Be Crowned with Laurel, and Triumphant Palm,
And all Confess, whilst they in You are Blessed,
I, MONARCHY, of Governments am Best.
Monarchy having ended her Speech, the Trumpets sound pleasant Levets, and the
Drums beat a lofty English March, whilst His Majesty, the Nobility, and the
Rear-Guard pass on.

The next Entertainment is at Corn-hill-Conduit, on the top of which stand
eight Nymphs clad in White, each having an Escutcheon in one Hand, and a
Pendent, or Banner in the other. On the Tower of the said Conduit, a Noise of
seven Trumpets.

archway THE SECOND ARCH.
NEAR the Exchange, in Cornhill, is erected the Second Arch, which is Naval.

On the East Side were two Stages erected; on each side of the Street, one. In
that on the South Side was a Person representing the River Thames; his Garment
Loose, and Flowing, Color Blew and White, waved like Water, a Mantle over,
like a Sail; his Head crowned with London Bridge, Flags, and Ozier, like long
Hair, falling o'ver his Shoulders, his Beard long, Seagreen, and White,
curled; an Oar in his right Hand, the Model of a Ship in his left, an Vrn
beside him, out of which issued Water; four Attendants in White, representing
the four fresh Streams, which fall into the River Thames, viz. Charwel, Lea,
Coln, and Medway. The Ancients did very much differ in the Description of their
Rivers, as Aelian Var. Hist. lib. ii. cap. xxxiii.
relates. Those, that worship Rivers, and those, that make their Images, some
form them in the likeness of Men, others in the likeness of Oxen. The
Stymphalians liken the Rivers Erasinus and Metope, the Lacedaemonians Eurotas,
the Sicyonians and Phliasians Asopus, the Argives Cephissus, unto Oxen. The
Psophidians liken Erymanthus, the Heraeans Alphaeus, the Cherronesians, that
came from Cnidus, the River Cnidus, to Men. The Athenians worship the River
Cephissus under the form of a Man, but wearing Horns. In Sicily the Syracusians
liken Anapus to a Man, but the Fountain Cyane to a Woman. Virgil Georg. iv.
describes Eridanus in the Form of an Ox.

Et gemina auratus taurino cornua vultu
Eridanus, quo non alius per pinguia culta
In mare purpureum violentior influit amnis.
Golden Eridanus, with a double Horn,
Faced like a Bull, through fertile Fields of Corn,
Then whom, none swifter, of the Ocean's Sons,
Down to the Purple Adriatic runs.
On which place says Probus; It Is feigned like a Bull, either because its noise
is like the lowing of a Bull, or because its Banks are crooked like Horns. The
same says Cornutus. The Scholiast on Sophocles renders other reasons, either
because they cut the ground like Oxen; or because Meadows, Pasture of Oxen, are
always adjacent to them. HORACE; tauriformis Aufidus. So we find in Pindar
that the Bull, Pyth.
which Perillus gave to the Tyrant Phalaris, was the Image of the River Gelon.
Very frequently we find Horns attributed to them: as in Virgil Aen. lib. viii.
, Corniger Hesperidum fluvius regnator aquarum,
Adsis o tandem, propius tua numina firmes.
Horned Flood, of all the Hesperian Rivers King,
Now show thy power, and us assistance bring.
Ovid, Cornibus hic fractis, viridi male tectus ab ulva,
Decolor ipse suo sanguine Rhenus erat.
Here Rhine with Vine and Reeds ill covered stood,
His Horns being broke, distained with Native Blood.
Claudian, De land. Etiliconis, lib. i.
-- Rhenumque minacem
Cornibus infractis adeo mitescere cogis.
-- and threatening Rhyne;
His Horns being broke, thou did to Peace incline.
And again of Eridanus, De vi. Consul. Honorii.
-- ille caput placidis sublime fluentis
Extulit, and totis lucem spargentia ripis.
Aurea roranti micuerunt cornua vultu:
Non illi madidum vulgaris arundine crinem
Velat honos: rami caput umbravere virentes
Heliadum, totisque fluunt electra capillis.
Palla tegit latos humeros; curruque paterno
Intextus Phaethon glaucos incendit amictus.
Raising his Head above his Watery Ranks,
His Golden Horns, reflecting, tip'd the Banks
With sprinkled light. Drops trickling from his Face:
He his moist Hair veiled not with Oziers base,
And vulgar Reeds: fresh Pop'lars Shade his Brows,
And Amber from his curled Tresses flows.
A Robe his Shoulders hides; Phaethon's wrought there,
His blew Vest burning in his Father's Chair.


So we find them also in the form of a Man. As the River Rhene, as it is
supposed: which Statue is still extant in Rome lying in a Rock, vulgarly called
Marforium from Mars's Temple in foro Augusti, his Hair and Beard long, as if
dropping with Water; just as Claudian De Prob. and Olyb.
describes the River Tyber, Illi glauca nitent hirsuto lumina vultu, etc.
Distillant per pectus aquae, frons hispida manat
Imbribus, in liquidos fontes se barba resolvit.
His blew Eyes shine under his beetle Brows, etc.
His Forehead swims, Water his Breast distills.
And his rough Beard dissolves in Crystal Rills.
And the River Danubius in the Coyns of the Emperors Trajan, and Constantine,
Cevart. p. 18. Croyac. Tab. xxxv.
coin obverse S.P.Q.R. OPTIMO PRINCI^^ DANVVIVS

coin reverse SALVS REIP. DANVBIVS

Their Heads were ordinarily environed with Reeds, Oziers, and the like. Ovid,
Metam. lib. xiiii.
relating the Fable of Acis turned into a River, -- subito media tenus extitit
alvo
Incinctus juvenis flexis nova cornua cannis.
From whence a Youth arose above the waste,
His horned Brows with quivering Reeds embraced.
Virgil, Aen. lib. viii.
of Tyber, the King of Rivers, Huic Deus ipse loci fluvio Tyberinus amoeno
Populeas inter senior se attollere frondes
Visus. Eum tenuis glauco velabat amictu
Carbasus, and crines umbrosa tegebat arundo.
The Genius of the Place, old Tyber, here
Amongst the Pop'lar Branches did appear.
Of finest Linen were his Azure Weeds,
And his moist Tresses crowned with shady Reeds.
where we may observe, that Virgil gives him a Sail for his Mantle.

Claudian De Prob. and Olyb.
of Tyber, -- crispo densantur gramine colla:
Vertice luxuriat toto crinalis arundo, etc.
-- taurina levantur
Cornua temporibus raucos sudantia rivos, etc.
Palla graves humeros velat, quam neverat uxor
Ilia, percurrens vitreas sub gurgite telas.
-- his Neck ripe Harvest bound;
An interwoven Reed his Temples crowned, etc.
-- And from his rising Horns distills
A Sweat, which swells to Crystal Rills, etc.
A Vest he wore, which Ilia, his Spouse
With Crystal Looms wove in her Watery House
OVID, Metam.
-- capitis quoque fronde saligna
Aut superimposita celatur arundine damnum.
-- the damage of his Brows
He shades with flaggie Wreaths, and sallow Boughs.


The Statue indeed of the River Tyber, now extant in Rome, has its Head
environed with several sorts of Leaves, and Fruits, to signify the fertility
of the places near it, caused by the same: yet it recedes not so far from the
Fiction of the Poets, but that it holds a Reed in its Hand. And the reason is,
because these thrive best in watery places.

They are ordinarily described too leaning on an Vrn, out of which issues Water.

VIRGIL, describing the Shield of Turnus, Caelataque amnem fundens pater
Inachus Vrna.
And Inachus powrs Water from his Vrn.
CLAUDIAN De vi. Consul. Honorii.
of Eridanus, Fultaque sub gremio caelatis nobilis astris
Aethereum probat urna decus. --
An Urn he bore, engraved with Celestial Signs
That proved his high descent. --


So is Danubius represented in the Coyns now mentioned. There is a little Image
of Nile leaning on its right Hand, with its left Hand pouring out Water from
three Urns with one handle, about which play sixteen little Children. Why Nile
should be figured with three Urns, this reason is given: because the Egyptian
Priests attributed the increase of it to three several causes especially,
rejecting all other opinions, which were innumerable. The sixteen Children are
the Hieroglyphick of sixteen Cubits, the proper increase of the River Nile:
for, if it swelled higher, it caused dearth: for, by how much the more it
swelled, so much the longer it was before it returned into its Channel, by
which means the Seed-time was lost: if much under fifteen, it irrigated not the
whole Land, and so part was unfit to receive Seed. PLINY; Justum incrementum
est cubitorum sedecim. Minores aquae non omnia rigant; ampliores detinent,
tardius recedendo. Hae serendi tempora absumunt, illae non dant sitiente.
Vtrumque reputat Provincia. In duodecim cubitis famem sentit, in tredecim
etiamnum esurit, quatuordecim cubita hilaritatem afferunt, quindecim
securitatem, sexdecim delicias. There was also not long since a Marble Coloss
of the River Nile dug up at Rome with sixteen Infants playing about it. And
so does Philostratus describe it.

Of the falling of the Mole, and Medway into the Thames, Draighton has feigned
a pleasant Relation.

At length it came to pass, that Isis, and her Tame,
Of Medway understood, a Nymph of wondrous Fame.
And much desirous were their Princely Tames should prove
If, as a Wooer, he could win her Maiden-love.
That of so great descent, and of so large a Dovver
Might well allie their House, and much increase his Power:
And striving to prefer their Son the best they may,
Set forth the lusty Flood in rich and brave Array;
Bank'd with imbroidered Meads, of sundry suits of Flowrs,
His Breast adorned with Swans, often vvash'd with Silver Showrs:
A Train of gallant Floods, at such a costly rate,
As might beseem their care, and fitting his Estate.
Attended, and attired magnificently, thus
They send him to the Court of great Oceanus,
The World's huge Wealth to see; yet with a full intent,
To woo the lovely Nymph, fair Medway, as he went.
Who to his Dame and Sire his duty scarce had done,
And whilst they sadly wept at parting of their Son,
See what the Tames befell, when 'twas suspected least.
As still his goodly Train yet every hour encreast,
And from the Surrian Shores clear Wey came down to meet
His Greatness, whom the Tames so graciously does greet,
That with the Fearn-crown'd Flood he, Minion-like, does play;
Yet is not this the Brook enticeth him to stay:
But, as they thus in pomp came sporting on the shole,
Against Hampton Court he meets the soft and gentle Mole;
Whose eyes so pierced his Breast, that seeming to foreslow
The way, which he so long-intended was to go,
With trifling up and down he wandreth here and there,
And that he in her sight transparent might appear,
Applies himself to Fords, and sets his delight
On that, which most might make him gracious in her sight.
Then Isis and the Tame from their conjoined Bed,
Desirous still to learn how Tames their Son had sped,
(For greatly they had hoped, his time had so been spent,
That he e're this had won the goodly Heir of Kent)
And, sending to enquire, had News returned again
(By such as they employed on purpose in his Train)
How this their only Heir, the Isle's imperial Flood,
Had loiter'd thus in love, neglectful of his good.
No mervail at the News, though Owse and Tame were sad,
More comfort of their Son expecting to have had,
Nor blame them, in their looks much sorrow though they showed,
Who, fearing lest he might thus meanly be bestowed,
And knowing danger still increased by delay,
Employ their utmost power to hasten him away.
But Tames would hardly on: often turning back to show,
From his much-loved Mole how loath he was to go.
The Mother of the Mole, old Homes-dale, likewise bears
The affection of her Child, as ill as they do theirs:
Who, nobly though derived, yet could have been content,
To Have matched her with a Flood of far more mean descent.
But Mole respects her words, as vain and idle Dreams,
Compared with that high joy to be beloved of Tames;
And headlong holds her course his Company to win:
But Homes-dale raised Hills, to keep the stragler in;
That of her Daughter's stay she need no more to doubt:
(Yet never was there help, but Love could find it out.)
Mole digs her self a Path, by working Day and Night,
(According to her Name, to show her Nature right)
And underneath the Earth for three miles space does creep,
Till gotten out of sight, quite from her Mother's keep,
Her fore-intended course the wanton Nymph does run,
As longing to embrace old Tame and Isis Son.
When Tames now understood, what pains the Mole did take,
How far the loving Nymph adventured for his sake;
Although with Medway matched, yet never could remove
The often-quickning sparks of his more ancient love.
So that it comes to pass, when by great Nature's guide
The Ocean does return, and thrusteth-in the Tide,
Up, toward the place, where first his much-loved Mole was seen,
He ever since does flow, beyond delightful Sheen.
Mr. DRAYTON in his Poly-Olbion. In the other Stage on the North-side, which is
made like the upper Deck of a Ship, were three Seamen, whereof one habited
like a Boat-Swain.

A Shield, or Table, in the Front of the Arch, bears this Inscription, NEPTUNO
BRITANNICO,

The Dominion of the Sea (signified here by this Inscription) has been in all
Ages so remarkable, that, when the Grecian Chronographers could find no
Foot-step of Supreme Empire by Land, before the institution of their Olympiads,
on whose Actions they could found their Chronography, they directed the Series
of Time according to the succession of those Nations, who had the Empire of the
Sea: which we see in Chronico.
Eusebius; who reckons up nine several Nations, who successively held it,
before the institution of the Olympiads, and distinctly enumerates the years
they retained it. The same right the Grecians challenged in their League with
Artaxerxes, King of a vast part of ASIA, after the overthrow of his Naval
Forces by Cimon the Athenian Admiral, (...). That he should not within a Horse
Race approach the Greek Sea, nor sail within the Cyanean, and Chelidonian
Islands with any Man of War. The same Dominion of the Sea was afterward
assumed by the Romans, as we find by the Commission granted to Pompey, (...).
That he should have the Empire of the Sea within the Streights, and of the
Continent for four hundred Stadia from the Sea. And not long after Dionysius
Halicarnassaeus says, Orig. Romans Lib. i.
That Rome was Empress of the whole Sea, not only of that within the
Streights, but of the Ocean it self, as far as it was Navigable. Whence
Augustus had a Dolphin in his Coyns to signify that Dominion,

And In Prologo.
Valerius Maximus, to Tiberius the Emperor, The Consent both of Gods and Men
has constituted you Governor of Sea, and Land. Afterward Claudian De vi.
Consul. Honorii.
, -- terrae dominos pelagique futuros,
Immenso decuit rerum de Principe nasci.
Those, who must rule both Sea, and Land,
Ought to be Princes Sons of great Command.


And sure, if any Nation may plead Prescription for this Title, the King of
ENGLAND may, having had a longer uninterrupted Succession in the Dominion of
the BRITISH Seas, then the ROMANS in the Mediterranean, or any other Nation,
that History has acquainted us with. The Antiquity whereof being purposely,
and at large declared by Mr. SELDOM, we shall only take notice of two Records
of it, the one taken out of the Laws of Hoelus Dha, Prince of WALES, about the
Year, 982. viz. Quos cum Cunadio Rege Scotorum, Malcolmo Rege Cambrorum, and
Maccusio Archipirata, ad civitatem Legionum sibi occurrentes, Rex Anglorum
Eadgarus in Triumphi pompam deducebat. Vna enim impositos remigrare eos hanc
coegit, dum in Prora ipse sedens Navis tennit gubernaculum: ut se hoc
spectaculo Soli and Sali orbis Britannici Dominum praedicaret, and Monarcham.
The other is a Record in the Tower of London, entitled De superioritate maris
Angliae, etc. in which it evidently appears, that the Dominion of the British
Seas belonged to the Kings of England time out of mind, even before Edward the
First, and was so acknowledged by other Neighboring Nations; out of which we
shall only extract so much as may serve for our present purpose, viz. That the
Procuratours of the Admiral of the Sea of England, and of other places, as of
the Sea Coasts, as of Genoa, Catalonia, Spain, Almain, Zealand, Holland,
Freezland, Denmark, and Norway, do show that the Kings of England, time out of
mind, have been in peaceable possession of the Seas of England, in making, and
establishing Laws, and Statutes, and Restraints of Arms, and of Ships, etc. and
in taking Surety, etc. and in ordering all other things necessary for the
maintaining of Peace, Right, and Equity, etc. and in doing Justice, Right, and
Law, according to the said Laws, Ordinances, and Restraints, and in all other
things, which may appertain to the exercise of Sovereign Dominion in the places
aforesaid.

The first Painting on the North side over the City-Arms, represents NEPTUNE,
with his Trident advanced; the Inscription, NEPTUNO REDUCI. NEPTUNE'S Statue is
seldom seen without a Trident in its hand. Pausanias In Phocicis.
, Within the Temple there is an erect Brazen Statue ( of NEPTUNE) with one foot
upon a Dolphin, and on that side his Hand on his Thigh; in his other Hand a
Trident. And so he is every where described by the Poets.

Perque tuum, pater Aegei Neptune, Tridentem. But more of this hereafter.

The Motto NEPTUNO REDUCI we find in two Medaigles, the one of the Emperor
Adrian, the other of Vespasian, with these Letters on one side NEPT. RED. and
the image of one standing naked, a Mantle on his left Shoulder, in his right
Hand a Whip with three Cords, in his left a Trident.

On the South Side, opposite, MARS, with his Spear inverted, his Shield charged
with a Gorgon; by his Knees, the Motto, MARTI PACIFERO. So HOMER describes the
Shield of Agamemnon, (...),
(...).
The Sable Field charged with a Gorgon's Head,
Mantled about with dismal Flight, and Dread:
and in another place the Armor of Pallas, (...),
(...).
Amidst, that horrid Monster Gorgon's Head,
Jove's direst Omen, fierce, and full of dread,


Pausanias; Under the Statue of Victory lies a Golden Shield, with a Gorgon
wrought upon it. And it is observed by the Scholiast on In Acharn.
Aristophanes, that it was Customary among the Grecians to have a Gorgon's Head
on their Shields, as he represents In Pace.
Lamachus's. The Form of this Gorgon's Head is still to be seen at Rome on the
Statues of the Emperors Vespasian and Domitian. It was feigned with Wings, to
signify the present death, that attended it: for whoever looked on it,
immediately was turned into Stone. Metam. lib. v. Fab. i.
The which at large, and very elegantly is declared by Ovid, But when he saw
his Valor oversway'd
By Multitude; I must, said he, seek aid
(Since you your selves compel me) from my Foe;
Friends turn your Backs: then Gorgon's Head does show.
Some others seek, said Thessalus, to fright
With this thy Monster, and with all his might
A deadly Dart endeavored to have thrown:
But in that Positure became a Stone.
Next Amphix, full of spirit, forward pressed,
And thrust his Sword at bold Lyncides Breast:
When in the Pass his Fingers stupid grow,
Nor had the power of moving to or fro.
But Nileus (he, who with a forged style
Vaunted to be the Son of sev'n-fold Nile,
And bare sev'n Silver Rivers in his Shield,
Distinctly waving through a Golden Field)
To Perseus said; Behold, from whence we sprung!
To ever-silent Shadows bear along
This comfort of thy Death, that thou did die
By such a brave, and highborn Enemy.
His utt'rance faulter'd in the latter Clause,
The yet unfinished Word stuck in his Jaws;
Who gaping stood, as he would something say,
And so had done, if words had found a way.
These Eryx blames; It Is your faint Souls, that dead
Your Powers, said he, and not the Gorgon's Head:
Rush on with me, and prostrate with deep Wounds
This Youth, who thus with Magic Arms confounds.
Then rushing on, the ground his footsteps stayed
Now mutely fixed, an armed Statue made.
These suffered worthily. One, who did fight
For Perseus, bold Aconteus, at the sight
Of Gorgon's Snakes abortive Marble grew,
On whom Astyages in fury flew,
As if alive, with his two-handled Blade,
Which shrilly twang'd, but no incision made.
Who, whilst he wonders, the same Nature took,
And now his Statue has a wondering look.
It were too tedious for me to report
Their Names, who perished of the vulgar sort:
Two hundred escaped the fury of the Fight;
Two hundred turned to stone at Gorgon's sight.
Mr. SANDYS.

The Head is thus described Epithal. Pol.
by SIDONIUS APOLLINARIS, Gorgo tenet pectus medium, factura videnti
Et truncata moras, nitet insidiosa superbum
Effigies, vivitque anima pereunte venustas.
Alta cerastarum spiris caput asperat atrum
Congeries, torquet maculosa volumina mordax
Crinis, and irati dant sibila tetra capilli.
The Gorgon's Head, which guards her Bosom, would
Change thee to Statue, should thou it behold.
The treacherous Face shows proudly, and, though dead,
Life's beauty keeps. Snakes, matted round her Head,
In speckled Curls voluminously wreath,
And biting Tresses direly-hissing breath.


PAUSANIAS In Arcad.
reports, that Pallas made a City impregnable, by communicating only a little
Hair cut off from her Gorgon's Head.

The Title of PACIFER is attributed to Mars in the Roman Coyns; as in this of
Quintillus, Hulsius.
coin obverse IMP CM AVR CL. QVINTILLVS

coin reverse MARTI PACIFERO



So we find, that the Romans erected a Temple to Mars Quirinus, as well as
Mars Gradivus. The first had his Temple within the City: the other without in
the Appian-way, not far from the Gate. The one, with a gentle, sedate
Countenance, to preserve the tranquillity, and peace of the City: the other, to
go out with them in their Wars abroad. Gellius Nect. At. Lib. xiii.
says, That Hersila speaking before T. Tatius, and desiring Peace, prayed on
this manner, O Neria, Wife of Mars, I beseech thee to grant us Peace, that we
may enjoy a during, and prosperous Marriage. And therefore the Olive, the
Symbol of Peace, was consecrated to Pallas, the Goddess of War; because War is
therefore undertaken, that a secure Peace may be enjoyed. Ideo arma inferri
dicuntur, ut postea in pace vivatur, says Pliny.

"Over the Arch, the Marriage of Them and Isis.

The Marriage of Rivers is a frequent Fiction among the Poets: as of Alpheus
and Arethusa; therefore feigned, because Alpheus, a River of Elis in the Morea,
passes through the Ocean, unmixed, to the River Arethusa in the Island
Ortygia, near Syracuse, a City of Sicily. Which passage has been often tried,
as by a Cup, says Geogr. Lib. vi.
Strabo, let fall in the River Alpheus in Elis, and found in Arethusa:
maintained also by an Oracle given to Archias, a Corinthian, that he should
thither deduce a Colony, where Alpheus is mingled with the Fountain of
Arethusa. The Marriage of these two we have described by Metam. Lib. v.
OVID, where the Nymph Arethusa speaks, being ready to be turned into a River;
Cold Sweats my then-besieged Limbs possessed:
In thin thick-falling Drops my strength decreast.
Where e're I step, Streams run; my Hair new fell
In trickling Dew; and, sooner then I tell
My Destiny, into a Flood I grew.
The River his beloved Waters knew;
And, putting off th'assumed shape of Man,
Resumes his own, and in my Current ran.
Chaste Delia cleft the ground: then, through blind Caves,
To loved Ortygia she conducts my Waves,
Affected for her Name: where first I take
Review of day. This Arethusa spoke.
Mr. SANDYS.

Thus Anapus, and Cyane are feigned mutual Lovers; because their Waters unite,
Ibid.
and run together into the Sea. OVID, -- quod si componere magnis
Parva mihi fas est; and me dilexit Anapus:
Exorata tamen, nec, ut haec, exterrita nupsi.
If humble things I may compare with great,
Anapus loved me; yet did he entreat,
And me, not frighted thus, espoused.


The Marriage of Tibur and Ilia is frequently mentioned, OVID, speaking of
both, Atque ita se in rapidas perdita misit aquas:
Supposuisse manus ad pectora lubricus amnis
Dicitur, and socii jura dedisse thori.
She leaped amidst the Stream with grief oppressed:
The River puts his hand beneath her Breast,
And, as they say, unloos'd her Virgin-Cest.


In another place, Nec te praetereo, qui, per cava saxa volutus,
Tiburis Argaei spumifer arva rigas:
Ilia cui placuit. --
Nor thee, rolled through worn Rocks, do I pass by,
Who on Tyburtian Grounds do foaming ly:
Whom Ilia pleased. --


SILIUS ITALICUS, Lib. xii.
Ad genitorem Anio labens sine murmr Tibrim.
Hic, ut signa ferox, dimensaque castra locavit,
Et ripas tremefecit eques, perterrita pulsis
Ilia prima vadis sacro se conjugis antro
Condidit. --
-- but on, like a rude Storm, he goes
To those low Banks, where Anio gently flows
With Sulfurous Waters, and with Silence, to
Old Tiber's Arms; when here the Line he drew
Of's Camp, and set his Standard up, and shook
His Banks with his Cavalry, first Ilia, struck
With Fear, flies to her Husband's sacred Cave,
And all the frighted Nymphs the Water leave.
Mr. ROSS.

The Marriage of Tame and Isis, here mentioned is pleasantly related by Mr.
DRAYTON In his Poly-Olbion, Song 15.
; Now Fame had through this I Will divulged, in every ear,
The long-expected day of Marriage to be near,
That Isis, Cotswold's Heir, long-woo'd, was lastly won,
And instantly should wed with Tame, old Chiltern's Son.
And now that Wood-man's Wife, the Mother of the Flood,
The rich and goodly Vale of Alesbury, that stood
So much upon her Tame, was busied in her Bowers,
Preparing for her Son as many Suits of Flowers,
At Cotswold for the Bride, his Isis, lately made;
Who for the lovely Tame, her Bridegroom, only staid.
Whilst every Crystal Flood is to this business pressed,
The cause of their great speed and many thus request;
O! whither go ye Floods? what sudden Wind does blow,
Then other of your kind that you so fast should flow?
What business is in hand, that spurs you thus away?
Fair Windrush, let me hear, I pray thee, Charwel say:
They suddenly reply, What lets, you should not see,
That for this Nuptial Feast we all prepared be?
Therefore this idle chat our Ears does but offend;
Our leisure serves not now these Trifles to attend.
But, whilst things are in hand, old Chiltern (for his life)
From prodigal expense can no way keep his Wife;
Who feeds her Tame with Marl, in Cordial-wise prepared,
And thinks all idly spent, that now she only spared
In setting forth her Son: nor can she think it well,
Unless her lavish charge do Cotswold's far excel.
For Alesbury's a Vale, that walloweth in her Wealth,
And (by her wholesome Air continually in health)
Is lusty; frim, and fat, and holds her youthful strength.
Besides her fruitful Earth, her mighty breadth, and length,
Does Chiltern fitly match: which mountainously high,
And being very long, so likewise she does lie;
From the Bedfordian Fields, where first she does begin,
To fashion like a Vale, to th'place where Tame does win
His Isis wished Bed; her Soil throughout so sure,
For goodness of her Glebe, and for her Pasture pure,
That as her Grain, and Grass, so she her Sheep does breed,
For Burden, and for Bone, all other that exceed:
And she, which thus in Wealth abundantly does flow,
Now cares not on her Child what cost she do bestow.
Which when wise Chiltern saw (the World who long had tried,
And now at last had laid all garish Pomp aside;
Whose hoar and chalky Head descri'd him to be old,
His Beechen Woods bereft, that kept him from the Cold)
Would fain persuade the Vale to hold a steady rate;
And with his curious Wife thus wisely does debate:
Quoth he, you might allow what needs, to the most:
But where as less will serve, what means this idle Cost?
Too much a Surfeit breeds, and may our Child annoy:
These fat and lushious Meats do but our Stomachs cloy.
The modest comely mean in all things likes the Wise,
Apparel often shows us Womanish precise.
And what will Cotswold think, when he shall hear of this?
He Will rather blame your Waste, then praise your Cost, I wiss.
But, Women wilful be, and she her Will must have,
Nor cares how Chiltern chides, so that her Tame be brave.
Alone which toward his Love she easily does convay;
For the Oxonian Owse was lately sent away
From Buckingham, where first he finds his nimbler Feet;
Toward Whittlewood then takes: where, past the noblest Street,
He to the Forest gives his farewell, and does keep
His course directly down into the German Deep,
To publish that great day in mighty Neptune's Hall,
That all the Sea-gods there might keep it Festival.
As we have told how Tame holds on his even course,
Return we to report, how Isis from her sourse
Comes tripping with delight, down from her daintier Springs;
And in her Princely Train, to attend her Marriage, brings
Clear Churnet, Coln, and Leech, which first she did retain,
With Windrush: and with her (all outrage to restrain,
Which well might offered be to Isis, as she went)
Came Yenload with a Guard of Satyrs, which were sent
From Whichwood, to await the bright and God-like Dame.
So Bernwood did bequeath his Satyrs to the Tame,
For Sticklers in those stirs, that at the Feast should be.
These Preparations great when Charwel comes to see,
To Oxford got before, to entertain the Flood,
Apollo's Aid he begs, with all his sacred Brood,
To that most learned place to welcome her repair,
Who in her coming on was waxed so wondrous fair,
That; meeting, strife arose betwixt them, whether they
Her Beauty should extol, or she admire their Bay.
On whom their several gifts (to amplify her Dower)
The Muses there bestow; which ever have the power
Immortal her to make. And, as she past along,
Those modest Thespian Maids thus to their Isis song.
Ye Daughters of the Hills, come down from every side,
And due attendance give upon the lovely Bride:
Go strew the Paths with Flowers, by which she is to pass:
For be ye thus assured, in Albion never was
A Beauty (yet) like hers: where have ye ever seen
So absolute a Nymph in all things, for a Queen?
Give instantly in charge the day be wondrous fair,
That no disordered Blast attempt her braided Hair.
Go, see her State prepared, and every thing be fit,
The Bride-chamber adorned with all beseeming it.
And for the Princely Groom, who ever yet could name
A Flood, that is so fit for Isis, as the Tame?
Ye both so lovely are, that knowledge scarce can tell,
For Feature whether he, or Beauty she excel:
That, ravished with joy each other to behold,
When as your Crystal Wastes you closely do enfold,
Betwixt your beauteous selves you shall beget a Son,
That when your lives shall end, in him shall be begun.
The pleasant Surrian Shores shall in that Flood delight,
And Kent esteem her self most happy in his sight.
The Shire that London loves, shall only him prefer,
And give full many a gift to hold him near to her.
The Skeld, the goodly Mose, the rich and Viny Rhein,
Shall come to meet the Thames in Neptune's watery Plain.
And all the Belgian Streams, and neighboring Floods of Gaul,
Of him shall stand in aw, his Tributaries all.
As of fair Isis thus the learned Virgins spoke,
A shrill and sudden Bruit this Prothalamion brake;
That White-horse, for the love she bare to her Ally,
And honored Sister-Vale, the bounteous Alesbury,
Sent Presents to the Tame, by Ock her only Flood,
Which for his Mother-Vale so much on greatness stood.
From Oxford Isis hasts more speedily, to see
That River, like his Birth, might entertained be:
For that ambitious Vale, still striving to command,
And using for her place continually to stand,
Proud White-horse to persuade much business there has been,
T'acknowledge that great Vale of Eusham for her Queen.
And but that Eusham is so opulent, and great,
That thereby she her self holds in the Sovereign Seat,
This White-horse all the Vales of Britain would or'ebear,
And absolutely sit in the Imperial Chair;
And beasts as goodly Herds, and numerous Flocks to feed,
To have as soft a Glebe, as good increase of Seed;
As pure and fresh an Air upon her Face to flow,
As Eusham for her life: and from her Steed does show,
Her lusty rising Downs as fair a Prospect take,
As that imperious Would; which her great Queen does make
So wond'rously admired, and her so far extend.
But to the Marriage, hence, industrious Muse descend.
The Naiads, and the Nymphs extremely overjoyed,
And on the winding Banks all busily employed,
Upon this joyful day, some dainty Chaplets twine;
Some others chosen out, with fingers neat and fine,
Brave Anadems do make: some Bauldricks up do bind;
Some, Garlands: and to some the Nosegays were assigned;
As best their Skill did serve. But, for that Tame should be
Still man-like as himself, therefore they will, that he
Should not be dressed with Flowers, to Gardens that belong,
(His Bride that better fit) but only such as sprung
From the replenished Meads, and fruitful Pastures near:
To sort which Flowers some sit; some making Garlands were;
The Primrose placing first, because that in the Spring
It is the first appears, then only flourishing;
The azur'd Hare-bell next with them they neatly mixed:
T'allay whose lushious Smell they Woodbind placed betwixt.
Amongst those things of scent, there prick they in the Lilly;
And near to that again her Sister Daffadilly.
To sort these Flowers of show with the other that were sweet,
The Cowslip then they couch, and th'Oxslip, for her meet:
The Columbine amongst they sparingly do set,
The Yellow King-cup, wrought in many a curious fret,
And now and then among, of Eglantine a spray,
By which again a course of Lady-smocks they lay:
The Crow-flower, and thereby the Clover-flower they stick,
The Daysie over all those sundry sweets so thick,
As Nature does her self; to imitate her right:
Who seems in that her Pearl so greatly to delight,
That every Plain therewith she powd'reth to behold:
The crimson Darnel Flower, the Blew-bottle, and Gold;
Which though esteemed but Weeds, yet for their dainty hews,
And for their scent not ill, they for their purpose choose.
Thus having told you how the Bridegroom Tame was dressed,
I Will show you how the Bride, fair Isis, they invest;
Sitting to be attired under her Bower of State,
Which scorns a meaner sort, then fits a Princely rate.
In Anadems, for whom they curiously dispose
The Red, the dainty White, the goodly Damask Rose,
For the rich Ruby, Pearl, and Amatist, men place
In Kings Emperial Crowns, the Circle that enchase.
The brave Carnation then, with sweet and sovereign power
(So of his color called, although a July-flower)
With the other of his kind, the speckled and the pale:
Then th'odoriferous Pink, that sends forth such a Gale
Of sweetness; yet in scents, as various as in sorts.
The Purple Violet then, the Pansie there supports:
The Mary-gold above t'adorn the arched Bar;
The double Daysie, Thrift, the Button-batcheler,
Sweet William, Sops in Wine, the Campion: and to these,
Some Lavander they put, with Rosemary and Bays:
Sweet Marjoram, with her like, sweet Basil rare for smell,
With many a Flower, whose name were now too long to tell:
And rarely with the rest, the goodly Flower-delice.
Thus for the nuptial hour, all fitted point-device,
Whilst some still busied are in decking of the Bride,
Some others were again as seriously employed
In strewing of those Herbs, at Bridals used that be:
Which every where they throw with bounteous hands and f^
The healthful Balm and Mint, from their full laps do fly,
The scent-ful Camomil, the verdurous Costmary.
They hot Muscado often with milder Maudlin cast:
Strong Tansey, Fennel cool, they prodigally waste:
Clear Isop, and therewith the comfortable Thyme,
Germander with the rest, each thing then in her prime;
As well of wholesome Herbs, as every pleasant Flower,
Which Nature here produced, to fit this happy hour.
Amongst these strewing kinds, some other wild that grow,
As Burnet, all abroad, and Meadow-wort they throw.


The Painting on the North-side, over Neptune, represents the EXCHANGE; the
Motto, -- GENERIS LAPSI SARCIRE RUINAS.

An Expression of Virgil's, in the fourth of his Georgicks, speaking of the
Industry of Bees, never discouraged by their Losses; his Description of it
running thus,

Quo magis exhaustae fuerint, hoc acrius omnes
Incumbent generis lapsi sarcire ruinas,
Complebuntque Foros, and Floribus Horrea texent.
How much by Fortune they exhausted are,
So much they strive the Ruins to repair
Of their fallen Nation, and they fill the Exchange,
Adorning with the choicest Flowers their Grange.
The Painting on the South Side, over Mars, shows the TOWER of London; the
Inscription, CLAUDUNTUR BELLI PORTAE.

This is in reference to the Temple of JANUS, never shut, but in the time of
Peace; nor opened, but in time of War. Therefore, when King Latinus had refused
to raise a War against Aeneas, and his Followers, and to that purpose, to open
the Gates of the Temple of JANUS, Juno, resolving to have a War prosecuted
against him, opened them her self: mentioned by VIRGIL Aenid. vii.
, Hoc and tum Aeneadis indicere bella Latinus
More jubebatur, tristesque RECLUDERE PORTAS.
Abstinuit tactu Pater, aversusque refugit
Foeda ministeria, and caecis se condidit umbris.
Tum Regina Deum, coelo delapsa, morantes
Impulit ipsa manu PORTAS: and, cardine verso,
Belli ferratos rupit Saturnia posts.
The King was here required by the States
War to denounce, and OPEN JANUS GATES.
He flies th'Engagement, and so foul a Cause,
And straight himself to privacy withdraws.
Then from high Heaven the Queen of Gods descends,
And the resisting Portals open rends.
She breaks the Hinges, tears down Iron Bars,
And makes a spacious way for impious Wars.


The Pedestals, in the Upper Story, are adorned with eight living Figures,
representing EUROPE, ASIA, AFRICA, and AMERICA, with Escutcheons, and Pendents,
bearing the Arms of the Companies trading into those parts.

EUROPE, a Woman armed a l'antique; on her Shield a Woman riding on a Bull; at
her foot a Coney.

The Effigies of Europe in Armor relates to the Warlike disposition of that
part of the World, evidently seen in the Greek, and Roman Monarchies. We shall
not need to describe her Armor in particular, but leave it to be taken from
this Description of Rome, the Mistress of Europe, in Claudian, Ipsa,
triumphatis quae possidet aethera regnis,
Assilit, innuptae ritus imitata Minervae:
Nam neque caesariem crinali stringere cultu
Colla, nec ornatu patitur mollire retorto;
Dextrum nuda latus, niveos exserta lacertos,
Audacem retegit mammam, laxumque coercens
Mordet gemma sinum: nodus, qui sublevat ensem,
Album puniceo pectus discriminat ostro.
Miscetur decori virtus, pulcherque severo
Armatur terrore pudor, galeaeque minaci
Flava cruentarum praetenditur umbra jubarum.
Et formidato clypeus Titana lacessit
Lumine, quem tota variarat Mulciber art.
She who by conquering Realms the Sky possessed,
Starts from her Seat, like Virgin- Pallas dressed:
Her Hair no Fillet bound, nor was her Head
Dressed up, Tresses hung over her Shoulders spread,
Her right side naked, with stretched out Arms, her Breast
Boldly she bares, a Jemme claspt up her Vest,
Her Faulchion in a Purple Belt, more bright
Her Bosom rendered, setting off the white:
Valor with Beauty mixed, a modest Blush
With terror armed, her threatening Cask and Bush
Of Bloody Plumage cast a dreadful shade:
And Gorgon-Shield, that Titan so dismayed,
Which Vulcan with such art and labor made.
Whom Sidonius Apollinaris followed so nearly, that there will need no other
Translation then the precedent.

Paneg. Majorian.
Sederat exerto bellatrix pectore Roma
Cristatum turrita caput, cui pone capaci
Casside prolapsus perfundit terga capillus.
Laetitia censura manet, terrorque pudore
Crescit, and invita superat virtute venustas.
Ostricolor pepli textus, quem fibula torto
Mordax dente vorat, tum quicquid mamma refundit
Tegminis, hoc patulo conclusit gemma recessu.
Hinc fulcit rutilus spacioso circite laevum
Vmbo latus, videas hic crasso fusa metallo
Antra Rheae, foetamque lupam, quam fauce retecta
Blandiri quoque terror erat, quanquam illa vorare
Martigenas and picta timet, pars proxima Tybrin
Exprimit; hic scabri fusus sub pumice tophi
Proflabat madidum per guttura glauca soporem.
Her Shield comprehends the Story from whence Europe had her name, agreeably to
the Custom of the Ancients: as we find by this description of the Shield of
Rome in the same Author. Ibid.


Hic patrius Mavortis amor, foetusque notantur
Romulei; post amnis inest, and bellua nutrix.
Electro Tyberis, Pueri formantur in Auro.
Tingunt era lupam, Mavors adamante coruscat.
Here Mars escapes, and there the Twins he drew,
And next the River, and the Shee-wolfe too:
Tyber in Amber, and the Boys in Gold,
The Wolf in Brass, Mars he in Steel did mould.
The first part of which seems to be taken from that of Aeneas in Virgil, Illic
res Italas, Romanorumque triumphos,
Haud vatum ignarus venturique inscius aevi,
Fecerat Ignipotens, illic genus omne futurae
Stirpis ab Ascanio, pugnataque in ordine bello
Fecerat, and viridi faetam Mavortis in antro
Procubuisse lupam; geminos huic ubera circum
Ludere pendentes pueros, and lambere matrem
Impavidos; illam tereti cervice reflexam
Mulcere alternos, and corpora fingere lingua.
Nec procul hinc, Romam, etc.
The Ignipotent God, well skilled in Fates to come,
The Roman triumphs and affairs of Rome,
There had engraved, Ascanius Offspring wrought,
And all their bloody battles must be fought.
The pregnant Wolf in Mars green Covert lay,
And hanging at her breasts two Infants play:
Bending her neck she licks the tender young,
And quiet, shapes their bodies with her tongue.
Not far from this, Rome, etc.
Or from these of Silius Italicus, describing the Shield of Flaminius, a Roman
Consul; Tum clypeum quatit, aspersum quem caedibus olim
Celticus ornarat cruor: humentique sub antro,
Ceu foetum, lupa permulcens puerilia membra
Ingentem Assarici caelo nutribat alumnum.
Next, he assumes his Shield, where they behold
The stains of Celtick blood, which he before
In Battle shed: and, in it carved, he bore
A She-Wolf's Figure, in her gloomy Den,
Licking a Child's soft Limbs, as it had been
Her Whelp, and nursed of the Assarick Line
A Stem, that afterward was made Divine.
Mr. Ross.

The other, from these Verses of Moschus, where he describes the Basket of
Europa, (...)
(...).
In Silver Nilus stood, the Cow in Brass,
And Jupiter in Gold engraven was.


The Fable presented in the Shield of Europe is this. Europa, Daughter of
Agenor, gathering Flowers near the Seaside, was carried away by Jupiter, in
the Form of a Bull, into Crete, where she became his Spouse; by whose Name he
caused that part of the World to be called, according to this of Manilius
Astronom. Lib. iv.
, Quod superest Europa tenet, quae prima natantem
Fluctibus excepitque Jovem, Taurumque resolvit.
Ille puellari donavit nomine fluctus,
Et monumenta sui titulo sacravit amoris.
Europa last place held, whom Jove his Prize
Through Billows bearing, cast his Bull's disguise,
And gave that Sea, to her eternal Fame,
In memory of his Love, the Virgin's Name.


This Virgin was generally reputed a Tyrian. EURIPIDES, (...)
(...) --
SENECA the Tragedian, Tyriae per undas vector Europae nitet:
Through Waves Tyrian Europa's bearer shone.
And Herodotus Lib. iv.
conjectures this quarter of the World was named (...) (which Valla renders, ab
Europa Tyria) in his first Book, affirming, the Cretans sailed to Tire, and
stole her from thence. The Chronographers, that follow Eusebius, rank this
about the time of Joshuah, but the Arundelian Marbles (set forth by Mr. Seldom)
show, that Cadmus came to Thebes, and built Cadmea the same time, when
Amphictyon reigned in Athens, which was before the Israelites forsook Egypt. By
this it is apparent, that Europa was not of Tire; for that was built long
after, viz. according to Josephus Antiq. Jud. Lib. viii. 2.
, before the Temple of Solomon, which was begun in the 480. Year after the
Israelites departure out of Egypt. It is supposed, that that part of the Fable,
which feigns her carried away by a Bull, signifies no more, then that she was
transported by Sea in a Ship called the Bull, from the Figure of a Bull on the
Prow of it. So LYCOPHRON, (...) it being among the Ancients the usual Custom to
nominate their Ships from the (...), or Insigne on the Prow, as the Tiger,
Centaure, and Triton, in the Navy of Aeneas, mentioned by VIRGIL Aeneid. x.
Massicus aerata princeps secat aequora Tigri.
In The Brazen Tigre Massicus first stands.
Filius aequales comitatus class catervas
Ingentem remis Centaurum promovet. --
Hunc vehit immanis Triton, and caerula concha
Exterrens freta. --
His Son attended with an equal Troop
Brings, with tuff Oars, the mighty Centaure up.
This mighty Triton bore, frighting the Tides
With his shrill Trump. --


We shall not need give any further account of this Fab the further Relation of
it to this Poem of Moschus, (...),
(...), etc.
A sweet Dream Venus once Europa lent,
In Nights third quarter, near the Morns ascent;
Whilst Slumber which her eyelids sweetly crowned,
Her Limbs unti'd, and her Eyes softly bound
(That time which does all truer Dreams beget.)
Europa Phoenix-child, a Virgin yet,
Alone in a high Chamber taking rest,
Beholds two Countries that for her contest,
The Asian, and her opposite; both seemed
Like Women; that a stranger, this esteemed
A Native who (a Mother like) does plead
That she of her was born, by her was bred;
The other violent hands upon her laid,
And drew by force the unresisting Maid,
Urging she was as prize to Jove designed:
Out of the bed she starts with troubled mind:
And panting heart; the Dream to life's so near:
Long sat she silent; long both Women were
After she waked presented to her sense,
Till thus at length she breaks her deep suspense.
Which of the Gods, as now I did repose,
Perplexed my Fancy with delusive Shows?
My calmer Sleeps disquieting with fear:
What Stranger in my Slumber did appear?
Her love shot suddenly into my Breast
And kindness, like a Mother, she expressed.
The Gods vouchsafe this Dream a good event!
She rose, and for her loved Companions sent,
In Years, and Friendship, equal, nobly born,
With them for Balls she used her self t'adorn;
Or in Anaurus current Bathes, with them,
She plucks the fragrant Lilly from her Stem
These straight come to her; each a Basket held
To gather Flowers; so walk they to a Field
Neighboring the Sea, whither they often went
Pleased with the Waters noise, and Roses scent.
A Golden Basket fair Europa bare,
Rich, yet in Vulcan's Workmanship more rare,
Which Neptune first to Lybia gave, when he
Obtained her Bed, to Telephassa she
Wife to her Son, from Telephassa last
This to unwed Europe her Daughter past
Which many Figures neatly wrought did hold.
Inachian Io was here carved in Gold,
Not yet in Woman's shape, but like a Cow,
Who seemed to swim, and force (enraged) through
The Briny Sea her way; the Sea was Blew;
Upon the highest point of Land to view
The Wave-dividing Heifer, two Men stand;
Jove strokes the wet Cow with his sacred hand,
Who, unto seven-mouth'd Nilus crossing over,
Did cast her Horns, and Woman's shape recover.
In Silver Nilus Flood, the Cow in Brass,
And Jupiter in Gold engraven was;
Mercury figured on the furthest round,
And next him lies distended on the ground
Argos, endu'd with many watchful Eyes,
Out of whose Purple Blood a Bird does rise,
Proud of his various Flowery Plumes, his Tail
He spreads like a swift Ship under Sail,
And comprehends the Border with his Wings;
Such is the Basket fair Europa brings.
All at the Painted Field arive, where these
With several Flowers their several Fancies please.
One sweet Narcissus plucks, another gets
Wild Savory, Hyacinths, and Violets,
Many fallen Spring-born Flowers the ground does share,
Some strive which yellow Crocus fragrant Hair
Should faster pluck; i'th'midst the Queen does stand
Gathering the Roses Beauty with her hand;
The Graces so by Venus are out-shind.
Nor must she long with Flowers divert her mind,
Nor long preserve unstained her Virgin Zone,
For Jove, upon the Meadow looking down,
By Venus subtle Darts was struck in love,
Venus has power to captivate great Jove.
Who of frow'rd Juno's jealousy afraid,
And that he might deceive the tender Maid,
In a Bull's Shape his Deity does vail,
Not such as are in Stables bred, or trail
The crooked Plough, the furrowed Earth to wound,
Or run amongst the Herds in Pasture Ground,
Or are to draw the laden Wagon used,
Yellow over all his body is diffused,
Save a white Circle shines amidst his Brow,
His brighter Eyes with amorous Sparkles glow.
His Horns with equal length rise from his Head,
Like the Moon's Orb, to half a Circle spread.
Into the Mead he comes, nor (seen) does fright;
The Virgins to approach him all delight,
And stroke the lovely Bull, whose divine smell
Does far the Meads perfumed Breath excel:
Before unblam'd Europa's Feet he stood,
Licking her Neck, and the Maid kindly wooed:
She stroak'd, and kissed him; and the Foam, that lay
Upon his Lip, wiped with her hand away:
He softly bellowed, such an humming sound
Forth breathing, as Mygdonian Pipes resound.
Down at her Feet he kneels, viewing the Maid
With writhed Neck, and his broad Back displayed,
When she to th'fair-haird Virgins thus does say;
Come hither dear Companions, let us play,
Securely with this Bull, and without fear;
Who, like a Ship, all on his Back will bear.
He tame appears to sight, and gently kind,
Differing from others, a discursive mind
Bearing like Men, and only Voice does lack.
This said, she smiling gets upon his Back;
Which the rest offering, the Bull leaps away,
And to the Sea bears his desired Prey;
She calls with stretch'd-out hands, she turns to view
Her Friends, alas unable to pursue;
Down leaps he, Dolphin-like glides through the Seas:
Up from the Deep rise the Nereides,
Mounted on Whales to meet her on the way:
Whilst hollow-sounding Neptune does allay
The Waves, and is himself his Brothers guide
In this Sea-Voyage; Tritons, on each side,
(The Deep's inhabitants) about him throng,
And sound with their long shells a nuptial song;
She by transformed Jupiter thus born,
With one hand holding fast the Bull's large Horn
Her purple garment with the other saves
Unwet by the swollen Ocean's froathy waves:
Her mantle (flowing over her shoulders, swelled
Like a full sail, and the young maid upheld.
Now born away far from her native coast,
Her sight the wave-washt shore and mountains lost.
She sees the Heavens above, the Seas beneathe,
And, looking round about, these Cries does breathe.
O whither sacred Bull? who art thou, say?
That through undreaded floods can break thy way:
The Seas are pervious to swift Ships alone,
But not to Bulls is their feared voyage known;
What food is here? or if some God thou be
Why do, what misbeseems a Deity?
Upon the Land no Dolphins, no Bulls move
Upon the Sea; Thou Sea and Land do prove
Alike; whose feet like Oars assist thy have;
Perhaps thou wilt soar through the bright Air at last
On high, and like the nimble Birds become.
Me most unhappy, who have left my home,
A Bull to follow, voyages unknown
To undertake, and wander all alone.
But Neptune thou, that rul'st the foaming Main
Be pleased to help me; sure I shall obtain
A sight of this great God, who is my guide,
Nor else could I these fluid paths have tried.
The largely horned Bull thus answered; Maid
Be bold, nor of the swelling waves afraid,
For I am Jove who now a Bull appear,
And whatsoever shape I please can wear;
In this to measure the wide Sea constrained
For love of thee, thou shall be entertained
By Creet my Nurse; our Nuptials shall be there
Performed, and thou of me great Sons shall bear,
To whose imperious Scepters all shall bow.
What he had said, event made good; Creet now
Appears in view; Jove his own form does take,
And loosed her Zone; the Hours their Bed did make,
She late a Virgin, Spouse to Jove became,
Brought him forth Sons, and gained a Mothers name.
Mr. STANLEY.

ASIA, On her Head a Glory, her Stole of Silk, with several Forms of Wild
Beasts wrought on it. Among the Poets, we frequently find Asia called Aurora
from the rising of the Sun there: as in CLAUDIAN, Jam Princeps molitur iter,
gentesque remotas
Colligit Aurorae, tumidus quascunque pererrat
Euphrates, quos lustrat Halys, quos ditat Orontes, etc.
The Prince his Progress now designing calls
Remotest Eastern Nations, they whose Walls
Euphrates, Halys, and Oront improves,
The Arabs leave their Incense-bearing Groves, etc.
-- Totam pater undique secum
Moverat Auroram: mistis hic Colchus Iberis,
Hic mitra velatus Arabs, hic crine decoro
Armenius. --
-- the Eastern World he raised:
There with Iberians Colchians mixed, and there
Wild Arabs, and fair-hair'd Armenians were.
And speaking of Asia, going to solicit Stilico for Assistance, Tendit ad
Italiam supplex Aurora potentem.
To Italy Aurora supplyant bends.
From whence they represented her like the Rising Sun. Claudian implicitly
delivers her ordinary Dress, though in regard of her calamity, at that time, in
mourning, Non radiis redimita comam, nec flammea vultum,
Nec croceum vestita diem; stat livida lucta.
No Rays, nor Glory dressed her Brows, nor clad
In Purple day, but pale she looked, and sad.


Her Mantle of Silk speaks her ancient Propriety in it: which came so late into
Europe, that we find no name for it in Homer, among his so frequent
Descriptions of the Vestments both of Gods, and Men. Nay, not in the Poets of
the Old, or Middle Comedy, some hundreds of Years after Homer. Whence we
conjecture, it was first brought into Europe after the Conquest of Alexander
the Great. After it was brought over, the Europaeans seem to have had no
certain knowledge how it was made. For, by what we can find, they thought it
to have grown naturally on the Trunk, or Leaves of some Trees in Asia. So
Virgil, Quid nemora Aethiopum molli canentia lana,
Velleraque ut foliis depectant tenuia Seres?
Of Trees in Aethiopia white with Wool;
How from the Leaves the Seres Fleeces cull?


PLINY, The Seres are the first, who are known to have a Woolly substance to
grow on their Trees, which they comb off after they have sprinkled it with
Water. And Julius Pollux Onomastis.
speaks it as a report of some, that the Seres gathered their Silk from certain
Worms, like unto the Bombyces of the Island Coos. Whence it appears, that in
the time of Commodus the Emperor, in whose time Pollux wrote, it was generally
believed to have been otherwise: and after that too, for Claudian, who
flourished under the Emperor Honorius, agrees with Pliny; -- and pollice docto
Jam parat auratas trabeas, currusque micantes
Stamine, quod molli tondent de stipite Seres,
Frondea lanigerae carpentes vellera Sylvae.
-- she rarely taught,
Rich Robes prepared, and Golden Chariots wrought,
With Thread, which from the Bark the Seres cull,
Shearing from spreading Boughs the Fleecy Wool.


Servius indeed, who lived in the time of Theodosius, as appears by his being
cotemporary with Macrob. Saturnal.
Macrobius, had a right opinion of it, as appears from these words of his in
the forecited place of Virgil,

Amongst the Indians, and Seres, are certain Worms upon the Trees, which are
called Bombyces; which, like Spiders, spin a very fine Thread, from whence is
made Silk.

In the time of Justinian Zonaras.
the whole Mystery was disclosed by some Monks, who brought from the Indies
some of the Eggs of the Worms: Since which time that Manufacture has been
constantly used in Europe.

That she has several Shapes, or Forms of strange Beasts wrought on her Vest,
is agreeable to the ancient Customs of that Country, Aristophanes Ranis.
, (...),
(...)
Mine not like your Prodigious Monsters be,
Such as are wrought in Median Tapestry.
PETRONIUS ARBITER, Tuo palato clausus pavo pascitur,
Plumato amictus aulaeo Babylonico.
A Peacock shall be crammed for thee,
Adorned like Median Tapestry.
SIDONIUS, Peregrina det supellex
Ctesiphontis ac Niphatis
Juga texta belluasque
Rapidas vacant panno
Acuit quibus furorem
Been ficta plaga cocco
Jaculoque ceu forante
Cruor incruentus exit:
Vbi torvus, and per artem
Resupina flexus ora,
It equo reditque telo
Fugiens fugansque Parthus.
From Ctesiphont straight get enough,
And Niphates fair Household stuff,
Wrought with Hills, and Wild Beasts, which
The empty Prospect may enrich;
Who by well-feignd Wounds enraged,
Seem more desperately engaged,
From Javelins fixed in their sides,
Blood in Bloodless Rivers glides;
Where the Parthian with such Art,
Over his Shoulder throws his Dart:
His Horse now charging, then retreats,
And flying, so his Foe defeats.


AFRICA, a Woman, in her Hand a Pomegranate; on her Head a Crown of Ivory, and
Ears of Wheat; at her Feet two Ships laden with Corn. Thus we find the Statue
of Africa at Florence leaning upon its left Hand, in which there is a
Pomegranate; in her right Hand an Vmbrella, to defend her from the heat of the
Sun; for her Pillow, two great Waters, signifying the Mediterranean, and
Atlantic Seas. So at Mycenae, the Statue of Juno (Protectrice of Carthage, the
Metropolis of Africa) made by Polyclet, holds in one Hand a Scepter; in the
other, a Pomegranate. Therefore, when the Queen sacrificed to Juno, she wore a
Rod of Pomegranate upon her Head, called by the Ancients Inarculum. FESTUS;
Inarculum virgulta erat ex malo Punico incurvata, quam Regina sacrificans in
capite gestabat.

She is crowned with Ears of Corn, to signify the Fertility of the place.
Horace, Fulgentem imperio fertilis Africae
Fallit sort beatior.
Thou happier art, then he commands
Rich Africk's fertile Strands.
Thus SIDONIUS introduces Africa, Paneg. Majoriani.
Jam male foecundas in vertice fregit aristas,
Et sic orsa loqui est.
Her Wheat-ear'd Wreath now early full she broke,
And thus then spoke.
And CLAUDIAN, De Laud. Stilic. lib. ii.
Tum spicis, and dente comas illustris eburno,
Et valido rubicunda die, sic Africa fatur.
With Ivory crowned, and Wheat, red with the Sun,
And fainting Heats, thus Africa begun.
According to which Description of his, we find her represented in a Coin of
Antoninus Pius, coin Seld Mar. claus. lib. 3.


De Bello Gildonico.
The same Author implicitly describes her, in the same manner, in another
place, -- mediis apparet in astris
Africa, rescissae vestes, and Spicea passim
Serta jacent, lacero crinales vertice dentes,
Et fractum pendebat ebur. --
Amidst the Stars next Africa appears
Her Garments torn, her Wreath of Wheaten Ears
Scattered about, Teeth braided on her Crown,
And broken Ivory hung. --


The Ivory on her Head, alludes to the great number of Elephants, bred in that
part of the World; Plin. Not. Hist. viii.xi.
especially in that part of Africa beyond the Syrtick Solitudes, and Deserts,
Aethiopia, Trogloditica, and Mauritania. Petronius, Quaeritur in silvis Mauri
fera; and ultimus Ammon
A frorum excutitur, ne desit bellua dente
Ad mortes pretiosa suas. --
The Libyan Wilds we seek, and the utmost South,
To find a Monster out, whose precious Tooth
Proves its own bane. --
JUVENAL, Dentibus ex illis quos mittit porta Syenes, Sat. ii.

Et Mauri celeres. --
From whiter Teeth, which the Syene sends,
And the swift Moors. --
Whence the Romans, in their Triumphs over Africa, usually had Elephants led
before them, to denote the place of their Victory: Plin. lib. viii. cap. vii.
as L. Metellus, in whose Coyns we find either an Elephant, or his Triumphal
Chariot drawn by two of them, or a Head of one of them under his Chariot.

coin Pier Hierogl.


Pliny says, Lib. Peod. cap. vii.
that the Chariot of Pompey was drawn by four Elephants in his African Triumph.
And we find that the Fifth Legion bore the Effigies of an Elephant on their
Colors, because they successfully managed a Battle against them, in the War
betwixt Caesar, and L. Scipio.

The two Ships at her Feet, relate to the Classis Frumentaria, which came
yearly to Rome from Africa: frequently mentioned in the Roman Writers; which
was instituted by Commodus the Emperor. Of whom Lampridius; Classem Africanam
instituit quae subsidio esset, si forte Alexandrina frumenta cessassent. He
appointed an African Navy, which should furnish the City, in case the Corn from
Alexandria should fail. Of which Claudian, Tot mihi pro meritis Libyam Nilumque
dedere, De Bello Gildonico.

Vt dominam plebem bellatoremque Senatum
Classibus aestivis alerent, geminoque vicissim
Littore diversi complerent horrea venti.
Stabat certa salus: Memphis si forte negasset,
Pensabam Pharium Getulis messibus annum.
Frugiferas certare rates, lateque videbam
Punica Niliacis concurrere carbosa velis.
They gave me Libya, and the Egyptian Shore
For my deserts, that they might with their Store
The People, and the Warlick Senate feed,
And with contrary Winds supply their need.
Famine farewell: if Memphis should deny,
Getulian Harvests will our Wants supply.
Freighted with Corn, I saw the Punick Fleet,
And Ships from Nilus in our Harbors meet.
And, Laud Serenae Riginae.
-- Phariae segetes and Punica messis
Castrorum devota cibo: dat Gallia robur
Militis, etc. --
-- Egyptian Crops, and Punick Grain
Our Camps with Bread, Gaul does with Men maintain.


De Providentia Dei, Lib. vi.
Wherefore Salvian, after he had mentioned the Destruction of Sardinia, and
Sicily, the Vital Veins, he calls Africa the Soul it self of the Commonwealth
of Rome. Prudentius, In Symmachum.
Respice number Libyci desistat raris arator
Frumentis onerare rates, and ad Ostia Tibris
Mittere triticeos in pastum plebis acervos.
See if the Libyan Swain neglects to load
Our Ships with Corn, and to the Ostian Road
Sends Wheaten Mountains for the Peoples Food.


AMERICA Crowned with Feathers of diverse Colors, on her Stole a Golden River,
in one Hand a Silver Mountain. So Pompey, in his Triumph over Methridates,
among the rest of his Silver and Golden Representations carried Montem aureum,
quadratum, Pliny, Not. Hist. Lib. xxxvii. cap. xi.
cum cervis and leonibus, and pomis omnis generis, circumdata vite aurea, A
square Golden Mountain, encompassed with a Vine of Gold, with Hearts and Lions
upon it, and all manner of Fruit. The Mountain in her Hand is Potosis in Peru,
whose Treasure has been accounted inexhaustible. Josephus Acosta relates, that
in that Mountain there was found a Vein of Silver, Not. Hist. Ind. lib. iv.
cap. vi.
about the height of a Spear above the Superficies of the Earth, three hundred
Foot long, and thirteen broad. The same Author witnesses, that the King of
Spain receives yearly from thence a Million of Ducats; and that only from the
fifth part of the Silver. We have read of indeed of Silver Mountains in Europe;
as that mentioned by Strabo in Spain; Not far from Costaon is a Mountain,
whence flows the River Baetis, called the Silver Mountain, in relation to the
Silver Mines there. And of a Golden Mountain in Asia, mentioned by Menander;
(...) (presently after (...)) (...), Where King Chaganus himself was, on a
Mountain called Ectag, that is, the Golden Mountain. And Appian before him;
Many Fountains bring down small Shavings of Gold from the Mountain Caucasus;
the Inhabitants sinking Fleeces of Wool very deep, take up what Shavings stick
to them: But these are all so considerable, in respect of the inestimable
Treasure of this Mountain, that America may reasonably from hence, as all other
Countries from what is most valuable, and appropriate to them, have its
distinguishing Character.

The River on her Stole is the Golden River Peru. So Claudian represents
Britain with the Flux and Deflux of the Sea on her Vest; Inde Caledonio velata
Britannia monstro,
Ferro picta genas, cujus vestigia verrit
Caerulus, Oceanique aestum mentitus amictus,
Britannia then veiled in a Boars rough Hide,
Walked on the Sea, her Cheeks with Iron died,
Clothed with the changings of the Oceans Tide.
And SPAIN, with the Golden River Tagus on her Stole: -- glaucis tum prima
Minervae
Nexa comam foliis, fulvaque intexta micantem
Vest Tagum, tales profert Hispania voces.
Then Spain with Olive-Branches crowned, her Vest
With Golden Tagus wrought, her self expressed
In words like these --
Which Leaves of Minerva, Max. claus. Lib. ii.
Mr. Seldom mistook for a Palm. Claudian, in several places, describes the
Olive in the same manner; as in his Epistle to Hadrian, Hoc pro supplicibus
ramis, pro fronde Minervae,
Hoc carmen pro thure damus. --
This for Minerva's supplicating Bough,
This Verse for Incense we bestow.
And in another place, In Europpium, Lib. ii.
-- pro fronde Minervae
Has tibi protendo lacrymas. --
-- for Pallas Boughs,
These Tears we thee present,
LUCAN, De Bell. Civ. lib. iii.
-- tamen ante furorem
Indomitum, duramque viri deflectere mentem
Pacifico Sermon parant, hostemque propinquum
Orant Cecropiae praelata fronde Minervae.
-- they to assuage
His cruel Breast, accustomed to rage,
Minerva's Branches stretching forth, beseech
The Neighboring Foe with a prepared Speech.


In which places it is evident, the Olive is signified, because carried in the
Hands of Suppliants. Statius, -- ramumque precantis Olivae.
A supplicating Olive Branch.
Vittatae laurus, and supplicis arbor Olivae.
With Bays and supplicating Olives crowned.
Whence Virgil makes Aeneas send a hundred to King Latinus, all crowned with
Olive Branches, called there Palladis rami.

-- ramis velatos Palladis omnes,
Donaque far viro, pacemque exposcere Teucris.
And for the Trojans Terms of Peace propound,
With Royal Presents, all with Olive crowned.
And Statius makes Tydeus, going in the name of Polynices, to demand the
Kingdom of Thebes, carry a Branch of Olive in his Hand, as a token of Peace;
and, his Demand being denied, to throw away the same, to signify, and declare
a War. So LIVY, Not far off was a Ship of the Carthaginians, covered with
Mitres, and Branches of Olive; in which were ten Ambassadors, chief Princes of
the City, sent to request Peace.

CLAUDIAN gives the same Epithet too, to the Olive-leaves, in his Epistle to
SERENA, -- glauca pinguis Oliva coma.
The unctuous Olive with a Silver Sprig.
And VALERIUS FLACCUS, Argonan^. Lib. iii.
-- glaucasque comis praetexere frondes Imperat.
Commands to braid their Hair with verdant Boughs.


The reason why Claudian so describes it, is, because that Tree was sacred to
Minerva: which we find attested by Pliny; The Esculus (a Species of
glandiferous Trees) is sacred to Jupiter, Not. Hist. lib. xii. c. i.
the Laurel to Apollo, the Olive to Minerva, the Myrtle to Venus, the Poplar to
Hercules; and is known from the Fable of the Contention of Minerva, and
Neptune, concerning the Possession of Athens. And Epopeus, after a Victory,
having erected and consecrated to her a Temple, and prayed, Pausan. lib. ii.
that she would show some token of her acceptance of it, there presently sprung
forth a Branch of Olive before it.

This Error of Mr. Selden's produced another in his following words, when he
gathered from thence, that the River Tagus, and Palm Trees were proper to
Spain. Hispaniae Palmae, and Tagus fluvius propria. Indeed the Palm Tree was
the Symbol of Judaea, as we see in the Coyns of Vespasian and Titus, coin
obverse IMP CAESAR VESPASIANVS AVG

coin reverse IVD CAPT

from the abundance of them in that Country. STRABO; Beside the common Palm,
it (Judaea) brings forth the Carupta, not much inferior to the Babylonian.
Lucan, -- Et arbusto Palmarum dives Idume.
And Idumea rich with Palm.
SILIUS ITALICUS, Lib. iii.
Palmiferamque senex bello domitabit Idumen,
Palm-bearing Idumaea shall subdue.
But Spain was commended for the abundance, and excellency of its Olives.
Epigram. Lib. xii.
Martial, Baetis, Olivifera crinem redimite corona,
Aurea qui nitidis vellera tingis aquis.
Baetis her Tresses crowned with Olive Stems,
Dies Golden Fleeces with her glittering Streams.
Which Verses, Lib. iii.
compared with these of Silius Italicus, evidently evince, that Palladis rami
signify the Olive.

-- genuit quos ubere ripa
Palladio Bethes umbratus cornua ramo.
-- both of equal age
Born upon Bethes Banks, whose horned Brows
Were overshadowed with fat Olive Boughs.
And in another place, of Spain, Lib. i.
Nec Cereri terra indocilis, nec inhospita Baccho,
Nullaque Palladia sese magis arbore tollit.
A Land, where Ceres, and Lyaeus too
Do dwell, and Olive Trees in plenty grow.
Whence, in a Coin of Hadrian the Emperor, we find that Country signified by
a Woman sitting, with her left hand leaning on the Pyrenean Mountains (Mr.
Seldom calls it a heap of Stones) in her right Hand holding a Branch of Olive;
at her Feet a Coney: Croyiac. Tab. xxxix.
coin obverse HADRIANVS AVG COS III PP

coin reverse HISPANIA



The Coney we find too at the Feet of Spain, holding an Olive Branch on her
Shoulder, in a Coin of the same Emperor. Ibid.


coin RES TITVTORI^ HISPANIAE SC



The Coney at her Feet signifies either the incredible number of those Animals
formerly in Spain (for Varro mentions a Town there undermined, Lib. viii. cap.
xxix.
and overthrown by them, as we find in Pliny) or rather the abundance of Mines
in that Country; the Latin word Cuniculi, from whence the allusion must be
taken, being aequivocal, and answering to both. From one of which
significations a part of Spain is called Cuniculosa Celtiberia by Catullus,
Epigram. xxxv.
Tu praeter omnes, une de capillatis,
Cuniculosae Celtiberiae fili.
The Mines are mentioned by Claudian, speaking of Spain, Dives equis, frugum
facilis, pretiosa metallis,
Principibus foecunda piis. --
With Steeds abounding, rich with Corn, and Ore,
And pious Princes store. --
And by SILIUS ITALICUS, De Bello Pun. lib. i.
-- hic omne metallum:
Electri gemino pallent de semine venae.
Atque atros chalybis foetus humus horrida nutrit.
Sed scelerum causas aperit Deus. Astur avarus
Visceribus lacerae telluris mergitur imis,
Et redit infelix effosso concolor auro.
-- here Metals grow
Of matter mixed: Electrum's pallid Veins
Produced, and darker Steel the Earth contains:
But God those Springs of mischief deeply hides;
Yet Astur, covetous, the Earth divides,
And, in her mangled Entrails drowned again,
Returns with Gold, and bears the precious Stain.


But to return. This River, says Josephus Acosta, Hist. Not. Ind. lib. i. cap.
xiii. De Peruviae regionis inventione.
gave the name to the whole Country of Peru. Of which Levinus Apollonius thus,
under another name; where he describes the Rivers of the Mountainous PERU, The
chiefest far is the River Argyreus (PERU) from its abundance of Silver, which
it casts up in glittering Sand, called in Spanish, Plata: it is equally
liberal, and profuse of its Treasures unto all parts it passes by, enriching
its Inhabitants with an inexhaustible abundance both of Gold, and Silver.

The uppermost great Table in the fore-ground represents King Charles the
First, with the Prince, now Charles the Second, in His Hand, viewing the
Sovereign of the Sea, the Prince leaning on a Cannon; the Inscription, O NIMIUM
DILECTE DEO; CUI MILITAT AEQUOR,
ET CONJURATI VENIUNT AD CLASSICA VENTI.
For thee, O Jove's Delight, the Seas engage,
And mustr'ed Winds, drawn up in Battle, rage.


Above, over the Cornich, between the two Celestial Hemi-spheres, an Atlas,
bearing a Terrestrial Globe, and on it a Ship under Sail; the Word,

UNUS NON SUFFICIT. Thus we find Atlas painted in an ancient Temple of
Jupiter's. In Eliacis.
PAUSANIAS, Amongst the rest, is the Picture of Atlas, bearing up Heaven, and
Earth; by whom stands Hercules, as ready to assist him: mentioned by Claudian,
-- sic, Hercule quondam
Sustentante polum, melius librata pependit
Machina, nec dubiis titubavit Signifer astris.
Perpetuaque senex subductus mole parumper
Obstupuit proprii spectator ponderis Atlas
-- so Hercules of old
Sustained the Pole, bore better on his Back
The poysed World, and fixed the Zodiac:
Atlas a while, from his great Burden free,
Admiring stood, the wondrous Load to see.
Of whom thus HOMER, (...)
(...)
(...).
Daughter of Atlas, who both Depth, and Sholes
Of the Ocean plumbs, and holds two long Poles,
That mighty Heaven, and the Earth sustain.
AESCHYLUS, In (...).
-- (...)
(...)
(...).
-- who near the Western Main
Bears on his Back that Pillar, does sustain
Both Heaven, and Earth, not easy to support.
VIRGIL, -- ubi coelifer Atlas
Axem humero torquet stellis ardentibus aptum.
-- where great Atlas bears,
Laden with Golden Stars, the glittering Spears.


He was thus described from his admirable knowledge in the motions of the
Heavens, and the nature of things here below. PAUSANIAS In Boethius.
, In which there is a place of ground called Polosus, where they say Atlas
studied the Heavens, and the Earth. DIODORUS SICULUS Lib. iii.
, They say, he (Atlas) was excellently skilled in Astrology, and was the first,
that published the Spherical Figure of the Heavens: from whence he was said to
bear the Heavens on his Shoulders; the Fable signifying the Invention, and
Description of the Sphere. Which seems not be understood of a solid Sphere, but
a Sphere described on a Plane: the other Invention, by most of the Ancients,
being attributed to Archimedes, who lived many Centuries of Years after him.

The great Painting on the West Side represents the Duke of YORK, habited
al'antique, like Neptune, standing on a Shell drawn by Sea-Horses, before which
a Triton sounding, in one Hand a Trident, the Reins in the other; his Motto,

SPES ALTERA. We generally find Neptune among the Poets drawn by Sea-Horses.
STATIUS, Theb. Lib. ii.
Illic Aegeo Neptunus gurgite fessos
In portum deducit equos, prior haurit habenas
Vngula, postremi solvuntur in aequora pisces.
Here Neptune entering left the Aegean Flood,
Landing his Steeds, their foremost Feet well shod:
The hindmost cut the Waves with Finny Tails.
VIRGIL, Aeneid. v.
His ubi laeta Deae permulsit pectora dictis,
Jungit equos curru genitor, spumantiaque addit
Fraena feris, manibusque omnes effundit habenas,
Caeruleo per summa levis volat aequora curru.
When thus her troubled Breast he had asswag'd,
He joins his Chariot-Horse, and curbs th'enrag'd
With Fomy Bits, then gives them liberal Rein,
With blew Wheels flying over the Azure Main.


They were called Hippocampae. NONIUS; Hippocampae, equi marini, a flexu
caudarum, quae piscosae sunt. Hippocampae are Sea-Horses, so called from the
flexion of their Tails, which are like Fishes. FESTUS; Campas marinos equos
Graeci a flexione posteriorum partium appellant, The Greeks call Sea-Horses
Campae, from the bending of their posteriour parts: from (...) to bend.

In the Medaigles of Caius Marius, and Quintus Creperius, is represented
Neptune riding upon these Hippocampae, or Sea-Horses.

Cheul. Goltz. in Fastis ad 646.
coin obverse CMARIVS C F

coin reverse And the Form of a Seahorse we have in the Coin of the Emperor
Gallienus, Choul.
coin II NEPTVNO CONS AVG



As he holds the Reins of his Horses in one hand, so we find him constantly
with a Trident in the other. From whence he is called by the Greeks, Proclus in
Crat. Plaetonis.
(...) Epigr. Gr.
, (...), by Pindar (...) by the Latins, Tridentifer, and Tridentiger. OVID
Metam. lib. viii.
, -- o proxima terrae
Regna vagae, dixi, sortite Tridentifer undae.
And, Cumque Tridentigero tumidi genitore profundi. VIRGIL, -- Tuque, O, cui
prima frementem
Fudit equum magno tellus percussa Tridenti,
Neptune. --
-- and Neptune, thou, to whom
The Earth first Trident struck brought forth a Steed.
HOMER, Iliad. m.
(...)
(...)
(...). --
Armed with his Trident, Neptune, leading on
Impetuous Waves, left neither Pile, nor Stone.


Callimachus, singularly, says, Hymno in Delum.
that his Trident was made by the Telchines, smiths in Creet.

-- (...)
(...).
-- Neptune the Mountain struck
With His Trident, which the Telechines made.
Plutarch tells, that the Troezenians mark their Moneys with a Trident, as a
Testimony of their Devotion to Neptune.

Amongst the rest of Neptune's Attendants was Triton his Trumpeter. OVID, Metam.
Caeruleum Tritona vocat, conchaque sonanti
Inspirare jubet, fluctusque, and flumina signo
Jam revocare dato. --
Triton he calls, commanding him to sound
His hollow Shell, and call the Floods profound,
And Rivers back. --
VIRGIL, speaking of a Ship, Aeneid.
-- Immanis Triton, and caerula concha
Exterrens freta. Cui laterum tenus hispida nanti
Frons hominem praefert; in Pristin desinit alvus:
Spumea semifero sub pectore murmurat unda.
This mighty Triton bore, frighting the Tides
With his shrill Trump. His Face, and hairy sides
Above presents a Man, a Whale the rest:
And foamy Waves resound beneath his Breast.
NONNUS, Dionysiac. xxxvi.
(...)
(...).
Broad-bearded Triton sounds his Trump at last,
Half humane Shape, a Fish beneath the Waste.
MOSCHUS, Eldyll.
-- (...)
(...),
(...)
-- Tritons on each side
(The Deep's Inhabitants) about him throng,
And sound with their long Shells a Nuptial Song.


On the four Niches within the Arch were living Figures, with Escutcheons, and
Pendents, representing Arithmetic, Geometry, Astronomy, and Navigation.

Arithmetic, a Woman habited a l'antique, with her Fingers erect: upon her
Vestment Lines, with Music Notes on them: in her Escutcheon a Book opened,
with a Hand, pointing to the Figures, I.V.X.L.C.D.M. etc. Under,

PAR ET IMPAR. The holding out of her Fingers erect points out to us that
ancient manner of Supputation, known of old to most Countries in the World, but
now out of use, by the Fingers of both Hands. This Supputation was divided into
three parts; Digits, Decades, and Compound Numbers. The Digits comprehend all
Numbers under ten, the Decads comprehend all tens, as 10, 20, 30, 40, 50, 60,
70, 80, 90. the Compound what was made of the other two, as 19, 27, etc. The
Digits (...) were expressed by the three last Fingers, beginning with the
little one. The Decads by the Thumb, either single, or in conjunction with the
first Finger. Thus far reaches the Arithmetique of the left Hand; so that,
removing to the right, the first Number is an hundred: Iraeneus
Vnius numerum, quo gestu significabantur in sinistra, translatum in dexteram
centena conficere. The Number of a Hundred, by the same gesture, In Valent.
lib. i. cap. xiii.
is signified in the right Hand, that one in the left. And, A numero
nonagesimo, qui fuit in laeva, per unius significationem, transferri in
dexteram, and ibi centena constitui. From which kind of Arithmetique we must
understand that Greek Epigram of Nicarchus, (...)
(...)
(...)
(...).
(...),
(...).
Grey-hair'd Cotyttaris, that infernal Scold,
Whom Nestor to compare with was not old;
Whose many Years the long-lived Hearts surmount,
She on her left Hand twice begins to count.
Swift-footed as a Nymph, her sight not fails,
Sure, I believe, the Devil something ails.
And this of JUVENAL, Rex Pylius, magno si quidquam credis Homero,
Exemplum vitae fuit a Cornice secundae.
Felix nimirum! qui tot per saecula vitam
Distulit, atque suos jam dextra computat annos.
Nestor, if thou wilt great Homer credit give,
As long as did the long-lived Raven live;
Blessed thou! who stood'st so many Lustres rage,
Till on thy right Hand thou did count thy Age.


So that as the Units were counted on the three Fingers of the left, so the
first Nine Hundred were counted on the same three Fingers of the right; and as
the Decads were counted on the Thumb, and Forefinger of the left, so were the
Thousands on the same of the right. Whence we may guess of the Figure of the
Fingers, which Pliny Lib. xxxix. cap. vii.
mentions in the Statue of Janus, dedicated by Numa, with his Fingers so
complicated, that the Note of CCCLXV Days, the signification of a Year, should
demonstrate him the God of Time.

Of this manner of Supputation must be understood that Saying of Orontes, who,
upon some distaste taken by King Artaxerxes, had fallen into disgrace; Plutarch.
As the Fingers of Accountants now represent one, now Myriads; so the Friends
of Kings now are much in favor, now not at all. This manner of Supputation
seems to have been ordinary among the Romans, used in their Pleadings before
the Judge. QUINTILIAN Lib. i. Instit.
, Si actor, non dico, si circa summas trepidat, sed se digitorum incerto solum,
aut indecoro gestu a computatione dissentit, judicatur indoctus. If the Pleader
not only trembles about the Sums, but if by a doubtful only, and uncomely
gesture, he differs from the Computation, he is esteemed unlearned. Apuleius in
his Apologetical Oration before AEMILIANUS, Si triginta annos pro december
dixisses, posses videri pro computationis gestu errasse, quos circulare
debueris, digitos aperuisse. If you had named thirty Years for ten, you might
seem to have mistaken in the gesture of your Computation, to have circl'd those
Fingers, which you should have opened. And therefore it is very strange, that,
after so common an usage of this manner of Computation, it should be so far
lost, that none can agree what it was.

The Author of Arithmetique, according to Aeschylus In (...).
, was Prometheus: (...)
(...)
The chief of Arts I Numbers found,
And first knew Letters to compound.
According to Plato, 'twas Palamedes: but Pliny Lib. ii
attributes the Invention of it to Minerva; Eoque Minervae Templo dicatam
legem, quia numerus a Minerva inventus sit.

The ancient Musick-Notes here mentioned, though for many hundred Years buried
in obscurity, have been brought to light again out of some Greek Authors of
Music, lately published by Meibomius. The Numbers are sufficiently known,
though not so well as those we generally use, lately brought into Europe from
the Arabians.

Geometry, a Woman in a pleasant Green, in her Shield a Compass, and a Read;
the Inscription, DESCRIPSIT RADIO TOTUM QUAE GENTIBUS

Geometry is supposed by the Ancients to have had its original in Egypt,
where, after the yearly overflowings of the River Nile, they were forced
continually to measure their ground out anew to distinguish Propriety. STRABO
Geogr. lib. xvi.
, (...) And, Lib. xvii.
(...). For which end, because they made use of a Read, it was amongst them
ever after for a Symbol of Geometry. So in a Silver Coin of C. Mamilius, in one
side there is a Mercury with a Cap, and Caduceus, on the other Mamilius, with a
Read by him, with this Inscription, LI. MET. AN. that is, Limitibus metandis,
where we find hs Office of measuring Land employed by a Read.

The Compass in her other Hand we have described by OVID, Metam. lib. viii.
Fab. iii.
-- and ex uno duo ferrea brachia nodo
Junxit, ut aequali spatio distantibus illis
Altera pars staret, pars altera duceret orbem.
He two-shank'd Compasses with Rivet bound,
The one to stand still, the other turning round,
In equal distances. --


The Author of it, ^alus, being envyed by his Uncle Daedalus for this, and
other Inventions, was thrown down headlong by him from the top of Minerva's
Tower: but in the middle of his fall, being favored by Minerva, the Patroness
of Wit, was turned into a Bird; which we have in the following Verses: Daedalus
invidit: sacraque ex arce Minervae
Praecipitem misit, lapsum mentitus: at illum,
Quae favet ingeniis, excepit Pallas, avemque
Reddidit, and medio velavit in aere pennis.
-- Daedalus thus began,
Who from Minerva's sacred Turret flung
The envied headlong; and his falling fains:
Him Pallas, fautor of good Wits, sustains.
Who straight the Figure of a Fowl assumes;
Clad in the midst of Air with freckled Plumes.
Mr. SANDYS.

Astronomy, a Woman in a loose Vestement, Azure, wrought with Stars of Gold,
looking up to Heaven: in her Shield a Table, wherein are diverse Astronomical
Figures; the Inscription, AURO CIRCUMSPICIT ORIONA.

ASTRONOMY holding a Sphere in her left Hand, in her right a Radius.

So she is described by Martianus Capella. The Sphere, which he gives her, is
that of Archimedes, as we see by the Epigram, in which he describes it, Ipsa
etiam, laeva, Sphaera fulgebat honora;
Assimilis mundo, sideribusque fuit.
Nam globus, and circi, Zonaeque, ac fulgida signa
Nexa recurrebant, art locata pari.
Tellus, quae rapidum consistens suscipit orbem,
Puncti instar medio haeserat una loco.
In her left Hand she a Celestial Sphere,
Like the great World, glittering with Stars did bear:
On the vast Globe the circulating Signs
Connexed ran in equidistant Lines
To rapid Orbs; the Earth, the fixed Base,
Like a small Point, just in the midst took place.


Navigation, a Woman in Seagreen Habit; in her Escutcheon an Anchor, with a
Cable about it; the Inscription, TUTUM TE LITTORE SISTAM.

While the Nobility passed the Triumphal Arch, the three Seamen entertained
them with this Song from the Stage on the North-side of the Arch.

I.
From Neptune's Watery Kingdoms, where
Storms, and Tempests rise so often,
As would the World in pieces tear,
Should Providence their Rage not soften;
From that fluctuating Sphere,
Where stout Ships, and smaller Barks
Are tossed like Balls, or feathered Corks,
When briny Waves to Mountains swell,
Which dimming often Heaven's glittering Sparks,
Then descending low as Hell;
Through this Crowd,
In a Cloud,
By a strange, and unknown Spell,
We, newly Landing,
Got this Standing,
All Merry Boys, and Loyal,
Our Pockets full of Pay,
This Triumphal Day,
To make of our Skill a Trial,
Of our little little Skill:
Let none then take it ill,
We must have no Denial.
II.
We, who have raised, and laid the Poles,
Plough'd frozen Seas, and scalding Billows;
Now stiff with Cold, then scorched on Coals,
Ships our Cradles, Decks our Pillows;
Among threatening Rocks, and treacherous Shoals,
Through Gibraltar's contracted Mouth,
And Realms condemned to Heat, and Drowth,
Or Baltic Waves bound up in Ice,
Or Magellane as Cold, though South,
Our good Fortune, in a trice,
Through this Crowd,
In a Cloud,
Brings us where, in Paradise,
We, newly Landing,
Got this Standing,
All Merry Boys, and Loyal,
Our Pockets full of Pay,
This Triumphal Day,
To make of our Skill a Trial,
Of our little little Skill:
Let none then take it ill,
We must have no Denial.
III.
We, who so often banged the Turk,
Our Broad-sides speaking Thunder,
Made Belgium strike, and proud Dunkirk,
Who lived by Prize, and Plunder,
And routed the Sebastian Shirk;
We paid their Poops, and painted Beaks,
Cleans'd before and aft their Decks,
Till their Scuppers ran with Gore,
Whilst in as fast salt Water breaks;
But we are Friends of this no more:
Through this Crowd,
In a Cloud,
We have found a happy Shore,
And, newly Landing,
Got this Standing;
All Merry Boys, and Loyal,
Our Pockets full of Pay,
This Triumphal Day,
To make of our Skill a Trial,
Of our little little Skill:
Let none then take it ill,
We must have no Denial.
Besides the three before-named, who sang the precedent Song, there were in
like manner habited, like Seamen, six other Persons, who made a Winde-Musick.

The Music in the Stage consisted of three Drums, and six Trumpets.

On the East Side, Winde-Musick, consisting of six Persons.

On two Balconies, within the Arch, Winde-Musick, consisting of twelve Persons.

On the West-Gallery were placed six Trumpets.

These, and all the other Music, belonging to this Triumph, performed their
Duty without Intermission, till such time, as His Majesty fronted the Figure,
which represented Thames, and then ceased; upon which, Thames made the ensuing
Speech, Ten Moons, Great Sir, their Silver Crescents filled,
Since, mounted on a Billow, I beheld
You on the Bridge; but louder Joys there were,
That barred my Welcomes from Your Sacred Ear:
Now I above my highest Bound have reared
My Head, to say what could not then be heard.
Hail, Mighty Monarch! whose Imperial Hand
Quiets the Ocean, and secures the Land;
This City, whom I serve with Neighboring Floods,
Exporting Yours, importing Foreign Goods,
With anxious Grief did long Your Absence mourn;
Now with full Joy she welcomes Your Return;
Your blessed Return! by which she is restored
To all the Wealth remotest Lands afford.
At Your Approach I hastened to the Downs,
To see Your moving Forts, Your Floating Towns,
Your Sovereigns, big with Thunder, plow the Main,
And swimming Armies in their Womb contain.
You are our Neptune, every Port, and Bay
Your Chambers: the whole Sea is Your Highway.
Though several Nations boast their Strength on Land,
Yet You alone the Watery World command.
Pardon, great Sir, fair Cynthia checks my stay;
But to Your Royal Palace, twice a day,
I will repair; there my proud Waves shall wait,
To bear our Caesar, and His conquering Fate.


We find the Speech of the River Tyber on the like Solemnity, the Procession
of the Senate, etc. attending on the two Brothers Probinus, and Olybrius, newly
elected Consuls, in CLAUDIAN; Est in Romuleo procumbens Insula Tybri,
Qua medius geminas interfluit alveus urbes
Discretas subeunte freto, pariterque minantes
Ardua turrigerae surgunt in culmina ripae.
Hic stetit, and subitum prospexit ab aggere votum;
Vnanimes fratres junctos, stipante Senatu,
Ire forum, strictasque procul radiare secures,
Atque uno bijuges tolli de limine fasces.
Obstupuit visu, suspensaque gaudia vocem
Oppressam tenuere diu, mox inchoat ore.
Respice, si tales jactas aluisse fluentis,
Eurota Spartane, tuis. Quid protulit aequum
Falsus olor, valido quamvis decernere caestu
Norint, and ratibus saevas arcere procellas?
En nova Ledaeis soboles fulgentior astris!
Ecce mei cives! quorum jam Signifer optat
Adventum, stellisque parat convexa futuris.
Jam per noctivagos dominetur Olybrius axes
Pro Polluce rubens, pro Castore flamma Probini.
Ipsi vela regent: ipsis donantibus auras,
Navita tranquillo moderabitur aequore pinum.
Nunc pateras libare Deis, nunc solvere multo
Nectare corda libet: niveos jam pandite coetus
Naiades, and totum violis praetexite fontem:
Mella ferent sylvae: jam profluat ebrius amnis,
Mutatis in vina vadis: jam sponte per agros
Sudent irriguae spirantia balsama venae.
Currat, qui sociae roget in convivia mensae
Indigenas fluvios, Italis quicunque fuberrant
Montibus, Alpinasque bibunt de more pruinas:
Vulturnusque rapax, and Nar vitiatus odoro
Sulfure, tardatusque suis erroribus Ufens:
Et Phaethonteae perpessus damna ruinae
Eridanus, flavaeque terens querceta Maricae
Liris, and, Oebaliae qui temperat arva, Galesus.
Semper honoratus nostris celebrabitur undis
Iste dies; semper dapibus recoletur opimis.
Sic ait, and Nymphae, patris praecepta sequutae,
Tecta parant peplis; ostroque infecta corusco,
Humida gemmiferis illuxit regia mensis.
An Isle 'midst Tyber, with her spreading sides,
The City, and his Silver Waves divides:
Banks on each Hand, and Tow'r-crown'd Margents rise,
Threatening with their approach the lofty Skies;
Here standing on a Summit, he survai'd
The loving Brothers, and the Cavalcade,
As on they marched, bright Axes born before,
And double Rods brought from one single Floor.
Amazed he stood, long e're his joy could make
Way for his struggling Voice, at last he spoke.
Spartan Eurota, see, if thou could e're
Such Brothers boast: compared to these, what were
The Swan's fair Race, though well they knew the Cest,
And how to steer a Fleet with Storms distressed.
New Stars, behold! outshine Ledaean Fires.
Behold my People, whom the Sky desires:
For future Flames a place Heaven ready makes.
Olybrius shall rule Night's duskie Ax
For Pollux, Probine shine for Castor's Star,
They Sails shall swell, and gently move the Air,
That Sailors through calm Seas may steer the Pine.
Now pay Libations, now drink freely Wine.
You, Naiades, draw forth your beauteous Ranks,
And strew with Violets your Fountain Banks:
Inebriated Streams, now overflow
Your Banks, turned Wine; in Woods let Honey grow;
The Meads sweat healing Balm; let one strait all
The Neighboring Rivers to a Banquet call.
All those, who wash the Ausonian Mountain's Feet,
And drink cold Alpine Snow; Vulturnus fleet;
Strong-sented Nar; and Vfens Streams, that grow,
By wandering through their own Maeanders, slow;
Eridanus too, who makes such pityous moan
For loss of his lamented Phaethon;
And Liris feaking off Marica's Groves;
Galesus, who Oebalian Fields improves.
This day our Waves shall always keep in State,
This we with annual Feasts will celebrate.
This said, the Nymphs, obeying, thither throng,
The Walls, and Roof, with stately Arras hung:
His Watery Court with Royal Purple shone,
And Boards enchac'd with Pearl, and precious Stone.


The River Thames having ended his Speech, the three Seamen, who entertained
the Nobility with the former Song, addressed the following to His Majesty.

I.
King CHARLES, King CHARLES, great Neptune of the Main!
Thy Royal Navy rig,
And We'll not care a Fig
For France, for France, the Netherlands, nor Spain.
The Turk, who looks so big,
We'll whip him like a Gig
About the Mediterrane;
His Galleys all sunk, or taken.
We'll seize on their Goods, and their Moneys,
Those Algier Sharks,
That Plunder Ships, and Barks,
Algier, Sally, and Tunis,
We'll give them such Tosts
To the Barbary Coasts,
Shall drive them to Harbor, like Conies.
Tan tara ran tan tan
Tan tara ran tan tara,
Not all the World we fear-a;
The great Fish Pond
Shall be thine-a
Both here, and beyond,
From Strand to Strand,
And underneath the Line-a.
II.
A Sail, a Sail, I to the Offin see,
She seems a lusty Ship;
Hoise all your Sails a-trip:
We'll weather, weather her, whatever she be.
Your Helm then steady keep,
And thunder up the Deep,
A Man of War, no Merchant She;
We'll set her on her Crupper;
Give Fire, Bounce, Bounce,
Pickeering Villains trounce,
Till Blood run in Streams at the Scupper.
Such a Breakfast them we shall,
Give with Powder, and Ball,
They shall need neither Dinner, nor Supper.
Tan tara ran tan tan
Tan tara ran tan tara,
Pickeering Rogues never spare-a;
With Bullets pink
Their Quarters;
Until they stink,
They sink, they sink,
Farewell the Devil's Martyrs.
III.
They yield, they yield; shall we the poor Rogues spare?
Their ill-gotten Goods,
Preserved from the Floods,
That King CHARLES, and we may share?
With Wine then cheer our Bloods,
And, putting off our Hoods,
Drink to His MAJESTY bare,
The King of all Compassion:
On our Knees next fall
To Our Royal Admiral,
A Health for His Preservation,
Dear JAMES the Duke of YORK,
Till our Heels grow light as Cork,
The second Glory of our Nation.
Tantara ran tan tan
Tantara ran tan tara
To the Royal Pair-a,
Let every man
Full of Wine-a
Take off his Can,
Though wan, though wan,
To make his Red Nose shine-a.
The Seamen having ended their Song, the several sorts of Music performed
their Duty, whilst His Majesty passed on toward Cheapside.

At the Stocks the Entertainment was a Body of Military Music, placed on a
Balcony; consisting of six Trumpets, and three Drums: the Fountain there being
after the Thuscan Order, venting Wine, and Water.

In like manner, on the Top of the great Conduit, at the Entrance of
Cheap Side, was another Fountain, out of which issued both Wine, and Water, as
in a Representation of Temperance; and on the several Towers of that Conduit
were eight Figures, habited like Nymphs, with Escutcheons in one Hand, and
Pendents, or Banners in the other: and between each of them Winde-Musick; the
number, eight.

On the Standard also in Cheap Side there was a Band of Waits placed,
consisting of six Persons.

archway THE THIRD ARCH.
THE third Triumphal Arch stands near Wood-street end, not far from the place
where the Cross sometimes stood.

It represents an Artificial Building of two Stories, one after the Corinthian
way of Architecture, the other after the Composite, representing the TEMPLE of
CONCORD; with this Inscription on a Shield, AEDEM

CONCORD was reputed by the Romans in the number of their Goddesses, as we
find in JUVENAL, Cui colitur Pax, atque Fides, Concordia, Virtus; and had
several Temples, upon various occasions, vowed, and dedicated to her. There
arose a dangerous Feud, which continued for some Years, between the Senate, and
People of Rome: whereupon Furius Camillus Anno U.C. cccxxcvi.
, turning himself to the Capitol, desired of the Gods, that he might speak, and
act that, which might tend to the benefit of the Commonwealth, and
reconciliation of the two dissenting Parties; and to that end vowed a Temple to
CONCORD. Wherefore having called the Senate, after a long, and various Debate,
upon certain Conditions, brought the Senate, and People to an Agreement. Which
Temple, according to his Vow, by a Decree of the Senate, was erected, and
dedicated to CONCORD. This is mentioned, though obscurely, in tabulis
Capitolinis; but plainly, by OVID Fastor. Lib. i.
: Nunc been prospicies Latiam CONCORDIA turbam,
Nunc te sacratae constituere manus.
Furius, antiquus populi superator Etrusci,
Voverat, and voti solverat ille fidem.
Caussa, quod a Patribus sumptis secesserat armis
Vulgus, and ipsa suas Roma timebat opes.
Now may thou CONCORD, Rome with kindness see,
Now sacred Hands a Fane erect for thee.
Furius, who conquered the Etrurian, made
A solemn Vow, which solemnly he paid.
Because the People did their Princes beard,
Taking up Arms; and Rome her own Wealth feared.


The like Vow was made by L. Manlius Anno U.C. DXXXV.
, upon a Mutiny of the Army under his Command, and the Year after the Temple
was erected, and dedicated by M. and C. Atilius Regulus, elected for that
purpose. So in the Sedition of Gracchus Anno U.C. DCXXXII.
, who encamped on the Aventine, and refused the Conditions offered him by L.
Opimius Consul, the Consul immediately vowed a Temple to CONCORD; and after his
Victory over those seditions Conspirators, dedicated it in Foro. Which did
highly incense the Communalty, who thought that CONCORD could not be founded on
the Slaughter of their Fellow-Citizens: and some of them adventured to add this
Inscription to the Title of the Temple, VECORDIAE. OPUS. AEDEM. FACIT.
CONCORDIAE.

We find mention of the like Temples in several Inscriptions, collected by
Gruter; as in this, D.N. CONSTANTINO. MAXIMO. PIO. FELICI. AC.

And in another not unlike the former, AEDEM. CONCORDIAE. VETUSTATE. COLLAPSAM

In the Spandrils of the Arch there are two Figures, in Female Habits, leaning:
One representing PEACE, the other TRUTH. That of Peace has her Shield charged
with an Helmet, and Bees issuing forth, and going into it; the Word, PAX BELLO
POTIOR.

TRUTH, on the other side, in a thin Habit, on her Shield TIME, bringing Truth
out of a Cave; the Word, TANDEM EMERSIT.

Over the great Painting upon the Arch of the Cupula is represented a large
GERYON with three Heads crowned; in his three right-Hands, a Lance, a Sword,
and a Scepter; in his three left-Hands the three Escutcheons of England,
Scotland, and Ireland: before him the King's Arms with three Imperial Crowns;
beneath, in great Letters, CONCORDIA INSUPERABILIS. GERYON, Son of Chrysaor,
and Callirrhoe, according to Hesiod, was feigned by the Poets to have three
Heads, and as many Bodies, who was subdued by Hercules. Of whom VIRGIL Aenid.
viii.
, -- nam maximus ultor
Tergemini nece Geryonis spoliisque superbus,
Alcides aderat, taurosque hac victor agebat
Ingentes, vallemque boves amnemque tenebant.
Here the Revenger great Alcides stood,
Proud with the triple Geryon's Spoils, and Blood;
The Conqu'rour drove his Cattle to these Grounds,
Whose Head possessed the Vale, and River's Bounds.
And more largely SILIUS ITALICUS Lib. xiii.
, Qualis Atlantiaco memoratur littore quondam
Monstrum Geryones immane tricorporis irae:
Cui tres in pugna dextrae varia armagerebant;
Vna ignes saevos, ast altera pone sagittas
Fundebat, validam torquebat tertia cornum,
Atque uno diversa dabat tria vulnera nisu.
-- So (famous in a former Age)
That horrid Monster of a Triple rage,
Geryon, fought on the Atlantic Shore:
Whose three Right-Hands three several Weapons bore;
One cruel Flames, behind him the other drew
His Bow, the third his trusty Javelin threw;
And dealt three several ways, at once, a Wound.


The Origination of this Fable, and its Significations, are variously related.
Palaephatus supposed him to have been feigned by the Poets to have three Heads,
because he had his Birth in a City on the Euxine Sea, called (...), that is, of
three Heads. Others, that it related to the three Brothers, who unanimously
governed Spain. And indeed, that Spain, by reason of its Tripartite Division,
was signified by the Hieroglyphick of Geryon, is not only the Opinion of some
Authors, but appears from a Coin of the Emperor Hadrian, the third time
Consul, in which there is a three-headed Image leaning on a Spear; either to
signify his Peragration of Spain, or his Origination from thence. Others have
referred this to the Vices of Speech, Body, and Soul, which Hercules overcame;
which is confirmed from the three Apples ordinarily held in one Hand of
Hercules, still to be seen in a Statue of his in the Farnesie's Palace at Rome,
which, Suidas says, alluded to the same.

On the top of the Cupula CONCORD, a Woman in her Right Hand holding her
Mantle; in her Left Hand a Caduceus; under her Feet a Serpent struggling, which
she seems to tread down. That a Serpent was a Hieroglyphick of Enmity, and War,
(for which cause it is presented trampled under the Feet of CONCORD) appears
from many Writers, Histories, and Medaigles. ARTEMIDORUS Oneirocrit. lib. ii.
cap. xiii.
, A Serpent signifies a Disease, and brings Enmity: according as that hurts any
one in his Dream, so shall his Disease, and Enemy. And ACHMET Oneirocrit. cap.
cclxxiii.
, Serpents generally, according to their proportion, signify Enemies.
NICEPHORUS, Patriarch of Constantinople, (...).
Killing a Serpent, think your Enemy you kill.


So DIODORUS says, that, according to the Egyptians, A Serpent is the Symbol
of Hatred. VIRGIL, describing Alecto, endeavoring to raise a War betwixt
Turnus and Aeneas, feigns her with two Snakes erect upon her Head; -- Flammea
torquens
Lumina, cunctantem, and quaerentem dicere plura
Reppulit, and GEMINOS erexit crinibus ANGUES:
Verberaque insonuit, validoquae haec edidit ore.
Rolling her bloody Eyes, she drives him back,
Laboring Requests, and once again to speak:
Then with two Serpents from her Snaky Hair
She scourging him did thus her Rage declare.
AESCHYLUS, of a Dream of Clytemnestra, (...).
(...)
(...)
(...).
(...).
As she reported, in her Dream she thought,
Forth to the World that she a Serpent brought,
Swathed like a tender Infant wanting meat,
And, pitying, lays the Monster to her Teat.
Milk issued forth commix'd with clotted gore.
From whence Orestes immediately conjectured she was to die by his Hand.

(...),
(...)
(...).
So she, who gave the Monster life, and breath,
Should therefore suffer by a violent Death:
And I, like an enraged Serpent, should
Kill her my self, and her sad Dream unfold.
Plut. in Gracchis.
Which may further be illustrated from several events. TIBERIUS GRACCHUS, in his
Bed, was clasped about by two Serpents. Which Prodigy when the South-sayers
had considered, they counseled, that he should neither kill both, nor let both
escape: and further said, that, if he killed the Male, it would cost his own
life; if the Female, his Wife Cornelia 's. TIBERIUS, bearing affection to his
Wife, and withal thinking it more agreeable, that he, being the elder, should
die first, killed the Male, and let the Female escape: and not long after died.
The same evil consequence we find in the History of C. HOSTILIUS MANCINUS
Obsequens De Predigiis, cap. lxxxiii.
; who, as soon as he had gone aboard a Ship, in order to his Voyage to
Numantia, on a sudden heard a Voice cry, Stay, MANCINUS. Whereupon he returned
back, and, at Genoa, going aboard again, found a Serpent in the Ship, which
escaped from him. He was overthrown, and delivered up to his Enemies. And
VALERIUS MAXIMUS Lib. i. cap. lxxxvii.
says, that in the dissension of M. Fulvius Flaccus about making some Laws, two
black Serpents, sliding into the Cell of Minerva, portended intestine Murders.
Thus we find them generally to portend sad Events, but particularly they were
the Hieroglyphick of War, and Devastation. This appears from that known Story
of Homer, where he tells us, that, while the Grecians were sacrificing at
Aulis, they saw a Dragon devour eight young Sparrows, with the Damm, and makes
the Prophet Calchas Iliad. z
interpret it the duration of the War for nine years.

(...),
(...)
(...),
(...).
For, as this Serpent, which from the Altar sprung,
Devoured the woeful Mother, and her Young,
Which with her tender Issue make up nine:
So many Years the Destinies design
This War shall last, and we the Tenth destroy
The lofty Bulwarks of well-builded Troy.
Where the Dragon signified the War; the number of the Birds, the Continuation
of it. So when Hannibal, in a Dream, saw a Serpent of vast magnitude throwing
down Rocks, Woods, and Towns, and enquired of the Gods the meaning of it, they
returned this Answer Silius Ital. lib. iii.
, BELLA vides optata tibi; te maxima BELLA,
Te strages nemorum, te toto turbida coelo
Tempestas, caedesque virum, magnaeque ruinae
Idaei generis, lachrymosaque fata sequuntur.
Quantus per campos populatis montibus actas
Contorquet sylvas squallenti tergore SERPENS,
Et late humectat terras spumante veneno:
Tantus, perdomitis decurrens Alpibus, atro
Involves BELLO Italiam: tantoque fragore
Eruta convulsis prosternes oppida muris.
-- Thou do see
The War so much desired, and sought by Thee.
Thee greatest Wars attend; the dreadful Fall
Of Woods, and Forests, with high Storms, that all
The Face of Heaven disturb; the Slaughter Thee,
And Death of Men; the great Calamity
Of the Idaean Race, and saddest Fate
Do follow, and upon thee daily wait.
As great, and terrible, as that dire Snake,
Which now the Mountains with his Scaly Back
Depopulates, and drives the Forests through
The Fields before him, and does Earth imbrue
With frothy Poison: Such thou, having past,
And overcome the Alps, with War shall wast
All Italy; and, with a Noise as great,
The Cities, and their Walls, shall ruinate.
Mr. ROSS. Which is evidently seen in some Medaigles of the Roman Emperors, as
in this Reverse of Augustus's.

Goltz. Caes. Aug. page xli.
coin obverse Number. C. CAES OCTAV
CAESAR IMP VII.

coin reverse RECEPTA ASIA



Where two Serpents, that is, the Hostility, and Dissension of the Roman
Empire, divided into two Factions, that of Augustus, and Antony, are separated
by an intervening Victory; that of Augustus at Actium, and Alexandria. That
upon these Victories this Coin was stamped, may be collected from the
Inscription on the other side, CAESAR IMP. VII. that is annus U. C. DCCXXIV. in
which Dio, Lib li.
Year he triumphed for the two Victories beforementioned. The same is to be
seen in a Reverse of M. Antony's.

Goltz. Jul. Caes. page xlviii.
coin obverse Number: M. ANTONII. III VIRI.
M. ANTONIUS IMP. COS DESIG ITERIT^^^

coin reverse III. VIR. R. P. C.



Where a Woman (supposed to be CONCORD, with the Face of Octavia, Sister to
Augustus, and Wife to M. Antony,) in a long Stole, holding in her left Hand a
pure Spear, in her right a Pontifical Vessel, parts two Serpents, signifying
the Armies of Augustus, and Antony. Which Interpretation of this Coin is very
much confirmed from History. For this Pacification, obtained by the Prudence of
Octavia, happened anno U. C. DCCXVI. Agrippa, and Gallus, being Consuls. That
this Coin was stamped after the Year DCCXIV. Vide Pighii Annal. ad cum annum.
(the time of the Peace between Sext. Pompey, C. Caes. Octavianus, and Antony,)
appears from the Inscription on the other side, M. ANTONIUS IMP. COS. DESIG.
ITER. ET. TERT. for Appian De Civil. Bell. Lib. v.
says, that, after that Peace, the Consulships were appointed for the next four
Years. For the first, Antony, and Libo (which Antony had been Consul before
with Julius Caesar;) next, Caesar, and Pompey; after them Ahenobarbus, and
Sossius; last, Caesar, and Antony: (...), then to become the third time Consuls.

On the West Side, the third great Figure, a Woman standing at the Helm of a
Ship; in her left Hand, a Cornu-copiae; the Word, FORTUNAE REDUCI. FORTUNE was
not more various, and unconstant in her Motions, then those, that painted her,
in their Descriptions. The first was Bupalus, who put a Celestial Orb (which
Pierius unhappily changed, by the mistake of one Vowel, into a Foal) on her
Head, and a Cornu-copiae in her left Hand; as we find her in a Reverse of a
Coin of the Emperor Gallienus, with this Inscription, (...) Afterward, some
feigned her either standing upon a Stone, or the top of some Mountain exposed
to the Winds, or upon a Wheel: others, upon the Prow of a Ship, holding a Sail
with both her Hands; which is frequent in Greek Medaigles. PAUSANIAS makes
mention of a Temple of Fortune, in which there was her Statue, holding a young
Plutus, the God of Riches, in her Hand: as we find her in ARISTOPHANES In
Pluto.
, to signify, that she was the Mother, and Nurse of Wealth. Some attributed
Wings to her, as EUSEBIUS mentions. HORACE Lib. iii. Od. 29.
, -- si celeres quatit
Pennas, resigno quae dedit. --
If she her nimble Pinions wave,
I straight resign whatever she gave.


The Scythians, both Wings, and Hands, but no Feet. When APELLES was asked, why
he made Fortune sitting, he answered, Because she never stood. But we shall
only take notice of what is here before us. In the same manner we find her
described in a Stone, insculp'd on both sides, with this Inscription on one,
NUMBER. DOM. AUG. SACRUM. FORTUNAE CONSERVATRICI HORRE S. P. B. D. with the Image
of Fortune, holding in her left Hand a Cornu-copiae, in her right the Helm of a
Ship: and so we find her too in a Reverse of a Coin of TRAJAN the Emperor,
mentioned by OCCO. The like says LACTANTIUS Lib. iii.
, Effingebatur quidem Fortuna cum Cornucopia, and Gubernaculo; tanquam opes
tribuere putaretur, and humanarum rerum regimen obtinere: Fortune was made with
a Cornu-copiae, and the Helm of a Ship, as if she were reputed the Disposer of
Wealth, and had the Government of Humane Affairs. And PLUTARCH De fortuna
Romanorum.
, after various instances on each side, at length concludes, that the Roman
Empire ought more to Fortune, then to Valor, or Prudence: and therefore says,
that, having left the Persians, and Assyrians, she lightly flew over Macedonia,
and presently she shaked off ALEXANDER; then passing through Egypt, and Syria,
often tried the Carthaginians: but when she had once passed the Tyber, and
entered the Palace, she laid aside her Wings, put off her Talaria, and forsook
her unfaithful, and ever-mutable Sphere, as if she intended to stay there for
ever. Indeed the Romans did confess as much; who, having dedicated sundry
Temples to Fortune, with all variety of Honor, in the most eminent places of
the City, never erected one to Virtue, or Valor, till the time of Marcellus,
that took Syracuse; or of Scipio Numantinus, about the Helvicus Chron. page 75.
d.
five hundred sixty and third year after the building of the City. To Prudence
never dedicated to any. Among the rest of Fortune's Titles none more frequent,
then this of REDUX, to whom we read that DOMITIAN the Emperor built a Temple,
mentioned by MARTIAL Lib. vii.
, Hic ubi FORTUNAE REDUCI fulgentia late
Templa nitent. --
Here, where bright Fanes to RETURNED FORTUNE shine.


Temples of the like nature are mentioned too by CLAUDIAN, Aurea FORTUNAE
REDUCI si Templa priores
Ob reditum vovere Ducum, non dignius unquam
Haec Dea pro meritis amplas sibi posceret aedes, etc.
If they to FORTUNE REDUX vowed of old,
Their Chiefs returned with Conquest, Fanes of Gold;
The Goddess never more deserved then now,
That we should stately Temples her allow.


There are also many Medaigles, and those ancient, of several Emperors with
the same Inscription, coin CAESARI AVGVSTO

coin FORT RED CAIS-AVO-S.P.Q.R.



Above there are eight living Figures with Pennons, and Shields, representing
the four Cardinal Virtues, each with an Attendant.

PRUDENCE, on her Shield Bellerophon on a Pegasus, running his Javelin into the
Mouth of a Chimera; the Word, CONSILIO ET VIRTUTE.

Bellerophon was the Son of Glaucus King of Corinth, renowned both for
Prudence, Courage, Beauty, and Modesty. Of whom thus HOMER Iliad. vi.
, (...)
(...)
(...). --
-- Glaucus Bellerophon,
In whom all Good concentered as in one:
And Heaven this Prince a Pers'nage did afford,
Which all admired. --


The Poets feign many Stories of him. They say, he went to Praetus, King of the
Argivi, by whom at first he was kindly entertained. But being afterward falsely
accused by Antea, the Wife of Praetus, for offering to tempt her Chastity, he
sent him to Iobates, King of Lycia, with a Letter written purposely to have him
killed, Iobates, to pleasure Praetus, sent Bellerophon against the Chimaera.
But Minerva, the Goddess of Prudence, and Valor, protected his Innocence.
Wherefore she bridled Pegasus, and delivered it to him. Upon whom being
mounted, he slew the Chimaera with his Javelin. After which Victory he sent him
against the Solymi (a Nation betwixt Lycia, and Pamphylia) and the Amazons.
From whence he returned also Conqueror; Iobates, moved with his Prudence, and
Valor, gave him to Wife his Daughter Philonoe, and afterward dying, left him
Successor in his Kingdom. Of which largely HOMER Ibid.
, (...)
(...)
(...),
(...).
(...).
(...)
(...).
(...).
(...)
(...)
(...).
(...).
(...),
(...).
(...).
First he commands him stern Chimaera kill:
This hideous Monster, of no Mortal Race,
A Dragon's Tail had, and a Lion's Face,
Backed like a shaggy Goat, still belching Flame:
This by Divine Assistance he o're-came.
Next he against renowned Solym fought;
This Victory, he said, was dearly bought.
He last against the Amazons prevailed.
But, when he saw all open Forces failed,
He fell to close contrivance, and did lay
An Ambuscade to kill him in his way;
Not one returned of all, that were employed,
All were by bold Bellerophon destroyed:
But when he knew he was of Heavenly Blood,
His only Daughter he on him bestowed,
Investing straight with half his Regal Power.
The Chimaera is in the same manner described also by HESIOD In Theogonia,
verse. 322.
, (...),
(...).
(...)
(...).
(...)
(...)
(...)
She bore Chimaera belching dreadful Fire,
Mighty, and strong, extremely swift, and dire.
Three Heads the Monster had; a Lion's first,
And next a Goat's, a Serpent's last, and worst.
A Dragon's Tail she had, and Lion's Face,
Backed like a Goat, belching out Flames apace;
Whom Pegasus took, and stout Bellerophon.
VIRGIL Aeneid. vii.
also makes a Chimaera on the Helmet of Turnus, vomiting forth Fire; Cui,
triplici crinita juba, galea alta Chimaeram
Sustinet, Aetnaeos efflantem faucibus ignes.
Tam magis illa fremens, and tristibus effera flammis,
Quam magis effuso crudescunt sanguine pugnae.
On's Crest Chimaera, through a triple Tire
Of bushy Horse-Mains, breathed Aetnaean Fire.
Strangely it roars, and Flame more fiercely glows,
When in the Battle blood in Rivers flows.


From that part of the History, wherein Minerva is said to bridle Pegasus for
Bellerophon, there was built a Temple, and Statue of Minerva called (...)
Fraenatrix; as PAUSANIAS In Corinthiacis.
relates.

That Bellerophon was the Son of Glaucus, King of Corinth, appears from a
Medaigle of the Corinthians yet extant, on the Reverse of which is Bellerophon
mounted on Pegasus, slaying the Chimaera with his Javelin: on the other side
VENUS, with this Inscription (...), because at Corinth VENUS had a most
splendid Temple. There is also a Coin of C. Caesar's, in which Bellerophon
kills the Chimaera, with this Inscription COL. JUL. COR. that is, Corinth the
Colony of Julius Caesar. Because C.J. Caesar restored the City of Corinth,
utterly destroyed before by Mummius, as we find in DIO, and in PAUSANIAS in
the beginning of his Corinthiaca.

coin COL IVL. CO



coin Q. CAECILNI^^^ C. HEIO.PAD II. VIR



What the Ancients did denote by this Triple Form of Chimaera, is doubtful.
NYMPHODORUS the Syracusan says, that Chimaera was a Mountain of Lycia, which
perpetually vomited forth Fire, on the top of which lived Lions, in the middle
(where were spacious pleasant Medows) Goats, at the bottom Dragons. Which
Mountain when Bellephoron had rendered habitable, he was said to have slain
Chimaera. But Antigonus Carystius says, it signified only the People of three
several Nations conquered by Bellerophon.

JUSTICE, on her Shield a Woman holding a Sword in one Hand, a Balance in the
other; the Word, QUOD DEXTERA LIBRAT. Though this Description of JUSTICE, with
a Balance in one Hand, has been by late Writers accounted modern, yet it
appears from Occo to have been ancient, who thus found her represented in the
Reverse of a Coin of Trajan the Emperor, with a Caduceus in the other Hand: if
he mistook her not for Moneta Aug. constantly so described; as may be seen in
the Coyns of Antoninus, and other Emperors.

coin IMP. C.M.AN. FLORIANVS. P. F. AVG.



coin MONETA AV G.



TEMPERANCE, a Viol in her left Hand, a Bridle in her right; the Word, FAR
LUPATA DOCET.

FORTITUDE, a Lion having the Arms of England, in an Escutcheon; the Word,
CUSTOS FIDISSIMUS.

The internal Part of this Triumph, or Temple, is Round, the upper part Dark,
only enlightened by Artificial Lights; the lower part divided into ten Parts
by Pilasters with Pedestals.

Within the Temple are twelve living Figures, three placed above the Rest.

The First the Goddess of the Temple in rich Habit, with a Caduceus in her
Hand, and a Serpent at her Feet. Behind the Goddess, a Man in a Purple Gown,
like a Citizen of London, presenting the KING with an Oaken Garland. Over the
KING'S Head, PATER PATRIAE.

Over the Citizen's, S. P. Q. L. OB CIVES SERVATOS.

There were several sorts of Crowns in use among the Romans, according to the
variety of the Deserts of those, who were rewarded with them; Obsidionales,
Murales, Castrenses, Navales, Rostratae, Civicae.

The Obsidionalis was given to him, who had raised a Siege; which was made of
the Grass, that grew in the place besieged: and this was accounted more Plin.
Lib. xvi. cap. iv.
honorable then any of the rest. The first among the Romans, that was rewarded
with this sort of Crown, was Q. Cincinnatus; after him P. Decius, and L.
Sicinius Dentatus, Calpurnius Flamma, and others.

The Mural Crown was the reward of him that first scaled the Walls, and entered
the place assaulted; mentioned by SILIUS ITALICUS Lib. xii.
, Fulvius ut finem spoliandis aedibus, aere
Belligero revocante, dedit; sublimis ab alto
Suggestu (magnis author non futilis ausis)
Lavino generate, inquit, quem Sospita Juno
Dat nobis, Milo, Gradivi cape victor honorem,
Tempora Murali cinctus turrita corona.
But when, from Plunder of the Town, again
The General, by the Trumpet's sound, his Men
Had called (a Noble Cherisher of great
Attempts) to Milo, from his lofty Seat,
He thus began; Lanuvian Youth, whom we
From Juno Sospita receive, from me
This Martial Honor for thy Victory
Accept, and 'bout thy Tower'd Temples try
This Mural Crown. --
Mr. Ross.

And in another place Lib. xv.
, -- phaleris hic pectora fulget,
Hic torque aurato circumdat bellica colla;
Ille nitet celsus Muralis honor coronae.
-- here shining stood
One with rich Trappings on his Breast, and there
Another on his Warlick Neck did wear
A Golden Chain: this with a Mural Crown
Was honored, --


The Castrensis belonged to him, that first entered the Tents of the Enemy:
which, in the Infancy of the Roman Empire, was made of Leaves. With such an one
Romulus rewarded Host^us Hostilius, Grandfather to Tul^us Hostilius, King of
Rome: afterward of Gold. This, without question, is the same with that, which
otherwise is called Vallaris.

The Corona Navalis, or Rostrata, (for they seem not to be different, however
Lipsius distinguishes them) was the reward of him, that first boarded the
Enemie's Ship, and took it: with this sort of Crown POMPEY the Great honored
M. Varro; and AUGUSTUS Agrippa. The Form of it is still preserved in the Coyns
of Agrippa, Goltz. August. xxix.
coin CA

This is it, which VIRGIL Aen. viii.
mentions, Tempora Navali fulgent rostrata corona,
His Brows, decked with a Naval Garland, shone.


But that, which gave us occasion to mention these, is the Corona Civica, given
to him, that in single Combat had rescued a Citizen, and slain the Enemy on the
place: and this was made of Oak. LU^^N Lib. i.
, -- Emeritique gerens insignia doni
Servati civis referentem praemia quercum.
-- Crowned with an Oaken Wreath,
Rewards for such, a Roman saved from Death.
CLAUDIAN Lib. iii. Stilich.
, Mos erat in veterum castris, ut tempora quercus
Velaret, validis fuso qui viribus host
Casurum potuit morti subducere civem.
'Twas the ancient Guise in Camps, an Oaken Bough
Should wreath his Temples, who had slain a Fo,
And off a Citizen in danger brought.
And in another place De land Serenae.
, Hunc cingit Muralis honos, hunc Civica quercus
Nexuit, hunc domitis ambit Rostrata carinis.
This Mural Honor crowns, that Civick Boughs,
This wreaths his Head with conquered Galleys Prows.


These were ordinarily prefixed the Entrance of the Emperor's Palaces, as
being populi Servatores. OVID Fast. Lib. i.
, Ante fores stabis, mediamque tuebere quercum,
Protegat and nostras querna corona fores.
Thou shall protect the middle Oak before
The Gates; let Oaken Garlands save our Door.
In another place, En domus haec, dixi, Jovis est; quod ut esse probarem,
Augurium menti querna corona dabat.
Behold, said I, this is Jove's House; I know
By th'Oaken Wreath, that needs it must be so.
Which seems to be derived from JULIUS CAESAR: of whose Statues thus APPIAN,
speaking of the Honors decreed to him; There were several Figures inscribed on
his Effigies: on some a Crown of Oak, as dedicated to the Savior of his
Country. And DIO of Augustus; When he denied the Monarchy, and discoursed of
dividing the Provinces, it was decreed, that Laurels should be set up before
his Palace, and a Crown of Oak hung over them, to signify, that he was
constantly overthrowing his Enemies, and saving his Fellow-Citizens. The memory
of which Honor conferred on him is preserved in several of his Coyns: in one
there is a Crown of Oak betwixt two Branches of Laurel.

coin CAESAR OB CIVIS SER AUGUSTUS



In another the same Crown betwixt two CAPRICORNS (he was born under that Sign)
with a Globe, and the Helm of a Ship.

coin DIVO AVGVSTO S. P. Q. R. OB CIVIS SER



In one this Inscription, within the Crown of Oak, SALUS HUMANI GENERIS: to
which PLINY Not. Hist. lib. xvi. cap. xii.
, without question, alluded in those words, Dedit AUGUSTUS Rostratam coronam
AGRIPPAE, sed CIVICAM a genere humano recepit ipse.

There are several reasons propounded by PLUTARCH, and others after him, why
this Crown should be made of this material; but none so probable as this,
because the Oak was sacred to JUPITER and JUNO Conservatoribus, (...), and
(...).

The Habit of VENUS it is something difficult in particular to deliver; the
ancient Artists having been more willing to form her naked, as appears from the
Statues of her still remaining in Rome, and from this Poem of ANACREON upon
VENUS engraved on a Basin, (...);
(...), etc.
What bold Hand the Sea engraves,
Whilst its undermined Waves
In a Dishe's narrow round
Art's more powerful Rage does bound?
See by some Promethean mind
Cytherea there designed,
Mother of the Deities,
Exposed naked to our Eyes
In all parts, save those alone,
Modesty will not have shown,
Which for Covering only have
The thin Mantle of a Wave:
On the Surface of the Main,
Which a smiling Calm lays plain,
She, like frothy Sedges, swims,
And displays her Snowy Limbs, etc.
Mr. STANLEY.

Yet, because there is something of it particular to her, we shall give some
account of it from CLAVDIAN, who thus describes her Dress, when she was going
to the Wedding of HONORIVS the Emperor: -- natum gremio Cytherea removit:
Et crines festina ligat, peplumque fluentem
Allevat, and blando spirantem numine ceston
Cingitur, impulsos pluviis quo mitigat amnes,
Quo mare, quo ventos, irataque fulmina solvit.
Venus the Boy lays from her Breast;
Binds up her Hair, and tucks her flowing Vest;
Girds on her Cestus breathing powerful love,
Which calms swollen Rivers by a Deluge drove,
The raging Seas, rough Winds, and thundering Jove.
What this Cestos is, may best be known from HOMER iliad. (...).
, who is the first, that mentioned it: (...),
(...)
(...),
(...).
This saying, off she takes her curious Cest,
Where all Allurements were of Love expressed,
Dalliance, Desire, Courtship, and Flatt'ries, which
The wisest with their Sorceries bewitch.


The Roses, and Dolphin, in the Hands of CUPID, signify his Dominion on Land,
and Sea: of which there is extant an Epigram of PALLADAS, (...).
(...).
The Dolphin he, nor Roses holds in vain:
In this Hand Earth, in that he holds the Main.


ANACREON, (...),
(...), etc.
Roses, of all Flowers the King;
Roses, the fresh Pride o'th Spring,
Joy of every Deity;
Love, when with the Graces he
For the Ball himself disposes,
Crowns his Golden Hair with Roses.
Of the Dolphin largely OPPIAN, (...),
(...),
(...)
(...)
(...),
(...).
(...)
(...)
(...)
(...), etc.
The Dolphin rules the Scaly Flocks, endowed
With Strength, and Swiftness; of his Beauty proud:
He, like a Lance discharged, through Billows flies,
And dazzling Flames darts from his glaring Eyes,
Finding out Fish, that frighted sculk in Holes,
Or Caves, and bed themselves in Sand like Moles.
As Eagles monarch it amongst fearful Birds;
As Lions Tyrants act amongst subject Herds;
As much as cruel Serpents Worms excel:
So Dolphins Princes in the Ocean dwell.
No Fish dares them approach, nor be so bold
His Eyes, and dreadful Visage to behold.
Far from the Tyrant, fearing sudden Death,
Frighted they fly; fainting for want of Breath.
But when the Dolphin, hungry, hunts out Food,
The Silver Fry in Troops amazed scud,
Filling each way with fear: then Caves, and Holes,
Rocks, Bays, and Harbors fill with frighted Shoals.
From all parts driven he selects the best,
Choosing from Thousands out a plenteous Feast.


Of the nine lesser Figures; the first bears, on a Shield, the King of Bees
flying alone; a Swarm following at some distance: the Word, REGE INCOLUMI MEN'S
OMNIBUS UNA.

The Second, on his Shield, a Testudo advancing against a Wall; the Word,
CONCORDIAE CEDUNT.

"The Third, a Shield charged with Hearts; the Word, HIC MURUS AHENEUS ESTO.

The Fourth, like a Spread-Eagle with two Heads, one of an Eagle, the other of
an Estrich; in the Mouth of the Estrich an Horse-shoe, in the Talon of the
Eagle a Thunderbolt; the Word, PRAESIDIA MAJESTATIS.

The Fifth, a Bundle of Javelins; the Word, UNITAS.

The Sixth, two Hands joined athwart the Escutcheon, as from the Clouds,
holding a Caduceus with a Crown; the Word, FIDE ET CONSILIO.

The Seventh, Arms laid down, Guns, Pikes, Ensigns, Swords; the Word,
CONDUNTUR, NON CONTUNDUNTUR.

The Eighth, a Caduceus, with a Winged Hat above, and Wings beneath, two
Cornu-copiaes coming out at the middle, supported by a Garland; the Word,
VIRTUTI FORTUNA COMES.

The Ninth, a Bright Star striking a gleam through the midst of the Escutcheon;
the Word, MONSTRANT REGIBUS ASTRA VIAM.

With these Figures is intermingled a Band of twenty four Violins.

The Bases, and Capitals within this Triumph, are as Brass, and the Pillars
Steel.

The Triumph thus adorned, and the several Music playing, all passed through,
till such time as His Majesty came to the middle of the Temple, at which time
the three principal living Figures, viz. CONCORD, LOVE, and TRUTH, who till
then had not been seen, were, by the drawing of a Curtain, discovered, and
entertained His Majesty with the following Song.

I.
Comes not here the King of Peace,
Who, the Stars so long foretold,
From all Woes should us release,
Converting Iron-times to Gold?
II.
Behold, behold!
Our Prince confirmed by Heavenly Signs,
Brings healing Balm,
Brings healing Balm, and Anodynes,
To close our Wounds, and Pain assuage.
III.
He comes with conquering Bays, and Palm,
Where swelling Billows used to rage,
Gliding on a silver Calm;
Proud Interests now no more engage.
Chorus,
Let these arched Roofs resound,
Joining Instruments, and Voice,
Fright pale Spirits under Ground;
But let Heaven and Earth rejoice,
We our Happiness have found.
He, thus marching to be Crowned,
Attended with thus Glorious Train,
From civil Broils
Shall free these Isles,
Whilst He, and His Posterity shall reign,
I.
Who follow Trade, or study Arts,
Improving Pasture, or the Plow,
Or furrow Waves to Foreign Parts,
Use your whole Endeavors now.
II.
His Brow, His Brow
Bids your Hearts, as well as Hands,
Together join,
Together joining bless these Lands;
Peace, and Concord, never poor,
Will make with Wealth these Streets to shine,
Ships freight with Spice, and Golden Ore,
Your Fields with Honey, Milk, and Wine,
To supply our Neighbors Store.
The first Song ended, CONCORD addressed her self to His Majesty, in these
words, Welcome, great Sir, to CONCORD'S Fane;
Which Your Return built up again;
You have her Fabric reared so high,
That the proud Turrets kiss the Sky.
Tumult by You, and Civil War
In Janus Gates imprisoned are.
By You, the King of Truth, and Peace;
May all Divisions ever cease!
Your Sacred Brow the blushing Rose,
And Virgin Lily twined enclose!
The Caledonian Thistle-Down
Combine with these t'adorn Your Crown!
No Discord in the Hibernian Harp!
Naught in our Duty flat, or sharp!
But all conspire, that You, as Best,
May 'bove all other Kings be Blessed.


The Speech ended, His Majesty, at His going off, was entertained with the
following Song, With all our Wishes, Sir, go on,
Our CHARLES, three Nations Glory;
That Worlds of Eyes may look upon,
Behind, Sir, and before Ye;
Go great Exemplar of our British Story,
Paternal Crowns assume,
That then Your Royal Name
May, registered by Fame,
Smell like a sweet Perfume:
Not writ in Marble, Brass, or Gold,
Nor sparkling Gems,
Such as shine in Diadems,
But where all Nations may behold
With brighter Characters enrolled,
On the Azure Vellum of configur'd Stars;
Who fixed, with gentle Smiles,
Two fluctuating Isles,
And built well-grounded Peace on Civil Wars.


On the little Conduit, at the lower End of Cheap Side, were placed four
Figures, or Nymphs, each of them having an Escutcheon in the one Hand, and a
Pendent in the other.

In a Balcony, erected at the Entrance of Paternoster Row, were placed His
Majesty's Drums, and Fife; the number of Persons, eight.

Between that and Ludgate there were two other Balconies erected: in one was
placed a Band of six Waits; in the other, six Drums.

On the Top of Ludgate six Trumpets.

At Fleet-Bridge, a Band of six Waits.

On Fleet-Conduit were six Figures, or Nymphs, clad in White, each with an
Escutcheon in one Hand, and a Pendent in the other; as also a Band of six
Waits. And on the Lanthorn of the Conduit was the Figure of Temperance, mixing
Water and Wine.

archway UBERITATI AU EXTINCTO BELLI CIVIL D^CENDID CLUSOQ. IA^^ (...)

THE FOURTH ARCH.
IN Fleet Street, near White-Friers, stands the fourth Triumphal Arch,
representing the Garden of PLENTY; it is of two Stories, one of the Dorick
Order, the other of the Ionick. The Capitals have not their just Measure, but
incline to the Modern Architecture.

Upon the great Shield over the Arch, in large Capitals, this Inscription,
UBERITATI To Vberity, or Plenty, there are frequent Dedications amongst the
Reverses of the Coyns of the Roman Emperors; as of AUGUSTUS, and GALIENUS,
coin IMP. C.C. VID. TRED. G^LLVS. ^VG.

coin UDERITAS AUG



She is represented in a long Stole, or Mantle, the proper Habit of Women,
holding in one Hand a Patera, or little Cup; in the other a Cornucopia. The
latter is well known to be the Emblem of Plenty. Its original related by OVID
Metam. lib. ix. Fab. i.
: which, though unknown to few, the elegancy of the Relation will not give me
leave to omit.

-- rigidum fera dextera cornu
Dum tenet, infregit; truncaque a front revellit.
Naiades hoc pomis, and odoro flore repletum
Sacrarunt: divesque meo bona copia cornu est.
-- my Brow he disadorns,
By breaking one of my engaged Horns.
The Naiades with Fruits, and Flowers this fill,
Wherein abundant Plenty riots still.
The Patera, or little Cup, which she holds in the other Hand, is frequent in
other Figures of Reverses; as coin M. ANTON. M.F.M. N.AVG. IMP. TER.



What is meant by EXTINCTO BELLI CIVILIS INCENDIO, the extinction of the Flames
of Civil War, is fortunately known to us all, and may serve to explicate what
follows, CLUSOQUE JANI TEMPLO, the shutting of Janus 's Temple: a Rite
instituted by NUMA, according to LIVY: Numa Regno potitus Vrbem novam, conditam
vi and armis, Jure eam Legibusque ac Moribus de integro condere parat: quibus
cum inter bella assuescere videret non posse (quippe efferatis militia animis)
mitigandum ferocem populum armorum desuetudine ratus, Janum ad infimum
Argiletum, indicem Pacis Bellique fecis: APERTUS, ut in armis esse civitatem;
CLAUSUS, pacatos circa omnes populos significaret. NUMA, being possessed of the
Kingdom, applied himself to reform the new City, which was built by Force, and
Arms, and to build it anew by Rites, Laws, and Institutions: with which
perceiving, that in the midst of War it was not possible to be effected, by
reason that their minds were made rough and fierce by Arms; he conceiving that
the fierce People might by their disaccustomance be made mild, he built a
Temple to Janus at the bottom of Argiletus, the signifier of Peace, and War:
which being OPENED, showed that the City was in Arms; SHUT, that they were in
peace with all Nations. This VARRO De ling. Lat. lib. iv.
confirms, The Janual Gate is so called from Janus: and therefore an Image of
Janus is placed there and a Rite instituted by* NUMA POMPILIUS ( as LUCIUS PISO
in his Annals relates) that it should be always SHUT but in the time of War. We
find no where, that it was OPENED in the time of POMPILIUS. PLUTARCH, in the
Life of NUMA, There is at Rome a Temple also of JANUS, with a two-leav'd Gate,
which they call Polemopyle, the Gate of War. For it was decreed, that in the
time of War that Temple should be OPEN; in Peace, SHUT. But VIRGIL Aeneid. vii.
derives this Institution higher, Mos erat Hesperio in Latio, quem protinus
urbes
Albanae coluere sacrum, nunc maxima rerum
Roma colit, cum prima movent in praelia Martem;
Sive Getis infer manu lachrymabile Bellum,
Hyrcanisve Arabisve parant, seu tendere ad Indos
Auroramque sequi, Parthosque reposcere signa.
Sunt geminae BELLI PORTAE (sic nomine dicunt)
Relligione sacrae, and saevi formidine Martis.
Centum aerei claudunt vectes, aeternaque ferri
Robora, nec custos absistit limine Janus.
Has (ubi certa sedet Patribus sententia pugnae)
Ipse, Quirinali trabea, cinctuque Gabino
Insignis, RESERAT stridentia LIMINA Consul:
Ipse vocat pugnas, sequitur tum caetera pubes,
Aereaque assensu conspirant cornua rauco.
There was an ancient use in Latium,
Which Alban Towns held sacred, and now Rome,
Greatest in power, observes; when they prepare
Against Arabs, Getes, or fierce Hyrcanians War,
Or march to India, or the Eastern Main,
Or Ensigns from the Parthians to regain.
Two Gates there be, are styled the PORTS OF WAR,
Sacred to Mars with reverential fear,
Shut with an hundred Iron, and Brazen Bands,
There in the Porch bifronted Janus stands.
Here, when the Senate have a War decreed,
The Consul, glorious in his Regal Weed,
And Gabine Robe, does groaning Gates unbar,
In his own Person then proclaims the War.
The valiant Youth, attending, guard him round,
And doleful Trumpets Diapasons sound.


This Temple was shut several times. First in the Reign of NUMA POMPILIUS, as
PLUTARCH In Vita Numae.
testifies. Next, after the second PUNICK War, by T. MANLIUS Consul, says LIVY
Lib. i.
. Thrice by AUGUSTUS: once after the Victory at Actium, about the time of the
Nativity of our SAVIOR; and then most justly, when there was an UNIVERSAL
PEACE over the whole World.

Of which last there is a Monument extant at this day in Spain: IMP. CAES. DIVI
F. AUGUSTUS PONT. MAX. And at this time it may properly be said to be shut at
the fortunate arrival of our Sacred Sovereign into His Kingdoms, at what time
there was a GENERAL PEACE throughout all Christendom.

There is also a Coin of AUGUSTUS, whose Reverse is the Temple of JANUS shut;
the Inscription, JAN. CLU. not to mention that of NERO, PACE TERRA MARIQUE
PARTA JANUM CLUSIT. Goltz. August. page lviii. Augustine. Dial. v.


coin obverse LAN CLV



coin reverse PACE PR TERRA MARIO PARTA IANVM^VS^T



Over the Postern, on the South Side of the Entrance is BACCHUS, a Youth in a
Chariot drawn by Tigres; the Reins, Vine-Branches; his Mantle, a Panther's
Skin, his Crown, of Grapes, and Ivy; a Thyrsus in his left Hand, a Cup in his
right: underneath, LIBER PATER. The Painting over this represents SILENUS on
his Ass, Satyrs dancing round about, in Drunken and Antic Postures: the
Prospect, a Vineyard. The Statues of BACCHUS were of a very different form
among the Ancients. MACROBIUS Saturnal. lib. 1. cap. xviii.
, Liberis Patris simulacra partim puerili aetate, partim juvenili fingebantur;
praeterea barbata specie, senili quoque, etc. The Images of BACCHUS were partly
like Boys, others like Youths, some with Beards, some like Old men. ULPIAN
Schol. in Midiam Demosth.
, Chorus's of all Ages contended in the Feasts of BACCHUS, because they framed
him of every Shape; for they paint him a Boy, an Old, and a Young man. Of which
MACROBIUS gives this Physical Reason, esteeming BACCHUS to be the same with the
SUN; Because the Sun in the Winter Solstice may seem a Boy, the days being then
the shortest; but, by continual increases in the Spring Aequinox, may seem a
Youth; in the Summer Solstice, at his full age; afterward in his diminution,
an Old man. In the form of an Old man we find him worshipped by the Graecians,
under the Name of Bassareus, and Bryseus; and at Naples under the Name of
Hebon: MACROBIUS in the same place. Of Hebon there is still remaining this
Monument, (...).

So PAUSANIAS In Eliacis.
tells us of a Bearded Statue of Bacchus holding a Golden Cup in his Hand. But
most frequently he is represented in the form of a Boy, or Youth. TIBULLUS Lib.
iii.
, Solis aeterna est Phaebo Bacchoque juventus:
Nam decet intonsus crinis utrumque Deum.
Phoebus, and Bacchus must be ever young:
For uncut Hair to either God belong.
OVID Metam. lib. iv. Fab. i.
of Bacchus, -- Tibi enim inconsumpta juventa,
Tu puer aeternus, tu formosissimus alto
Conspiceris coelo. --
-- still do thou enjoy
Unwasted Youth, eternally a Boy.


The Poets feign him riding in a Chariot drawn either by Tigres, Leopards, or
Lynces. STATIUS Lib. iv.
, Liber pampineos materna ad moenia currus
Promovet, effrenae dextra laevaque sequuntur
Lynces, and uda mero lambunt retinacula tigres.
Thence to his Mother's City Bacchus rides,
Rein'd Lynxes by his Viny Chariot sides,
And Tigres licked the Harness moist with Wine.
HORACE, Lib. iii. Od. iv.
Hac te merentem, Bacche pater, tuae
Vexere tigres, indocili jugum
Collo trahentes. --
Blessed Bacchus thee thy Tigres drew,
Who Yoaks and Harness little knew.
OVID Metam. lib. iv. Fab. i.
, -- tu bijugum pictis insignia fraenis
Colla premis lyncum. --
-- thou hold'st in aw
The spotted Lynxes, which thy Chariot draw.


These not only drew his Chariot, but were his constant Companions; as we
find in the Ship of Bacchus, (taken from the Mariners, whom he had turned into
Dolphins) described by OVID Metam. lib. iii.
, Quem circa tigres, simulacraque inania lyncum,
Pictarumque jacent fera corpora pantherarum.
Stern Tigres, Lynxes (such unto the eye)
And spotted Panthers round about him lie.


His Ship is lively set forth by Philostratus In Imag.
; which, or the like, is still to be seen in the Church of St. Agnes at Rome,
formerly a Temple of Bacchus's, in most exquisite Mosaic Work.

He was constantly crowned either with Grapes, Ivy, or both. OVID Metam. lib.
iii.
, Ipse racemiferis frontem circumdatus uvis
Pampineis agitat velatam frondibus hastam,
He, head-bound with a Wreath of clustred Vines,
A Javelin shook, clasped with their leavy twines.
Non crines, non serta loco, dextramque reliquit
Thyrsus, and intactae ceciderunt cornibus uvae.
His Hair disordered now no Wreath adorns,
His Thyrsus fell, plump Grapes drop from his Horns.
HORACE Lib. ii. Od. xix.
, -- Deum
Cingentem viridi tempora pampino.
-- a virdant Vine
The God about his temples did entwine.
TIBULLUS, Candide Liber ades, sic sit tibi mystica vitis,
Sic hedera semper tempora vincta feras.
Bacchus assist, so may the sacred Vine,
So may fresh Ivy still thy Brows entwine.


So in Achaia, at the Feasts of Bacchus Pausanias n^ Achaicis.
, the Children having washed themselves in the River Meilichus, they put on
Crowns of Ivy, and so go to the Temple of Bacchus Aesymnetes.

Hence M. Antony Dio lib. xlviii.
, having assumed the Title of (...), New Bacchus, caused the Coyns, stamped
with his Image, to bear a Crown of Ivy.

Goltz. Jul. Caes. page xlviii.
coin obverse Number: M. ANTONII. III VIRI.
M ANTONIUS IMP. COS DESIG. IIE RETI^^^

coin reverse Number: M. ANTONII. III VIRI.
III VIR R P C.



And the Ancients used this, as an Argument, to prove that Bacchus of the
Grecians, and Romans, was the same with Osiris of the Egyptians, because Ivy,
which was sacred to Bacchus, was in Egypt called (...), that is, The Plant of
Osiris.

Why Bacchus, and those that drank, did wear a Crown of Ivy, Athenaeus gives
this Reason amongst the rest, because there is great plenty of it, and it grows
of it self, and is everywhere to be had, being not undelightful for sight,
shading the Forehead with its green Leaves, and Berries, and of a body fit for
binding, besides that, cooling without any Carotique smell offensive to the
Head. The Wine-Bowls also were ordinarily adorned in the same manner. VIRGIL,
-- pocula ponam
Fagina, coelatum divini opus Alcimedontis:
Lenta quibus torno facili superaddita vitis
Diffusos hedera vestit pallen^e corymbos.
-- two Beechen Cups I Will stake,
Which the divine Alcimedon did make:
Whereon with a smooth turn soft Vines he shapes,
And with pale Ivy clothes the spreading Grapes.
ANACREON, (...),
(...), etc.
(...),
(...).
Vulcan come, thy Hammer take,
And of burnished Silver make
(Not a glittering Armor, for
What have we to do with War?
But) a large deep Bowl, and on it
I would have thee carve no Planet,
Pleiades, Wains, nor Waggoners;
But to life exactly shape
Clusters of the Juicy Grape;
Whilst brisk Love their bleeding Heads
Hand in hand with Bacchus treads.


We find him clothed with the Skin of a Tigre (though that not the only one
Garment he used) in CLAUDIAN De raptu Proscrp. lib. i.
: -- Lenisque simul procedit Iacchus,
Crinali florens hedera, quem Parthica velat
Tigris, and auratos in nodum colligit ungues.
-- So Bacchus marched with Ivy crowned,
Clad in a Parthian Tigre's spotted Hide,
And Golden Claws in neat composure tied.


A Thyrsus is a Spear adorned with Ivy at the upper end, which Bacchus, and his
Attendants, made use of to sustain them in their drink. Claudian De raptu
Proserp. lib. i.
, of Bacchus, Ebria Maeoniis fulcit vestigia Thyrsis.
His Lydian Thyrse supports his reeling Limbs.


Pausanias In Arcadicis.
, The Statue (of Jupiter) is like unto Bacchus; for it has Buskins instead of
Shoes, and it holds in one hand a Cup, in the other a Thyrsus. This Thyrsus,
with a Cornu-copiae, is the Hieroglyphick of Mirth in a Coin of Faustina's; the
Inscription HILARITAS. In one hand she holds a Cornu-copiae, in the other a
Thyrsus, on a Spear, covered from one end to the other with Leaves, and
Coronets.

Silenus, and the Satyrs, were the constant deboist Companions of Bacchus. Of
whom Pausanias In Atticis.
relates a Story told him by Euphemus a Carian, that, in a Voyage to Italy, by
cross Winds, their Ship was forced beyond the Streights into the Atlantic
Ocean, and was driven by the Tempest upon the Islands, called, by the Mariners,
The Islands of Satyrs. Whose Inhabitants were of a yellowish color, and had
Tails not inferior to those of Horses. Who, as soon as they saw the Ship
arrived, presently entered, and laid hold of the Women: so that the Mariners
were forced, out of fear, to land them a Woman, whom the Satyrs used not only
according to Nature, but abused all parts of her body: Nor were the young
Satyrs more devoted to Venus, then old Silenus to his Patron Bacchus. VIRGIL
Eclog. vi.
, -- Chromis and Mnasylus in antro
Silenum pueri somno videre jacentem,
Inflatum hesterno venas, ut semper, Iaccho;
Serta procul tantum capiti delapsa jacebant,
Et gravis attrita pendebat cantharus ansa.
Say Muse, how Chromis and Mnasylus found
In's Cave Silenus sleeping on the ground,
Of The last nights Bacchus swelled (his usual guise)
Far from his Head his fallen off Garland lies.
So OVID Metam. lib. iv. Fab. i.
, -- Bacchae, Satyrique sequuntur,
Quique senex ferula titubantes ebrius artus
Sustinet, and pando non fortiter haeret asello.
Light Bacchides, and skipping Satyrs follow,
Whilst old Silenus, reeling still, does hallow,
Who weakly hangs upon his tardy Ass.
Whence the Eleans Pausanias.
, in their Temple of Silenus, make Drunkenness delivering a Cup of Wine to him.

He was conceived to be the Fosterer, and Educator of Bacchus; from whence
AURELIUS NEMESIANUS Eclog. iii.
describes him with Bacchus in his Arms, Cui Deus arridens horrendas pectore
setas
Vellicat, aut digitis aures adstringit acutas,
Applauditve manu mutilum caput, aut breve mentum,
Et simas tenero collidit pollice nares.
Smiling on him the God his bristly Hairs
Plucks from his Breast, or nips his pricked Ears,
His low Brow claps, and short'ned Chin, and grows
Familiar, tweaking of his Saddle Nose.


And thus we find Silenus in an ancient Statue at Rome Antiq. Romans
. The Satyrs were painted with Goats Horns, and Feet, to signify the
insatiableness of their Lust. FULGENTIUS Mythol. lib. iii.
; Satyri cum caprinis cornibus depinguntur, quia nunquam novere saturari
libidine; The Satyrs are painted with Goats Horns, because their Lust is
unsatiable. HORACE, Carm. lib. ii. Od. xix.
, -- aures
Capripedum Satyrorum acutas.
The Goat-foot Satyrs pricked Ears.


On the North-side opposite, CERES, drawn in a Chariot by winged Dragons, and
crowned with Ears of Corn: in her left Hand, Poppy; in her right, a blazing
Torch. The Painting over her is a Description of Harvest; with CERES AUG. That
the Chariot of CERES was feigned to be drawn by Dragons, appears from several
places in the Poets. CLAUDIAN De raptu Proserp. lib. i.
, -- sinuosa Draconum
Membra regens, volucri qui pervia nubila tractu
Signant, and placidis humectant fraena venenis.
Frontem crista tegit, pingunt maculosa virentes
Terga notae, rutilum squamis intermicat aurum.
-- she sinewy Dragons guides,
Who at high speed cut yielding Clouds in twain,
Their Snaffles frothing with delightful bane,
Crested their Fronts, Backs marked with freckling green,
Their Scales, when brissell'd up, Gold shines between.
And immediately after, -- fulvis SERPENTIBUS attigit Iden.
With yellow SERPENTS drawn she Ida reached.
OVID Fast. lib. iv.
, Dixit, and egrediens nubem trahit, inque DRACONES
Transit, and alifero tollitur axe Ceres.
Then going forth, a Cloud she draws, through Skies,
With Dragons drawn, her swift-wheel'd Chariot flies.
And a little before, of the same Goddess, Quo simul ac venit fraenatos
curribus ANGUES
Junxit, and aequoreas sicca pererrat aquas.
Her harnessed Serpents in her Chariot puts,
And dry her way through swelling Billows cuts.


Where we see promiscuously used angues, and dracones. So the Rod of Mercury,
which is perpetually represented with Serpents about it, by Martial is
encompassed by a Dragon: Cyllenes caelique decus, facunde minister,
Aurea cui torto virga DRACONE nitet.
Heaven and Cyllenes Joy; Speaker divine,
A Golden Dragon on thy Wand does shine.
And CLAUDIAN De Bello Getico.
speaking of the Golden Fleece kept by a Dragon, -- insopitisque refusum
Tractibus aurati custodem velleris ANGUEM.
The watchful Dragon kept the Golden Fleece.


The memory of Ceres her Chariot drawn by Serpents is preserved likewise in
several old Marbles, and this Medaigle, coin C. VIBIVS. C.F.C.N



The reason why Poppy should be attributed to Ceres, and from thence be called
by VIRGIL Georg. i.
Cereale papaver, is variously rendered by SERVIUS: Vel quod est esui sicut
frumentum: vel quo Ceres usa est ad oblivionem doloris; nam, ob raptum
Prosperpinae vigiliis fracta, gustato eo acta est in soporem: vel quia pani
adspergatur. Either because it is fit to eat, as Corn: or because Ceres used it
to procure a forgetfulness of her grief; for, being wearied with continual
watchings in pursuit of her Daughter Proserpina stolen from her, upon tasting of
it, she fell asleep: or else because it is sprinkled upon Bread. But the
Mythologists, who esteem Ceres to be the same with the Earth, make it only a
Cornutus de Diis.
Symbol of the Fecundity of it; or, from its orbicular Figure, to signify the
rotundity of the Earth; from its inequality, the Valleys, and Mountains; from
the multiplicity of its Grains, the vast multitude of Men, and Animals. For
which reason the fertile Country of Sicily was sacred to her, which she
contended for with Vulcan; and, in token of the Victory, the Sicilians
dedicated her Statue with a little Image of Victory on her Hand. Which Statue
CICERO Contra Verrem.
makes mentioned by several of the Poets; as by CALLIMACHUS, -- (...)
(...). --
Poppies she took, and Garlands in her Hand.
THEOCRITUS, -- (...)
(...)
In either Hand she Corn, and Poppies had.


Porphyry, quoted by Eusebius De Prepar. lib. iii.
, says, that Ceres was crowned with Ears of Corn, about which were several
Branches of Poppy, which were the Symbols of Fertility.

She was accounted by the Ancients the Goddess, that first delivered to Mankind
the Art of Tillage, whence they usually crowned her with Ears of Corn.
TIBULLUS, Flava Ceres, tibi sit nostro de rure corona
Spicea --
O yellow Ceres, round thy Golden Locks,
Place Garlands taken from our Country Shocks.
OVID, Flava Ceres, tenues spicis redimita capillos,
Ceres, whose slender Hairs Corn-ears do bind.
Or put them in her Hand. So in the Reverse of a Coin of Julia Pia, there is
one loaning with her left Hand on a Spear, holding in her right Hand an Ear of
Wheat, with this Inscription, CEREREM.

She is frequently described with a Torch in her Hand, from that known Story of
her searching after her Daughter, stolen, and carried away by Pluto out of
Sicily. Of which CLAUDIAN De raptu Proserp.
, Accingor lustrare diem, per devia rerum
Indefessa ferar: nulla cessabitur hora.
Non requies, non somnus erit, dum pignus ademptum
Inveniam, gremio quamvis mergatur Iberae
Tethyos, and rubro jaceat vallata profundo.
Non Rheni glacies, non me Ripaea tenebunt
Frigora: non dubio Syrtis cunctabitur aestu, etc.
Sic fatur, notaeque jugis illabitur Aetnae,
Noctivago tedas inflammatura labori.
I Will search the day, no hour shall stop me hurled
Unwearied through all Cranies of the World;
No rest, no sleep, till my dear Pledge be found,
Though she lie hidden in the Iberian Sound,
Or the Red Sea. Riphaean Frosts, nor Rhyne,
Crusted with Ice, shall hinder my Design:
Nor yet the doubtful Syrts with wallowing Tides.
This said, to Aetna's Top she makes a flight,
Kindling her Torch for business of the Night.


So PAUSANIAS In Arcadicis.
mentions a Statue of Ceres, holding in her right Hand a Torch, with her left
Hand laid upon a Statue adjoining, called Despoina. STATIUS Thebaid. lib. xii.
, Qualis, ab Aetnaeis accensa lampade saxis,
Orba Ceres magnae variabat imagine flammae
Ausonium Siculumque latus, vestigia nigri
Raptoris, vastosque legens in pulvere sulcos.
Robbed Ceres so at an Aetnean Stone
Kindled her Torch, which blazing she drives on,
Reprinting Pluto's steps on either Coast,
Plowing up dusty Clouds in Furrows vast.


OVID Fastor. lib. iv.
, Illic accendit geminas pro lampade pinus:
Hinc Cereris sacris nunc quoque teda datur.
There for a Torch two Pines the Goddess lights:
Since, they with Tapers celebrate her Rites.


From whence she was called Dea tedifera: Et per tediferae mystica sacra Deae.

The like we meet with in the Collection of GRUTER.

CERERI AUGUST. On the West Side of the Arch, over the South Postern, the
Goddess FLORA, in a various-coloured Habit; in one Hand, Red and White Roses;
in the other, Lilies: on her head, a Garland of several Flowers. The Painting
over this, a Garden with Walks, Statues, Fountains, Flowers, and Figures of Men
and Women walking. The Story of this Goddess FLORA is variously related: we
shall only take notice of the account Lactantius Lib. ii. cap. xx.
gives of her. FLORA, having gained a great Estate by prostituting her Body, at
her Death left the People of Rome her Heir, and allotted such a certain sum of
Money; the Yearly use of which should be expended in the Celebration of her
Birthday with several Sports called FLORALIA. Which seeming a flagitious thing
to the Senate, they took occasion, from the very name of the Sports FLORALIA,
to add some Dignity to so shameful a business, to feign a Goddess FLORA, who
had the care of Flowers, whom they should Yearly appease for the greater plenty
of their Corn, Vines, etc. Her various-colour'd Habit, with the reason of it,
is mentioned by OVID Fastor. lib. v.
, Cur tamen, ut dantur vestes Cerealibus albae,
Sic est haec cultu versicolore decens?
An quia maturis albescit messis aristis?
Et color, and species floribus omnis inest?
Annuit. --
In white at Ceres Feasts why are they dressed,
While Flora wears a party-colored Vest?
Is it because Corn looks in Harvest white,
Whilst Flowers in various Colors take delight?


She was crowned with Flowers, as we find in these following Verses, Annuit:
and motis flores cecidere capillis,
Decidere in mensas ut rosa missa solet.
She nods: and Flowers fell from her Head,
Like Roses on a Table shed.


Answerable to the Life of the Author were the Sports on her Festival;
lascivious, and celebrated by lascivious Persons. OVID Ibid.
, Quaerere conabar quare lascivia major
His foret in ludis, liberiorque jocus, etc.
Turba quidem cur hos celebret meretricia ludos.
I did enquire why a more wanton way
These Sports are granted, and a freer Play:
Why Prostitutes should at these Rites attend.


Which Cato had no sooner entered, but his Gravity forced him to retire.
MARTIAL, Nosses jocosae dulce cum sacrum Florae,
Festosque lusus, and licentiam vulgi,
Cur in Theatrum Cato severe venisti?
An ideo tantum veneras, ut exires?
Thou knew'st, that Flora's joyful Rites
Free License had, and all Delights;
Why came thou Cato to the Play?
Came only thou to go away?


Which Story is more copiously related by Valerius Maximus. Onuphrius Panvinius
mentions a Coin, in which we have the first, that caused these Sports to be
celebrated. C. MEMMIVS FLORALIA PRIMVS FECIT. She had her Flamen, mentioned by
Varro De ling. Lat.
.

Opposite to this, on the North-side, the Goddess POMONA crowned with a Garland
of several Fruits; in her right Hand, a Pruning-Hook; in her left Hand, the
Sun: at her Feet, all sorts of Graffing, and Gardening-Tools. OVID Metam. lib.
xiv. Fab. 16.
thus describes her at large, Rege sub hoc POMONA fuit: qua nulla Latinas
Inter Hamadryadas coluit solertius hortos:
Nec fuit arborei studiosior altera foetus;
Vnde tenet nomen. Non sylvas illa, nec amnes,
Rus amat, and ramos felicia poma ferentes.
Nec jaculo gravis est, sed adunca dextera falce:
Qua modo luxuriem premit, and spatiantia passim
Brachia compescit: fisso modo cortice, lignum
Inserit, and succos alieno praestat alumno.
Nec sentire sitim patitur, bibulaeque recurvas
Radicis fibras labentibus irrigat undis.
POMONA flourished in those times of ease:
Of all the Latian Hamadryades,
None fruitful Hort-yards held in more repute,
Or took more care to propagate their Fruit;
Thereof so named. Nor Streams, nor shady Groves,
But Trees producing generous Burdens loves.
Her Hand a Hook, and not an Javelin bare:
Now prunes luxurious Twigs, and Boughs, that dare
Transcend their Bounds: now slits the Bark, the Bud
Inserts, enforced to nurse another Brood.
Nor suffers them to suffer Thirst, but brings
To moisture-sucking Roots soft sliding Springs.


She had her Flamen too, though the last of the fifteen. SEXTUS POMPEIUS,
Maximae dignationis Flamen Dialis est inter XV. Flamines: and, quum caeteri
discrimina Majestatis suae habeant, minimi habetur Pomonalis; quod Pomona
levissimo fructui agrorum praesidet. The Flamen of Jupiter is of the greatest
Dignity amongst the fifteen Flamens. There is a distinction betwixt all of
them, but the meanest is the Flamen of Pomona, because she presides over the
meanest Fruit of the Grounds.

BOREAS, instead of Feet, two Serpents Tails, his Wings covered with Snow: his
Emblem, a rockie Mountainous Country, and the Pleiades rising over it; his
Motto, -- SCYTHIAM SEPTEMQUE TRIONES HORRIFER INVADIT -- That the Ancients
described BOREAS with Serpents Tails, instead of Feet, appears out of PAUSANIAS
In Eliacis.
, (...). If you compass it on the left Hand, there is Boreas forcibly taking
away Orithyia. He has Serpents Tails instead of Feet.

Thus OVID describes him stealing away Orithyia, Haec Boreas, aut his non
inferiora loquutus,
Excussit pennas: quarum jactatibus omnis
Afflata est tellus, latumque perhorruit aequor.
Pulvereamque trahens per summa cacumina pallam,
Verrit humum, pavidamque metu caligine tectus
Orithyiam adamans fulvis complectitur alis.
Thus Boreas chafes, or no less storming, shook
His horrid Wings; whose aerie motion struck
The Earth with Blasts, and made the Ocean roar,
Trailing his dusty Mantle on the Floor.
He hid himself in Clouds of Dust, and caught
Beloved Orithyia, with her fear distraught.


VIRGIL Georg. iii.
, Qualis Hyperboreis Aquilo cum densus ab oris
Incubuit, Scythiaeque hyemes, atque arida differt
Nubila. --
As when from Hyperborean Mountains fierce
Boreas does Clouds, and Scythian Storms disperse.


CLAUDIAN De raptu Proserp. lib. i.
, -- ceu turbine rauco
Cum gravis armatur Boreas, glacieque nivali
Hispidus, and Getica concretus grandine pennas,
Bella cupit, pelagus, sylvas, camposque sonoro
Flamine rapturus. --
As with a Whirl-Winde when rough Boreas arms
Wings stiff with Ice, and Snow, and Gothic Storms,
Desiring War, the Woods, and Deeps profound,
And Plains breaks thorough with a dreadful sound.


AUSTER, in a dark-colored Habit, with Wings like Clouds; his Emblem, a
Cloudy Sky, and Showers: his Motto, NUBIBUS ASSIDUIS PLUVIAQVE MADESCIT. The
Authors of Natural History do attribute a Thunderbolt to the South-Winde
alone. From whence Virgil, describing Vulcan's Shop, His informatum manibus,
jam part polita
Fulmen erat, toto Genitor quae plurima coelo
Dejicit in terras: pars imperfecta manebat.
Tres imbris torti radios, tres nubis aquosae
Addiderant, rutili tres ignis, and alitis Austri.
A Thunderbolt half finished now in hand,
(Many of these by angry Jove are thrown
From Heaven to Earth) the rest as yet not done.
Three parts of Hail, three of a Watery Cloud,
As much of Fire, and three of Wind allowed.


Upon which place SERVIUS. Nonnulli manubias Fulminis his Numinibus, Jovi,
Junoni, Marti, and Austro vento asserunt attribui, quod ex hoc Maronis loco
ostendunt, Of this Wind we have the Picture in Antoninus's Pillar at Rome,
remarkable for the History, in which is represented the Rain, that fell in the
Tents of the Romans, ready to perish for Drouth, and the Thunder, and
Lightning, which at the same time destroyed the Enemy: obtained by the Prayers
of a Christian Legion, as the Fathers of those times relate it; by others
attributed either to the Piety of the Emperor, or the Magic of Arnuphis: of
which CLAUDIAN; Laus ibi nulla Ducum; nam flammeus imber in hostem
Decidit: hunc dorso trepidum flammante ferebat
Ambustus sonipes; hic tabescente solutus
Subsedit galea, liquefactaque pulvere cuspis
Canduit, and subitis fluxere liquoribus enses.
Tunc contenta polo, mortalis nesciateli,
Pugna fuit. Chaldaea mago seu carmina ritu
Armavere Deos; seu, quod reor, omne Tonantis
Obsequium Marci mores potuere mereri.
The Chiefs no Fame got there; the Enemie's force
A fiery Shower dispersed: a burning Horse
Bore this on's flaming Back; this over-turn'd,
His Cask did melt, in Dust his Javelin burned,
And melting Swords in smoking Rivers glide.
Heaven's Arcenal did for this Fight provide
Weapons destroying more then Mortal Arms.
Either the Gods were armed by Magic Charms,
Or Jove so much to Marcus merits owed,
That all this kindness he on him bestowed.


It is thus described by DIO, You might see at the same time Rain and Fire fall
from Heaven: some were wet, and drank; others were burnt, and died. The Fire
touched not the Romans; if it fell among them, it was immediately quenched. The
Rain did their Adversaries no good, but rather like Oil increased the flame.
They sought for Water, while the Rain fell on them. Some of them wounded
themselves, as if they meant to quench the Fire with their Blood; others ran
over to the Romans, who alone had the Water could save them; and those
Antoninus saved. The same Author, who lived in the time of Commodus, Son to
Antoninus, mentions, from a Report in his time, the Magic of Arnuphis, as a
cause of it, as it is delivered by Xiphiline, Patriarch of Constantinople: It Is
reported, that Arnuphis, an Egyptian Magician, then in company of the Emperor
Marcus Antoninus, had invoked with his Magic Art, among other Gods, the aerial
Mercury, by whose assistance he obtained the Shower. And thus the Story is told
by SUIDAS In (...).
. Others mention Julian the Magician. The Christians had a fair Plea for what
they pretended, an acknowledgment from the Emperor himself, by Letter to the
Senate, had not that Letter, still remaining, upon examination proved
counterfeit. The Picture, being rare, we have caused here to be published.

scene of Mercury with emperor Marcus Antoninus

Baronius mistook it for Jupiter Pluvius, who is never represented with Wings.
This Wind is excellently described by OVID Metam. lib. i.
, -- madidis Notus evolat alis,
Terribilem picea tectus caligine vultum;
Barba gravis nimbis, canis fluit unda capillis,
Front sedent nebulae, rorant pennaeque finusque.
With moist Wings Notus flies in sable Bags
His sour Face hid, his Beard with Tempest sags,
His Hair sheds Crystal Drops, dark Clouds encamp
Upon his Brows, his Wings and Bosom damp.


His Thunderbolt is mentioned too by Lucretius; Altitonans Volturnus, and
Auster ulmine pollens.

ZEPHYRUS, like an Adonis with Wings; the Emblem, a Flowery Plain; the Word, --
TEPENTIBUS AURIS
DEMULCET --
So CLAUDIAN describes De raptu Proserp. lib. ii.
,

-- Pater o gratissime Veris,
Qui mea lascivo regnas per prata volatu
Semper, and assiduis irroras flatibus annum, etc.
-- ille novo madidantes nectare pennas
Concutit, and glebas foecundo rore maritat,
Quaque volat, vernus sequitur color: omnis in herbas
Turget humus, medioque patent convexa sereno.
Sanguineo splendore rosas, vaccinia nigro
Induit, and dulci violas ferrugine pingit.
Blessed Father of the Spring, all Hail,
Who rul'st my Meadows with a wanton Gale,
And dew'st the Season with a constant breeze, etc.
From his moist Wings he richest Nectar sheds,
And the hard Glebe with pregnant Moisture weds:
Color the Spring attends, and every where
Earth swells with Herbage, Heaven's high Forehead clear.
Roses in Red, Berries in Black he dies,
And gives the Violets Purple Liveries.
LUCRETIUS calls it the Messenger of Venus:

Et ver, and Venus, and Veneris praenuntius ante
Pennatus graditur Zephyrus vestigia propter.
The Spring, and Venus, warming Zephyre brings
Love's gentle Herbinger on painted Wings.
PHILOSTRATUS Imag.
represents it thus, A Youth smooth-faced, with Wings on his Shoulders, and on
his Head a Garland of several Flowers.

The Seat of this Wind was feigned by the Ancients to be in Spain. SENECA In
Hercule O. taeo.
, -- quae Zephyro
Subdita tellus, stupet aurato
Flumine clarum radiare Tagum.
The Lands, where Zephyre dwells, behold
With wonder Tagus shine in Gold.
CLAUDIAN In laudibus Serenae.
, Deseritur jam ripa Tagi, Zephyrique relictis
Sedibus, Aurorae famulas properatur ad urbes.
He Tagus banks, and Zephyr's Court forsakes,
And haste to Conquered Eastern Cities makes.


Not so much from the Vernal temperature of the place, as that it was esteemed
the remotest place from whence Italy received these Western Gales.

The great Figure on the top of all represents PLENTY, crowned, a Branch of
Palm in her right Hand, a Cornu-copiae in her left. The Music aloft on both
sides, and on the two Balconies within, were twelve Waits, six Trumpets, and
three Drums.

At a convenient distance before this Structure, were two Stages erected,
divided, planted, and adorned like Gardens, each of them eight Yards in length,
five in breadth. Upon that on the North-side sat a Woman representing PLENTY,
crowned with a Garland of diverse Flowers, clad in a Green Vestment embroidered
with Gold, holding a Cornu-copiae: her Attendants, two Virgins.

At His Majesty's approach to the Arch, this Person representing PLENTY rose
up, and made Address to him in these Words; Great Sir, the Star, which at Your
Happy Birth
Joy'd with his Beams (at Noon) the wondering Earth,
Did with auspicious luster, then, presage
The glittering Plenty of this Golden Age;
The Clouds blown over, which long our joys o'recast,
And the sad Winter of Your absence past,
See! the three smiling Seasons of the Year
Agree at once to bid You Welcome here;
Her Homage Dutious Flora comes to pay;
With Her Enameled Treasure strows Your Way:
Ceres, and Pales, with a bounteous Hand,
Diffuse their Plenty over all Your Land;
And Bacchus is so lavish of his Store,
That Wine flows now, where Water ran before.
Thus Seasons, Men, and Gods their Joy express;
To see Your Triumph, and our Happiness.


His Majesty, having passed the four Triumphal Arches, was, at Temple Bar,
entertained with the View of a delightful Boscage, full of several Beasts, both
Tame, and Savage, as also several living Figures, and Music of eight Waits.
But this, being the Limit of the Citie's Liberty, must be so likewise of our
Description.

A BRIEF NARRATIVE OF HIS MAJESTY'S SOLEMN CORONATION: WITH His Magnificent
PROCEEDING, and ROYAL FEAST in WESTMINSTER HALL.
A BRIEF NARRATIVE OF His Majesty's Solemn Coronation.
UPon the 23d of April, being Saint George's Day, about seven in the Morning,
the King took Water from the Privy-Stairs at White Hall, and landed at the
Parliament-Stairs: from whence He went up to the Room behind the Lords-House,
called the Prince's Lodgings: where, after He had reposed Himself for a while,
He was arrayed in Royal Robes of Crimson Velvet, furred with Ermine: By which
time the Nobility, being come together in the Lords-House, and Painted-Chamber,
Robed themselves.

The Judges also, with those of the Long-Robe, the Knights of the Bath (then in
their Robes of Purple Satin, lined with white Taffaty) and Gentlemen of the
Privy-Chamber, met in the Court of Requests. And, after some space, being drawn
down into Westminster Hall, where this great Solemnity (ordered by the Officers
at Arms) began; the Nobility, in their proper Robes, carrying their Coronets in
their Hands, proceeded according to their several Dignities, and Degrees,
before His Majesty, up to His Throne of State; which was raised at the West end
of that large and noble Room, and there placed themselves upon each side
thereof.

The King being thus set in a rich Chair, under a glorious Cloth of State, Sir
Gilbert Talbot Knight, Master of the Jewel-House, presented the Sword of State, as
also the Sword called Curtana, and two other Swords, to the Lord
High-Constable; who took and delivered them to the Lord High-Chamberlain, and
he laid them upon the Table before the King.

Then did he also deliver the Spurs to the Lord High-Constable; and he the same
to the Lord High-Chamberlain, who also placed them upon the Table.

Immediately after the Dean and Prebends of Westminster, (by whom the Regalia
had been brought in Procession from the Abbey-Church unto Westminster Hall)
being vested in rich Copes, came up from the lower end thereof, in manner
following.

1 The Sergeant of the Vestry, in a Scarlet Mantle. 2 Then the Children of the
King's Chapel, in Scarlet Mantles. 3 Then the Quire of Westminster, in
Surplices. 4 Then the Gentlemen of the King's Chapel, in Scarlet Mantles. 5
Next the Pursuivants, Heralds, and Provincial Kings of Arms. 6 Then the Dean,
carrying Saint Edward's Crown.
And after him five of the Prebends of that Church; the first carrying the
Scepter with the Cross.

The second the Scepter with the Dove.

The third the Orb with the Cross.

The fourth King Edward's Staff.

The fifth the Chalice and Patena.

Passing thus through the Hall, and making their due Reverences in three places
thereof; the Quires, with the Officers at Arms falling off on each side,
toward the upper end of the Room; the said Dean and Prebends ascended the
Steps; at the top whereof Garter, Principal King of Arms standing, conducted
them to the Table placed before the Throne, where they made their last
Reverence.

Which being done, the Dean first presented the Crown, which was by the Lord
High-Constable, and Lord Great-Chamberlain, set upon the Table; who likewise
afterward received from each of the Prebends that part of the Regalia, which
they carried, and laid them also by the Crown: which done, they retired.

Then, the Lord Great-Chamberlain presenting the Regalia severally to the King,
His Majesty thereupon disposed of them unto the Noblemen hereafter named, to
be carried by them in the Proceeding to the Abbey-Church, viz.

Saint Edward's Staff to the Earl of Sandwich. The Spurs to the Earl of
Penbroke and Montgomery. The Scepter with the Cross to the Earl of Bedford. The
Pointed Sword (born on the left hand of Curtana) to the Earl of Derby. The
Pointed Sword (born on the right hand thereof) to the Earl of Shrewsbury. The
Sword called Curtana to the Earl of Oxford. The Sword of State to the Earl of
Manchester. The Scepter with the Dove to the Duke of Albe-marle. The Orb with
the Cross to the Duke of Buckingham. Saint Edward's Crown to the Duke of
Ormond. The Patena to the Bishop of Exeter; and lastly, The Chalice to the
Bishop of London.
All things being thus prepared, (it being about ten a Clock,) the Proceeding
began from the Hall into the Palace-Yard, through the Gate House, and the end
of King's-street; thence along the Great Sanctuary, and so to the West End of
the Abbey-Church, all upon Blew Cloth, which was spread upon the Ground, from
the Throne in Westminster Hall to the great Steps in the same Abbey-Church, by
Sir George Carteret Knight, His Majesty's Vice Chamberlain, as Almoner for
that Day by special Appointment.

The PROCEEDING to the CORONATION was in this following Order.
THE Drums four. The Trumpets sixteen, in four Classis. The Six Clerks of the
Chancery. Ten of the KING'S Chaplains, having Dignities. The Aldermen of
LONDON. The KING'S Learned Council at Law. The KING'S Solicitour. The KING'S
Attorney. The KING'S eldest Sergeant at Law. The Esquires of the Body. The
Masters of Request. The Gentlemen of the Privy-Chamber. The Knights of the
Bath, in their Purple Robes. The Barons of the Exchequer, and Justices of both
Benches, two and two, in order, according to their Seniority.
The Lord Chief-Baron. The Lord Chief Justice of the Common Pleas. The Master
of the Rolls. The Lord Chief Justice of the King's Bench. The Serjeant-Porter.
The Sergeant of the Vestry. The Children of the King's Chapel. The Gentlemen of
the King's Chapel. The Prebends of Westminster. The Master of the Jewel-House.
The Knights of the Privy Council. Port-cullis, Pursuivant at Arms.
The Barons in their Robes, two and two, carrying their Caps of Crimson Velvet,
turned up with Miniver, in their Hands. The Bishops, two and two, according to
their Dignities, and Consecrations. Rouge-Croix, Blew-Mantle, Pursuivants. The
Viscounts, two and two, in their Robes, with their Coronets in their Hands.
Somerset, Chester, Heralds. The Earls, two and two, in their Robes, holding
their Coronets in their Hands.
Richmond, Windsor, Heralds. The Marquess of Dorchester, The Marquess of
Worcester, in their Robes, with their Coronets in their Hands. Lancaster, York,
Heralds. Norroy, Clarencieux, Provincial Kings, carrying their Crowns in their
Hands. The Lord High-Treasurer, The The Lord High Chancellor. Saint Edward's
Staff, born by the Earl of Sandwich, The Spurs, born by the Earl of Penbroke,
and Montgomery, Saint Edward's Scepter, born by the Earl of Bedford. The third
Sword, drawn, and born by the Earl of Derby. The Sword called Curtana, drawn,
and born by the Earl of Oxford. The Pointed Sword, drawn, and born by the Earl
of Shrewsbury. The Lord Mayor of London Garter, Principal King of Arms. The
Gentleman-usher of the Black-Rod. Sergeants at Arms. The Earl of Lindsey, Lord
Great-Chamberlain of ENGLAND. Sergeants at Arms. The Earl of Suffolk, Earl
Marshal for this present occasion. The Sword of State in the Scabbard, born by
the Earl of Manchester, Lord Chamberlain of the Household. The Earl of
Northumberland, Lord Constable of England for this present occasion. His
Highness the Duke of YORK. The Scepter, with the Dove, born by the Duke of
Albemarle. St. Edward's Crown, born by the Duke of Ormond, Lord High-Steward
for this present occasion. The Orb, born by the Duke of Buckingham. The Patena,
born by the Bishop of Exceter in his Cope. The Regale, or Chalice, born by the
Bishop of London in his Cope.

The Pensioners with their Pole-Axes. Barons of the Cinque Ports, (their whole
Number XVI. habited in Doublets of Crimson Satin, Scarlet Hose, Scarlet Gowns,
lined with Crimson Satin, black Velvet Caps, and black Velvet Shoes, carrying
the Canopy. The KING supported by the Bishops of Bath and Wells, and Duresme.

His Train born by the Lords Mandevil, Cavendish, Ossory, and Percy; and
assisted by the Lord Mansfield, Master of the Robes.

The Earl of Lauderdale, one of the Gentlemen of the Bedchamber.

Mr. Seamour, Mr. Ashburnham, both Grooms of the Bedchamber.

The Captain of the Guard.

The Captain of the Pensioners.

The Yeomen of Guard, in their Coats.

Barons of the Cinque Ports, (their whole Number XVI.) habited in Doublets of
Crimson Satin, Scarlet-Hose, Scarlet Gowns, lined with Crimson Satin, black
Velvet Caps, and black Velvet Shoes, carrying the Canopy. The Pensioners with
their Pole-Axes.

When the Proceeding was entered the Abbey-Church, all, passing through the
Quire, went up the Stairs toward the great Theater; and, as they came to the
top thereof, were disposed by the Heralds into two Galleries, built on either
side the upper end of the Quire. On the North-side, the Aldermen of London, the
Judges, and others of the Long-Robe; as also the Quire of Westminster, with the
Gentlemen and Children of the King's Chapel; and, on the South side, the
Knights of the Bath, and Gentlemen of the Privy-Chamber.

Near the Pulpit stood the Master of the Jewel-House, and the Lord Mayor of
London.

The Nobility were seated on Forms round about the inside of the Theater: on
the corner whereof, nearest to the Altar, adjoining to the two uppermost
Pillars, stood the Provincial Kings, Heralds, and Pursuivants at Arms, within
Rails there placed.

Within the Rails, on either side the entrance of the Theater from the Quire,
stood the Sergeants at Arms (XVI. in number) with their Maces. And over the
Door, at the West End of the Quire, stood the Drums and Trumpets.

The King, being entered the West-door of the Church (within which a
Fald-stool, and Cushions were laid ready for him to kneel at) was received with
an Anthem, begun by the whole Quire, viz.

The first, fourth, fifth, and sixth Verses of the 122d Psalm: beginning thus;
I was glad when they said unto me, We will go into the House of the Lord, etc.

He kneeled down, and used some short Ejaculations; which being finished, He
thence proceeded up to the Theater (erected close to the four high Pillars,
standing between the Quire and the Altar) upon which the Throne of Estate was
placed (being a Square raised five Degrees) on the East Side whereof were set a
Chair, Footstool, and Cushion, covered with Cloth of Gold, whereon for a while
He reposed Himself.

Immediately after, the Bishop of London (who was appointed to Officiate, in
part, that Day, for the Archbishop of Canterbury, whose age and weakness
rendered him incapable of performing his whole Duty at this Coronation) having
the Lord High Constable, the Earl Marshal, the Lord Great Chamberlain, the Lord
High Chancellor, and Lord Chamberlain of the Household before him, went first
to the South, next to the West, and lastly, to the North side of the Theater;
and at every of the said three sides, acquainted the People, that he presented
to them King CHARLES, the rightful Inheritour of the Crown of this Realm; and
asked them, if they were willing to do their Homage, Service, and Bounden Duty
to Him.

As this was doing, the King rose up, and stood by the aforesaid Chair, turning
His Face still to that side of the Stage, where the said Bishop stood, when he
spoke to the People; who signified their willingness, by loud Shouts, and
Acclamations.

The same Question was likewise put by the said Bishop to all the Nobility
present.

Immediately after, this following Anthem was sung by the Gentlemen of the
King's Chapel: Let thy Hand be strengthened, and thy right Hand be exalted, etc.

In which time, a large Carpet was spread by certain Officers of the removing
Wardrobe, from the Altar, down below the hault-Paces thereof; and over that a
silk Carpet, and Cushion, laid by the G^^tleman-Vsher of the Black-Rod,
assisted by the Yeoman of the ^^^d-robe. Which being done, the Bishop of London
went down from the Theater toward the Altar; and, having made his Reverence,
placed himself at the North-side thereof.

Then the King descended from His Throne, and proceeded toward the Altar,
supported by the Bishops of Duresme, and Bath and Wells, with the four Swords;
the grand Officers, the Noblemen, Bishops, who carried the Regalia before Him,
and Dean of Westminster also attending. Being come to the Steps of the Altar,
He kneeled down, and first offered a Pall of Cloth of Gold; next an Ingot of
Gold of a pound weight, prepared by the Master of the great Wardrobe, and
Treasurer of the Household, by virtue of their Offices. Immediately after, His
Majesty retired to a Chair of State, set on the South Side of the Altar, a
little below the Traverse of Crimson Taffaty.

After this, the Bishops, and Noblemen, who carried the Regalia, presented
every particular to the Bishop of London, who placed them upon the Altar; and
then retired to their Seats. And the King kneeled at a Fald-stool (set on the
right side of his said Chair of State) whilst the Bishop of London said the
Prayer, beginning thus, O God, which do visit those, that are humble, etc.

Which Prayer ended, the Bishop of Worcester went up into the Pulpit, placed on
the North-side of the Altar, opposite to the King, and began his SERMON; the
Text being taken out of the 28th Chapter of the Proverbs, and the second Verse.

On the King's right Hand stood the Bishop of Duresme, and beyond him the
Noblemen, that carried the SVVORDS, who held them naked, and erect. The Duke
of YORK sat a little behind Him on His left Hand; next to whom stood the
Bishop of Bath and Wells, together with the Lord Great-Chamberlain.

The Lord High-Chancellour, and Lord High-Treasurer, sat on a Form behind the
Duke of YORK; and behind them, in a Gallery, sat the Duchess of YORK.

In the same Gallery also were placed Baron Bateville, Ordinary Ambassador
from Spain. Prince Maurice of Nassau, Extra-ordinary Ambassador from the
Electour of Brandenburgh. Monsieur Weyman, the Electour's Chancellor, who was
joined in Commission with him. The Count Coningsmark, Envoy from Sweden.
Monsieur Friesendorf, Resident of Sweden. Monsieur Petcom, Resident of Denmark.
Monsieur Plessis Bellieure, Envoy from Monsieur the Duke of Orleans. Signieur
Giavarina, Resident of Venice. Signieur Bernardi, Resident of Genoa. Monsieur
La-Motte, and Monsieur Frays, Envoys from the Prince Electour. Monsieur
Gormers, Deputy Extra-ordinary from Hamburgh. An Envoy from the Cardinal of
Hess. The Marquess de Montbrun, with several other Gentlemen-strangers.


But Don Francisco de Mello, the Ambassador of Portugal, was placed in the
Lord Chamberlain's Box.

On the North-side of the Altar sat the Bishop of London, directly opposite to
the King in the Arch Bishop's Chair, covered with Purple Velvet: the rest of
the Bishops being placed on Forms behind him.

And higher, toward Saint Edward's Chapel, stood Garter, Principal King of
Arms, with the Officers of the standing and moving Wardrobe, in Scarlet Gowns;
the Sergeant of the Vestry with his gilt Verge, and other Vergers: as also some
of the Grooms and Pages of the Bedchamber, who attended to do service, as
occasion required.

Opposite to them, on the South Side of the Altar, stood the Dean and Prebends
of Westminster.

Saint Edward's ancient Chair (covered all over with Cloth of Gold) was placed
upon the North-side of the Altar, a little lower then that belonging to the
Archbishop, but something nearer the middle of the Isle, and between the
King's Chair of State, and the Pulpit.

SERMON being ended, the Bishop of London arising from his Seat, drew near to
the Chair of State, and asked of the King (who then uncovered His Head) whether
He was willing to take the usual Oath of His Progenitors, viz. to confirm the
Laws to the People, and namely the Franchises granted to the Clergy by Saint
Edward the Confessor; to maintain the Gospel established in the Kingdom; to
keep Peace; execute Justice, and grant the Commons their rightful Customs: unto
every of which Questions His Majesty made particular Answers, That He would.

Then likewise did the Bishop of Rochester read the Bishop's Petition to the
King; the Prayer whereof was, That He would preserve unto them, and the
Churches committed to their charge, all Canonical Privileges; due Law, and
Justice; as also protect, and defend them, and the Churches, under their
Government: which His Majesty most graciously by a large Answer (which repeated
the words of the Petition) granted, and promised to perform.

Afterward the King, assisted by the Bishops of Duresme, and Bath and Wells,
was led from His Chair up to the Altar (the Sword of State being born before
Him, and the Lord Great Chamberlain attending) where He took an Oath to
perform, and keep what He had promised.

Which Oath taken, the King was led, in like manner, back to His Chair of
State; and immediately the Bishop of London begun the Hymn, Come Holy Ghost,
eternal God, etc. the Quires singing the rest of it.

And a little before the ending thereof, the Fald-stool was set again at the
King's right Hand; whereat (as soon as the Hymn was finished) He kneeled) the
Bishop of London standing before Him, and saying the following Prayer, We
beseech thee, O Lord, Holy Father, Almighty, and everlasting God, for this thy
Servant CHARLES, etc.

This Prayer ended, the Bishop of London went to the North-side of the Altar,
the King still kneeling; and forthwith the Bishops of Peterborough, and
Gloucester, went, and kneeled on the upper hault-pace of the Altar, where they
began the Letany, the Quires singing the Responses; the Dean of Westminster,
kneeling all the while on the King's left Hand.

After the Letany followed three Prayers, said by the Bishop of coronation
scene London at the North-side of the Altar; and, a little before the last of
them was ended, the Archbishop of Canterbury came out at the North-door of
Saint EDWARD'S Chapel, vested in an rich ancient Cope.

The third Prayer being ended, the said Archbishop standing before the Altar,
began the Versicle, Lift up your Hearts. Resp. We lift them up to the Lord.


Archbishop. Let us give thanks unto the Lord our God.


Resp. It is meet and right so to do.


Archbishop. It is very meet, and right, and our bounden Duty, that we should
at all times, and in all places, give thanks unto thee, O Lord, Holy Father,
etc.




Then the King arose from before the Fald stool, and went to the Altar,
supported by the aforesaid Bishops of Duresme, and Bath and Wells: where He was
disrobed by the Lord Great-Chamberlain of His Royal Robes, which were
immediately carried thence into the Traverse erected in Saint Edward's Chapel.

Whilst this was in doing, the Chair, that was before placed at the entrance of
the Theater was removed, and set on the North-side of the Altar, betwixt it,
and Saint Edward's Chair: whereunto the King being come, sat down, and was
anointed by the said Archbishop, (the Dean of Westminster holding the Ampulla,
and pouring the Oil out into the Spoon) first on the Palms of both His Hands,
the Archbishop, as he anointed Him, pronouncing the Prayer, which begins
thus; Let these Hands be anointed with Holy Oil, as Kings and Prophets have
been anointed, etc.

After which, the Quire sung this Anthem, Sadoc the Priest, and Nathan the
Prophet anointed Solomon King, and all the People rejoiced, and said, God save
the KING.

At the end of which Anthem, the Archbishop said the Prayer, beginning thus;
Look down, Almighty God, with thy favorable Countenance upon this Glorious
KING, etc.

And then proceeded with His anointing on the King's Breast, between His
Shoulders, on both His Shoulders; the two bowings of His Arms, and on the Crown
of His Head, in manner aforesaid.

Which being done, and the Anointing dried up with fine Linen; and also the
Loops of His Shirt closed up by the Dean of Westminster, the Archbishop said
the two Prayers, beginning thus; 1 God, the Son of God, Christ Jesus our Lord,
who is anointed of his Father with the Oil of Gladness above his Fellows, etc.
2 God, which art the Glory of the Righteous, and the Mercy of Sinners, etc.


During the time of this His Unction, a rich Pall of Cloth of Gold, was held
over the King's Head by the Dukes of Buckingham, and Albe-marle; and the Earls
of Berks and Sandwich, as Knights of the most Noble Order of the Garter.

After these Prayers, the Lord Great-Chamberlain delivered the Coif to the
Archbishop, who put it on the King's Head: and immediately after, the Dean of
Westminster put the Colobium Sindonis, or Surplice upon the King; the
Archbishop saying the Prayer, beginning thus; O God, the King of Kings, and
Lord of Lords, by whom Kings do reign, and Lawgivers do make good Laws,
vouchsafe, we beseech thee, in thy favor, to bless this Kingly Ornament, etc.

Then the Dean of Westminster, having likewise fetched the Tishue-Hose and
Sandals from the Altar, arrayed the King therewith; as also with the
Super-tunica, or close Pall of Cloth of Gold, and girded the same about Him.

After all this, the said Dean took the Spurs from off the Altar, and delivered
them to the Lord Great-Chamberlain, who, having touched the King's Heels
therewith, forthwith sent them back to the Altar.

Then the Archbishop received the Sword of State in the Scabbard from the
Lord-Chamberlain of the Household, and laid it upon the Altar, saying the
Prayer, beginning thus, Hear our Prayers, we beseech thee, O Lord, and
vouchsafe, by thy right Hand of Majesty, to bless, and sanctify this SVVORD,
etc.

This Prayer finished, the Archbishop, and Bishops assisting, delivered the
Sword back to the King, saying, Accipe gladium per manus Episcoporum.

Whereupon, the Lord Great-Chamberlain girt it about the King, and the
Archbishop said, Receive this Kingly Sword, which is hallowed for the defense
of the Holy Church, etc.

After this, the Dean of Westminster took the Armillae sunt in modum Stolae,
and ab utraque scapula usque ad Compages Brachiorum erunt dependentes, in ipsis
Compagibus laqueis sericeis connexae.
Armil, made of Cloth of Tishue, and put it about the King's Neck, tying it to
the bowings of His Arms; the Archbishop standing before the King, with the
Bishop of London on His right Hand, and saying, Receive the Armil of Sincerity,
and Wisdom, etc.

Next the Mantle, or open Pall, being made of Cloth of Gold, and lined with red
Taffaty, was put upon Him by the said Dean; the Archbishop likewise using the
words of Signification, viz.

Receive this Pall, etc. In the next place, the Archbishop took Saint EDWARD'S
Crown, and blessed it, saying, God, the Crown of the Faithful, etc.

In the mean time, Saint EDWARD'S Chair was removed into the middle of the
Isle, and set right over against the Altar, whither the King went, and sat down
in it: and then the Arch Bishop brought Saint EDWARD'S Crown from the Altar,
and put it upon His Head.

Whereupon, all the People, with loud and repeated shouts, cried, God save the
KING; and, by a Signal then given, the great Ordinance from the Tower were also
shot off.

At the ceasing of these Acclamations, the Archbishop went on, saying, God
crown Thee with a Crown of Glory, and Righteousness, etc. Adding thereunto the
Prayer, beginning thus; O God of Eternity, etc. Bless this thy Servant, who At
which words the King bowed His Head.
boweth His Head unto thy Majesty, etc. After which Prayer, the Archbishop
read the Confortare, Be strong, and of a good Courage, and observe the
Commandments of the Lord, to walk in his ways, etc. In the mean while, the
Quires sung this Anthem, The King shall rejoice in thy strength, O Lord.
Exceeding glad shall He be of thy Salvation, etc.

Upon this, the Dukes, Marquesses, Earls, and Viscounts put on their Coronets;
the Barons their Caps: And Mr. Garter, and the Provincial Kings put on their
Coronets.

Then the Master of the Jewel-House delivered to the Archbishop the Ring, who
consecrated it, saying, Bless, O Lord, and sanctify this Ring, etc.

After which, he put it upon the fourth Finger of the King's right Hand, and
said, Receive this Ring of Kingly Dignity, and by it the Seal of Catholic
Faith, etc. And then used the Prayer, beginning thus; O God, to whom belongs
all Power, and Dignity, give unto thy Servant CHARLES the Fruit of His Dignity,
etc.

Which Prayer being finished, the Linen Gloves were delivered to the KING by
the Lord Great-Chamberlain. Then the KING went to the Altar, ungirt His Sword,
and offered it: which, being redeemed by the Lord-Chamberlain of the Household,
was drawn out of the Scabbard, and carried naked by him all the following part
of the Solemnity.

Then the Archbishop took the Scepter, with the Cross, from off the Altar, and
delivered it into the KING'S right Hand, saying, Receive this Scepter, the Sign
of Kingly Power, the Rod of Kingdoms, the Rod of Virtue, etc.

Whilst this was pronouncing by the Archbishop, Mr. Henry Howard (Brother to
Thomas Duke of Norfolk) delivered, by virtue of his Tenure of the Manor of
Wirksop, in the County of Norfolk, to the King a rich Glove for His right Hand;
which having put on, He then received the Scepter. And after that the
Archbishop said the Prayer, beginning thus, O Lord, the Fountain of all good
things, etc. Grant, we beseech thee, to this thy Servant CHARLES, that He may
order aright the Dignity, which He has obtained, etc.

During which time, the said Mr. Howard performed the Service, ratione tenurae
dicti Manerii de Wirksop, of supporting the King's right Arm.

Next of all, the Archbishop took the Scepter with the Dove, and gave it into
the King's Hand also, saying, Receive the Rod of Virtue, and Equity, learn to
make much of the Godly, and to terrify the Wicked, etc.

After which, the King kneeled, holding both the Scepters in His Hands, whilst
the Archbishop thus blessed Him, The Lord bless Thee, and keep Thee; and as He
has made Thee King over his People, so he still prosper Thee in this World,
and make Thee partaker of his Eternal Felicity in the World to come. Amen.

Then the KING arose, and set Himself again in Saint Edward's Chair, whilst
the Archbishop and Bishops present, one after another, kneeled before Him, and
were kissed by Him.

Whcih done, the KING returned to that Chair, placed on the Theater behind His
Throne, having then also the four Swords born naked before Him, (the
Archbishops, Bishops, and Great Officers attending) at whose arrival there,
the Archbishop said this Prayer, Grant, O Lord, that the Clergy and People,
gathered together by thine Ordinance for this service of the KING, etc.

Then the King reposed Himself in the said Chair, whilst both the Quires sung
Te Deum.

When Te Deum was ended, the King ascended His Throne placed in the midst of
the Theater (the Swords, and Great Officers standing on either side; as also
the Bishops) the Archbishop then saying, Stand, and hold fast from henceforth
that Place, whereof hitherto You have been Heir by the Succession of Your
Forefathers, etc.

After this, the Bishops, and Nobility did their Homage to the King in manner
following.

And first the Archbishop of Canterbury kneeled down before the King's Knees,
and said, I, WILLIAM Archbishop of CANTERBURY, shall be Faithful, and True,
and Faith, and Truth bear unto You, Our Sovereign Lord, and Your Heirs, Kings
of ENGLAND, and shall do, and truly acknowledge the Service of the Land, which I
claim to hold of You, in right of the Church: So help me God.

Which said, he kissed the King's left Cheek.

The like did all the other Bishops, that were present.

Then came up the Duke of YORK, with Garter, Principal King of Arms, before
Him, and His Train born by two Gentlemen, who, being arrived at the Throne,
kneeled down before the King, put off His Coronet, and did His Homage in these
words;

I, JAMES Duke of YORK, become Your Liege-man, of Life and Limb, and of Earthly
Worship: and Faith and Truth I shall bear unto You, to live and die against all
manner of Folk: So God me help. At which the Drums beat, Trumpets sounded, and
all the People shouted.

The like did the Dukes of Buckingham, and Albe-marle, for themselves, and the
rest of the Dukes.

So also did the Marquesses of Worcester, and Dorchester.

Next, the Earl of Oxford did Homage after the same manner for himself, and the
rest of the Earls, who attended upon him to signify their Consents.

After him, Viscount Hereford did the like for himself, and the rest of the
Viscounts; and then the Drums beat, and Trumpets sounded again, and the People
shouted.

Lastly, the Baron Audley in like manner did Homage for himself, and all the
Baronage, who also accompanied him to the Throne, in testification of their
Consents; which being finished, Drums, Trumpets, and Shouts followed.

Afterward the Duke of YORK, and all the Nobility singly ascended the Throne,
and touched the King's Crown, promising by that Ceremony to be ever ready to
support it with all their power.

During the performing of this Solemn Ceremony, the Lord High-Chancellour went
to the South, West, and North-sides of the Stage, and proclaimed to the People
the King's General Pardon, being attended by Mr. Garter to the South Side, and
by a Gentle-man-Vsher, and two Heralds to the other two Sides.

And at these three Sides, at the same time, did the Lord Cornwallis, Treasurer
of His Majesty's Household, fling abroad the Medals, both of Gold, and Silver,
prepared for the Coronation, as a Princely Donation, or Largess, among the
People. An Ectype of which is this, coin obverse CAROLVS-II-DG
ANG-SCO-FR-ET-HI-REX

coin reverse VEV^E^O-MISSVS. SVCCV^^^EE. SECLO-XXIII. APR. 1661



The King being thus enthronized, the Gentlemen of His Chapel began this
following Anthem, Behold, O Lord, our Defender, and look upon the Face of thine
Anointed.

At the ending of which Anthem, the Trumpets sounded, and Drums beat again. In
which time the Bishop of London went up to the High- Altar, and began the
Communion; and immediately the King took off His Crown, and delivered it to the
Lord High-Chamberlain to hold; the Scepter with the Cross to Mr. Henry Howard,
and that with the Dove to the Duke of Albemarle.

The EPISTLE (taken out of the First Epistle of St. Peter, the second Chapter,
and beginning at the eleventh Verse) was read by the Bishop of Chichester.

The GOSPEL (being part of the twenty second Chapter of St. Matthew, beginning
at the fifteenth Verse) by the Bishop of Ely.

After which, the Nicene Creed was began by the Bishop of London, and sung by
the Gentlemen of the Chapel.

All which time the King stood by His Throne.

But toward the end of the Creed He took again His Crown from the Lord
Great-Chamberlain, and put it on His Head; as also the Scepter with the Cross
from Mr. Howard, and that with the Dove from the Duke of Albemarle, and
prepared for His Descent from His Throne toward the Altar, to receive the
Communion.

And, as soon as singing of the Creed was fully ended, the King descended with
the Crown on His Head, and Scepters in both Hands, (the Bishops of Duresm, and
Bath and Wells, supporting Him) with the four Swords naked before, all the
great Officers attending. In the time of which Proceeding the Quire sung, Let
my Prayer come up into thy presence, as the Incense, and the lifting up of my
Hand be as an Evening-Sacrifice.

Here the Archbishop of Canterbury retired from the Ceremonies into Saint
Edward's Chapel, and thence went home, leaving the remainder of his Duty to be
performed by the Bishop of London.

At the King's approach to the Altar, the Bishop of Ely delivered unto Him
Bread, and Wine, which He there offered, and then returned to the Fald stool,
on the South side of the Altar, near His Chair of State; before which He
kneeled down, and laid His Crown upon the Cushion before Him, toward His right
Hand; and the Scepter with the Dove, on His left; and gave again to Mr. Howard
the Scepter with the Cross, who held it, kneeling on the King's right Hand: the
Grand Officers, and the Noblemen, with the four Swords naked, and erect,
standing about Him.

Then the Bishop of London said this Prayer, Bless, O Lord, we beseech thee,
these thy Gifts, and sanctify them unto this holy Use, etc.

At the end of which, the Lord Cornwallis, Treasurer of the Household, delivered
another Wedg of Gold (which goes under the name of the Mark of Gold) to the
Lord Great-Chamberlain, who presenting it to the King, He offered it into the
Basin, kneeling still at His Faldstool, whilst the Bishop of London said the
following Prayer, beginning thus; Almighty God, give Thee the Dew of Heaven,
and the Fatness of the Earth, and abundance of Corn, and Wine, etc.

And next pronounced this Blessing, Bless, O Lord, the virtuous carriage of
this KING, and accept the Work of His Hands, etc.

Then the Bishop proceeded to the Consecration of the Sacrament: which being
finished, he first of all received; next, the Dean of Westminster; then, the
Bishop of Bath and Wells; and lastly, the Bishop of Duresm.

These four Prelates having communicated, and Preparation made for the King's
Receiving (who kneeled all this while before the Fald-stool) the Bishop of
London gave the King the Bread, and the Dean of Westminster the Cup.

As soon as the King had received, this Anthem was begun by the upper Quire.

O hearken unto the voice of my Calling, my King, and my God, etc. In the mean
while, the King returned to His Throne upon the Theater, with the Crown on His
Head, and bearing the Scepters in His Hands.

When He came thither, He first put off His Crown, and delivered it to the Lord
Great-Chamberlain: then the Scepter with the Cross to Mr. Howard; and that
other with the Dove to the Duke of Albemarle.

After this the Bishop of London went on with the Communion; which being
finished, the King (attended as before) descended from His Throne crowned, with
both the Scepters in His Hand, (the rest of the Regalia being carried before
Him; and thence proceeded into Saint Edward's Chapel, where He took off Saint
Edward's Crown, and delivered it to the Bishop of London; who immediately laid
it upon Saint Edward's Altar, all the rest of the Regalia being given into the
hands of the Dean of Westminster, and laid there also. Then He retired into a
Traverse, where He was disrobed of the Robes He was crowned in, which were
delivered to the Dean of Westminster to lay up with the rest of Regalia) and
invested with His Royal Robes of Purple Velvet, He came near to Saint Edward's
Altar, where the Bishop of London standing ready with the Imperial Crown in his
hands, set that upon His Head. All which being performed, He took the Scepter
with the Cross in His right Hand, and the Globe in His left; and proceeded to
Westminster Hall, the same way that He came; and attended after the same
manner, saving that the Noblemen, and Bishops, who brought the Regalia to the
Abbey Church, went not now immediately before Him, as they did then, but were
ranked in places according to their Degrees: all the Noblemen having their
Coronets, and Caps on their Heads; and the Kings of Arms their Coronets.

The Proceeding being entered into Westminster Hall, the Nobility, and others,
who had Tables assigned them, went, and placed themselves thereat; but the
King, (attended with the Great Officers) withdrew into the Inner-Court of
Wards, for half an hour.

In the mean time, all the Tables in the Body of the Hall were served; viz.
before the King's Service came up, and were placed in this manner.

(viz. the South-East side of the Hall) were set two Tables, one beneath the
other: at the upper end of the first (which had two Side-Tables to serve it)
sat the Bishops; and below them the Judges, with the rest of the Long-Robe.

Table (which had two Side-board Tables likewise to serve it) sat the Masters
of the Chancery and the Six Clerks. At which likewise the Barons of the
Cinque Ports were then necessitated to sit (by reason of a Disturbance which
some of the King's Footmen made in offering to take the Canopy from them)
although the upper end of the first Table was appointed for them.

On the other side of the Hall was placed likewise a long Table,
Common-Pleas-Court, whereat the Nobility dined.

And behind this, close to the Wall, at a shorter Table, sat the Lord Mayor,
Aldermen, Recorder, and twelve chief Citizens of London.

Lastly, within the Court of Common Pleas was a Table set for the Officers at
Arms, whereat they also dined. Each Table being furnished with three Courses
answerable to that of the King's, besides the Banquet.

At the upper end of the Hall (where, upon an ascent of Steps, a Theater was
raised for His Majesty's Royal Seat at this great Solemnity) a large Table
being placed, the Sergeant of the Ewry, two Sergeants at Arms with their Maces
going before him, bringing up the Covering, was spread by the Gentlemen-ushers,
and Sergeant of the Ewry.

This being done, the Officers of the Pantry, with two Sergeants at Arms also
before them, brought up the Salt of State, and Caddinet.

A little before the King returned to Diner, two Esquires of the Body, took
their Seats upon two little Foot-stools, on either side of the Foot of the
King's Chair, (placed opposite to the middle of the Table) and there sat until
the King came in to Diner; when rising, and performing their Duty in placing
the King's Robes for His better convenience of sitting, they sat down again at
the King's Feet some part of Diner-time, until the King gave them leave to rise.

On the right Side of the Throne was erected a Gallery for the Officers at
Arms. And opposite to that, on the other side, another for the Music: and
below, on the old Scaffolds, next the Court of Common Pleas, stood the King's
Trumpeters.

The Proceeding at carrying up of the First Course to the KING'S TABLE.
The two Clerks Comptrollers, The two Clerks of the Green Cloth, And the
Cofferer of His Majesty's Household.
All in Black Velvet Gowns, trimmed with Black Silk, and Gold Lace, with Velvet
Caps raised in the Head.

Six Sergeants at Arms, two and two. The Earl-Marshal on the left Hand. The
Lord-High-Steward. The Lord High-Constable on the right Hand.
All three mounted on Horseback in their Robes, and with their Coronets on
their Heads; having their Horses richly trapped.

Six Sergeants at Arms, two and two.

The Comptroller of the Household, The Treasurer of the Household, with their
White Staves.

Earl of Dorset, Sewer.

Earl of Chesterfield, his Assistant.

The Knights of the Bath, carrying up the Service, two and two to a Dish, which
was set upon the Table by the Earl of Lincoln Carver, assisted by the
Earl-Sewers.

In the Rear came up the three Clerks of His Maiestie's Kitchen, all suited in
Black, Fugar'd, Satin Gowns, and Velvet Caps, in fashion like those worn by the
Clerks Comptrollers.

Diner being set on the Table, the King came forth from the Inner-Court of
Wards, in His Royal Robes, with the Crown on His Head, and Scepter in His Hand,
having the three Swords born naked before Him, and having washed, sat down to
Diner, the Bishop of London saying Grace.

On the King's right Hand, the Noblemen, that carried the three Swords, stood,
holding them naked, and erected, all the Diner-while; at His left Hand stood
the Lord High-Chamberlain, to whom the King had given the Scepter to hold. And
at the Table's end, on the King's left Hand, sat the Duke of YORK, in his
Robes, and Coronet.

Soon after Diner was begun, the Lord Allington, by virtue of his tenure of the
Manor of Wymundeley, in the County of Hertford, served the King of His first
Cup (which was of Silver Gilt) and after the King had drank, he had the Cup for
his Fee.

Next, Thomas Leigh Esquire was brought up to the Table with a Mess of Pottage,
called Dillegrout, by reason of his tenure of the Manor of Addington, in the
County of Surrey.

Afterward, a little before the second Course was ready, Sir Edward Dymock
Knight (being the King's Champion, as being seized of the Manor of Scrivelsby,
in the County of Lincoln) entered the Hall on a goodly White Coursier, armed at
all Points: and there having made a stand for some time, advanced in manner
following; First, Two Trumpets. Then the Serjeant-Trumpeter with his Mace.
After him two Sergeants at Arms, with their Maces.


Then one Esquire carrying his Target, having his Arms depicted thereon; and
Another Esquire carrying the Champion's Lance upright.
After them YORK-Herald at Arms.

The Earl-Marshal on his left Hand. The Champion. The Lord High-Constable on
his right Hand.
Both likewise on Horseback.

Being come on some few steps, he made a stand: whereupon the said Herald
proclaimed his Challenge in these following words; IF any Person of what degree
soever, high or low, shall deny, or gainsay Our Sovereign Lord King CHARLES
the Second, King of England, Scotland, France, and Ireland, Defender of the
Faith, Son and next Heir to Our Sovereign Lord CHARLES the First, the last King
deceased, to be right Heir to the Imperial Crown of this Realm of England; or
that He ought not to enjoy the same: here is His Champion, who says, that he
lies, and is a false Traitor, being ready in person to Combat with him, and
in this Quarrel will adventure his Life against him, on what day soever he
shall be appointed.

Whereupon the Champion threw down his Gantlet, which lying some small time,
and no body taking it up, it was delivered unto him again by the same Herald.
Then he advanced further forward, until he came to the middle of the Hall;
where the Herald having reiterated the same Proclamation, the Gantlet was again
thrown down, taken up, and returned unto him. And lastly, advancing to the Foot
of the Steps to the Throne of State, the said Herald again proclaimed the same
Challenge, whereupon the Champion threw down his Gantlet again, which no body
taking up, it was delivered unto him.

This being done, the Earl of Penbroke and Montgomery (assisted, as before)
presented on the Knee to the King a Gilt Cup with a Cover, full of Wine, who
drank to the Champion; and, by the said Earl sent him the Cup, which having
received, he, after three Reverences, drank it all off, went a little backward,
and so departed out of the Hall, taking the said Cup for his Fee.

All which being performed, Garter Principal King of Arms, with the two
Provincial Kings of Arms, having their Coronets on their Heads; and likewise
all the Heralds, and Pursuivants at Arms, came down from the Gallery, and went
to the lower end of the Tables, where they made their first obeisance to His
Majesty. Then advancing up into the midst of the Hall, they did the like, and
afterward at the Foot of the Steps toward His Majesty's Throne, where Garter
being ascended, proclaimed His Majesty's Style in Latin, French, and English,
according to ancient usage, crying Largess thrice. Which done, they all retired
backward into the midst of the Hall; and there, after crying Largess again
thrice, he proclaimed the King's Style as before. And lastly, they went yet
backwards to the end of the said Noble-mens Table, and did the same again; and
from thence into the Common-Pleas-Court, to Diner.

Immediately after this, the second Course was brought up by the
Gentlemen-Pensioners, with the former Solemnity; the last Dish being carried up
by Erasmus Smith Esquire, who then presented the King with three Maple Cups, on
the behalf of Robert Barnham Esquire in respect of his tenure of the Manor of
Nether-Bilsington in the County of Kent, by performance of that service on the
Day of the King's Coronation.

Lastly, the Lord Mayor of London then presented the King with Wine in a Golden
Cup, having a Cover; of which the King having drank, the said Lord Mayor
received it for his Fee.

By this time the day being far spent, the King (having Water brought Him by
the Earl of Penbroke, and his Assistants) washed, and rose from Diner before
the third Course was brought in; and, retiring into the Inner-Court of Wards,
He there disrobed Himself: and from thence went privately to His Barge, which
waited for Him at the Parliament-Stairs, and so to the Privy-Stairs at
White Hall, where He landed.

It is a thing very memorable, that, toward the end of Diner-time (although
all the former part of the day, and also the preceding day, in which the King
made His Cavalcade through London, were the only fair days, that we enjoyed of
many both before, and after) it began to Thunder and Lighten very smartly:
which, however some sort of People were apt to interpret as ominous, and
ill-boding, yet it will be no difficult matter to evidence from Antiquity, that
Accidents of this nature, though happily they might astonish, and amaze the
common Drove of men, were by the most Prudent, and Sagacious, looked upon as a
prosperous, and happy presage. And of this Virgil gives us a very pertinent
Example (in the eighth Book of his Aeneids) where Evander having addressed
himself in a Speech to Aeneas for aid against the Hetrurians, and He being
sollicitous how to answer his request, mark what Sign was immediately sent from
Heaven.

Namque improviso vibratus ab Aethere fulgor
Cum sonitu venit, etc.
For suddenly from Heaven a brandished Flash
With Thunder came, etc.
And presently after the Poet adds, Obstupuere animis alii, sed Troius Heroes
Agnovit sonitum, and Divae promissa Parentis.
While others stood amazed, the Hero knew
His Mother's Promise by the Sound that flew.


The same Author, in another place Lib. 2.
, mentions the same thing as a Testimony of Prayers heard, and answered; as
when Old Anchises, seeing the lambent Flame upon his Grandchild Iulus his
Head, lifted up his Hands to Heaven, and prayed to Jove for help, and
direction, he was thus answered, Vix ea fatus erat Senior, subitoque fragore
Intonuit lavum, etc,
Scarce had the grave Sire spoke, when suddenly
It thundered prosperous, etc.
For so Intonuit laevum is interpreted by Servius, according to the Maxim of
the Ancient Augurs, who interpret Thunder from the North, that is (as they,
contrary to the common Astronomers, accounted if) the left part of Heaven, for
a prosperous Omen.

But, in reference to our present Purpose, we may proceed to a larger
Interpretation, and conclude, that the Heavens, with Vollies of Thunder, and
nimble Flashes of Lightning, seemed to give a Plaudite, and Acclamation, to
this Grand and Sacred Solemnity; in like manner as we Mortals use to close our
greater Triumphs with Fireworks, Bonfires, and the loud Report of our great
Ordnance: this Terrestrial Thunder being but the Imitator, and Counterfeit of
the Heavenly Artillery.

And so I observe it expounded by Claudian in these Verses Claud. de Cons.
Probini and Olybrii ver. 205.
, Vt sceptrum gessere manu, membrisque rigentes
Aptavere togas, Signum dat summus hiulca
Nube Pater, gratamque facem per inane rotantes
Prospera vibrati sonuerunt Omina Nimbi.
As soon as robbed, and sceptered, Jove aloud
His Signal Favor thunders from a Cloud,
Successful Lightning through Heaven's Arches shines;
Both at His Coronation happy Signs.


FINIS.
portrait of Catherine of Braganza (queen consort of Charles II) CATHARIN
REGINA.
HONI SOIT QVI MAL Y PENSE


