ODES AND ELOGIES UPON Divine and Moral SUBJECTS.

LONDON: Printed for Henry Bonwicke at the Red-Lion in St. Paul's Churchyard,
School.

ODES.
The Priest.
I.
WHence is it my Muse, that thou appear'st so fair?
Exalted both in Garb and Air?
Not only Verdant are thy Bays,
But round thy Head they dart unwonted Rays. Muse
Did not great Wor'ster, learntd Ely late
Their matchless Works to thee communicate?
Make them frequent thy unfrequented Gate?
And that my Laurel Springs, do thou admire?
Enough, my Muse! thou have Reason to aspire.
Strain to a higher Key thy Strings,
And Sing henceforth of Sacred Things;
Odes and Elogies essay divine,
The Priest to these thou wilt rightly join,
The Priest too let thy Lays adorn,
The Priest so much the Ages Scorn.
II.
GOd with his Voice, did once his Laws proclaim
In Thunders, Earthquakes, and in Fire,
Lest if Men's Hearts he only did inspire,
And they no Outward Object saw,
They should deny him Author of his Law,
And take him for an empty Name:
But the Conviction was so full of Dread,
While Men beheld that God did live, themselves were well-nigh dead.
Their sinful Nature they confessed too weak,
To bear his Presence, or to hear him speak.
III.
HIs Mercy, for this Cause, made choice
Of Men, to be unto the World his Voice.
Not that all Men should claim this Grace,
No, not the Blemished, even of Aaron's Race,
Less the profane and vile by Trade.
It Is true, that he did call
Elisha from the Plow, and Amos from the Oxes Stall,
And Fishermen Apostles made.
But then his Call advanced their State;
As Men from Earth, Wise men from Idiots did create.
These to the World at first did Preach,
God inspired what they did teach.
Says he, Solicitous be not what to say,
It shall be given you in that day.
IV.
BUt when our Lord to Heaven had showed the Way,
And none but the Perverse could stray,
Of such Almighty Aid there was not need,
It was enough the Rule to weigh, as well as read;
Together with a pious Heart,
Study to use, and humane Art.
Industry to undergo,
And learned Languages to know.
The which the Spirit does befriend,
Though it o'er-bears not Men unto the End.
V.
IN these Phanatick and Atheistick Days,
Heaven enough we never can praise,
When Botchers, Cobblers, from the Stall,
Their Itch to Preach do term a Call;
And those a God deny, believe no Priest at all;
That yet the Holy Order we enjoy,
Debased by no late Alloy;
Learned, Apostolic, and pure,
That fiery Trials can endure,
And Truth against Hell it self secure.
VI.
MY Muse, thy Lyre is faint and weak,
One Stillingfleet alone to speak;
His Reverend Aspect, Gracious Life to draw,
Answ'ring both Gospel and Levitic Law;
Who Singly dares all Heretics engage,
Their Strength, their Rudeness, and their Rage,
Hour famed in ours, or any former Age.
When ancient Errors they disguise,
Or New devise,
He does detect them with his piercing Eyes.
The Reason show, they so much vaunt,
Is miserable Sophistry and Cant;
Their Doublings, Sculkings can descry,
Dodging 'tween Gibb'rish and Philosophy,
Their Scoptic and Elaborate* Shifts expound;
Be the grave Nonsense never so profound.
If to Antiquity, or Tongues, they fly,
They find that there,
He Is Conversant, and they but Strangers are.
VII.
THe solid Truth, when heretofore,
Such Triflers could not shake,
The Good Man they, their Sport did make:
With Flourishes of Wit insulted over.
Hobbs, though subtle in Dispute,
His Talent was to baffle, not confute.
And when he made a lucky Jest,
His Follow'rs thought he had the Best.
But here, together with the Truth, they see,
Language and Wit, though both neglected be;
So strong, so beautiful, and high,
What they their Business make, is far below his Bye;
That here their Petulance so ill they place,
They throw but Dirt upon a lovely Face,
Which them does brutish show, but it no way disgrace.
Psalm. lxxvii. 7. Will the Lord cast off for ever? Will he be favorable no
more?
Written before the Peace.
I.
WHen Men through high Presumption disobey
Not by mistake, but knowing, go astray
What wonder is it, if they Danger meet,
As Cattle led not by their Head, but Feet,
And like to them, become a Prey?
What wonder is it, when they cry;
And when Afflictions them oppress,
That God is Deaf to their Distress,
And does all Help to them deny?
They cry not from their Sense of Sin,
But from the Durance they are in;
Deliverance if they could obtain,
And in beloved Sins remain,
Midst Threats of Hell, their present Ease, they would hold a Gain.
For present Ease is all their Care,
This their Devotion warms, it is this enflames their Prayer.
II.
IN these our Days,
Loud are the Plaints we here,
" It Is now no less than the Ninth Year,
" That Wars amaze:
" The Accounts brought to us from abroad,
" However Various, Evils all record;
" Allies are false, and separate Leagues renew,
" France only and the Port between themselves are true;
" Plantations late are lost, our Merchants tan'e,
" Thousands by Famine, Sieges, Earthquakes slain:
" Forts are betrayed,
" Towns stormed, rased, plundered, or in Ashes laid:
" Even at this Distance, Bombs we seem to hear,
" And Seas, tho interposed, secure us not from fear:
" And in these Mis'rys having long been tos't,
" It Is said, Our hoped for Peace, at last, is crossed.
Ungrateful Men confess,
Our Evils, than our Sins, are less;
And Providence adore,
Upon this very Score,
However they are near,
We do not see and feel them, tho we hear;
That in Gazetts they only have a Place,
Of Slaughters when we read,
None in our Streets do bleed,
And Bombs and Cannon flash not in our Face.
III.
THeir Sufferings those compute, but not their Sin;
Long it would be, before these Men confess,
That more than twice Nine Years they have lived in
Profaneness, Whoredom, and in Drunkenness;
That Means they never used, Lust to subdue,
Never cared to pay to God or Man their Due;
Or thought the Nations Happiness the less,
When most Enormous Crimes did it oppress;
But if the Foe, at any time prevailed,
To murmur and complain they never failed,
If Vengeance, with our Sins, kep't equal Pace,
Deplorable, in truth, would be our Case:
For yet no Age did ever see,
Vices improved to such Degree:
He that was lately Lewd, essays
To justify his wicked Ways
By Blasphemy:
Our Libertines are Unitarians grown,
Themselves to be Socinians, Deists, own.
I doubt to call, what is ugly, Paints,
Yet these Pretenses are but Feints,
For Atheism is the real End,
To which these Vizor-Names do tend.
IV.
THe Foe of God and Man does now despise,
By sly Delusions, to subvert a few,
Here and there to gain a Prize,
To Tempt, he holds below his Fame,
It answers not his Mighty Aim,
Which is, Religion, Truth, and all that is Holy, to subdue.
God's Throne, in Heaven, he did attack in vain,
But that, on Earth, he doubts not to obtain:
And with these Hopes his Grandees does excite
To Piqueroon no more,
As mean and poor,
But against the strongest Forts of Faith to fight.
Adult'ry, Murder are the common Facts,
A Vulgar Sinner daily acts;
Exploits of greater Moment and Effect,
He from his Heroes does expect,
Not only, by their Lives, that they deny,
But by their Words and Pens, a Deity;
That they invalid and disgrace
The sacred Writ, that holds with Men so high a Place,
That makes Distinction between Good and Bad,
Fools terms Wise; and Wisemen Mad:
It Is this, Religious Mormoes, does sustain,
And Hells Endeavors renders vain:
For what Men idly teach,
All that is seen, a God does preach.
As Air and Earth, were other Sermons mute,
Them we'd despise, and not confute;
Never fear, though Tellescopes discry,
A spot in the Sun, or unknown Star in the Sky,
That God they will ever show unto a Mortal Eye.
V.
IN vain we hope for Peace,
While against Heaven we war,
Blessings expect, when Sins increase,
And what we beg, our selves debar.
We use the Psalmists Words in vain,
In this our State provoke, when we complain.
" Will the Lord's Anger always burn?
" His Favor will it never return?
" His Mercy has he quite forgot?
" And will he never,
" From out his Book Transgressions blot,
" But cast us off for ever?
God at no time is slow to hear,
To Contrite Souls to lend an Ear,
Their Supplications does not slight,
Or in their Miseries delight.
From him all Cruelty's removed far,
And Men alone Obdurate are;
We think, that Months and Years, we wait
His Pleasure to redress our State,
Deplore his long protracted stay,
When, in truth, it is We delay,
And God it is, that does attend,
Till we reform our Lives, and impious Ways amend;
If this were done, no more would need,
Blessings from Heaven would come with winged Speed.
Psalm. xc. 10. The days of our Age are Threescore years and Ten.
I.
WHen David old Barzillai did invite,
To share with him the Glorys and Delight,
The Pomp and Affluence that did await,
His new recovered Throne and State;
Says he, Thy Servant fourscore Years has passed,
And can I longer what is Delicious taste?
The Voice of Singing Men or Women hear?
It more becomes my present Care,
To cast an Eye upon my Grave, and End,
Than to Pleasures now pretend,
More for a Tomb, than for a Court prepare.
II.
THe Old as little Relish find
In youthful Pleasure,
As dying Men do at the News of Treasure;
Or those that hood wink't are or Blind
In what is Fair;
To them the Object is, as 'twere not there.
When on the Beautiful the Aged look,
Straightway without Delight,
They drop their Sight,
And by its Charms are no way struck.
When loud, at Triumphs, are the Peoples Voice,
With Feasting, Bells, and Bonfires, all rejoice,
Calmly they their Sense express,
Bless the God, that does them bless,
All beside this, to them is Irksomness.
And 'twere not much, if such were all
The Evils which old Age befall,
Sharp Pains do also them attack,
Their Board afflictive makes their Bed a Rack.
III.
YEt as a Blessing, Men old Age do prize,
And justly; though infirm, it is also wise:
It is not captivated with the sight,
Of evr'y Toy; but judges right:
What others dote on, can despise:
When it contests with Aches or the Stone,
Under Infirmities, or Years does groan,
It is but like the Pain,
A Prisoner does sustain,
When they his Gyves unlock,
The Bolts, to free him, rudely from him knock;
A Glorious Jubilee he sees is near,
And Death is welcome, 'cause, he after it does nothing fear.
But if that Men grow old in Sin,
Sad indeed's the State they are in,
Beside the Burden under which they lie,
There Is always standing in their Eye,
The Horrors of a sad Eternity.
Boaz and Ruth.
I.
WHen Boaz among his Reapers came,
And lovely Ruth did gleaning see,
She seemed an Angel in his Eyes,
Clad in a mean and mortal Guise:
Astonished in no low degree,
He ask't the Damzels Name,
And being told,
With Joy he her no less, than Wonder did behold:
For tho, by Face, she was unknown,
Her near Alliance he did own,
And long before she came,
Loud was the Trumpet of her Fame:
These things he gladly understood,
Tho Love alone supplied both Fame and Blood:
He gave the Reapers charge,
To let her range the Field at large,
And no way her reproach,
Tho on the bound-up Sheavs she did encroach,
But rather, purposly let fall
Handfuls of Ears: For in his Heart, he wished her All.
II.
HIs Speech he next did to her self address,
After the most obliging wise,
A Virtuous Passion could devise,
And Love and Bounty both express.
Damsel, said he, glean not elsewhere,
You shall be always welcome here;
Strict Command on all l'ave laid,
That high regard to you be paid,
And when you are with Heat oppressed,
Where to refresh and be at rest,
These Maids will show.
Surpised she was, and bowed low,
(For Boaz, among the Great Ones, had a Name)
The sense of such unlook't for Grace,
Flush't in her sweet and modest Face,
And, 'bove her Words, declared her highest Aim,
Was but his humble Handmaid to be known,
If yet so proud a Title she might own.
When Evening came, she gladly bore
To Naomi her gathered store;
A homely Load, you will say, for One so Fair,
And who deserved much more to wear
A Robe of Ermins and a Crown:
But Royal Ensigns, tho of high Renown,
May not with Filial Piety compare.
III.
HEaring the Progress Ruth had made,
Naomi worshiped; And then said,
Our gloomy Days begin to clear,
Our Sorrows draw unto an end,
We have no longer Cause to fear,
Although the Good is small,
Which does to us befall,
Compared with the Glorious Work, which God does more intend.
By a Prophetic Ray,
I see, I see, the Blessed Day,
Moab and Ammon will no more,
Baal, Moloch, Ashteroth adore,
But Israel's God obey;
Abra'm will Lot a Second time redeem --
Here to adore, she then again did seem,
And Daughter said, observe what I appoint,
In Jordan bath, and cleanse away the Soil,
Contracted by your late incessant Toil;
With precious Oil your self Anoint,
Adorn you in your best Attire,
That Nature may with Grace conspire,
Till we do all, we can our selves Effect;
Divine Assistance vainly we expect.
Boaz will shortly hold his Harvest Feast,
Where you will be a bright and shining Guest,
Keep still your natural modest Mien,
Most meek, when Beauty's most Imperious seen:
This your Excellence will show,
When that which All admire, your self you do not know.
IV.
UPon the solemn Feasting Day,
First, Boaz, did the Temple's Dutys pay,
And then, to all that Genial was, gave way.
The Threshing-floor did loudly ring,
While on Cymbals some did play, to Timbrels others sing.
The good of all the Land was there,
What ever fruitful Canaan bears;
With generous Wine the Cups went round,
The loaded Tables did abound
With Fatlings of the Earth and Air:
And there not only Plenty was, but Wit,
Or something that did pass for it,
The Room did reel with harmless Rural Mirth,
While some applauded, others gave it birth.
Thus the Guests themselves did please,
But Boaz Soul aloft did soar,
A Divine Rapture him did seize,
And to Celestial Regions bore,
Where he did behold,
In sacred Leaves enrol'd,
His Offspring should a Scepter sway,
All Judah, his and Ruth's Posterity obey.
And in dark Clouds tho more involved,
Yet Greater things,
This Wonder of all Wonders Heaven resolved,
From them shoud come the Lord of Lords, and King of Kings*
V.
THe Fleeting of his Soul to hide,
Frolic he bid his Guests abide.
With Thanks, they told him he might spare,
To have of them a further Care,
After so long enjoying such voluptuous Fare.
The Day was spent,
And with a joint Consent,
To leave the Board, all signs did give,
Thither they came to Feast, but not to Live;
Tho all delicious were, and naught did cloy.
Men in long time grow weary even of Joy.
Boaz was glad to see his Guests well pleased,
And of his Care not sorry to be eased,
That what imported more, he might pursue,
Considered yet if ought from him was due,
Then from his Princely overflowing store,
Large Gifts he sent unto the absent Poor,
That which Religion did begin, the Meal,
He careful was, with Charity and holy Hymns to ^eal
VI.
TO Ruth he did declare that Night,
His love and high esteem,
And his Faith to her did plight,
In case her nearer Kinsman waved his Right,
Her and her Heritage he would redeem.
Which falling out to his desire,
His heart suppressed a scorching Fire,
Till he his Purpose did relate,
Before the Judges sitting in the Gate.
Which heard: with One united Voice,
They all approved, and blessed his Choice:
For unto them 'twas not unknown,
That she despised the Gods of Wood and Stone;
Her Parents, Country, all did leave,
To the God of Israel, tho with wants to cleave.
It added also much unto her Fame,
Lovers both Young and Rich she did disclaim,
And chose with Boaz to engage,
An Elder as in Honor, now also one in Age*
They prayed like Leah, she might fruitful prove,
Powerful, as Rachel, to excite his Love.
Before the Year its Course had run,
All Vows were heard,
And joyful Naomi in her Bosom reared,
A darling, and much prayed for Son.
On David and Goliath.
I.
Marshalled and drawn-up in array,
The Host of Israel and Philistia stood,
An ample Plain between them lay,
Designed the present Stage of Blood.
From the Uncircumsised a Champion came,
The Earth a Prouder never bore,
A Squire and Terror ushered him before,
Goliath was his Name.
We do not read,
He was renowned for any Warlike deed,
Nor was there need.
His vast Dimensions did suffice,
Without the help of Enterprise.
To rigester his Fame.
His Stature did surpass,
The size of human Race,
His monst'rous Limbs were clad in Brass,
Dreadful his Aspect, insolent his Pace.
Between the Camps he stood, and thus did cry,
All that bear Arms in Israel I defy,
Among your Troops, he that is of greatest Might,
I Challenge to contest with me in single Fight.
And let the Vanquished side serve and obey
His, whose Victorious Arms shall win the Day.
But from his Face all fled for fear,
His Presence without Stroke, beat up the Quarters he drew near.
II.
WHile forty Days he thus did signalize,
His haughty and presumptuous Pride,
The Host and God of Israel both despise;
The Boaster more to baffle and deride,
Divine Wisdom did refuse,
A Champion from the Camp to choose,
But to disgrace, as well as to destroy,
From out the Sheep-folds sent a blushing Boy.
Who did the Semblance of a Virgin bear,
So fresh his looks, so white his Limbs, so flowing was his Hair.
Thin the Youth was also clad,
Sword nor Armor had,
Nor trained was in Military Art,
A Lamb without, but Giant in his Heart.
When the o'reweaning Foe did on him look,
To be so scorned, he could not brook,
With Rage being ready even to burst,
His Sword he drew not, but his Tongue and cursed.
Then against his Youth and Weapons thus he raves,
Am I a Dog, thou come to me with Staves?
Or do thou hope that I,
Who dare even Gods defy,
Will thee vouchsafe the Name of Enemy?
To be a Prey the art fitter for a Kite,
Than with a Man of War, like me to fight.
III.
TO his Contempt thus David did reply.
On thy huge Bulk thou do rely,
Thy massy Spear and Coat of Mail,
Which nothing yet shall thee avail,
But thy vain Confidence only show,
And more inglorious make thy Overthrow:
Unarmed to thee I come, but in his Might,
Who Sword nor Shield does use in fight,
Thy Headless Carcass I will throw,
To dogs and wolves, to pay the Debt, thy Blasphemy does ow.
Goliath urged thus high, to combat rose,
David as prompt, before they came to Close,
His Shepherds Tackling against him bent,
There was no doubt of good Event,
Not only from the Sling, but Heaven, the Stone was sent,
Which in his Brain took up its fatal Bed,
The Giant lowr'd his lofty Head,
And sell, as if ashamed of his Disgrace,
Prone and grovling on his Face.
His ponderous Corpse did loud resound,
As if a Tower of Brass had rush't unto the Ground.
Israel raise,d a cheerful shout,
Their Champions death their Foes did rout,
Who fell by thousands all the Way,
'Twixt Ekron, Gath and Shaaron lay.
IV.
REturned from the Chase of Blood,
Before the King and Captains David stood,
Holding the Head, they did so lately fear,
Which made his beaut'ous Youth more excellent appear.
And all pronounced him worthy, with one Voice,
Not only of Readiness Promise, but his Choice.
For where a Son, so Glorious could he find?
Or if not seen, have fancied in his Mind?
And there was none did Saul so far engage,
To hold his Word, as Jonathan, first Hero of his Age.
And Princess Michal, by a secret Flame,
Approved the Justice of the Victors Claim.
Even at this early Day,
His Air did future Majesty display,
To which these things did only plain the Way.
But ever he laid his Sheephook down,
Assumed a Scepter and a Crown,
Greater Prowess he must show,
More Goliahs overthrow,
Envy, Malice, Jealousy,
Slanders, Snares and Treachery,
Temptations must with those combine,
And through them all a mighty Grace must shine.
Thus God conducts the noble to their End,
David's high Virtue made him David's Friend.
David's Lamentation, on the Death of Saul and Jonathan.
I.
GRief and Amazement in my Breast contend,
To the highest Part, both in this Threne pretend,
Both say, To me pertains the fatal Story,
Israel has lost her Beauty and her Glory;
Her high Renown, in Arms disgrace't,
Her Old stupendous Victorys deface't.
Her King and mighty Men are overthrown,
Offended God, his People and his Host refused to own.
Horror invades me, when I say,
The Strong have cast their Shields away,
Their Bodies ly upon the Ground,
Among the Vulgar slain are found,
As Saul, with holy Oil, had never anointed been, and Crowned.
The Blood of Foes his Sword did always stain,
And Ionathans, from Fight, did never return in vain.
As swift as Eagles, and as Lions strong,
Wherever they March, Victory went along.
How are the Mighty in the Battle slain!
Who shall thy Glory Israel now sustain?
II.
THe Daughters of Philistia will rejoice,
In Dances, and with Instruments and Voice,
Isreal's Dishonor make their Theme,
Dagon extol, the God of Heaven blaspheme,
Gilboa, the Scene of all our Woe,
May Corn nor Grass ever on thee grow,
Such Blessings may thou never know.
An Offering to God's House to pay,
A Lamb or Sheaf upon his Altar lay.
The Conflict was not in the Plain,
In thy High Places Trust was put in vain:
Israel never felt so heavy a Rod,
But when she lost the Ark, the Symbol of her God.
Saul and Jonathan in their Lives,
Lovely and pleasant were in all Men's Eyes;
Their Death the Land has wounded deep,
Daughters of Sion mourn and weep,
In Gold and Scarlet Saul did you array,
His Reign, your Lives made constant Holy Day.
How are the Mighty in the Battle slain!
Who shall thy Glory, Israel, now sustain?
III.
AH! my brother Jonathan,
Generous Prince, and more than Man,
A nobler Soul was never Guest,
Than thine, in any Mortals Breast:
To me thou yet resigne'st a Throne,
No less by Virtue, than by Birth, thy Own.
The Love for which I unto thee do owe,
Was wonderful, surpast what softest Women know.
Great for thee is my Distress,
Thy Loss, my Soul, does like to Death oppress.
Utter my Harp some lofty Strain,
That his Memory may retain,
But Harp and Hand invoked are in vain.
The powerful Notes did disenthral,
From the Evil Spirit rescue Saul,
Faint, and wans Help themselves when they relate thy Fall
How are the Mighty in the Battle slain!
Who shall thy Glory, Israel, now sustain?
All Sin is Folly.
I.
OF this no other Proof there needs,
Then the Confusion which Men find,
In their recoiling Mind,
After their Wicked Deeds:
For the Sin's no sooner over,
But they immediately deplore,
The loss of Wisdom, Virtue, Innocence, which they possessed before
The Veil is fallen from the Face
Of the bewitching Sin,
And they disclose, involved within,
A Hag, and not a Helen, in the place;
That which they loath and disapprove,
A Cure, and not a Cause of Love.
II.
NOr was it God's least Favor to Mankind,
That first their Guilt themselves should find,
Their Conscience them upbraid,
Chastise and make afraid,
Before the Law their Crimes could reach,
A sober disabused Mind should them impeach.
'Twas not the Parable of the Poor-mans Lamb,
Did David's Soul at first awake,
These words [I'ave sinn'd] within his Heart he spake'
Before that Nathan came.
Nor was it the Cock's repeated Crow,
Made Peter his Transgression know.
It star'd in's Face, and stood before his Eye,
While yet he cursed, and did his Lord deny;
The Horror and Compunction felt within,
Forestal'd the outward Herald of his Sin.
III.
THo Sin's a Folly, it does not yet denote,
Things of a small and light Import,
But such as are of greatest Weight,
Folly, in what concerns our mortal and immortal State.
It Is a Defect, but it is no Jest;
Not what Men laugh at, but detest.
The Flames of Hell are said, to yield no Light,
So Sin, tho foolish, causes no Delight.
Absurd and harmless things, our Mirth do make,
They Are Fools themselves, pleasure in Mischief take.
Who over a Precipice, can a blind Man see
To step, and laugh at the Calamity,
Be tickled at the Sight of such an Evil,
Must have the Spleen and Malice of a Devil.
IV.
IN a wicked Man's Condition,
There is not only Error, but Perdition,
Mistake, but Death, in all Transgression.
For God he makes his Foe, who was his Friend,
The Bow he for him bent, against him bend.
Those then that by his Goodness are not won,
It will concern his Vengeance yet to shun,
The Apostle makes this smart Demand,
To those his Anger dare withstand,
Are Men, than he, of greater Power?
There Is none, that think so, in their Wits,
But in Sins raging and over-bearing Fits,
As if they were, they slight him in that Hour.
Eternal Burning who can bear?
None possibly:
And yet in Sin when Men engaged are,
Whether they can or no, they do not care.
V.
FOlly in Sin does never so high abound,
As when among the Saints it is found,
They Sin against a mighty'r Grace,
Boldly transgress,
As they confess,
Before God's Face.
Astronomers wonder in no mean Degree,
Dark spots in the Body of the Sun to see,
In The Source and Font of Light to find,
Night and Day together joined.
The World's yet seized with more amaze,
And does, as at a Portent gaze,
When crimes, the Righteous stain and spot,
Their Lives, like common Persons blot;
When such bright Luminarys cease to shine,
Sullied, to darkness in their Orbs incline,
Frailty confess, who were supposed Divine.
VI.
WHen from what is just the Impious range,
There falls out nothing that is strange;
But when a David does from Grace depart,
Adult'ry and Murder perpetrate,
A Man that is after God's own Heart,
The Truth of Faith the Holy fear,
In'ts Firmament no greater Prodigy can appear.
The Salt that should preserve, the World does taint;
Those Sin encourage, who should lay restraint;
Religion does it self receive a Wound,
Atheists blaspheme upon this Ground.
The Sin of every Saint,
Adams Offense does lively paint;
For every Saint's renewed again
Unto God's Image he was created in,
And if he stood in Adams place,
He would the stamp again deface,
A second Time destroy all human Race.
Quakers.
I.
THo Isreal's Sins were numberless and great,
Long time God seemed not to chastise, but threat;
Ten Murmurings he passed-by,
When in the Desert they did ly,
Their Whoredoms and Idolatry;
His whole Displeasure would not show,
Endured the Golden Calf, and those of Dan and Bethel too.
And in Rebellion when more mad,
Apostasy to Idols they did add,
Into his Temple Baalim brought,
The Heathens worst Abominations wrought,
His Patience thus tho highly urged,
He did not them destory, but scourged;
Delivered them into the Hand,
Of those enslaved them in a for^ign Land,
But with a Purpose to recall again,
And that his People still they should remain.
They found his Oath, to Abra'm true,
As they their Sins, his Mercy unto them he did renew,
II.
BUt when most spared, they most did disobey;
The Saints of God, the Son of God did slay;
Not only Blood of Prophets spill,
But the Messiah, their Redeemer, kill;
This Act, for Pardon, left no place,
Mercy it self, in Him, they did destory, and Grace
And wrought not only Deportation,
Some Weeks of Years of Desolation,
But the entire Rejection of their Nation.
His Wrath, so long restrained, God on them laid,
This last Offense for all the former paid.
Into the Place of Abra'ms carnal Seed,
He made his spiritual Offspring to succeed.
These only, for his People, now did know
And all the formers Titles, Privileges, did on these bestow
And when St. Paul does to the Churches write
To all Believers he does give the Name
Of Saints, it being now their Right,
Jews, to this Title, having forfeited their Claim.
III.
BUt this high Honor's little in the Eyes,
Of our thrice holy Sectaries,
Thus to be herded, they disdain,
To march in the common Christian Train,
Those the Apostles holy call, they count Profane.
Affect a more Supreme degree,
Saints above the Saints to be.
And more exc'llent Precepts do they give?
Than others do they better live?
Divine Credentials can they show,
They more than former Ages know?
Sad Experience answers, No.
What are then their great Seize?
Rude Behavior, uncouth Garments.
New coined Words, distorted Looks,
Ignorance, and contempt of Books,
To all Government, Perverseness,
To Conviction, an Aversness.
To speak the Truth, the Faith they do desert,
Religion, all that is sacred, to a Farce convert.
IV.
WHen James and John, to our Lord their Mother brought,
To sit at's right and left Hand him besought,
They might the Honor in his Kingdom have,
Says he, You know not what it is you crave --
So we may say to those among us aspire,
To the Name of Saints, you know not what it is that you desire.
Can you sustain the Burden you take up?
Support the Honor, which you so usurp?
The style of Saint is not a flaunting Name,
To give a Sect Repute and Fame,
A Term, a Badge; but does denote a State,
Dutys requires of an Heroic Rate.
The Saints Gods Champions are,
Against Hell and Sin they War:
Temptations, Hardships undergo,
All Dangers, Torments, Death it self break through.
And as their Calling's higher
So from them greater Wisdom all require;
And if at any time they fall,
None their Lapse, does Frailty call.
But in their Eyes it does avail,
As when Natures self does fail,
And, as a Monster's looked upon by All.
V.
IF St. Paul's Advice be therefore good,
Least he fall, let him beware,
Who lately stood:
Much more it will become their Care,
To keep their Footing, who Exalted are.
For if a Fall on level Ground,
A Bone may break, or Limb may Wound,
He that walks upon a Tower,
Had need be circumspect that Hour,
If Heedless here he be and rash,
To pieces his whole Body he may dash.
Those Angels from their Station fell,
Stopped not, till they came to Hell.
And so,
An Hypocrite Saint will sink, until he can no lower go.
The Title therefore wave, and be the Thing;
An empty Name to Heaven none ever did bring.
That which on Aarons Miter was inscribed,
Holiness to the Lord, let none through Pride,
In Capital Letters on his Forehead write,
But labor to be Holy in his sight.
While to be Christ's, you all declare,
You do confess, that you no Christians are.
The Sin of the Jews and yours comes all to One,
They took away Christ's life, and you allow him none.
VI.
Heriticks in the Days of Old,
To Oppose some single Truths were bold:
But Quakers dare,
Against Universal Faith declare.
All Christian Doctrines, Worship, Churches, brand,
Whose sacred Rites, Professors, Structures stand,
Besmeer'd, with Ordure, by their impious Hand.
Nor Holy Scriptures do they less blaspheme,
Advancing 'bove them, what themselves do dream.
Subjection to all Magistrates, disown,
Usurp both Power of Parliament and Throne.
A Sect, by Leather Breeches, first begun,
Rude and Seditious, silly and course-spun;
In which, for the highest Place, these two do vie,
Excess of Folly and Impiety;
Contemned by all the Sober, Pious, Wise.
But they by their Numbers fright, those who their Cant despise,
For the Ecclesiastic and the Civil State,
Profess'dly are their Grievance and their Hate.
And could they reach their highest Aim and Vow,
They would destroy, All that they disallow.
The Muses.
I.
PHoebus, his daily Course being run,
His Rays of fire
Quenched in the Sea, or else laid by,
Apollo now, and not the Sun,
The Prince and President of the Muses Quire,
As on Parnassus he did ly,
Said, you to whom I did bequeath,
My Daphnes ever verdant Wreath,
Refresh me with your charming Lays,
Our Votaries record, those who adore the Bays.
Thalia promptest of the Nine,
Whose Harp was ever turned, as ever strung,
At his Command thus Sung,
In lofty Numbers and Divine.
All mortal and immortal Powers,
All that are great in Heaven and Earth are Ours,
The God's themselves do higher prize
A Hymn, than Sacrifice;
To be extolled, for doing Good,
Than have their Altars flow with Sheeps and Oxens Blood.
II.
THe mighty Hero, when h' as fought,
And Conquest, his high Wishes glut,
All Opposition, under him has brought,
On Necks of Kings has set his Foot.
Whose noble Deeds shine forth so bright,
His very Person is a sight;
And never moves without the Ax and Rods
To show that Life and Death
Depend upon his Breath,
And that his Power approaches to the Gods.
This Pomp and Glory he does lightly prize,
His Tribute and Dominion yet much more despise,
With all the Vulgars gaze,
And simple Praise,
An Ode of Pindars far esteems more,
Than Crowds and Crowns, than Trophies Triumphs all the Peoples Rore.
The great Pelaean Prince, Achilles Tomb
Beholding, wept': and his a happyer Doom
Pronounced, in being sung in Homer's Verse,
Than to be styled himself, Lord of the Universe.
III.
BEauty, which does such mighty Monarchs sway,
Makes them to stoop, whom all beside obey;
At whose proud Feet do prostrate ly,
Riches, Youth, Nobility,
Who causes her own Fair Sex for Envy die.
This her Empire holds below
The Glorys, we the Muses do bestow,
Famed Helen thought it less,
To reign a Queen, than to be enthroned in Verse.
And Iulia did their Court despise,
Who her Person did admire,
Because Augustus was her sire.
What was so great in their's, was little in her Eyes,
Chose Ovids celebrated Love to be,
Before her high Imperial Dignity.
The Learned and the Wise
Seek Fame, tho under Truths disguise.
Thy self, great Paean, the admired Eye
Of Heaven, when brightest thou do shine,
The art but a Planet in the Sky,
At Helicon a God, and Power Divine.
A Chorus here of all the Nine
Joined in the Close,
And Phoebus, to restore the Day, to mortal Men arose.
The Sullen Shepherd.
I.
PRetending Muse! What do thou here?
Naught more Ungrateful can appear;
Thy Laurel I disclaim and Lyre,
Thy Verse and Music less admire;
I Would rather see a shaggy Coat,
Than this thy gorgeous Dress, and Varie'gated Coat,
The adored Idol of our Plains,
The Ambition of our most accomplished Swains,
Fair Aleria, for a while,
By thy Arts I did beguil.
She did pronounce, that I would prove most true,
Who knew so well, Beauty and Worth to give their due.
On this Success I bore me high,
But while on thee I did rely,
Behold! where foiled and scorned upon the Ground I ly.
II.
THis is Pans high and solemn Day,
In which I Sung, and on the Pipe did play,
Through Natures secrets Thou my Song did steer,
And the Celestial Orbs that guide the Year.
In wondrous Strains I made our Shepherds know,
Whence fruitful and unfruitful Seasons flow,
Philosopher, Bard, Astronomer, I my self did show
Our reverend Priest, Damon, the learned sire,
My soaring Numbers did so much admire,
Upon my Brow he placed his sacred Wreath,
Saying, My Son, This I to thee bequeath,
My Crook, my Pipe, my Priesthood, all I leave.
As to an Oracle, the Congress all did bow,
With joint Consent, his Legacy allow.
III.
YOung Thyrsis next to Sing arose,
For Theme the flowery Medows chose,
Soft Fancys did his Subject grace,
But more the Beautys in his Face
The Rose and Lilly there
Than those in the Field were held more fair,
These chiefly did support his Cause,
When Art did fail, acquired him high Applause.
The Nymphs overwhelmed him with their Showers
Of Garlands, and of fragrant Flowers;
Aleria too, however slow
Me to adorn, did forward show,
By others willing to be led,
To plant a Rosy Chaplet on his Head.
Is this Thy promis't vast Renown?
Is this a Poets never withering Crown?
The Flower of Youth survives more Days;
A Flower it self, than Thy immortal Bays.
IV.
TO's Raving thus the Muse replied.
Art thou Strephon so Blear eyed!
Which hold thou the nobler Prize,
The Applause of Girls, or Judgment of the Wise?
If Idiots know not Good from Bad,
Must all that is Exc'lent, be accounted Mad?
Because Aleria answers not thy Flame,
Are Phoebus and the Muses sacred Choire to blame?
This said,
Displeased she fled,
And tho convinced of Folly in his Mind,
One Word, the Sullen, could not find,
T'implore her stay.
Obscurer now became his Day,
But while he in Confusion lay,
To his amazement and surprise,
He saw Aleria stand with weeping Eyes:
And yet in Tears showing Celestial Grace,
Strange! so near Heaven, sorrow should find a Place.
V.
STrephon, said she, your Faith I come to prove,
Faultless Aleria, all that knew, did love:
But when so many su'd my Grace to find,
To thee, Famed Shepherd, I was only kind.
This is the Hour,
It Is put within thy Power,
To return my Generous Deed.
Favor I then bestowed; but Favor now I need;
Which tho I say, (for my late acted Part)
I read my Crime in thy enraged Eyes, not in my Heart.
After that Damon had advanced thy Fame
To so Divine a Pitch, me who could blame,
If I to add my trifling Flowers, was then withheld by shame?
If thou some savage Beast should see,
Lion or Tiger seize on me,
With hazard of thy Life, thou would set me free.
No Cruelty of Lions, Tigers, equals that of Jealousy.
VI.
HEr Words his Heart, her Presence charmed his sight,
Yet still Morose and Foe to's own Delight;
As beneath the Oak he lay,
He only this vouchsafed to say;
I am resolved, not to outlive this Day,
You are the Murderer, tho I my self do slay.
At hearing which, she fell into a Swound,
And like a Star, tho Dead, she shon upon the Ground
Horror did now his Soul invade,
Of's hateful Mood he grew himself afraid,
He saw the Tendance of his black Disease,
And trembling, set the Nymph to cheer, and God's to appease.
No longer dally'd and delayed,
But all that Duty, Pity, Reason did command, obeyed.
The Words of our Lord Luke 23. 17. [Daughters of Jerusalem weep not for me,
but weep for your selves -- ]
Applied to the Superstitious Penitents of the Church of Rome.
THy misplaced Tears, blind Penitent forbear,
With Sighs to raise a Tempest in the Air;
Cease the sad Sufferings of our Lord to mourn,
That Is Head with Thorns, his Flesh with whips was torn;
To hug his Cross desist, to kiss his Wounds,
Placing in these Contrition's utmost Bounds.
Let faithless Jews lament this Tragic story,
Authors of's Death, and Exiles from his Glory;
These were they did the Holy One destroy,
To their Eternal Woe, but Christians Joy;
Though they can never expiate their Guilt,
The World was saved by the Blood they spilt.
It Is true, that all Apostates Christ do slay,
All murder him, who not his Laws obey;
But weep not then, Our Lord sustained such Pain,
But weep for thee, he suffered all in vain;
Weep, when for Sin he under Torments died,
No Sin by thee was ever mortified;
Weep not the Soldiers mocked, and him disguised,
But him thy self has ridiculed despised;
Weep, 'cause the good his Death for others wrought,
Greater Damnation upon thee has brought.
The immortal Soul is such a precious Thing,
That to redeem, it Christ from Heaven did bring;
The lapsed Souls of Men, I say, to save,
He changed his Glory for a Cross and Grave.
And now they 're Ransomed at so vast a Rate,
They far excel their Primitive Estate;
He then that now does for this Jewel trade,
The World tho gained, has an ill Bargain made;
Not only what is immortal does despise,
But Heavens dear Purchase also lightly prize;
Parts with his Soul Redeemed, and Savior too,
When Mercy's self no more for him can do.
Here is no place to act a Pageant Part
Of Grief, Christ's Sufferings to set-off with Art,
Rejoice in these, bewail thy wicked Heart.
Isaiah 53. v. 2. -- He has no form nor comeliness in him, and when we shall
see him, there is no beauty that we should desire him.
THus the Evangelic Prophet long foretold,
The carnal Synagogue would Christ behold,
When without Worldly Pomp he did appear,
A King without a Court, a Sword or Spear;
His Person and Pretenses they would disdain,
Measuring him by his despicable Train.
It was enough, could they object no worse,
A mean Condition is it self a Curse,
The Spirit, (as their Wisemen taught) denied,
On any, but the Noble to abide.
Could they believe, that he could Heaven bestow,
Who not a Foot of Earth, of's own could show?
That he their Nation could exalt and save,
Whose miserable State relief did crave?
A Prophet say he were in Word and Deed,
They all were Prophets, and they none did need;
T'expiate their Sins; their Priests well knew,
Their Business was, the Nations to subdue;
And though he spoke, as no Man ever spoke,
Words would not free them from the Roman Yoke.
An Abject, daring Israel's Throne to engross,
Deserved to be Exalted on the Cross.
With these the Impious, in all Ages join,
And with the Sanhedrim, against Christ combine;
See naught that is Great in him, naught to admire,
Naught that is lovely, or they can desire;
To Riches, say, he is a professed Foe,
Indeed to all, the World does Pleasant know;
So little aims Men's Happiness to improve,
He interdicts them what they most do love;
Joys visible and present bids forsake,
Invisible and absent to partake.
But Land on Earth they will exchange as soon,
For Lordships and Possessions in the Moon.
The Cloud conducted Israel in their Way,
Cast Night on Pharaohs Host, on their's a Day.
Messiah thus Inglorious in the sight
Of sensual Men, Illust'rious is and bright
In's Churches Eyes, 'bove all she can express,
For all created Excellence is less;
His Majesty does ravish and amaze,
She can not speak it, though adore and praise.
What Words can show Immensness in a Span?
The son of God veiled in the son of Man?
His Deity, in his Works, to her was clear;
In's Life, the Heaven he promis't, did appear;
Upon the Cross as great in her Account,
As when he was Transfigur'd on the Mount;
Dominion, Wealth, for him, she does despise,
The Crowns of Kings are Refuse in her Eyes.
I.
LO here! a Glorious Vision did appear,
Tumultuous Clouds, amazing bright,
Often broke with intermingl'd Light,
Revealed a Choire of Angels near.
Their airy Harps with Sunbeams strung,
Messiah great in Heaven, despised on Earth they sung.
Brisk Zephers held the Trebles place,
Soft roling Thunders made the Base.
II.
THe substance of their Hymn did say,
The Almighty can no-wise display
His Power, but Mortals disobey;
When he revealed himself in Wonders,
In Fire, in Earthquakes, and in Thunders,
When Rocks, at his Approach did melt,
A Trump did louder, than loud Thunders sound,
His Voice, both Trump and Thunders drowned
And things Inanimate the fragor felt,
Such Majesty they could not brook,
No, not toward mount Sinai look,
His Presence bear,
His Voice too dreadful was for sinful Men to hear.
III.
ANd when again in lowly Guise,
He among them, as a Prophet did arise,
And Miracles of Mercy wrought,
Because no Bloody fields he fought,
Nor captive Kings in fetters led,
No Prospect their Ambition saw
Of Empire, but a holy and a hateful Law,
They him did more despise, than dread.
Tho, at his Word, the Blind did see,
And cleansed was the Leprosy,
The Dead did rise, the Lame did walk,
The Dumb and Deaf both hear and talk,
The Seas and Winds rebuk't, gave way,
They durst Blaspheme and Disobey.
IV.
Disdained Messiah on the Score,
They ought him chiefly to adore;
The Son of God denied to be,
Because he hung upon a Tree;
Although, when after he was slain,
His Power more Mighty did remain:
All Kingdoms to his Scepter bow,
Their Wisemen, 'bove their own, his Wisdom did allow:
When not only he set free,
Some few from Satan's Tyranny,
But the whole World by him oppressed,
The World a Demoniac grown, he dispossessed.
The Shechinah was glorious here,
Miracle and Prodigy did both appear,
Against all they saw, they stuck not to declare,
On the other side their Lusts and Vices were.
V.
A Fiat did the World create,
But fallen Man to re-estate,
Did both Grace and Power require,
To save him against his own Desire,
To save him, and God's justice save,
Did the whole System of his Wisdom crave,
And tho much Goodness did with it abound,
All was too little found,
To make a Sinner bliss enjoy,
And the free Agent not destroy,
Gratis the lofty Regions he would possess,
Like Stars, but not on Terms of Holiness.
Six days gave Heaven, and all its Host their Birth,
The obdurate Rocks, and stubborn Earth;
But tho six thousand Years are near run-out,
Men to Obedience are not brought about.
On the first six Verses of the 63 Chapter of Isaiah.
Proph. WHat mighty Warrior's this, that comes the way
Of Edom, all stained with Blood from Bozrah?
Whose stately March, and Martial garb proclaim
A Hero of immortal Rank and Name?

Christ.] I, who in Righteousness destroy and save,
Give some a Kingdom, and to some a Grave.

Proph.] Why art thou soyl'd with Gore, thy Garments red.
Like unto those who in the Wine Press tread?

Christ.] Well thou allud'st: the Wine Press I alone
Have trod, when to assist me there was none.
A General I am without an Host,
My Fellow-Soldier none himself can boast.
Singly the God of the World I did engage,
Singly sustain his, and his party's Rage.
The Blood thou see, which thus my Raiment dies,
Conquest's proclaim, mysterious Victory's:
For never Captain did by Sword and Spear,
As I by Wounds, so high a Trophy rear,
When cover'd-ore with these, I forced my Way
Through the Foes guarded Quarters, did display
My Banner, till I broke his who Array.
First, I his Temples and his Pomps defaced,
Silenced his Oracles, his Priests disgraced,
All Monuments of his Deity eras'd;
To Demons Men now sacrifice no more,
But Execrate, what late they did adore.
Aloft, I next, my sacred Standard bear
Amid'st his Principality, the Air,
His Legions made my Chains, like Meteors, wear.
Thence to the Infernal Regions did descend,
To the Amazement of the Lordly Fiend;
And though worse Evils, than he does partake,
He could not fear, I made his Greatness quake.
Broke-up his fenced Prison of the Grave
The Iron bars and gates a sunder clave;
Captives brought thence, and made the Tyrant see,
Although the rest still slept, they all were free.
The proud Usurper thus I did unthrone,
Forced him his Lord, unwilling, yet to own.
The Ransomed World now Alelujahs sing,
Blessed, and Blessing, of their Heavenly King
From Hell and Satan's Bondage all are free,
But those who choose his Vassals still to be.

The Christian Slave.
IT was the Hour, that Slaves allowed were,
'Bove Ground to breath, their wasted Strength repair
With moldy Bread, foul Water, sted of Wine,
An aged worthy issued from the Mine,
Grisly and Horrid, with six Christians more,
They sighed, but without sighs the Hero bore
His massy Chain: Heaven for their Fare did bless,
With larger Thanks and Grace, than those express,
Whose Tables loaded are with all Excess.
My Brethren said, fall-to with cheerful Heart,
More then ten Years I'ave acted here my Part,
Whether my Food did nourish, or did kill,
Was not my Care, but to perform the Will
Of our Great Lord: We come not here, y' are sure.
For Health or Good, but Torments to endure
For sacred Truth; such Courage then let us show,
May make Idolaters the Difference know
Between a God, and senseless Stone. In vain
I have not spent my Days, and fruitless Pain.
But have confirmed the Weak, the Faithful brought
To suffer Death, by my Endurance taught;
Fire and Wild-beasts withstand, and to contemn
Their Persecutors, far worse Beast's than them;
To choose to eat like Dogs upon the Ground,
A Fare scarce better, than the Tables found,
Than in the Demons stately Temples feast,
Devils adore, and be the Devils Guest.
The Bloody Guard, who all did over-hear,
Bid him the Food, before him, to forbear,
For him they had provided other Cheer.
Then with a hundred Stripes their Rage did reek,
Scarce left him Strength to breath, and less to speak.
He smiling said, Let not my Sufferings shake
Your Courage Brethren, but more Constant make;
They fail to reach in me their aimed Effect,
They have destroyed, but cannot me deject.
Then turning to the Guard, Poor Men, sai'd he,
While to Afflict you hoped, you have set me Free,
A Period put to all my Misery:
Whilst you did grudg your scant unwholesome Meat,
I Am called to a Celestial and Eternal Treat --
His Powers here sunk, not He; rather than Die,
He seemed to triumph over Cruelty.
On the general Peace.
I.
IGnoble Peace is often known,
Worse, even than War, to make a People Groan:
But when Usurping Foes they quel,
A strong invading Power repel,
Ambitious Neighbors keep in aw,
Prescribe, and not receive the Law;
Loud Triumphs, Publi'k Joy, declare,
Conduits with Wine, like Blood, do flow,
Such thundr'ing Salvos rend the Air,
That even in Peace Men hardly know,
Whether it be true Peace, or no.
Such are the Joys from Reswicks Peace abound,
Blessings alone its Articles compound.
II.
AS our Allies Conditions did obtain,
With no less Conflicts then a Town is taken,
We in the hot and high Contest,
Seemed unconcerned among the rest,
Bandi'd, with no disputes, our Claim,
No Days Transaction it does name
We like Assessors, not a Party came.
A friendly Conference did our Plea decide,
Naught we demanded, was therein denied.
Portland and Boufflers met unarmed in the Field,
Their business was not there to fight, but yield;
To make the World a rare Example see,
Two Hostile Nations vye Civility.
Preliminaries to the Treaty were,
Courtly Salutes, and Carriage fair.
Complements did its Body frame,
Mutual Embraces, and rich Presents end the same.
III.
THe Reformed Soldier now,
Discharged the Camp, does hold the Plow
Returns unto a former Trade,
The Ax, the Saw, the Trowel, or the Spade.
Muses alone assume their laid by Arms,
The Marches sound, the Charges, fierce Alarms;
Make Bombs and Cannon in their Verses, roar,
Louder than from the Fort, or from the Shore.
The Images of War, the Real, drown,
With grateful Horror strike, tho none they wound.
IV.
KIng William too, without annoy,
The Fruits of's Noble Conduct does enjoy;
Sits not on Horse both day and night,
While Storms of Rain and Hail,
Beat against his Cask and Mail,
A Duty harder, than to fight.
He now admits of Princely Ease,
The Pastimes that a Hero please;
Hunts the Stag and Fallow Deer,
While Foes abroad his Prowess fear;
Receives three Nations Homage and Address,
All striving highest to express,
Their Honor, Duty, Love, and Happiness.
And foreign States not backward are.
The Blessings to profess, by Him, they share.
V.
GReat Prince! high Glory thou have won,
But count thy Warfare changed, not done;
The have many Sieges yet to form,
Many strong Forts and Towns to storm,
Vice, and Irreligion fight,
The Foes of Peace to put to flight;
Ambitious Friends, and Mal-Contents,
stubborn Factions, Against all Reason steeled,
Brainless Fanatics that want Sense to yield;
Flatt'rers of thy prosperous State,
William pretend to love, and yet a King do hate.
Worthy Thy Self thou wilt find thy Task,
Which Virtues does of Peace and War, Prudence and Valor, ask.
EPIGRAMS.
On the two Scaligers.
'BOve the most Learned exalted is your Name,
Conjoined with your insatiat Thirst of Fame;
Which moved you, others Worth often to depress,
Jealous, their Glory, made your Glory less.
When any did a noble Work produce,
To the Commonwealth of Learnings greatest Use,
Y'allow'd it not the Author's, or did blame,
It Was mean, or stolen, if not from You it came.
If the Age cried up some Exc'lent Person high,
For Poetry, Languages, Philosophy --
Their Parts you slighted, or did else deny;
Tho, when in these a Proof you were to make,
You could not show, you always better spoke.
To damn a Work, 'twas a sufficient Cause,
To show your single Vote, out-weigh'd all men's Applause.
Candor, among your Virtues, made no Blaze,
If some there were, extorted from you Praise,
'Twas rare, and short, or else your selves to raise:
They had your help, or your Encouragement,
All that was in them good by You was lent.
To steal from others, tho you did disdain,
Plagiarys to be of Fame, you held no stain.
But from Erasmus while you did detract,
And such as he, what was it but to act
Against the Palm, to which you did aspire?
Into Contempt to bring, (O mad Desire!)
What in your selves you would have the World admire?
Pride thus o'erthrows its own Ambitious Ends,
Foe to its self, and to its greatest Friends.
How much more Noble, and of more Renown,
Were sincere Vossius, excellent Casaubon,
Grotius, Gyraldus, and yet many more,
Your Peers in Science, tho you they set before
Themselves: These loved and sought the Truth you Praise:
Knowledge was their Aim, yours, your Name to raise.
Learning deserves a Crown, as well as Bays,
But scorn, when Arrogance the Scepter sways.
On Sylvia now in Years.
WOnder in Youth, and Miracle in Age,
Through all thy Life admired in every Stage!
At first all Flower, all Spring, all Air, and Spright,
All that in charming Virgins move delight.
These days pass't-o'er, thy Flower to Fruit did turn,
And those adored thee heretofore, did burn.
Years coming on, thy Beauty still did hold,
As drained from Humane Dregs, but not grown Old.
Temperance, and Virtue in thy Limbs do shine,
Interred, they will make thy Grave a Silver Mine.
To Paulus.
A Generous deed a Lady having wrought,
The thanks, from the Obliged, by me was brought;
Which she received with such an Air and Mien
The greatness of her Mind therein was seen.
She did engage me often her to see,
With Words of more than bare Civility;
Her Person might a Courtly Eye delight,
And yet her Actions were a Nobler sight.
But by a near Converse I did descry,
Faults, I don't say, but Incongruity.
And holding it Ungrateful to be mute,
Madam, said I, this and this no way suit
With the rare Virtues, which in you excel --
What was the Issue, would you have me tell?
Praise brought me in, Reproof did me expel.
On Galla.
AS Flushings, Pimples many do molest,
Incessant Laughter does thy Face infest,
Who never made, nor understood'st a jest.
Thou art of the Number whom the World despise,
For being neither fair, nor rich, nor wise,
Yet senseless thou in this deplored Case
Wear'st both the Fool, and Gracious in thy Face.
To Drusus.
TO Apollo and the Muses Claud's no Debtor.
Drus'.] You will not think so, when you know him better.
I can assure you, Much in him you will find,
It must be doubtless then, when he has Dined.
On Nevia.
THou never ceasest before a Glass to prank,
To talk of Beauty, as of the first Rank
Thou were: See not, how this does thee disgrace,
Brings thy Ill-shape to mind, and yet worse Face,
That Ugly thou art, none would regard, or care,
If thus pretend thou did not, to be Fair.
On Linus.
Naught from the World the 'ast learned, nor yet by Book,
Yet none so ill does all Instruction brook.
Knowledge, thou think, is but a proud Pretense,
Another differing from thee in his Sense.
And if what is better, than thou do, would show,
Thou scrupl'st not to treat him, as a Foe.
Enjoy thy Way; I will no more Endeavor,
As thou desir'st, be thou a Sot for ever.
To Aphelia.
WHat is the Way, most pow'rfully does tend,
Love to promote, and happily to End,
Do thou Aphelia, fair and young, enquire?
Being desirable, express no desire.
The Beauteous need no forwardness to show,
In being Fair alone, they always Woo.
On Calis.
THou say, While thou my Counsel did believe,
Given to Aphelia, I did thee deceive:
For there-upon, neglecting all to Woo,
The 'ast found no more Regard, than an Old shoe.
To court I bid the Fair, not Thee, to shun.
But thy Mistake no harm to thee has done:
For who'd take-up, what is Sluttish in his Way,
Tho never so Earnestly it him should pray?
To Lovers.
DEluded Lovers come and learn of me,
I will disclose to you a Mystery;
The Wonders in the Fair you so admire,
You find not in them, but your selves inspire;
Your selves create the Idol you adore,
A Goddess make, what was a Stock before.
Infuse the transport, nectar, and the bliss,
Which you believe resides in them you kiss.
When on Asterias Beautys I did dote,
Nothing, I thought, could rightly them denote;
I summoned Planets, Odors, Jewels, Flowers,
Angels, feigned Graces, and celestial Powers;
And all seemed short: till Time and her Neglect,
Opened my Eyes, and did the Truth detect.
Her Charms did then but weak and mean appear,
In her Address she seemed to come too near;
Her Eyes I saw were Stars, no more than mine,
Nor yet in a more real Heaven did shine.
When her Perfections I did duly scan,
The Difference only was, a Maid and Man;
As she excelled in brightness of her skin,
Her Facultys came short of mine within.
All that I valued at so high a Price,
Was but a Fools mistaken Paradise.
Beauty's a liveless Corpse, Love is its Soul,
Cupid, not Venus, does the Heart control.
To Godly Edwards, on his Gangraena.
THy Book a dreadful Catalogue does show,
Of numerous Sects, that did the Land oreflow
From Forty One, till Truth again did dawn
In Blessed sixty: all the monst'rous Spawn
Of Antinomians, Seekers, Independents,
Wild Ranters, Dippers, Atheists their Attendants:
When from the Air, the Marshes, and the Floods,
The desert Plains, the Mountains, and the Woods,
Accursed Spirits took the Form of Preachers,
And stock't the Realm with Fiends instead of Teachers,
Whose impious Wreaks no power on Earth could quell,
But they blasphemed as boldly as in Hell.
Under these Sects, good Edwards thou did groan,
But did not see their Rise was from thine Own;
Thou did not see thou were the true Church Hater,
Thy self a Rebel, Schismatic and Traitor.
As Errors, in some Cases, Pardon crave,
Thy Dullness, and Well-meaning thee may save.
To the same.
WHen on Dissenters Sins thou do enlarge,
And them with Diabolick Lewdness charge,
Incest, Drunkenness, and Adultery,
Profaneness, Atheism, and Blasphemy --
Their Hellish Crimes more heinous to express,
Gravely and soberly thou do profess,
The Bishops and their Chaplains Sins were less.
When they, in Power, good Christians did enjoin,
Kneeling to take the Sacred Bread and Wine,
And with the Cross baptized Infants sign.
O wondrous piercing and discerning Eye!
Could this hid Truth, through such dark Mists descry.
Doting and biast thus thou do deplore,
When prosperous Treason all before it bore,
And Rebel Covenanters had won the Day,
Accursed Independants shared the Prey.
So little Dogs are heard to whine and moan,
When Great insult, and snatch away their Bone.
On Zoilus.
LEan and Consumptive, and with Jaundice yellow.
Thou were advised for Health, to turn Good Fellow
On this: thou faithfully did ply the Pot,
And Flesh regain'dst, but art become a Sot.
On Calis and Clora.
CAlis and Clora both did Damon love,
Calis a Vulture seemed, Clora a Dove;
Calis would kind, and angry also, show,
As Love she bore, so Love she held her Due.
Clora, not lighter touched by Cupid's Bow,
That such a Right she had, yet did not know.
Love, by a Sigh, she scrupled to display,
Offended, if a Blush did it betray.
Her rak'd-up Fire did Damon scorch and charm,
Whom Calis blazing Flame could never warm.
On Glaucus.
GLaucus employed his Pen, the Great to praise,
But his vile Rithmes got neither Coin nor Bays.
Enraged at this, in a Satyric strain,
He railed at all the World, but railed in vain;
None were made angry, did his Words regard,
Or thought their Credit was at all impaired.
In the most Guilty he produced no Blushes,
He whipped them not with Brambles, but with Rushes.
The Muses yet he does not quite despise,
Tom-Thumb and Balads in the Streets he cries.
On Critics.
Puffed up and proud, why do most Critics show?
Words, which are Wind, they glory most to know.
Who Judges are of Reason, Sense, and Wit,
On their own Acts, as well as others, sit:
But over a World, though but of Words, these reign,
They all, beside their Tribe, like Kings, disdain.
Useful they are: and so are other Tools
In skilful Hands, Toys in the hands of Fools.
To Celer.
I Eighty Five, thou in a Vigorous Age,
Demandst, Which way I now my Pen engage?
How I the rigorous Season entertain?
IN the Lyrick, or the Epigrammick Vein?
Neither: And though at no Design I drive,
My Work's not small, to keep my self alive.
FINIS.

