AMERICA



AMERICA: BEING THE LATEST, AND MOST ACCURATE DESCRIPTION OF THE NEW WORLD;
CONTAINING The Original of the Inhabitants, and the Remarkable Voyages thither.
THE CONQUEST OF THE VAST EMPIRES OF Mexico and Peru, AND OTHER LARGE PROVINCES
and TERRITORIES, WITH THE SEVERAL EUROPEAN PLANTATIONS IN THOSE PARTS. ALSO
Their Cities, Fortresses, Towns, Temples, Mountains, and Rivers. Their Habits,
Customs, Manners, and Religions. Their Plants, Beasts, Birds, and Serpents.

WITH An APPENDIX, containing, besides several other considerable Additions, a
brief Survey of what has been discovered of the Unknown South-Land and the
Arctick Region.

Collected from most Authentic Authors, Augmented with later Observations, and
Adorned with Maps and Sculptures, by JOHN OGILBY Esquire His Majesty's
Cosmographer, Geographick Printer, and Master of the Revels in the Kingdom of
IRELAND.

LONDON, Printed by the Author, and are to be had at his House in White Friars,
M.DC.LXXI.

A Catalogue of the Authors, which are either mentioned, or made use of in this
Volume of America.
ABraham Mellinus Abraham Mylius Adriaen vander Donk Aelian Albertus Magnus
Aldrete Aelius Lampridius Alexander Aphrodiensis Alexander ab Alexandro
Alexander Guaginus Alonso Garcia Alonso de Ouagli Andraeas Caesariensis Angrin
Jonas Antonio de Herrera Apuleius Aristonicus Grammaticus Aristotle Athanasius
Kircher Augustinus Augustine de Tarcate Augustus Thuanus Ayton of Armenia
Balthazar de Amizquita Barnaba Cabo Bartholomaeo de las Casas Benjamin
Tudalensis Caspar Barlaeus Castaldus Charles Rochfort Christopher Arcisseuski
Cicero Claude de Abbeville Clemens Alexandrinus Conradus Gesner Cornelius Nepos
Cornelius Witfleet Ctesias Curtius Cyrianus David Ingran David Powel Diodorus
Siculus Dionysius Halicarnassaeus Dirk Ruiters Dithmar Blefken Duarte Mendez
Seraon Egydius Fletcher Emanuel de Moraez Erasmus Stella Erick Roothaer
Everhard Reid Eusebius Euthymius Zibagenus Festus Avienus Francisc. Burmannus
Francisc. Delapuente Francisc. de Gomara Francisc. Lopes de Gomesa Francisc.
Raphelingius. Francisc. Soarez Francisc. Tirolmonte Francisc. Xaverius Fullerus
Galenus Garcilasso de la Vega Genebrardus Gerardus Joannes Vossius Guido de
Brez Guilielm. Piso Guilielm. Postellus Harmannus Moded Henrick Haelbos Henrick
Hawks Hernando de Leon Herodotus Hesychius Hieronim. Benzo Hieronim. Cardanus
Homer Hugo Grotius Hugo Linschot Jacob Bontius Jacob Planensis Jacob Rabbi Inca
Garcilasso Joannes Ardenois Joannes Bertius Joannes Chilton Joannes Gysius
Joannes Johnstonus Jean de Laet Joannes de Ledesma Joannes Leonclavius Joannes
Lery Joannes Mariana Joannes Nieuwhof Joan. van de Sand Joseph. Acosta Joseph.
Anchieta Joseph. Scaliger Isaacus Pontanus Isaac. du Verne Isidorus Mendes
Sequera Julius Caesar Julius Caesar Scaliger Lactantius Lauren. Ananias Lauren.
Bikker Lauren. Guascus Gerascius Lauren. Keymis Levinus Lemmius Lieven Aizma
Lopez Vaz Lucan Lucretius Lodowick Leo Lysander Manethon Persa Marcus Zeno
Martin del Barco Martin Perez Matthaeus van den Broeke Matthiolus Melchior
Soiterus Mich. Lithower Michovius Miles Philips Moses Nicolaus Zeno
Olympiodorus Paulus Venetus Pedro de Ancieta Pedro Pizarro Pedro Fernandez de
Quir Pedro Maria Peter Martyr Pedro Ordonnes de Cevallos Peter van Gendt Philo
Judaeus Philippus Cluverius Philippus Mornaeus Phylarchus Piere Moreau Pinedas
Plato Pliny Plutarch Pomponius Mela Proclus Procopius Quarterius Rabbi Simeon
Robertus Comtaeus Sam. Purchase Sebastiaen Schroten Simplicius Salust Sigismond
Baro Strabo Theodosio Theopompus Thevet Tertullian Trigaut Vegetius Virgil
THE CONTENTS of the several CHAPTERS and SECTIONS.
The first Book.
AMerica unknown to the Ancients Fol. 1 Of the Original of the Americans,
whence they came, when, how, and from what People Planted Fol. 11 First
Discoverers of America, with Christopher Colonus his Expedition Fol. 43 Pedro
Alphonso Nigno his Voyage Fol. 56 The Voyage of Vincent Agnes Pinzon Fol. 58
The Expedition of Americus Vesputius Fol. 60 The Expedition of Alphonso Fogeda,
Diego Nicuesa, Ancisus, and Roderick Col. menares Fol. 65 Peter Arias his
Expedition, and the remarkable Passages of Vascus Nunnez Fol. 69 The Expedition
of Francisco Fernandez, Lupo Caizedo, Christophero Morantes, Bernardo Igniguez,
and Juan Grisalva Fol. 76 The Expedition of Ferdinand Magaglian, commonly
called Magellan Fol. 79 Ferdinando Cortez his Voyage. Fol. 81 Diego Gottierez
his Expedition Fol. 92 The Expedition of Pedro Alvarado, Francisco and Gonzalvo
Pizarro, and Diego de Almagro Fol. 95 The Expeditions of John Stade and
Nicholas Durando Villegagnon Fol. 103 The Expedition of John Ribald, Renatus
Laudonier, and Gurgie Fol. 105 Four English Expeditions, under the Command of
our famous Sea-Captains, Martin Forbisher, Sir Francis Drake, Thomas Candish,
and John Smith Fol. 108 A Netherland Expedition, by Jaques Mahu and Simon de
Cords Fol. 110 The Expedition of Oliver van Noord Fol. 113 The Expedition of
George van Spilbergen Fol. 115 The Expedition of Corneliszoon Schouten and
Jacob Le Maire Fol. 117 The Voyage of the Nassavian Fleet, under the Command of
Jaques le Heremite and Hugo Schapenham Fol. 120 Henry Brewer his Voyage Fol.
122
The Second Book.
OF the Bounds of America, and of the Division of the Mexican, or Northern part
thereof Fol. 125 Estotiland Fol. 126 Terra Laboratoris. Fol. 128 Canada, or New
France Fol. 129 Accadia, or Nova Scotia Fol. 133 Norumbegua Fol. 138 New
England Fol. 139 New Netherland, now called New York Fol. 168 A new Description
of Maryland Fol. 183 Virginia Fol. 192 The Relation of Captain Smith 's being
taken Prisoner by Powhatan, and his deliverance by his Daughter Pocahonta. Fol.
202 Carolina Fol. 205 Florida Fol. 213 Jucatan Fol. 222 Guatimala Fol. 224 Vera
Paz Fol. 227 Honduras Fol. 229 Nicaragua Fol. 232 Costarica Fol. 235 Veragua
ibid. Guatimala, properly so called ibid. The Kingdom of Mexico, or New Spain
Fol. 238 Mechoacan Fol. 261 Tlascalla Fol. 264 Guaxata Fol. 268 Panuco Fol. 270
Tabasco Fol. 273 New Gallicia Fol. 281 Guadalajara Fol. 284 Xalisco Fol. 285
Chiametla ibid. Couliacan Fol. 286 Cinoloa Fol. 288 Zacatecas Fol. 289 New
Biscay Fol. 290 New Mexico Fol. 291 Cibola, Tontonteac, and Nova Granada Fol.
298 Quivira Fol. 301 Terra Nova, or Newfound Land, with the Island of
Assumption Fol. 304 The Bermudas, or Summer-Islands Fol. 311 Hispaniola Fol.
314 Porto Rico, and Monico Fol. 327 Cuba Fol. 331 Jamaica Fol. 337 The Islands
called The Lucaies Fol. 344 The Caribbee-Islands, Fol. 345 Anegada and Sombrero
Fol. 362 Las Virgins Fol. 363 Anguilla ibid. Saba Fol. 364 St. Crux ibid. St.
Martin Fol. 365 St. Bartholomew Fol. 367 Barboude Fol. 368 Rotonda ibid. Nevis
ibid. Eustathius Fol. 369 Antego Fol. 370 Montserrat ibid. Guadalupe Fol. 371
Deseado Fol. 372 Marigalante ibid. Todos Sanctos Fol. 373 De Aves ibid.
Dominico Fol. 375 Martinico Fol. 376 St. Lucia Fol. 377 Barbados ibid. St.
Vincent Fol. 380 Bekia Fol. 381 Granada ibid. Tabago Fol. 382 St. Christophers
Fol. 383 California Fol. 389
The Third Book.
CAstella Aurea, otherwise called Terra Firma Fol. 394 Panama Fol. 395 Darien
Fol. 399 New Andaluzia Fol. 400 St. Martha. Fol. 403 Rio de la Hacha Fol. 405
New Granada Fol. 406 Granada Fol. 408 Popayana Fol. 409 Peru Fol. 412 Quito
Fol. 441 Los Quixos Fol. 446 Lima Fol. 450 Cusco Fol. 456 Los Charcas Fol. 462
Collao Fol. 466 Chile Fol. 471 Chile, properly so called Fol. 472 Magellanica
Fol. 473 Paraguay, or Rio de la Plata Fol. 475 Rio de la Plata, properly so
called Fol. 476 Tucuman ibid. La Crux de Sierra Fol. 477 Brasile ibid. St.
Vincent Fol. 495 Rio de Janeiro Fol. 496 De Spirito Santo Fol. 497 Porto Seguro
Fol. 498 Los Isleos Fol. 501 Bahia de Todos los Sanctos Fol. 502 Pernambuco
Fol. 505 Parayba Fol. 508 Maragnan Fol. 511 The Lordships Tamarica, Rio Grande,
Siara, and Para Fol. 517 A Relation of the Proceedings of the Netherland
West India Company in Brasile, to the Year 1658. Fol. 518 The Journey of
Rodulphus Baron, with the Description of the Customs and Manners of the
Tapuyans Fol. 595 Grave Maurice his Account of Brasile, so far as it concerned
the West India Company Fol. 600 The Councellor Dussen 's Relation of so much of
Brasile as concerned the West India Company Fol. 601 A Description of the
Palace Freyburgh, two Bridges, and a Banqueting House, all built by Grave
Maurice Fol. 605 Guiana Fol. 607 A Relation of the Journey of Francisco
Orellana ibid. Paria, or New Andalusia Fol. 620 Cumana Fol. 621 Venezuela Fol.
624 The Islands Margareta, Cubagua, and Coche Fol. 627 Of the Islands of
Southern America Fol. 628
In the Appendix.
RIo de la Plata Fol. 631 Chili Fol. 634 A View of the Chilesian Language Fol.
635 Magellanica Fol. 649 The Unknown South-Land Fol. 653 Terra Borealis, or The
Arctick Region Fol. 661 Several Attempts for the discovery of the North-West
Passage Fol. 672 A brief View of what Places are possessed at this day in the
West Indies, by the English, Spaniards, French, Portuguese, and Dutch Fol. 674
map of the Americas

AN ACCURATE DESCRIPTION OF AMERICA.
CHAP. I. America, unknown to the Ancients.
Description of the Ocean*
THE Sea, that takes several Denominations from the Countries which it washes,
and surrounding the dry Land, cuts out, and shapes so many winding Bays,
Creeks, and Meandring In-lets, seems no where so much confined and penned into
so narrow a Channel, as the Straights of Magellan: From whence again, soon
expatiating, it spreads it self into two immense, and almost boundless Oceans,
that which opens to the North, gives terminaries to the four Regions of the
Earth; that to the South, only to Asia and America; both which, indeed, are
but one continued Sea, extending it self round the Universal Globe.

This watery part of the World, that almost through all Ages lay Fallow, has in
these later times been Furrowed by several Expert and Stout Captains, who now
by their Art and Industry, have given a good Account of, and made clear
Discoveries from East to West, wherever the Sun rises or sets.

The Northern Bounds under the Artick-Zone, have been hitherto so obstructed
with Ice, that the undertakings of such as adventured either to find by the
North-East or North-West a Passage to India, have been utterly frustrate. Of
the Southern, no such pains has as yet been taken in the Discovery, so that
for the most part it is yet unknown how far the Water, either deep or shallow,
overspreads the Earth, only thus much Experience has made out, that the
Antartick needs lesser Line to Fathom, than the Artick-Ocean.

The Ancients had little knowledge in Navigation.
The ancient Greeks, Phenicians, and Romans, or whosoever that were Renowned by
Antiquity, and Listed in the number of their famous Navigators, were no less
Timorous than Ignorant concerning Maritim Affairs, and are not fit to stand in
the least degree of competition with our later Voyagers.

Of old, by an inviolable Law, made by Custom, according to Pliny, Vigetius and
others, the Sea was locked up, from the eleventh of October, to the tenth of
March, no Ships daring to venture forth, dreading short Nights, and foul
Weather; neither in Summer, did they so much as once offer, unless driven by
Storms, to attempt the Offin, or loose sight of Land; yet there is no question,
but that several Nations in former Ages, Navigation is very ancient.
made it their business, spending their whole time, and wearying themselves in
the Practical Art of Navigation.

The Sacred Scripture testifies, That the Kings of Judea, Solomon, Jehosaphat,
Ozias, and others, prepared several Fleets that Sailed through remote Seas,
freighting themselves with Gold from Ophir, and other Rarities, which were
Imported to supply and enrich the Holy Land. Geograph. lib. 1.
And Strabo also tells us, That King Solomon being contemporary with Homer,
then discovered India. And Pliny relates, That the Romans, in the Reign of
Augustus, passing the Straights of Gibraltar, and sleighting the Ne plus ultra,
Hist. Not. lib. 2. cap. 67.
Coasted Spain, France, and Belgium, leaving not at the Promontory of the
Cimbrians (now called Shager-Riff) but also ventured into the Northern Ocean,
which washes Norwey and Lapland: But long before this, as Athenaeus relates,
Phileas Taurominites, a Grecian Captain, and several others passed the
Herculean-Pillars, penetrating the Northern Seas as far as Britain, and
adventuring, Vltima Thule, supposed by some to be Ireland. Vide Georgic.
made the first Discovery of Thule: And to the Southward the African Coasts
without Gibraltar, and beyond Atlas, were now and then explored by several
expert Captains. But more remarkable is the Voyage of Hanno a Carthaginian, The
Voyage of Hanno.
who out-sail'd these, and inspected the Coasts of Africa, Of Eudoxus, Strab.
l. 2.
as far as the Gorgades: And Eudoxus Cyzicenus, flying from King Lathyrus, set
Sail from the Arabian Gulf, and passing the Great-Cape, came to an Anchor at
last in the Mouth of Gibraltar, having discovered all the Eastern, Southern,
and Western parts of Africa.

Moreover, it deserves special observation, That an ancient Swedish King, as
Cornelius Nepos relates, sent as a Rarity and great Present to the Roman Consul
Metellus Celer, Strange Voyage of some Indians.
some Indians, who loosing their course, hatter'd up and down with perpetual
Storms and stress of Weather, were at last driven into the Northern Ocean,
where they suffered Shipwreck; yet saving themselves, Landed on his Coast: Of
Menelaus.
Aristonicus Gramaticus relates, That Menelaus Sailing from the Sack of Troy,
became so great a Voyager, that leaving the Straights, he surrounded Africa,
and discovering India, after eight years re-measuring the same way he went,
returned with great Riches in safety to his own Kingdom: Which is consentaneous
to Homer, who says, Odyss, l. 4.

-- None must compare
Mansions with Jove, his Seats Celestial are:
But with me any may, who eight years tossed
Through Worlds of Miseries from Coast to Coast,
Amongst unknown Seas, of my Return small hope,
Cyprus, Phoenicia, Egypt, The Commentators on Homer have been very
inquisitive to find out Menelaus Voyage into Aethiopia. Crates supposed that he
passed out at the Straights, doubled the Southern Cape, and so arrived thither.
Eratosthenes conjectures, that in the time of Homer the Straights Mouth was an
Isthmus, and the Egyptian Isthmus overflowed by the Sea, which afforded him a
shorter passage. But that is most probable which Strabo delivers, that he then
went to the borders of Aethiopia, when he passed up Egypt to the City of
Thebes; the Borders of Aethiopia being not far distant from thence in Strabo's
time, probably very near it in Homer's.
Aethiope,
Sidon, Erembos found, and Lybia, where
Their Lambs are horned, their Ews teem thrice a year.
(...).
(...).
(...)
(...)
(...)
(...),
(...)
(...),
(...).
That which the Grecian Geographers relate concerning Ptolomy Euergetes, King
of Egypt, is not to be forgotten, That sending Pilots, Remarkable Voyage of an
Indian into Egypt.
Commissioned to take the Soundings, and settle the Landmarks in the Arabian
Gulf, they found by chance a forsaken Vessel, only in it one Man half dead,
lying among several other breathless Bodies, of whom, being refreshed with
convenient Cordials, they inquired his Fortune, but he being unable to give
them any present satisfaction, neither understanding what the other said, they
sent him to the Court, where soon having got a smattering of Greek, he informed
Euergetes, that he was a Native Indian, driven from their course into the place
where they found him by stress of Weather, and that his company were famished,
all their Provision spent in their Wanderings from their intended Voyage; Thus
being kindly entertained, he also promised the King to open his Passage (if so
he pleased) into India. The King slept not upon this Intelligence, but
immediately prepared a Fleet Freighted with such Commodities as were advised;
Of Ptolomy into India.
with which setting forth by the Conduct of this their Indian Pilot, they
Anchored in their desired Port, and brought the King in return from thence a
rich Cargo of Silk, Spices, costly Drugs, and precious Gems. Cleopatra, about
sixty years after, intending not to lose the advantages reaped by the former
discoveries, And also of Cleopatra;
equipped another and greater Navy; which passing through the Red Sea, found
the Stern of a Ship, on which was Presented a Horse, whereby some of the more
knowing Seamen judged, that it had been a Gibraltar Vessel, and Sailing about
Africa, there by sad accident suffered a Wrack. This Stern was afterward set
up, and fixed as a Memorial in the Marketplace of Memphis.

In these later times, the first that endeavored to drive an European Trade in
Africa, and held Commerce with India, was the State of Venice, who Sailed from
thence through the Adriatic, into the Mediterranean-Sea: The Venetians were
the first that drove a trade from Europe to the East Indies.
So Steering for Alexandria, where unlading their Goods, from thence they
carried them over Land, and Shipping again in the Arabian Gulf, Sailed
directly for India. Thus by Land and Water, were exchanged several Commodities,
and the Indian Growth and rich Products of the Oriental World plentifully
Transported to Venice, and from thence, all Europe had ample Accommodation, How
they went their journeys.
until an Egyptian Sultan suffered the Way to be infested by Thieves and
Murdering Robbers, that so they were enforced to remove thence, and Dischage
their several Cargoes at Aleppo; from whence, on Mules and Camels, they carried
their Goods to Babylon, so to Balsarum, and then to Ormus, where they Re-ship'd
thence, directly standing for India.

Thus they enjoyed the benefit of so great a Trade and Commerce, until the
Portuguese found a Passage by, Sea, saving the Expense and trouble of carrying
Goods so far by Land to India; Of which here we will a little enlarge.

By what means the Portuguese came first to discover the Coasts of Africa and
India.
John, the first King of Portugal, who took from the Moors, by force of Arms,
Septa, an African City, having five Sons; Henry his fourth behaved himself so
gallantly in the Leaguer of Septa, that after he became Master of the place,
this Prince made many bold Excursions in several Parties against the Enemy,
bringing in daily great store of Booty; so growing rich, he Rigged out two new
Vessels to make farther Discoveries along the Coast of Africa. Yet this his
Expedition went on but slowly, being much taken off in Building there a new
City, then called Tarzanabala, and since Villa Infantis; but being Admonished
by a Dream, and Checked for his laying thus aside his first Design of
Navigation; he soon after, Anno 1410. set forth the Ships that he intended,
which he the more accelerated, being informed by some of his Prisoners Natives,
that Africa spread from the Basis of Mount-Atlas, very far toward the South:
Why Africa was no further discovered.
This Mountain then was the Terminary of Navigation that way, because
thereabouts a long Ridge or Shelf of Sands thrust its Point under Shallow
Waters so far out into the Ocean, that none durst venture to Sail into the
Offin, being out of sight of Land to double this concealed Cape.

Who first ventured into the Offin.
The first that attempted to find Deep Water, and get round about, discovering
several unknown Coasts, and Uninhabited Isles belonging to that Region, were
Joannes Gonsalves, Tristan Varseus, and Aegidius Annius; amongst which were the
Madera's, Madera's by whom peopled.
and St. George de Picho, which Prince Henry first Planted with Portuguese, and
others since with Netherlanders. He also obtained a Grant from Pope Martin the
Fifth, of all the discovered Territories Eastward from the Canaries, for ever
to be the undoubted Right, and belonging to the Crown of Portugal.

After Henry's Decease, Anno 1460. the business of Navigation and Discoveries
of new Countries, lay neglected, because King Alphonso turmoyl'd in a Civil
War, his Crown being at stake, had not leisure to think or look after uncertain
improvements by Sea; yet at last having quelled his Enemies, he ventured forth
some Ships, who Sailed as far as the River Zenaga, and came to Anchor before
the City of Genny, By whom Genny was discovered
famous since for Trade, which gave its denomination to the Country and Coasts
of Guiny, where they dealing, Bartered for Ivory, Gold, Slaves, and also got so
much footing into the Country, that they suddenly raised up a Fort, and Manned
it with a strong Garrison, Shipping their Slaves for Lisbon.

John the Second succeeding his Father Alphonso, had a great design upon Arabia
and India, and if possible, was ambitious to open a Passage from the Atlantic,
to the Oriental-Seas. But the difficulty lay in Steering so often from sight of
Land, venturing into the Main Ocean, obstructed by so many dangerous Shoals
that lay so far out into the Offin.

At that time flourished three famous Mathematician, Rhoderick, Joseph, and
Martin Bohemus, Pupils bred up by Joannes Monteregius; with which the King
consulting, persuaded, that they would by their Art invent some Instrument,
that by Southern Constellation, the Pole being depressed, the Navigator might
know where he was, and in what height. so guessing what distance they were from
this or that Country; they accordingly Club'd Learning, and by their great
Study, found out what since has proved so useful and beneficial to Seamen, the
Astrolabe; For the Northern Constellation the Astrolabe was in use long before.
which help having obtained, the Sailers encouraged, more frequently ventured
into remote and unknown Seas.

After these, King John of Portugal sent Jaques Cano with a Fleet, who Sailing,
found the River Zaires, where he erected a Pillar with an Inscription, Latin
and Portuguese, signifying by whom, and in what Kings Reign these African
Coasts were discovered: Here he also met some of the Natives, who more
civilized than the rest, told him, That they had a mighty King, who Reigning
over them, kept his Court some few days Journey up in the Country, to whom
Cano sending his Agents, detained four Africans as Pledges, which he carried
with their free consent to Portugal, promising to bring them back in fifteen
Months, who before that time having got some smatterings of their Tongue,
informed them, Remarkable passage of Jaques Cano.
that their Native Soil was called Congo, whither returning by the appointed
time, they were according to their agreement, exchanged for the Portuguese, and
Cano addressed himself with rich Presents to their King, whom he found sitting
in their manner on an Ivory Throne, being from the middle upward Naked, his
nether parts covered with long Silken Skirts, D^scovery of Cong^.
a Golden Armlet on his left Arm, athwart his Shoulders hung a Horses Tail,
their Badge of Royal Dignity: Cano humbly laid the Presents down at the Kings
Feet, amongst which was a Gilded Flag, or Pennon with a Cross, which Pope
Innocent the Eighth had Consecrated with great Ceremony. After this, many of
that Nation became Christians, and the King himself received Baptism. But in
short time, by the Instigations of their Diabolical Priests, and others,
Christianity loosing ground, grew out of countenance: Mean while, John the
Second, seek^ to discover India by water,
King John the Second vigorously Prosecuted the business of Discovery, sending
Jews and Christians by Land from Alexandria and other parts of Egypt to India,
and from thence to explore the Coasts on the Eastern side of Africa, to the
Great-Cape; if so a way might be found fit for Navigators, having doubled that
Point, to Traffic with the Oriental parts of the World.

Vasque de Gama his expedition,
After this Princes Death the Work lay still a while, but in short time, King
Emanuel his Successor freshly undertook the business once more, sending Vasques
Gama with four Ships, who passing through many Dangers with great
Difficultties, Anchored at last before Calecut, and was the first of the
Europeans that found a way to the East Indies.

Christopher Columbu^'s.
But Chistopher Columbus, five Years before Gama's Expedition to the East, had
been employed in Western Discoveries, which proved so very successful, that he
found no less than another World; which soon after, from Americus Vesputius,
was called America: So that the Division of the World by the Ancients, Dividing
of the earth*
(concerning which they had so long erred, and were utterly mistaken) was now
made manifest by Experience, and undisputable Demonstration; for formerly the
whole World was known by no other names than Asia, Africa, and Europe, but now,
those three are found to make but one Part of what incircles the Universal
Globe; because in the South lies a second, known no further than by its
Coastings and Superficial Margents; the third part being the New-World, our
America.

A query, if America was known to the Ancients.
Here it will not seem amiss, having proved that Africa was more than Coasted by
the Ancients, to engage and search with some scrutiny, concerning this America;
First, Whether at any time 'twas known by the Ancients? And next, by what
People, and when first Inhabited? About the former, the Learned of these later
times Jangle amongst themselves, for some of them will needs ascribe so much
Honor to Antiquity, declining the Worthy Praise of those that made so wonderful
a Discovery, as if they of old, and many Ages before, had done the same, or at
least, that this New-World to them was not unknown, maintaining this their bold
Assertion from the Authority of what they find, both in Ancient Greek, and
Latin Authors: First, especially in the Learned Plato, who, as you know at
large, Atlantica. Plato in Cri^i^ and Timaeo,
describes a New Atlantis, lying beyond the Straights of Gibraltar; whose Coast
is surrounded with two vast Seas that are Sowed thick with scattered Islands.
By these Seas they understand the Atlantic and Southern-Sea, by the many
Isles, Cuba, Hispaniola, Jamaica, California, and others, which lie sprinkled
along the Coasts of America. But it cannot be made out, that Plato describes
ought but a Fancy, his own Idea, not a Country that ever was, is, or shall be,
though he sets it forth so Accurately, and with such Judgment, as if he had
taken a Survey of the place, and found such a Land indeed.

In like manner, Diodorus Siculus undertakes to prove, Diod. Sic. lib. 6.
That America Was known to the Ancients; telling a Story, how the Phenicians
were driven by a Storm from the Coasts of Africa Westward, falling at last
upon a great and altogether unknown Island, which our late Expositors take for
America; Must it therefore be so? Surely not, for it is only a bare Story,
without any Proof or the least Testimony. Arist. de Mirandis in Nature auditis.
They endeavor to make Aristotle bolster up their opinion that he had a
knowledge of this New-World, which with no small pains they pump from these
Words: Beyond the Herculean Pillars, certain Carthaginian Merchants penetrated
the Atlantic Ocean so far, that at last they found a vast, yet un-inhabited
Island, producing nothing but Herbage, Plants, and Wild-Beasts, yet interlac'd
with many Meandring Rivers, abounding with several sorts of Fish, lying some
days Sail from the Continent; they Landing, found a Soil so fertile, and Air so
temperate, that there they settled, and were the first Planters of that Isle.
But the Carthaginians having intelligence thereof, Prohibited all Persons
whatsoever, upon Pain of Death, to go thither, fearing the place being so much
commended, all the People would be ready to flock thither, and desert their
own, and so utterly unfurnish and debilitate their then growing Commonwealth.

But how could the Carthaginians find America, without the use of the Compass?
How happened it, that they were so taken with the fertility of this their
New Foundland, when the Adjacent Countries and Fields about Carthage are every
where Flourishing, and most Luxurious? So that it may better be supposed, that
what Aristotle found so long since, may rather be the Canary-Isles, or
Great-Brittain, than America. The Greeks having then also made some Inspection
into the Brittish-Isles. They would also make you believe, that Virgil the
Prince of Latin Poets, Aeneid. lib. 6.
had known the New-World in these Verses; Aeneid. lib. 6.

There, there is the Prince, often promised us before,
Divine Augustus Caesar, who once more
Shall Golden Days bring to the Ausonian Land,
Kingdoms that once old Saturn did command,
And shall His power to India extend,
Beyond the Annual Circle, and beyond
The Sun's long Progress, where great Atlas bears,
Laden with Golden Stars, the glittering Spears;
Hic vir, hic est, tibi quem promitti saepius audis,
Augustus Caesar, divum genus, aurea condet
Saecula, qui rursus Latio, regnata per arva
Saturno quondam, super and Garamantas and Indos
Proferet imperium. Jacet extra sidera tellus,
Extra anni Solisque vias, ubi coelifer Atlas
Axem humero torquet stellis ardentibus aptum.
America was not known to the Ancients.
But what of all this? Who finds in any of these Writings, any Marks of America,
or the least Description thereof? Though we cannot deny that the Ancient Sages
and Wise Philosophers of former times might easily make out, and no question
did, that the Earth and Sea made the perfect Figure of a Globe; first from the
round Shadow of the Earth that Ecclipses the Moon; the different Risings and
Settings of the Celestial Luminaries; and the still Variation of the Pole; so
that the Earth and Sea making one Ball, they might easily conjecture, that the
South Side of the Equinoctial might be Inhabited as well as the North: But all
this was more grounded upon Natural Reason and Right Judgment, than any
Experience of theirs, or the least certain knowledge thereof, which since these
later times had the first happiness to obtain; so laying these Conjectures
aside, there have been none more grossly erroneous, and so utterly mistaken in
this Point, than some of the Ancients, and especially the Fathers of the Church.

Lactantius Firmianus, Lactant. l. 3. c. 24.
and St. Austin, who strangely jear'd at as ridiculous, and not thinking fit
for a Serious Answer the Foolish Opinion of Antipodes, or another Habitable
World beyond the Equator: At which, Lactantius Drolling, says, What, Forsooth,
here is a fine Opinion broached indeed; an Antipodes! heigh-day! People whose
Feet tread with ours, and walk Foot to Foot with us; their Heads downwards, and
yet drop not into the Sky! There, yes, very likely, the Trees laden with Fruit
grow downwards, and it Rains, Hails, and Snows upwards; the Roofs and Spires of
Cities, tops of Mountains, point at the Sky beneath them, and the Rivers
reversed topsi-turvy, ready to flow into the Air out of their Channels!

Lactant. error concerning our Antipodes.
But these seeming witty Observations of Lactantius, though they may serve for a
Jest, yet are not grounded on any serious Reasons; for the Earth and Sea being
Globular, making one Universal Ball; all Materials whatsoever that belong to
this great Body, sink by a natural Propensity toward its Center; so that
wherever we Travel, our Feet are downwards, and our Heads upwards, the Sky
above, and the Earth beneath; neither need they fear, that any where the Earth
should Moulder and drop into the Clouds: As also St. Austin. de Civit. Del l.
16. c. 9.
But St. Austin Reasons better, admitting that the Earth and Sea make a
Universal Globe; yet it no way follows, that inhabited Countries should lie
opposite to our Northern, nay, altogether impossible, seeing that side which is
our Antipodes is all nothing but Sea; and should we allow, that there were Land
and Water mixed as ours is, who could prove, that they were Peopled? or how
could any get thither, over such Vast and Immense Seas? or possibly pass the
extreme heat of the Torrid Zone, not to be endured by any living Creature? And
what then becomes of Sacred Scripture, which says positively, That all Men were
derived from Adam, and after the Flood, from Noah and his three Sons? Therefore
the Nations of the Antipodes must be of another Abstract, there being no
possibility (as they supposed) of passing from this World to that: But since
the Discovery of the East and West Indies, Experience, the best Mistress, has
taught, that in the South are mighty Lands and vast Territories, and that as
far as they have been Penetrated, are found to be full of People, extending
their Dominions from East to West. And though St. Austin denied this now
well-known Truth, yet long before his time, Cicero, Pliny, and others amongst
the Greeks and Romans, divided the Earth under five Zones; which Virgil
describes thus:

Five Zones the heavens infold, hot Sunbeams beat
Always on one, and burns with raging heat.
The two Extremes to this on each hand lies
Muffled with Storms, fettered with cruel Ice.
'Twixt Cold and Heat, two more there are, th'aboads
Assigned poor Mortals by The Immortal Gods.
Quinque tenent caelum zonae: quarum una corusco
Semper Sole rubens, and torrida semper ab igni:
Quam circum extremae dextra, laevaque trahuntur
Caerulea glacie concretae, atque imbribus atris.
Has inter, mediamque, duae mortalibus aegris
Munere concessae divum: via secta per ambas,
Obliquus qua se signorum verteret ordo.
Marcob. in Somnio Scipionis. l. 2. c. 5. Vide Carpent. Geograph.
With Virgil, Pliny, and the Prince of Latin Orators agree, who says, You see,
that those that inhabit the Earth dwell in Countries so separated one from
another, that it is impossible they should have any Commerce; some of them are
our Antipodes, walking with their Heads downwards, some their Feet against our
sides, others, as we, with their Heads upright. You see how the same Earth
seems to be Swathed about with Rolls, of which, two separated by the other
three, are at utmost distance one from the other, lying equi-distant under the
Vertick Points of Heaven, always covered with Snow and Ice; but the middlemost
and greatest is scorched by the violent heats of the Sun: Two Tracts are
Habitable, one to the South, our Antipodes, the other North, which we Inhabit.

And Pliny also affirms, Pliny lib. 2.
though against the Vulgar Opinion, this truth, That the Earth is round about
inhabited, and that people walk Foot to Foot in most parts thereof; though
every one be ready to ask why our Antipodes drop not into the Sky; which
question, our Antipodes may also ask concerning us.

But although the Ancients upon these and the like Demonstrations well
understood, that there was a Habitable World toward the South under our
Horizon, yet they could not make out or believe, that there was any possibility
to pass thither; And, according as St. Austin conceived, That the Earth
produced nothing under either Pole, by reason of excessive cold, and that the
Equinoxs or Middle-Zone, was not to be penetrated, because of the insufferable
heat.

Macrob. in Somno Scip. lib. 2.
And Macrobius says, That the Equinoctial Circle, the Artick and Antartick
Lines, bind the two Habitable Zones, and make Temperate by the excessive
Neighboring Heats and Colds; and these Countries only give Animation, and
comfortable Enjoyment to all Living Creatures.

Moreover, St. Austin in some places seems to clear his own Doubts, saying,
That People, if they could find a means to Sail those Vast and Undiscovered
Seas, might make Land, raising new Stars under another Sky.

How beasts came on remote Islands.
A Learned Father, searching after the Original of all sorts of Beasts which
multiply by Generation, concludes, That they must derive themselves from those
that were saved with Noah in the Ark. But how came they to the Isles? To those
adjacent and near the Main Land, they might easily Swim; to the remoter, they
were Transported.

And chiefly the wild.
But this Doubt is not altogether cleared, for the Domestic and other Creatures
fit for Humane use and Sustenance were thus brought thither: Yet how comes it
to pass, that Voracious and Wild Creatures are also found there, such as
Wolves, Tigers, Lions, and other Beasts of Prey? This puzzle putting St. Austin
to a stand, he had no other means to get off, but by saying, that by God's
Commands or Permission, the Angels conveyed them thither; If so, why might not
God please to Plant Men there in like manner, and the rather, the Earth being
created for Humane use? Austin is contradicted.
But what needed this, when Men can in Ships Transport themselves, either of
their own accord for curious Inquest, to find new Countries, or else enforced
by stress of Weather, to far remoter, and altogether unknown Lands: How men
came to new Countries.
Besides, though the Earth is here and there divided by large Bays and vast
Seas, yet nevertheless, in other places it is all continued Land, or at least
parted by some narrow Inlet or Sea; so that there was no difficulty for a
crowded Plantation to go over, and so ease themselves in another Country, till
then not Inhabited; therefore none need to question, but that from Adam, or
nearer, from Noah's three Sons, Sem, Ham, and Japhet, those, as well as we,
were extracted, that Inhabit this our other World.

Reasons why America was so long unknown.
But one question is to be observed, How first after the expiration of so many
Ages in these our later times, a New-World was discovered, altogether unknown
to the Ancients, when they in the greatness of their Parts and Undertaking,
Prowess and Prudence, were no ways inferior to the Modern, and every way as fit
for great Designs and grand Exploits? Who first sailed on the Ocean.
We need not scruple or make the least doubt, but the Sea has been Navigated
of old; but the first attempters set forth unexperienced, Several opinions of
the Ancients concerning it.
in as pitiful and ill-contriv'd Vessels. The Heathens ascribe the Art of
Navigation, first to the Cretans, who under the Conduct of Neptune, set forth a
Navy to explore Foraign Countries. But Pliny long before gives the Invention of
this Art to Erythra, King of Egypt, who upon Pieces of Timber, conjoined and
braced together, crept along the Shores, and ventured to Discover the Isles in
the Red Sea. But others give that honor to the Trojans, and Micians, when with
a Fleet by Sea, they Invaded Thrace: Others; Britains amongst the first
Inventors of Navigation
to the Britains, who made little Vessels of Leather, and were the first that
by this Invention found how to Float upon the Waters: Some plead, that the
Samothracians were first. Others, that Danaeus before all, found a way by Sea
from Egypt to Greece. But without all Contradiction, Noah's Ark was the Pattern
or Sample, that succeeding Ages imitating, built their Ships by; and the more
probable, because his Offspring multiplying so fast, that they were enforced to
enlarge their Colonies, by passing Seas, and other broad Rivers, to settle
their Super-numeraries there.

The first Inventers of several things belonging to Shipping.
So Jason Invented a Ship, which he called Argos, which Sesostris King of Egypt
took as his Pattern. Next, the Biremis, a Galley with double Banks of Oar, was
made by the Erythreans; with treble Banks, by the Corinthian Amocles; the
addition of the Quadruple, the Carthaginians boast; of the Quinqueremis
Nesichthon, Alexander the Great, brought them to twelve Banks; Ptolomy Soter,
to fifteen; Demetrius, Antigonus Son, doubled them to thirty; Ptolomy
Philadelphus, to forty; and last of all, Philopater raised them to fifty Banks
of Oars. Hippus a Tirian, was the first that set Ships upon the Stocks; the
Rhodians a Ketch, and the Batavians a Boat; the Copes made the first Oar;
Dedalus the Mast and Boltsprit; Piscus the Beak; the Tyrrheans the Anchor;
Tiphys the Rudder; taking example from the motion of a Kites Stern; Icarus
found Sails, fancied by the Poets for Wings, though some ascribe that honor to
his Father Dedalus.

Why in former Ages no remote Countries were discovered.
Minos was the first that Engaged in a Sea Fight, whereby we may easily
conjecture, that of old none adventured far into the Offin, or to remote
Countries, not daring to trust their so slight contrived Vessels. But these
later times have strangely and suddenly improved this growing Art of
Navigation, yet pitched not to that height at first, as boldly to adventure,
and loose sight of Land.

The manner of the Ancients Sailing.
The Tyrians first understood how to Steer their Course by the North-Star, and
when dark and foul Weather had Clouded the Sky, that they could neither see
Heaven or Earth, but only Sea, they directed their Course by the Wind; and if
they doubted the change thereof, they let some Birds fly, whom they followed,
supposing that they flood directly to the nearest Land. But these are but poor
helps, and blind Guides to show you Land from the middle of the boundless
Ocean. It is certain, Of the Romans.
that the Romans in the time of Julius Caesar and Augustus, stretched the
Bounds of that Empire Eastward to Euphrates, Why America was so lately known.
the Rhyne, and the Danube, and Westward to the Ocean and Mount Atlas, Sailing
up and down the Mediterranean, with great Fleets, which stoutly endured the
violence both of Waves and Weather; but all this made them not so hardy, as
once to think or look after new Worlds. But after the Roman power decreased, by
several Eruptions of the Goths, Vandals, Huns, Normans, Lumbards, and other
Northern Countries, which swarmed with People, that overflowed all places like
a Deluge, so that Europe was every where puzzel'd and Imbroyl'd, their whole
business consisting in conjoyning Forces to withstand such bold Invaders, and
so vexatious an Enemy.

And farther East, Asia was at the same time little better, still trembling at
the daily Alarms and Incursions of the Scythians, Persians, and Saracens; and
afterward the Turks growing upon them more than any of the former, expected no
other than a sad Gatastrophe, so that the known World had too much work cut out
for them by these Distractions and Alterations of Government, then to go in
Quest of uncertainties, to find they know not where, another.

Here also is added by St. Jerome, Hieron. in c. 2. Ephesians.
what an ancient Writer says, Great care has been taken in Computing the Age
of this World, and if there be another which Commenced not with ours, (as
Clemens mentions in his Epistles) where are situate those Seas and Lands that
make that second World? Or is it a part of that, in which Adam was Created? Or
may it not rather Metaphorically be taken for Worldly Affairs, governed by the
Prince of the Air, ruling in the Hearts of the Children of Disobedience?

The Ancients opinion of an unknown world.
But Pliny, Cicero, and Virgil, the best in their kind of Latin Writers, concur,
That there may be a habitable World under our Horizon, in the temperate
Southern Zone, beyond the extreme heat, and on this side of the Antartick colds.

But what signifies all this to the Discovery of America, which lies not only
under the scorching Heats of the Equinox, but under the Frosts and Snows of the
Artick and Antartick-Poles? In Comment. super Obad. v. 19, 20, 21. And they of
the south shall possess the mount of Esau, and they of the plain, the
Philistines: and they shall possess the fields of Epharim, and the fields of
Samaria, and Benjamin shall possess Gilead. And the captivity of this host of
the children of Israel shall possess that of the Canaanites, even unto
Zarepath, and the captivity of Jerusalem, which is in Sepharad, shall possess
the Cities of the south. And saviors shall come upon mount Zion, to judge the
mount of Esau, and the kingdom shall be the LORDS

If America is known in the Scripture.


Yet less probable is that which Lodowick Leo, an Augustine Friar takes out of
Obadiah; as if that Prophet in the three last Verses of his Prophecy should
speak of the Spaniards, which should not only discover and Conquer America,
but also Convert the Inhabitants to the Christian Faith, because those that are
in Sepharad, should Inherit and Possess the Cities of the South, And Saviors
shall arise from the Mountains of Zion, to judge the Mount and Wealth of Esau.

But certainly, Obadiah meant no other than the Restoration of the Jews from
the Captivity of Babylon, who after their return, should grow more powerful
than ever, and they, led by their Messiah, obtain the height of all felicity,
who would send his Evangelists and Apostles to declare Salvation to the utmost
Borders of the Earth. It is true, that the Rabins Expound Sepharad to be Spain,
and therefore he concludes, that Obadiah Prophesi'd of the Spaniard, and their
Conquests in America; so they would prove, that America was long known before
Christ.

And lastly, It signifies as little what Pineda and Levinus Lemnius drive at,
That Solomon first finding the use of the Compass, Solomon's Fleet sailed not
to Peru.
Rigged a Navy at Ezion-Geber, which from the Red Sea had no indirect Course to
the Straights of Magellan; from whence he might Lade his Vessels with the Gold
of Peru. In whose Description it shall be manifested, that Peru is not Ophir,
as some without any show of Reason or Truth would make us believe.

Solomon did not find the Compass.
But as concerning King Solomon's finding out the use of the Magnet, it is soon
said, but not easily proved; for though that Prince exceeded all Mankind in
Wisdom and Learning, and was perfect in the Operations, and knew the Occultest
Secrets of Nature, understanding what e're belonged to Plants, from the Cedar
of Libanus, to Hysop, and the meanest Shrub that grows upon the Wall; yet it
nothing makes out, that he knew the Mystery of the Navigable use of the
Lodestone: But suppose he did know, there is no where any mention of it; and
if this excellent thing, the Compass, had been found in Solomon's time, how
came it afterward so utterly to be lost?

Albertus Magnus mistakes, when he ascribes the knowledge of the Compass to
Aristotle, of which he himself makes not the least mention; neither Galen,
Alexander Aphrodisiensis, Pliny, Lucretius, nor any of the Roman, Greek,
Arabian, or other Country Writers whatsoever. Lodestone, by whom found.
Some give the honor thereof to an Indian, others to a Shepherd in Mount Ida,
whose Clouted Shoes being full of Hob-Nails, the Iron sticking fast to the
Stones on which he stood, stopped his motion. And although the Ancients found but
many Secrets of Nature, amongst which this of the Lodestone, Attracing Iron,
as being its proper Food; and the three sorts of the Magnet, of which some will
not draw Steel, found by Theamedes a Greek Author, and other since, well known
Properties: Yet they never attained that knowledge, that the Lodestone would
ease Pain, Strange operations of the Loadstone.
and stop the effusion of Blood, though the edge piercing the Skin, opened the
Vein: as Hieronimus Cardanus experienced on himself and others, De subtilitate
l. 7.
which he had from Laurentius Guascus, a great Chyrurgeon. Much less, that the
Needle of the Compass being touched by the Lodestone on the Northside of the
Equinox, respects the North; but depressing the Artick, and raising the
Antartick Pole, it looks as steadfastly toward the South: But far less dreamt
they of its several variations, Variance of the Compass.
according to the Coasts that are nearest; as when you come from the Island del
Cuervo, the Point varies more West; but Sailing toward the Equinox, it varies
Eastward; by which we may absolutely conclude, that without this use of the
Lodestone, first found by Flavius Melvius a Neapolitan, Genebrad. Chron.
in the Year 1303. it was altogether impossible to reach America. So that
Joseph de Acosta mistakes, When, and by whom the Compass was found.
who gives the honor of the finding so great a benefit to Navigation, to some
Mahumetan Seamen which Vasques de Gama met with near Mosambique, who had
Sailed those Seas by the use thereof; whereas Gama's Expedition was above a
hundred years after Melfius, who lived in such a juncture of time for
Mathematical Learning, that few Ages boasted the like: For then flourished in
England, and were Contemporaries, besides others abroad, Richard Wallingford,
Nicolas de Lynna, John Halifax, Walter Britte, John Duns, and John de
Lignarijs, all eminent in Astronomical Arts, belonging to Navigation, and
doubtless, no small helps to Melfius in this his happy Invention.

Lastly, We will relate what has, been held as a seeming, Testimony; (that
America was known to the Europeans before the Birth of our Savior) by an
antique Meddal of the Emperor Augustus, dug out of the Ground in Peru, and
sent to his Holiness at, Rome, which may well be reckoned with the like Cheat
contrived by Hermicus Cajadus, Anno 1505. near Syntra, a Town in Portugal,
where three Marbles Engraven with ancient Characters, concerning a Prophecy of
discovering the East Indies by the Portuguese, in the Reign of King Emanuel,
were privately buried under Ground, and not long after, by a pretended accident
dug out, which made such a bustle amongst the Learned, that several tired
themselves about the explanation of the supposed Sibylline Prediction.

CHAP. II. Of the Original of the Americans, whence they came, when, how, and
from what People Planted.
The original of the Americans much disputed on.
ABout the Original of the Americans, the Learned Dispute so much, that they
find nothing more difficult in Story, than to clear that Point; for whether
inquiry be made after the time, when the Americans first settled themselves
where they now inhabit, or after what manner they came thither, either by
Shipping or by Land; on purpose, or accidentally; driven by Storm, or else
forced by a more powerful People, to remove from their old Plantations, and
seek for new? or if any one should be yet more curious, asking the way that
directed them out of another Country to this New World? or else enquire for
those People, from whom the Americans derived themselves? He will find several
Opinions, and the Learned still Jangling.

The first Doubt is concerning the time: Voyagel l. 1. c. 8.
Mr. Purchase, wherever he had the Hint, endeavors to prove, that America has
been but lately Planted; for which he thus argues,

That if Asia, or Europe furnished America with People in Abraham's time, or at
least before the Birth of our Savior; then it must upon necessity, by the
Expiration of so many Ages, have been much more Populous, then the Spaniards
found when first they discovered it. The time when America was first Peopled.
Besides the vast Territories yet unhabited (says he) are sufficient
testimonies, that this New World has been Planted but scatteringly, and not
many Ages since, else the Country would have more abounded with Inhabitants,
because the fertility of the Soil was able plentifully to maintain Millions
more, then were there when first discovered: And what Marks are better to know
a new People by, in any Country, than a rude Life and unsettled Government?
just like a Family removing to another House, which takes no short time to
settle their Goods and Household Stuff in a handsome and convenient Order.

The condition of the first World after the Flood.
When Noah went out of the Ark on Mount Ararat, and not long after, saw his Seed
spread over Armenia and Assyria, the new Generation of People consisted in
Shepherds and Husbandmen, that settled themselves near Lakes and Rivers.
Villages, Cities (and much less) whole Kingdoms, were scarce found on the Face
of the Earth, and as little of Trade or Commerce; Riches, Division of Lands,
costly Garments and Furniture for Houses, were not then in use, but the works
of long settlements in happy Peace. To curb growing-Wickedness, and the Pride
of Libertines, who incroach'd upon their weaker Neighbors, Laws were invented,
by which Bridle, the unbroke or wild World grew tamer: And first, the Assyrians
were brought to endure the Bit, and answer the Reins of Government; then Egypt,
next Greece, and after that the Romans, who spreading their Power by Arms and
Martial Discipline, first civilized the Gauls, Spain, Britain, and lastly
Germany.

But because a Country or Pastoral Life, knowing no Commerce, but mean Hovels,
and to dwell in Huts, priding in poor and no Habits, despising all greatness,
unlimited by Laws, and all things else, (which the People observed presently
after the Flood) is now found among the Americans, who will take them for ought
else, but new Comers to that Land, as themselves acknowledge? For the Mexicans
boast, that they are the eldest there, and that from them, Peru, Chili, Chika,
and other Countries toward the South, had their Colonies, and yet the oldest
Chronicles of Mexico reckon not above a thousand Years.

Thus far Mr. Purchase.

But certainly, all this Muster of appearing Reasons, is not able, to vanquish
single Truth; For, grant that America was not very Populous when the Spaniards
first arrived there; America was Peopled many Ages ago.
must this needs prove, that it was never well inhabited before? Perhaps the
Civil Wars, which have been always destructive to this Nation, have much
hindered the increase of People; and the more, because their Salvage Nature is
such, that in several places they account Man's Flesh Broiled a very great
Dainty. Purchase contradicted
And suppose such Prodigal Excess of their Humane Bankets were not used in
America, as indeed they are, Is it wonder, that such a great part of the World,
not only exceeding Europe in bigness, but Asia also should here and there have
a Tract of Land uninhabited? These might by reason of their Barrenness, be
useless, as many such places are found in the midst of the most Populous and
fertile Countries. But above all this, it is certain, that America to this day
(notwithstanding almost innumerable thousands of Indians formerly Slain arid
Massacred by the Spaniards) is so well inhabited, that it may stand in
Competition with either Asia or Europe. And how could such vast multitudes
Plant the far-spreading Country of America, without the help of many Ages?
Moreover, This truth is not without sufficient Testimonies; when any one looks
on the Islands with which America lies encompassed, he may suppose they did not
willingly go from the Main Continent to the Isles, but were driven thither by
Wars among themselves, or as most times it happens, because of the vast
increase of the Natives, the Country must discharge its burden.

Hereto is added, the several Languages used in America, as in Europe or any
other part of the known World; whereby we may easily guess, that America was
Peopled presently after the Confusion of Tongues at Babel. Furthermore, If the
Americans live a Rude Life, go meanly Habited, be without stately Houses; such
Customs are even among us observed by several People; as the Tartars,
Numidians, and others, which made their Antiquity be called in question. He
also must needs have no knowledge of the Arts and Mechanic Sciences used by
the Americans, who concludes, that they settled but lately in America. One
Argument at present will be sufficient to contradict them all; and in the
further Description, the contrary will be more manifest.

American Goldsmiths.
Hieronimus Benso relates, That he stood amazed at the Gold and Silver Smiths
in the Territory of Chito, who without any Iron Tools made Images, and all
manner of Vessels: Which work they performed thus, First, they made an Oval
Crucible of a good Look, round about Pasted with Earth, embodied with the
Powder of Wood Coals; which Crucible being Baked very hard in the Sun, they
fill with Pieces of Gold or Silver, and put in the Fire; about which standing
with five, six, or more Pipes made of Canes, they blow the Fire so long, till
the Metal melts, which others sitting on the ground, run it into Moulds of
black Stone, and so with little trouble, Cast into what shape they please.
Lastly, Though Mexico can reckon but a thousand years, must it therefore
follow, that the Inhabitants are no older? How many famous places (even among
our selves) have no longer Registers, and if they have, they are commonly
Fabulous, few Nations boasting truly their own Original; which Argument, not
only contradicts (as we suppose) Mr. Purchase, but all others ascribing the
Plantation of America to our later times.

SECT. I.
After what manner the Inhabitants of America came thither.
IN the next place, let us enquire, how the Americans were transmitted thither,
whether by Sea, or Land? Both which are feasible two several ways; if they made
an Expedition thither, as Discoverers, or were driven on those Coasts by stress
of Weather.

The first is most unlikely, and not seeming possible, for how could they Steer
through so vast an Ocean, to Countries they never heard of, without the Compass,
and other Necessaries for such a Voyage? for when first discovered, their want
of experience in Shipping for so long a Voyage, knowing no further than the use
of small Boats or Canoos, plainly explode, that they willingly Steered from a
known World, to an unknown, with no better accommodation; but some probable
reasons may be made out, to induce us to believe, that they were rather driven
thither by Storm.

But some will say, How lived the little Boats, and how endured they in such a
continual Tempest, and were not either swallowed up amidst the Waves, or
starved for want of Provision, which their hollow Troughs could not contain?

The first doubt is the least, for there are Examples enough by which appear,
that oftentimes great Ships Bulging, are over-set or sunk in the Sea by foul
Weather when the Mariners escape in their Cock-Boat; and if they were but
thinly Victual'd for so long a Voyage, questionless, that little which they
had, they spun out, and made it last, while the impetuous Storm shortened the
passage, which fair Weather would have made much longer.

Pliny tells us of Annius Plocquius, Plin l. 5. c. 22.
General of the Red Sea, That one of his Slaves being Enfranchiz'd, Strange
voyage of a Roman Slave.
Sailing down toward the Arabian Gulf, was carried by a violent Tempest from
the North, beyond Caramania, and on the fifteenth day came to an Anchor in
Hippuros, a Haven of Taprobane, which Ortelius judges to be Sumatra; but
Mercator and Cluverius, on better grounds, Zeylon, which is no less than three
thousand English Miles.

In like manner, Joseph de Acosta tells us, That in fifteen days time, he got
with a Northerly Wind from the Canaries to America, and his Voyage had been
shorter, durst he have born more Sails, which may partly clear the former
doubts.

The Peruvians opinion concerning ancient Sea-Vogayes.
Moreover, the Peruvians themselves give some small Testimony (in their ancient
Records) of a few that Landed of old upon their Coasts, which were (as they
say) mighty and cruel Giants, committing much Bloodshed, Slaughtering the
Natives every where; and having subdued the whole Country, built stately
Edifices, of which remain yet the Ruins of some Foundations, very Artificial
and Costly. They also show near Manta, and Puerto Viejo, many huge Bones (as
they believe of Giants, three times longer and thicker than an ordinary Man's.
They also tell us, that many Ages since, one Ica and Arica Sailed Westward
thither upon Sea Wolves Skins, blown up like Bladders: But however, Acosta.
Histor. Not. l. 1 c. 12.
without contradiction, the Americans never knew, much less built any such
Vessels, with which they durst venture to the Offin, out of sight of Land:
their Balsas, Periagos, and Canoos, will not all amount to the Bulk of one of
our small Barques; wherefore the Inhabitants of Tumbez, when they descried the
Spanish Fleet, sent to discover Peru, were amazed at the high Masts, spreading
Sails, and bigness of the Ships, judging them first to be Rocks, cast up out of
the Sea; but observing them to approach their Coast, and that they were full of
Bearded-Men, Ridicolous opinion of the Americans.
thought the Gods were walking in them; by our Modern Poet, Mr: Dryden in his
Indian Emperor, thus Elegantly described.

Guyomar to Montezuma.
I went in order, Sir, to your Command,
To view the utmost Limits of the Land:
To see that Shore, where no more World is found;
But Foamy Billows, breaking on the ground;
Where, for a while, my Eyes no Object met,
But distant Skies, that in the Ocean set:
And low-hung Clouds that dipped themselves in Rain
To shake their Fleeces on the Earth again.
At last, as far as I could cast my Eyes
Upon the Sea, somewhat, methought did rise
Like Bluish Mists, which still appearing more,
Took dreadful Shapes, and moved toward the Shore.
Mont. What Forms did these new Wonders represent?
Guy. More strange than what your Wonder can invent.
The Object I could first distinctly view,
Was tall straight Trees, which on the Waters flew;
Wing on their sides, in stead of Leaves did grow,
Which gathered all the Breath the Winds could blow:
And at their Roots grew floatingg Palaces,
Whose out-blow'n Bellies cut the yielding Seas.
Mont. What Divine Monsters, O ye Gods, were these,
That float in Air, and fly upon the Seas!
Came they alive or dead upon the Shore?
Guy. Alas, they lived too sure, I heard them roar.
All turned their sides, and to each other spoke,
I saw their Words break out in Fire and Smoke.
Sure, it is their Voice that Thunders from on high,
Or these, the younger Brothers of the Sky.
Deaf with the noise, I took my hasty Flight,
No Mortal Courage can support the Fright.
But the resolving these Doubts, starts a harder Question, viz. Grant that the
Americans were by Tempest driven thither, How then came the Beasts thither? It
is certain, that those which are beneficial for humane use, as Dogs for to
Hunt, great Cattle, Sheep, for Food, and other Necessaries, might easily be
carried thither, for so the Spaniards brought Cows, Horses, Swine, and other
Cattle; Spaniards carry Oxen, and Sheep to the American Isles.
and also Poultery from Spain, to the new-discover'd Isles, Cuba, Hispaniola,
Jamaica, Margaretta, and La Dominica, when at their arrival, formerly no
four-footed Beasts were found there, whose fertile Soil has so multiplied
their increase, that the Dogs running Wild, and breeding as fast, do great
hurt to the Grazing Herds, which they only shoot for their Skins, leaving
their Flesh, the best of Meats, only to Manure the Ground on which they lie.

The Transporting of tame and profitable Cattle might easily be allowed of, but
who would load their Ships with Lions, Tigers, Bears, Wolves, Foxes, and other
Serpents and Voracious Beasts? it is certain that some may be tamed before they
were Shipped.

How wild Beasts came in America, and the Isles. In vita Heliogabali.
Lampridius relates, That Heliogabalus the Roman Emperor, took great pleasure
in Domestic Lions, and Leopards, to frighten his Guests withal; for with the
third Course, they were all brought in, and sat betwixt the Invited, a Man and
a Beast. Lib. 2. cap. 17.
The great Cham, as Paulus Venetus an Eyewitness attests, Rides on Hunting,
Strange Hunting.
attended in couples with tame Leopards. The King of Camboja in like manner is
served with Panthers: Scaliger adds also, That they went not unprovided of a
Lamb or Goat, to give the Panther, lest falling into his natural ferocity,
provoked by hunger, he should make the Huntsmen his Quarry, if he had no other
Prey. But notwithstanding some wild Beasts seem to forget their Voracious
Nature, yet there ought great care to be taken in the Transporting of them,
because they oftentimes grow wild again, which France can witness, Strange
accident of two Leopards.
where two Leopards, a Male and a Female being tamed, presently after the death
of King Francis, whether negligently or on purpose, let loose, ran into the
Woods, and near Orleans devoured a great number of People, and Cattle: Gesner
says, That some Women's bodies were found, who were untouched, only their
Breasts eaten by the Leopards, as if they took them for the daintiest part;
which is not unlike the ancient, Jeres, who according to Saint Hierom, Adv
Jovin. l. 2.
entertained their Guests as a most delicious Dish, with Women's Breasts, and
Men's Buttocks Roasted. Besides, the devouring nature of these Wild Beasts,
what profit could Tigers, Lions, Wolves, Bears, and the like advantage the
Transporter? And how came Serpents, Adders, and other Reptiles, thither over
the Ocean, that with no Art whatsoever can be made tame? Were the small Vessels
just laden with such terrible Creatures, when against their wills, they were by
Storm driven on a new Coast? By these impossibilities we may easily judge, that
the Americans came thither by Land, and no other way, but how, and upon what
occasion must be our next enquiry.

SECT. II.
Two reasons wherefore the people remove from their Countries.
HIstories generally gives us only two accounts, Why People removed from one
Country to another, either not, or thinly inhabited; whether driven by force,
or of their own accord, so to unburthen and give ease to their too Plethorick
Countries.

Thus the banished Japanners forsook their Native Country, and settled
themselves in a desolate Soil, since a flourishing Empire, shining with Riches,
and Crowned with stately Cities: So the Batavians took possession of the
uninhabited Isle, lying between the Rhyne, and the Wael, being driven out of
Hessen by Civil-Wars, and preserved the memory of the place, from whence they
had their Original on the utmost Point of the Island, in the Villages of
Cattenwyck; for the Hessens formerly went by the name of Catti; others that
removed did not only fall upon their Neighbors, but made a way by force of
Arms, chosing their Habitations under a temperate Climate, and in a fruitful
Soil. After which manner the Franks entered Gaul, and afterward the Normans
set upon France; so that the Conquered Countries, have ever since from the
Conquerors been called France and Normandy: But although it cannot punctually
be said, how the Inhabitants of America removed, yet it is without
contradiction, that they first found an empty Country. The Flood acknowledged
by the Americans and other Heathens but mysteriously.
The Opinions which they have themselves concerning it, are full of idle
Fancies. First, they question their Original from the Flood, which is so well
rooted in the memory of all Nations, that the blindest and most ignorant know
something of it, though deformedly altered and varied, tacked up with
additional fabulous Stories, the truth it self known only to us, but to all
others lost in Oblivion.

Who has not heard of Deucalion's Flood, how his Wife Pyrrha and he only
escaped in a little Boat, and (as it is Fabl'd) landing on a Mountain, from
thence Peopled the World again, by throwing Stones backwards over their Heads?
Something of this seems to hint the true Story of Noah, his Wife, and Children,
from whom the desolated World was replenished.

The same they relate of Prometheus, concerning whom, thus Diodorus Siculus:
They say that the Nyle breaking through his Dams, and overflowing his Banks,
drowned all Egypt, especially that part where Prometheus Ruled, where all the
Inhabitants were swallowed by the Deluge. None can imagine but that Diodorus by
this makes mention of a particular Flood, and not the general one in Noah's
time; for as the Greeks ascribed all things to their Heroes, so the Egyptians
in like manner did the same to theirs: Therefore they have of the general
Flood, made a particular one in Egypt, though perhaps it never was: So that
what is Fabled of Prometheus, is nothing but a Part of the Universal Deluge;
which the Name Prometheus proves, because it signifies, Prometheus and Noah are
the same.
Sprung from Heaven, and is the same with Noah, whom they hold to be the first
Father of all Mankind since the Flood, born of, or regenerated from his Wife
Asia; and Asia signifies Earth, or The Mother of all things; and so espousing
Noah, being sprung from God, to Ararat, from whence descended the Generations
of Mankind, and by degrees spread over the whole surface of the Earth.

The Chinese, East-Indians, Japanners, and other People of Asia and Africa,
have also some knowledge of a very ancient Flood; but hood-wink't under many
idle Fancies, not unlike that which the Americans relate, from whom several
Learned Persons find no obscure Confessions of the Deluge, Acosta, l. 1. c. 25.
which thus mystically they have wrapped up, That one Viracocha came out of the
great Lake Titicaca, and settled his Residence upon Tiaguanaco, where yet remain
the Ruins of ancient Walls, built after a wonderful manner: At length removing
from Tiaguanaco to Cusco, he began to multiply the Generation of Mankind. They
show in the forementioned Lake a small Island, under which, the Americans say,
Strange Opinion of the Americans concerning the Flood.
the Sun saved himself from the Flood; wherefore in ancient Times they
superstitiously observed that place, heightning their Bloody Sacrifices with
Humane Slaughter. Others relate, That six Persons leaped through a Hole out of
a Window, from whence all Men were since Extracted; and from that new Increase,
the place (after the Inhabitants of the Old World were all drowned) got the
Denomination of Pacari Tampo; and therefore they hold the Tampo's to be the
most ancient Families: From hence Mangocapam derived, Original of the American
Kings, and the Custom.
being the Primogenitor of the Ynca's or Kings; from whom sprung two
Generations, Hanon Cuzco, and Urim Cuzco. They tell us also, That their Ynca's,
when they make War upon any People, say that the occasion, as they pretend,
was, because all Territories are Tributary to them justly, from whom they were
derived and restored, being the first Planters of the New World; and withal,
That the true Religion was declared to them from Heaven.

This Relation, though mixed with Fables, shows (but very darkly) that they
have some knowledge of the Flood: Americans Flood is taken out of the Scripture.
For who are those six else that leaped out of a Window to replenish the
Generations of Mankind, but Shem, Ham, and Japhet, with their Wives?

The Americans can give but a little better Account of their first Original;
and indeed it is no wonder, because for want of Books they can relate nothing
certain, but only what they have Registered in their usual Quipocamagos, which
is not above four hundred years old. Acosta asking what Original they judged
they were of, Peruvians Opinion.
and from what Country and People derived? received no other Answer, but that
America only was their native Country, and that they were derived from no
other elsewhere. But though the Peruvians are of this Opinion, yet the Mexicans
are of another mind, And also the Mexicans, of their Original.
giving the Spaniards a far better Account when first they came thither,
wherein we must a little deviate, viz. How they were removed from some other
place, as Robert Comtaeus relates, who with many Learned and seemingly true
Arguments affirms, That the Original of the Americans must be sought for either
among the Phenicians, Sydonians, Tyrians, or Carthaginians, Lib. 1. cap. 7.
being indeed all one People. Herodotus says thus of the Phenicians, They
lived formerly, according to their own Relation, along the Shore of the
Red Sea; from whence removing, they planted the Seacoast of the Syrians.
Festus Avienus the Latin Poet agrees with this Opinion, where he says,

On the Phenicians Coasts the Ocean beats,
Who through the Red Sea Sailing, changed their Seats.
They were the first that ventured through the Seas,
And freighted Ships with richer Merchandise:
Fair or foul Weather, They without control!
Sought Foreign Trade, directed by the Pole.
Original and Habitations of the Phenicians, of whom, according to serval
Learned, the Americans are extracted.
Aristotle from a Greek Word calls them Phenicians, from their being red or
bloody with the Slaughter of all Strangers that Landed on their Coast; but
rather, and so indeed they are called Phenicians, or Erythreans, from Esau, or
Edom, from whom they are derived; for these two Words, or Denominations,
signify in Greek, Red; the two last, the like in Hebrew. Phoenix himself first
planted all the Country lying between the River Eleutherus, and the Egyptian
City Pelusium; and afterward Damiata, washed by the Mediterrane: But since,
these Boundaries are altered, on the North, by Judea; Westward, by the
Mediterrane; Southerly, by Egypt; and toward the East, by the Desert Arabia.

The chiefest Cities are Ptolemais, otherwise called Acon, Sidon, Arad, Great
Cana, Sarepta, Biblis, Bothrit, Berithus, and their Princess Tire, formerly
situate in an Isle, but since joined to the Main-Land by Alexander the Great.

None can disown, but that the Phenicians have every where been Admirals of the
Sea; so that they were formidable to the greatest Princes. When the Persian
King Cambyses came with a vast Army against the Carthaginians, Heredot. lib. 1.
he was forced to give over his Design, because the Phenicians refused to help
him with their Fleet, being allied to, and the City founded by them: But they
not only built Carthage, Salust in Igurtha.
which strove with Rome to be the Empress of the World, but also the famous
Cities Leptis, Utica, Hippo, and Adrumetum in Africa, with Cad^z and Tartessus
in Spain; nay, they sent Plantations of People into the Heart of Iberia and
Lybia. It will not be amiss to add Q. Curtius his Relation, who tells us,
Wherever the Phenicians came with their Fleets, Wonderful Power of the
Phenicians.
Landing their Men, they subdued whole Countries, and by that means spread
their Colonies over the known World; Carthage in Africa, Thebes in Boetia, and
Cadiz near the Western Ocean. Aristotle relates, "That they made such rich
Returns of their Merchandise, and chiefly of their Oil, in Spain, that their
Anchors, Pins, and all Iron Materials belonging to a Ship, in stead of that
Metal, were Silver.

But to return to our Discourse, and disprove the former Testimony, That the
Phenicians found America. The formention'd Comtaeus says thus; None can justly
doubt, Testimonies that the Americans are derived from the Phenicians.
but that since the Phenicians took the Command of the Sea from the Rhodians,
they more and more increased their Fleets, and growing experter in Navigation,
passing the Gibraltar Northward, became Masters of Cadiz, and still prepared
new Fleets, which searching beyond Atlas Southward, discovered the Coasts of
Africa, and the adjacent Isles, driving a great Trade to the Canaries, and to
those which lay scattered along Cape de Verd, formerly called the Gorgades.
This way of Trade also was not unknown to the Greeks, Iberians, and other
People; but after the Phenicians assumed it wholly to themselves, without any
respect or difference of Countries, they sunk all whomsoever they could catch.
Curtius further adds, saying, First Testimony.
"I believe that the Phenicians, sailing into the Main Ocean, have discovered
unknown Countries. And which are those? Not the Gorgades, or Canary Isles; for
those were sufficiently known before; but a Main Land, far beyond. Is
contradicted.
But though the Phenicians were most expert, yet not skilful enough to make out
such Discoveries. They indeed were the first that before any other sailed out
of the Mid-land Sea; nay, they ventured a good way into the main Ocean, beyond
the Straights of Gibraltar, or the Herculean Pillars: But how far? Not to the
Gorgades, above half way betwixt Spain and America; but to the Cassiterides, or
Flemish Islands, which to the number of nine lie in sight of Spain. Strabo
affirms this Truth, Lib. 3. Geogr.
saying, The Cassiterides are ten, lying in order close by one another:
Flemmish. Islands.
One remains uninhabited; on the rest live a swarthy People. This way the
Phenicians sailed first, when they were in quest for Trade, from Cadiz. And
though he reckons ten, there are indeed but nine, viz. St. Michael, St. Mary,
St. George, Tercera, de Pico, or Tenariff, so called from the Mountain which
vomits Fire, Fayal, Las Flores, Del Cuervo, and Gratiosa. Moreover, the same
Strabo relates, Lib. 17.
That the Carthaginians did not throw overboard the Traders on the remote
Gorgades, but those especially that came from Sardinia or Cadiz.

Salt-Islands how long known. Joan. Mariana de Reb. Hispan. lib. 1. cap. 20.
Mean while, we cannot deny, but that the Gorgades that lie before Cape de Verd
were frequented by the Carthaginians, long before the Birth of our Savior; but
with so much admiration, that Hanno their Captain in that Expedition was listed
amongst the number of their Heroes, happening thus: The Carthaginians sailing for
Cadiz, to assist the Phenicians against the Spaniards, made that the Seat of
War, which soon drew on a greater Design; for Hamilco and Hanno being empowered
by the Senate at Carthage, managed the War in Spain. Both of them were
ambitious to discover new Countries. Hamilco sailed along the Coast of Spain
and Gaul, reaching to Batavia. Hanno steered Southerly, Very remarkable Voyage
of Hanno the Carthaginian, along the Coast of Africa to the Salt-Islands.
carrying thirty thousand Men of all Trades in his Fleet, purposing to build a
new City in some place or other, and got beyond the Promontory Ampelusium, now
called Cabo Spatil; the River Ziloa, which washes the City Arzilla; and the
Stream Lix, now Lusso, where the Poets place the Gardens of the Hesperides, in
the custody of a waking Dragon: From thence proceeding on his Voyage, he came
to an Anchor in the Mouth of the River Subur, at this day called Subu; and
afterward before the City Sala, now called Salle, at that time made very
dangerous by the voracious Beasts in the neighboring Woods: At last the Fleet
reached the Foot of the lesser Atlas, which ends at the Point Chaunaria, by the
Modern Navigators called Cabo Non, because it was judged, that none could escape
with Life, that durst adventure to steer beyond Chaunaria; yet Hanno sailed
between Palma, one of the Canary-Islands, and the Promontory Bojadoris, toward
the pointed Coast called then Cornu Hesperium, but now Cape Verd, in the River
Asama, by Castaldus called Omirabi: Here he found horrible Croccodiles, and
Hippopotami or Sea-Horses. Atsama is held to flow from the same Fountain whence
the Nyle has its Original. In this Latitude Hanno descried those Islands which
he called Gorgones (from the three deformed Sisters Medusa, Sthenio, and
Euryale, whose Heads were Periwig'd with curled Serpents) because they found as
illfavor'd Women on these Islands, which at this day the Hollanders call the
Salt-Islands; amongst which, the chiefest is St. Jago, a Colony of The
Portuguese; but the Mountains opposite to the Gorgones, on the main Coast of
Africa, rising aloft with spiring tops near the River Masitholus, Hanno called
the Chariots of the Gods, now named Sierra Liona, lying in eight Degrees
Northern Latitude. When Hanno and his Armado, either provoked by an undaunted
Courage, or covetous of Fame, if they proceeded in their so wonderful
Adventure, went forward, Strange Vision.
where they reported, that they saw Rivers of Fire falling into the Ocean, the
Country all about burning, and the tops of the Mountains dazleing their Eyes
with continual Flashes of Lightning, intermixed with terrible Thunder; adding
further, That the Natives all the Summer sheltered themselves from the
excessive Heat, in Caves under Ground; and coming forth in the night, run
abroad with lighted Torches over their Ground, so gathering in their Harvest,
and Officiating all other Affairs of Husbandry: Yet Hanno no ways daunted at
such strange Sights, sailed from Sierra Liona Southerly to the Aequinox, where
he discovered an Island not far from the African Coast, inhabited by a rough
and hairy People, The Ancients believed Baboons to be Men.
to take some of whom, he used all possible means, yet could not; only two
Women, being encompassed by Soldiers, were taken, and carried aboard; but being
very salvage, and barbarously wild, could not be tamed, or brought to any
Complacency; so they killed them, and carried their stuff'd-up Skins to
Carthage, where they were a long time gazed upon with great admiration.

The Island St. Thomas.
This Island which Hanno then found, can be no other but that which we call St.
Thomas, and has a very unhealthy Air for Strangers, but else very fruitful,
and abounding with Sugarcanes; and the hairy People which he makes mention of,
were Babeons, or Baboons, which Africa in this place breeds large, to the
amazement of the Beholders, in great abundance; because those deformed
Monsters, more than any other Beast whatsoever, represent Humane shape.

Hanno's Return.
Here Hanno stopped his Voyage, being hindered from going further for want of
Provision. Five years he spent in this Expedition, before he Anchored again at
Cadiz, from whence not long after he steered to his Native Country Carthage,
where he was received with no less Wonder than State, insomuch that none before
or after him ever gained greater Honor, seeming to oblige his Country with the
hopes of future Profits from these new discovered Regions: Nay, Is for his
Voyage placed amongst the Gods.
he received a Name, and was placed amongst their Gods in the Temples, which,
he being ambitious of, promoted after a strange manner, teaching several Birds
to cry, The great God Hanno; which when they could speak perfect, they were let
fly in the Air, where to the admiration of all People, they every where
repeated their well-taught Lesson.

This the most remarkable Voyage which happened in the time of the Ancients,
considering they wanted several Mathematical Instruments belonging to
Navigation, and especially the use of the Compass; and also considering the
length of the Voyage to Sierra Liona, whither never any durst venture before:
Nay, in so many Ages after Hanno, the famousest Navigators which were set out
by the King of Portugal, feared a long time to cut their Passage through the
Aequinoctial-Line; however in long Process of time, diverse Experiments were
made, which have now so much improved the Art of Navigation.

Testimony that America was not known to the Ancients.
Hanno's Voyage was four hundred years before the Birth of our Savior;
therefore if none have been further than Hanno, until the time the Portuguese
sailed beyond Cape de Bona Esperana, how could America be discovered by Sea?
How did they steer from the Salt-Islands, or St. Thomas, out of sight of Land,
through the Main Ocean, to an unknown World? Hanno himself, who was the
stoutest of all Ancient Navigators, not only crept along the African Coast,
which made him spend so much time; but not daring to cross over those wide
spreading Bays he found, left not his hold of the Shore, and measured and
searched every winding Inlet and Creek: And if he found a New World, why was it
not known? The more; because his Ambition carried him on to get a Name and
Reputation by such Naval Discoveries. And how true the Relation of this
Expedition is, Pliny tells us, saying, The Journal-Books were then to be seen
which Hanno writ in that his African Expedition: Though many of the Greeks, and
also of our Moderns, following Hanno, have found several things contrary to his
Observations, wherein he makes mention of several Cities built by him, which
none ever since heard of, or any have seen, neither is there the least Marks of
their Ruins to be found.

This large Relation serves for nothing else, but to show that they seek in
vain herein to give the Honor of the Discovery of America to the Ancients; And
as little do those Testimonies signify that are taken out of Diodorus Siculus,
Pliny, Pomponius Mela, and Aelian. It will be worth our time to hear every one
of them particularly.

Lib. 6. cap. 7: Second Testimony, that Americans are derived from the
Phenicians.


First, Diodorus says, Beyond Lybia, in the Ocean, lies a very great Island,
several days sailing in Circumference, having a very fruitful Soil, and
pleasant Meadows, distinguished by Hills, and moistened by Navigable Rivers,
unknown in Ancient Times, because it seems to be separated from the other
World, and was thus found: The Phenicians sailing along the Lybian Coast, were
several days and nights tossed with perpetual Tempests, and at last driven to
the forementioned Island, where Anchoring, and observing the pleasant
Situation thereof, made it known to their Magistrates.

Is contradicted.
But how comes this nameless Island to be America? What Man would take that for
an Island, which far exceeds the main Continent of Asia? And have the
Phenicians ascribed the finding of this New World to any? Whence then proceeds
such great silence amongst all the Ancient Writers of a whole World, who
otherwise used to give Denominations to the least remote Village, or Mountain,
or River?

Lib. 5. cap. 1. Description of Atlas.
Pliny speaks after the same manner, saying, The Writers make mention, that
Atlas rises out of the middle of the Sands, with a Shrubby and Bushy top
toward the Sky, on the Shore of the Ocean to which he gives his Denomination;
That it is full of Woods, and watered by several Fountains on that side toward
Africa, by which means it bears all manner of Fruit. In the Daytime none of
the Inhabitants appear, all things being in silence, as in the middle of a
Desert; the Approacher is struck with sudden amazement. And besides its
excessive high Crown, reaching above the Clouds, and neighboring, as they say,
the Circle of the Moon appears in the Night as if it were all in a Flame,
resounding far and near with Pipes, Trumpets, and Cymbals; and the Journey up
thither, very long and dangerous.

I cannot understand that Pliny can mean America by this, because himself, in
the first Division of his Fifth Book, makes his beginning with the Description
of Africa: And as to what further concerns the strange Relation and danger
thereof, is a little before related in Hanno's Voyage; and it is but a slight
Argument to prove it America, because it seems to resound with those sorts of
Instruments which the Americans were observed to use when discovered.

Pomponius Mela being the third, Lib. 1. cap. 4.
has no greater Arguments than the former. We hear (says he) that utmost
People toward the West, Strange Men.
being the Atlanticans, are rather half Beasts than Men, cloven-footed, without
Heads, their Faces upon their Breasts, and naked, with one great Foot, like
Satyrs or Goblins, which range up and down, without any Artificial Shelters or
Houses.

Lastly, Lib. 3. cap. 18.
Aelian seems to say something, when he sets down the Discourse between Midas
and Silenus, Discourse between Midas and Silenus concerning the Unknown World.
out of Theopompus, where Silenus relates, That Europe, Asia, and Lybia are
Islands; and that a vast Country lies beyond this his tripple-divided World,
mighty Populous, and abounding with all other Living Creatures, as big again as
ours, and living twice as long: That they are wondrous rich; their Religions,
Laws, and Customs, founded upon another Morality and Reason, quite different
from ours. They boast especially of two great Cities, Machimus and Eusebes; the
Inhabitants of the first maintaining themselves by driving altogether a Trade
of War, mustering up, and filling their numerous Regiments with several valiant
Nations. The Listed Citizens amount in their Muster-Rolls, all bred to
Soldiery, to two Millions, of whom few but scorn either dying bravely by Wounds
received with Flint-edg'd Laths, and Staves, in stead of Spears, pointed with
Stones, not knowing the use of Iron or Steel, but so over-stock'd with Gold and
Silver, that they account it a Drug of less Value than our basest Metal. Some
Years since they marched into our World, a hundred thousand strong, as far as
the Hyperborean Mountains, where being informed, that all the Nations of our
World, compared with them, lived in a poor and despicable condition; as not
thinking them worth their Conquest, they returned. But the second City Eusebes,
deals altogether in Peace, and its Citizens are not rapacious, but exercise
Justice, so much affecting Morality and Divine Worship, that they conquer
Heaven by their Piety and Meekness; and the Gods themselves are pleased to
descend, and advise with them concerning their Celestial Affairs.

Who observes not this to be a Poetical Relation, showing how much better the
Acquirements of Peace are, than those of War; the one conquering only Men, the
other, the Gods? Nor can more be taken out of Aelian's Discourse, but that the
Ancients believed there was another Habitable World to be our Antipodes.

Thus far has been disputed concerning the Original of the Americans, whose
Plantations from Tire or Carthage by Sea, are found altogether invalid: Yet we
will search a little further, Inquiries whether the Constitutions of the
Phenicians agree with the Americans.
to see whether the People Analogize, either in their Religion, Policy,
Economy, or Customs.

It is certain, that the ancient Phenicians lived in Tents, and sometimes
exchanged eaten-up Pastures for fresh, which the Americans to this day observe;
by which it might appear, that they are of a Phenician Extract. But why not as
well derived from Numidia, Tartary, or the ancient Patriarchs, who all lived
such an unsettl'd wandering Life? Besides, the Phenicians had a long time given
over Pastoral Business, for Maritime Affairs of greater consequence, not only
Merchandising through all the World, but sending great Colonies in Ships to new
Plantations: And moreover, the Americans could not so strangely degenerate from
their Ancestors, but would have built great Cities like them; of which many
were found in Phenicia, but none of Antiquity in America.

As also both their Religions.
As to their Religion, if it agreed with the Phenicians, it was the same that
all the World professed at that time, and therefore may as well be extracted
from any other, as them: It Is true, we find them inclind to Sorcery, and
dealing with Evil Spirits, as the Phenicians, in which they were not only
guilty, but all other Nations at that time.

The Known World formerly full of Witches.
Nay, why not as well transported out of Asia or Europe, where were formerly
many the like Tamperers, and those that dealt in such Diabolical Sciences? And
why not from Salmantica, where, as Laurentius Ananias relates, De Not. Demon.
l. 3.
Magick-Arts were publicly taught, and they commenced Doctors, and took their
Degrees according to their Learning? The Devil also has public Worship
amongst the Americans, and so he had with the Phenicians: yet not only they,
but the whole World had dedicated Temples to him. Lucan. lib. 6.
Here began Humane and Infernal Sacrifices, supposing that Evil Spirits were
delighted, and so feasted with the Steam of Humane Offerings, whose sweetness
made them milder, and so intoxicating, lulled them into less mischief.

Devil-worship formerly used in all the World, and now by the Americans.
How famous is Zoroaster, and the whole School of the Eastern Magicians? In
Moses's time this Wickedness had already took place: Nor can it be denied but
that the Phenicians carried their Idols in their Ships, Lev. 17.6.
as Herodotus testifies, Idols in Ships.
saying, The Image of Vulcan much resembles the Phenicians Patacoioi, which
they placed on the Fore-castle of their Ships.

In like manner, the Americans when they go to Sea, carry their Idols with
them; and the Ships took Name from the Image, which was either painted or
carved on the Stern, or placed elsewhere upon the Deck.

The same Custom the Chinese observe to this present: Francis Xaverius
relates, That he sailed in a Chinese Vessel from Goa to Japan, which bore an
Idol in its Stern, before which the Master lighted Candles, perfumed it with
Aloe-wood, and offered Birds and other Food, inquiring of it the Event of his
Voyage. Sometimes he judged from the Statues immovable Looks, that it would
fall out successfully; and other times, not.

De abstinent Animal. l. 2.
Lastly, Porphyrius relates, That the Phenicians upon any great Exigency, as
War, excessive Heat, or Mortal Distempers, by order selected one of the most
comely and beautiful of their Children, to be offered up to Saturn. And
Eusebius says also out of Porphyrius, That Saturn, Prepar. Evang lib. 1.
whom the Phenicians call Israel, the Learned Vossius and Hugo Grotius read Il,
or El (one of the ten Names of God in Hebrew) which they also give to the
Planet Saturn, who when he Reigned in Phenicia, having one only Son born by the
Nymph Anobret, and was in danger to lose his Kingdom, being worsted in an
unlucky War, he dressed him in Royal Robes, and placing him on an Altar built
for that purpose, sacrificed him with his own Hands.

Men and Children used for Sacrifices by the Phenicians and other People.
And although such like cruel Oblations are used in America, must it therefore
follow, that they are derived from the Phenicians, when several other People
are guilty of the same? Nay, there is scarce one Country, which has not at
some time or other performed such inhumane Acts, seeming to them Zeal in their
Religion; for the most eminent of the Heathens scrupled not at it, which
certainly are held to be the Persians, Greeks, and Romans; and yet they were
not abhorred, though committing Humane Slaughters.

This holy Butchery and Religious Slaughter of Mankind began in Rome in the
Emperor Adrian's Reign, so continuing till the time of Tertullian, Lactantius,
and Eusebius. The Greeks which inhabited the utmost part of Italy, employed
themselves daily in Sacrificing Strangers to Saturn, and sometimes one another.
Who forbade the sacrificing of Men.
But at last this formal Cruelty became a ridiculous Custom; for the Romans by
severe Edicts strictly forbad all such Humane Offerings: Yet that they might
retain some memory of their former Sacrifices, they ordered thirty Images to be
made of Rushes, which every year on the fifteenth of April, were by the Roman
Priests and Vestal Nuns, to be thrown from the Milvian Bridge into the Tyber.

Lib. de Superstit.
Moreover, Manethon relates, "That the Egyptians in Heliopolis used to offer
three Men at once to Juno; which Custom was observed till King Amasis ordered,
That in stead of Men, they should serve her with Wax Candles.

Amestris, Queen to the famous Xerxes, caused twelve Men to be burned alive, as
an Oblation, to pacify and oblige Pluto to maintain them in their present
Grandeur.

Procopius relates of the People about the Arabian Gulf, Rer. Persic. l. 1.
That they oftentimes Sacrificed Men to the Sun.

The Indians, Lib. 3. sect. 8. G^^gr.
says Pomponius Mela, kill their nearest Relations and Parents, before they
decay by Sickness or Age, and judged it fit and most Religious to Feast and
Banquet themselves with the Entrails of the slain.

The Albanians, Lib. 11. Geog.
as Strabo relates, offer yearly one of their Priests to the Moon.

The same Mela relates of the Tauri, That they used to cut the Throats of
Strangers, whenever they came near to the Place of their Sacrifice.

The Egyptian Idol Typhon, Lib. 2. cap.
as you may read in Manethon, was daily made redhot, and living People put in,
and broyl'd to death.

But to pass by several other People guilty of such bloody Idolatry, How did
the Altars erected in the Woods in Gaul and Germany, for Taran, Hesus,
Teutates, and Woden, continually smoke with the Blood of Humane Expiations? Of
which, Caesar says thus in his Commentaries; Bell. Gall Comm.
The Gauls are a very Devout and Superstitious Nation; and therefore when any
were dangerously sick, or likely to be worsted in Battle, they vowed to feast
their Gods that saved them with Humane Flesh, and if need were, would make
themselves a thankful Sacrifice to those that helped them off in such an
Exigence. Concerning these bloody Rites, they consulted and employed the
Druydes, by whose advice they all believed that no Victim was so acceptable to
the Numens, as pour'd-out Humane Blood, but especially that of Malefactors;
which Dainty if they could not procure, their Gods must be treated with the
Lives of the Innocent.

Lastly, 2 Reg. 3. v. 26, 27.
the Holy Scripture says thus, When the King of Moab saw that the Battle was
too sore for him, he took with him seven hundred Men that drew Swords, to break
through even to the King of Edom; but they could not. Then he took his eldest
Son, that should have reigned in his stead, and offered him for a
Burnt-offering on the Wall.

These Testimonies are sufficient Witnestes, That the Ancient Heathens
expressed the height of their Devotion, and fury of mad Zeal, in such execrable
Rites, as to this day the like is practiced by the Indians, Chinese,
Japanners, and others: Wherefore it can no ways be a sufficient ground to
prove, that the Americans are derived from the Phenicians, because of their
Humane Sacrifices, for that they were usual Customs in all Places.

Third testimony, That the Americans are derived from the Phenicians, because
their Language agrees
The third Proof they offer us, is borrowed from the similitude and likeness of
the Phenician and American Languages: Comtoeus sets down some Words, viz. the
Phenicians called a Mountain, Abila; Blood, Edom; a Mother; Anech; a Maid,
Hellotia; Water, Heni, and Jam: With the first agrees the American Anthla; with
the second, Holedonch; with the third, Anam; with the fourth, Hellotie; with
the fifth, Ame, and Jame. Is contradicted.
But those that will thus corrupt the Words, may as well make the unseemliest
Comparisons. It is certain, that the Phenicians and some of the Americans call
a Cup Asur, and Red Wine, Belasa; But does it therefore follow by this, that
the one is extracted from the other? How many Names do signify all one,
amongst People that never had any Conversation together? This proceeds only
from mere accident; Or else if some Words of one, sound like the same Words
used in a remote Country, and be of one signification, must they therefore be
derived from one another? Then upon necessity the Greeks, Latins, and Germans
had their Original from the Hebrews, or the Latins from the Greeks, or the
Germans from the Latins, or the Persians from the Germans; or, on the contrary,
the last owe their Extract to the first. I will as a Testimony, and to give you
a Pattern, pick out a few from a greater number.

Greek and Hebrew agree.
How little difference is there in many Words between the Greek and Hebrew? The
Hebrews call a Church-Congregation Sanhedrim, the Greeks(...); the Greeks for I
advise, use (...), the other (...); the Hebrews call Wisemen Zophei, the other
(...): And less difference there is between Symphoniah and (...), A well-set
Lesson; or Psanterin and (...), A Spiritual Hymn: And who also will not find a
near resemblance in the consonating of diverse Latin and Hebrew Words? Also the
Hebrew and l^tin.
For there is little difference betwixt Mesurah and Mensura, a Measure; Shekar
and Saccarus, a sweet Moisture; Levya and Leaena, a Lioness, Sabbeca and
Sambuca, a Chopping-board; Pesa and Passus, a Pace.

Likewise the Teutonick, the great Language of Germany, Britain, the
Low Countries, and other Northern Nations.
Then starting over the Greek and Latin, the Teutonicks would likewise produce
many Words which have the same sound and signification with the Hebrew; as
Chobel, a Cable; Ethmol and Etmael, Watching; Sothim and Sotten, Fools; the
Hebrew Arets, is in Dutch, Aerde, or as we in English, Eared Lands; Phert and
Peert, a Horse; Levyah and Leeuw, a Lion; Shad and Schadea, Damages; Kiss and
Kussen, in our Dialect the very same, Kiss; Shaken and Schenken, a giving,
whence we derive our English Skinker, from serving of Drink; Bell and Beeld, an
Image; for Bell properly signifies Lord, perhaps because the Images of Heroes or
Lords were worshipped by them, or else because Ninus first erected an Image for
his Father Belus, or Bell, to be worshipped.

It would make a large Volume it self, to reckon up the Consonancies of the
Hebrew, Greek, and Latin, and their scatterings among all Languages where ever
their Empire spread, the one being indeed borrowed from the other, as all
Languages that deal or have any converse together: For not only the Words, with
some small Alterations of Letters, signify the same in both Languages; but
also without the least alteration. Greek and Latin Tongues agree. Abrah. Mihi,
Ling. Belg. c. 5, 6, 7, 1^.
Both Greeks and Latins express I do, by Ago; the Number Eight, by Octo; an
Arm, by Brachium or Brachion, in English, Branches, and Braces; I eat, by Edo;
a Cup, by Phiale; a Curtain, by Cortina, or Cortine; Merry, by Hilaris, or
Hilaros; a rattling Noise or Sound, by Clango; a Camel, by Camelus, or Camelos;
a Knee, by Genu, or Gonu; a Bowl or Chalice, by Calix; a Mouse, by Mus; Deceit,
by Dolus, or Dolos; a House, by Domus, or Domos; I carry, by Fero, or Phero;
the Pronoun I, Ego; a Lion, by Leo, or (...); Flax, by Linum, or Linon; a
Mother, by Matter, or Meter; now, by nunc, or nun; the Night, by Nox, or Nux; a
Rock-stone, by Petra; a Nickname, by Scomma, or Skomma; a Boat, by Scapha, or
Skaphe; a Treasure, by Thesaurus, or Thesauros; Father, by Pater; I tremble, by
Tremo; an Hour, by Hora; the Evening, by Vespera, or Hespera; and an
innumerable many Words more, that are of one signification in both.

Phenician and American Tongues have no similitude
Now if there is not the hundredth part of the resemblance found between the
American and Phenician Tongues, as there is between the Hebrew, Greek, Latin,
and Dutch, according to the forementioned Examples, which notwithstanding
cannot be observed to be derived from one another, what testimony can there be
in five or six Words, which only have a few Letters that do not differ? But
suppose that the agreeing of the Phenician and American Tongues could serve for
a testimony, Americans much divided in Speech and People.
that these last People had their Original from the first, then there remains
another doubt, viz. To know what Americans acknowledge the Phenicians for their
Fathers; because their Country is so big, that it may almost stand in
competition with all the other three parts of the Known World, being divided by
so many Nations, which differ not only in their various Customs, but also in
their several Languages, most of them not having the least likeness one with
another: Nay, often times the Inhabitants of one Province differ so much in
Dialect, that, according to Petrus de Cieca, the one cannot understand the
other.

In America one Tongue is not at all like the other.
John de Laet observes out of Peter Martyr, and other Writers concerning the
West Indies, That there are several Languages and strange Words spoken among
the diverse Inhabitants of America; for the Hurones call a Head Sionta; the
Mexicans, Tzontecontli; the Inhabitants of New-Netherland, Anonsi; the
Brasilians, Acanga; the Jaos, Boppe: the Figures One, Two, Three, and Four, the
Hurones tell thus, Escate, Teni, Hachin, Dac; the Mexicans, Ce, Ome, Yei,
Nahuy; the Sankikanders, Cotte, Nysse, Natcha, Wyve; the Brasilians, Oyepe,
Mocoy, Mocapir, Oirundi; the Jaos, Tewyn, Tage, Terrewaw, Tagyne; the Natives
of New-Netherland, Onsat, Tiggani, Ass, Cayere. Moreover the Hurones call a
Father Aystan; the Mexicans, Tathli; the Canadensers, Notaovi; in
New-Netherland, Ragina; in Brasile, Tuba: And so it is generally with all other
Words, which agree not in the least one with the other; so that every Territory
has not only a several Dialect, but in many Places they use besides two,
three, or more distinct Speeches, not relating in the least one to another, in
one Province, by which the People inhabiting Towns and Villages are
distinguished. The Islanders discovered by the Spaniards, and destroyed, Decad.
3.
have left few Words behind them; yet Peter Martyr sets down some of them,
which were formerly used in Hispaniola: They called Heaven Tures; a House, Boa;
Gold, Cauni; a good Man, Tayno. It is worthy of observation, De Lact. Orig
Amer. obs. 5.
that they pronounce no H in their Language, but what is spoken with a Vowel,
and then give it a strong Aspiration, like the warbling guttural (...) Ghain of
the Hebrews.

Our last and chiefest Testimony is Moses, Genesis 9. v. 25, 26, 27.
who says thus in Genesis, Cursed be Canaan, a Servant of Servants shall he be
unto his Brethren. Moreover he s^id, Blessed be the Lord God of Shem, and
Canaan shall be his Servant: God shall enlarge Japhet, and he shall dwell in
the Tents of Shem; and Canaan shall be his Servant. And in the next Chapter,
Genesis 10. v. 15.
Canaan begat Sidon. These Scriptures are explained as a Testimony of the
Americans Extract from the Phenicians, Last Testimonies of the Americans
Extract from the Phenicians.
which they ground on these following Reasons: The Phenicians are Canaan's
Successors from Sidon, who gave name to their chief City. Tubal the Issue of
Japhet, whose Tents God promised to enlarge, and that Canaan should be his
Servant, planted Spain. The Phenicians, descendants from Sydon, (say they)
Peopled America; the Spaniards sprung from Tubal, of Japhet, have subjected the
Americans, descended from Sydon, of Canaan; wherein is fulfilled that Prophecy
of Moses, That Canaan should be Servant to Japhet; but it seems a great
mistake, Is contradicted.
so to derive the Phenicians from Canaan, for they are Extracted from Shem,
Heber, Abraham, and Esau, Franc. Burman. in Genesis 25 30.
sirnam'd Edom, from his saying, Adom, Adom, when he asked of Jacob, That Red,
That Red, because he knew not how to call the prepared Pottage by its proper
Name; And Edom settling himself on Mount Seir, a part of the Stony Arabia,
Phenicians derived from Esau.
and on the Coast of the Red Sea, gave denomination to it, because that Sea was
much frequented and Navigated by his Successors. The Greeks call it Erythreum,
from Erythros, who is the same with Esau, and likewise signifies Red. Hereto is
added, That Phaeix and Erythros have the same signification in the Greek; So
then, these Idumeans taking the name of Phenicians, from the great Phaenix,
spread themselves far and near under mighty Kings, by Navigation in the
Red Sea, and from thence Planted several Coasts and Islands, removing at last
to Syria.

The seventh King of Edom, Moses reckons to be Baal-hanan, which name, Gen
36.3^.
by transposing the Syllables, the famous Carthaginian General Hannibal bare.
Moreover, it may easily be demonstrated, that the Phenicians Extracted from
Heber, have formerly spoke Hebrew, and since Arabic; for they dwelt before
their removing, in the Stony- Arabia. St. Jerome says, Com. in J^^^
the Punick Tongue agrees for the most part with the Hebrew: And St. Austin
tells us, that many, nay, In Ps. ^30 l. ^. c. 3 Punick Tongue. Hebrew.


most of the Carthaginian words are Hebrew. Elisa, Dido, the first Foundress of
Carthage proves this, for Elisa or Elissah, with the Hebrews, denotes A Lamb of
my God; and Dido, A Lover. But who can find the least likeness, between the
Hebrew or Arabic Tongue with the Americans? Lastly, Since the Phenicians
acknowledge Esau for a Father, what then concerns the Americans, the curse of
Canaan, since they are no more Extracted from Canaan, than the Phenicians? Thus
much concerning the Phenicians.

If the Americans were derived from the ^ews, or the ten Tribes of Israel.
Some would derive the Americans from the Jews; others, from the ten Tribes of
Israel, carried into captivity. The ground of which Opinions is, That the Jews
and Israelites were scattered amongst all Nations; therefore they conclude,
that America was also Peopled by them, the rather, because the ancient Jews and
Americans were of one Complexion, and went a like Habited, both going without
Shoes, only wearing Sandals, and an upper Coat over a shorter Linen Vest.
Both are humble, quick of apprehension, and obliging, yet Valiant: But it is
certain, they cannot be like the Jews, Is contradicted.
because the Americans change their Habit, according as they live in cold or
hot Countries, and go not in the least like one another.

Father Immanuel relates, That he saw a Brasilian, not only stoutly make his
party good against three Portugal Soldiers, but had it not been by mere chance,
worsted them.

Lastly, What Ceremonies of Religious Rites are observed by the Americans,
which are used in Judaism? The Jews indeed have transplanted their Circumcision
amongst diverse Eastern People, and have they only forgot the first Ceremony
and signal Badge of their Religion in America, which yet not only they, but
those Mahumetans and other Sectaries punctually observe?

This makes evident their scatterings about the Face of the Earth, but will not
bring them to reach America. Jews distribution.
The Sacred Text sets forth a twofold description of the Jews; The one before
the Birth of our Savior, when they lived as strangers in Pontus, 1. Pet. 1.1.
Scaliger in Notes ad N. T.
Galatia, Cappadocia, Asia, and Bythinia. Jerusalem was their Metropolis,
although others had their chief residence in Babylon, and Alexandria; for there
was an Asiatick and a European dispersion; those of Asia had Babylon for their
chief City, and used in their Synagogues the Chaldean Translation of the Bible.
The Europeans kept their Seat at Alexandria, where they had a Temple like that
of Jerusalem; and whilst they employed themselves in the Greek Version of the
Holy Scripture, by the seventy two Interpreters, under Ptolomeus Philadelphus,
Joh. 7.35.
they were called Wandering Greeks: Therefore, certainly the Americans are not
derived from these Jews, and with as little reason from those, which by Titus
Vespasian, after the destruction of Jerusalem were driven into several
Countries, for they were never permitted (that I may borrow the words of St.
Cyprian) to set forward one step, L. de Idolo. vanitate.
though but as Pilgrims, toward their Native Country, but strictly forbidden
not to assemble or meet together in any considerable number, which would have
been necessary, if they intended to Plant a new World.

A small seeming Testimony is added, being taken out of the fourth Book of
Esdras, 2 Reg. 17.6.
that the ten Tribes of Israel that were carried away by Salmanassar with their
King Hosea to Nahalah, Habor, the River Gozan, and the Cities of the Medes,
might be acknowledged for the first Planters of America: Concerning which, 4
Esd. 13.40, 41, 42, 43, 44, 45, 46.
Esdras says thus, The ten Tribes brought over into another Country,
consulted that they should forsake the multitude of the Heathens, and travel to
a remoter Country, where no Generation of Mankind had ever lived before, there
they would maintain their Laws, which they had not observed in their Country:
Whereupon they went thither through the narrow entrances of the River Euphrates,
for the Almighty stopped the Vains of the River, till they were past over; for
through the Country was a way of a year and halfs Journey: wherefore that Tract
of Land is called Assareth, then they lived there till the last time.

But since these Books of Esdras were not Written by a Prophet, either in the
Hebrew Tongue, or allowed by the Jews to be the Word of God, or any where taken
notice of in the New Testament; wherefore then is Assareth more America than
any other remoter Country?

L. 5. in Ezekiel. and l. 6. in Jerome.
St. Hierom (who certainly had a peculiar knowledge of the condition of the ten
Tribes of Israel, because he lived in Asia, and held Correspondence with the
Jews, that he might perfectly learn the Hebrew Tongue,) relates, That the ten
Tribes (St. Hierome lived about the Year four hundred, under the Emperor
Theodosius) underwent great slavery in the Cities of Medes and Persians; so
that this strange Voyage to Assareth, which must have happened long before St.
Hierom's time, may be Recorded amongst the other Legends of the Rabbis,
concerning their Behemoth and Leviathan, who locked up the Souls of those that
slighted their Laws, 4 Esd. 6.49, 50. and 14.21. and 4.41.
in Caves under ground, as Esdras.

Ancient condition of the Persians.
And how little opportunity the Israelites had to remove since his time, may
appear by the horrible Destruction that was made for several Ages together in
Persia and Media; for although the Persians became Masters again of the Realm,
Conquered by Alexander the Great, whilst Alexander's Successors invaded one
another, yet they were continually in War, either against the Romans, or else
the Indians, and other Eastern People; nay, the Saracens wrested the Scepter
out of their hand, though but for a small time; for soon after, breaking out
into Factions amongst themselves, Muchumet Subictigenes, Imbrael's Son,
established his Throne on their Ruins, and encouraged by such success, Armed
himself against the Indians, Melchior Soiterus de Reb. Turc.
and made use of the Turks assistance, with which he subdued the Babylonian
Arabians: After which, the Turks, not without great slaughter set the Persian
Crown on their Head; which immediately tottered by bloody Commotions; for
Tangrolipix being King of Persia, clashing with his Brother Cutlumuses, made
Persia swim in the Blood of a Civil-War, till at last Zengis Chan brought from
Tartary so great an Army, Anno 1200. that none durst stay to make opposition;
for the Turks forsook Persia after a Conquest of six Ages, and made their own
way for new Quarters into Carmania, Phrygia, and Bithynia, whence they made
such incursions on the Greek Empire, that at last they became sole Masters
thereof. Who cannot but easily judge by this, how little opportunity the ten
Tribes had, to be assembled together from remote Countries, and to go long
Journeys through untrack'd ways, and full of Enemies, to travel to America?

Mora's opinion concerning the Americans Extract.
Immanuel de Moraes, who had gotten peculiar knowledge of the Americans by his
long Conversation with them, judges that they are not derived from one People,
but from the Carthaginians and Jews, and that at several times, and places,
they Landed in this New World; for the Carthaginians Sailing thither, found the
Soil so fertile, that many forsook their Native Country to dwell there:
Whereupon, it was forbidden upon pain of Death, to send no more thither, left
if Carthage should be invaded by a foraign Enemy, it should want People for a
Home-defence: From this occasion it happened, that those that were already
Transported, became rude, and of a Salvage Disposition, and spreading their
Families, planted the desolate Countries in a ranging manner, without
acknowledging any Supreme Head or Governor.

Thus being scattered up and down, every one invented to himself a new
Language, which should neither agree with the Carthaginians, or any other: But
this Opinion is before at large contradicted.

Customs and Constitutions of the Brasilians are several.
Moreover, Moraes endeavors to show, that the Brasilians are of a Hebrew
Extract, because that according to the example or the Jews, they might not
Marry, but in their own Tribes; they also call their Unkles, Fathers, and their
Aunts, Mothers; both mourn for the Dead a Month together, and wear long
Garments down to their Ankles. But these Arguments seem to us of small
consequence, for indeed the Brasilians differ in their Marriages from the Jews,
for they not only Marry in their own Tribes, but frequently commix with their
Sisters, and Daughters, or other their nearest Relations. Moreover, the Jews
called them Fathers, from whose Loins they sprang many Ages before, as well as
their Unkles, which the Americans do not.

The Mourning for the Dead has been an old Custom, and is not observed by many
People, but the time of a Month was not settled amongst them, but was observed
after a more unusual manner, seventy days, as in the Fields of Moab for Moses,
and elsewhere for the Patriarch Jacob. Lastly, all people know, that the Romans
and Persians girt themselves about with long Clothes. Besides, the Jews were
strictly bound to observe Circumcision, without which they were not accounted
Jews, which the Brasilians use not, as neither their Language or Letters. How
is it possible, that in America they should at once have forgotten their
Extract, Laws, Circumcision, Language, and other Ceremonies, when the rest of
them observed nothing more strictly in all parts of the Earth?

Grotius is of opinion, that the Americans belong^d to Norway.
The Learned Hugo Grotius, in his Enquiry after the original of the Americans,
brings them with many Circumstances to belong to Panama, situate opposite to
the Northern Parts of Norway, because something of their Languages agrees, and
the Way thither easy and nearest to be found: for first they traveled from
Norway to Ysland, over which the Norwegians Ruled above a thousand years since;
so from Ysland through Friezland to Groenland, and from thence to Estotiland,
being a part of the Main Continent of America.

From Friezland some Fishers went thither (as he says) two Centuries before the
Spaniards touched that Shore; This Opinion is largely contradicted.
which John de Laet contradicts. And indeed what Reasons can be given, Why the
Americans of the Straights, between Panama and Nombre de Dios, lying Northerly,
should have another original than those that live to the South, seeing the same
Straights are neither divided by Mountains nor Rivers; and the Spaniards found
no alteration in the Customs and Languages betwixt them that lived above or
below these Straights. And who will believe that Norway, which was but
indifferently peopled, could afford such numerous Colonies as could plant the
Northern America, which far exceeds the South, and chiefly, when the great
Islands that lie near the East and West, are added to it? Moreover it is
certain, (if the Yslander Angrim Jonas is to be credited) that some Families
fled out of Norway from their enraged King to Ysland in the Year 874. which at
that time was but meanly inhabited.

Isaac Pontanus de Reb. Danicis.
Forty years before, Lewis the Just put the Yslanders under the protection of
Pope Gregory the fourth, who gave the Government of the Ysland Church to Ansgar
Archbishop of Hamburgh. But how comes it that there is not the least spark of
Christianity found amongst the Northern Americans, if they are derived from the
Ysland Christians? and why did the Yslanders remove to colder Countries than
Groenland and Friezland, or their own native Soil, and for the most part not
inhabited?

Concerning Groenland and Friezland, it is known by our English Navigators,
that they are joined together, and both to the Northern America; but not
without vast Bays and Inlets, which betwixt Groenland and America are
obstructed with floating Castles of Ice; so that the Passage is very dangerous.
And full as troublesome, if not altogether impossible, would the Journey be by
Land, because the Earth lies so thick covered with Ice and Snow, especially the
Valleys, that no Traveller is able to get through.

The voyage of two Zeno's.
Moreover, that which Grotius says farther of the Fishers which first discovered
Estotiland, is grounded on the Relation of the Venetian Knights, Nicholas and
Marcus Zeno, two Brothers. Anno 1380. Nicholas Zeno suffered Shipwreck on the
Friezland Coast; Marcus informed thereof, steered his Course thither; fourteen
years they spent before they came to Estotiland: at last they returned again to
Friezland, where Nicholas died: But Marcus returning home published his
Journal; Relatio Marc. Zenonis.
wherein he relates, That Estotiland is above a thousand Leagues distant from
Friezland, and was discovered by Friezland Fishermen that were driven thither
by Storm. But he has set down many things that have little resemblance of
truth, according to what is since found by credible Navigators; and therefore
we cannot depend on Zeno's Discovery.

The Ameriecan Tongue is nothing like the Norwegian.
John de Laet accounts it a great mistake in Grotius, that as a testimony of
the Americans original out of Norway, he compares their Languages. He reckons
up some Places to be Northward of Panama, which end their words with the
syllable Lan in stead of Land, because the Spaniards have left out the Letter D
at the end thereof. It is certain, that in the Northern America lie Cimatlan,
Coatlan, Guescolan, Artlan, Quaxutatlan, Icatlan, Tapatlan, Cinacatlan,
Tenuchitlan, Comitlan, Metzitlan, Guatitlan, Necotitlan, Curcatatlan. Besides,
that most of these Names are not of Countries, but of Towns and Villages, and
therefore no ways fitting to have the termination of Land: and it is well known
that many ny American words end with Lan, which signify nothing less than
Land: for the Mexicans say Puertatitlan, which signifies At the Gate below;
Ochachitlantzitlan, Yet lower; Tenoxtitlan, (this City is also called from her
Founder Mexis, Mexico) that is, Rests on a Rock. Moreover, it may not without
reason seem strange to any, that the Northern Americans have remembered but
three Cities out of all the Teutonick Tongue, viz. Lan in stead Land.

Groenland when discovered.
Concerning Groenland, through which the Norwegians are thought to have
traveled to America, Lysander witnesses, Sermon. 3. Antiq. Da^^^.
That it was accidentally discovered by one Eric Rauder, Anno 987. and planted
thirteen years after.

Olaus, King of Norway, placed two Bishops over the new Inhabitants, as
Substitutes to the Archbishop of Dronthen. For four Ages they Sailed frequently
to Groenland; but since their King was impoverished by War, they left off that
Trade.

We find not in any Author, that the Norwegians which lived along the Seashore,
ever went to seek a Way over the inaccessible Snowy Mountains of Groenland, to
this our New World.

Besides, Grotius stands for the Norwegians as Planters, upon testimony of the
Mexicans themselves, who told the Spaniards, That their Ancestors which planted
there came from the North, first settling themselves on Estotiland, where to
this day there are not improbable proofs by several remarks, that they were a
Norwegian Colony.

The opinion conce^^^^ the City Norumbega (...) America.
In the American City Norumbega, live a People that speak the same Language, and
observe the same Customs with the Mexicans.

In this by-Corner are found also some Alavards, or Longobards, or Lombards, as
they say. Now the Spaniards call that New Mexico because last discovered,
though indeed the old, crammed with People eight hundred years since: for the
Mexicans of New Mexico do not lie so far Northerly, as to the North-west: for
this Mexico lies in sight of California, which is believed to border on
Tartary, or at least separated from it by a narrow Channel. But Norumbega (if
ever such a Place was) must, according to the West-Indian Records, have been
situate where a part of New France lies, now planted by the English: between
which and New Mexico lies an almost unmeasurable vast Tract of Land. Mean while
here is not the least sign of this City Norumbega to be found: neither do the
Inhabitants dwell in Cities, but live in Tents, or moveable Villages, which
change their Names as often as their Governors. Moreover, the Norwegians could
not get to this Norumbega by Land through Ysland and Groenland to Estotiland,
because of the vast Bays, and great Midland-Sea, discovered by the English in
their North-western Discoveries; so that leaving Estotiland, it was altogether
impossible for them to come to Norumbega.

Hereto may be added what the Mexicans say of themselves, who acknowledge, That
traveling from the North, they did not find an un-inhabited Country before
them, but were forced to make their Way by a long and bloody War with the
Chichimecen, a salvage People, Chichimecen.
that knew neither Laws or Religion.

The People also dwelling opposite to California, differ from the Customs of
the Mexicans, being divided into several People of contrary Constitutions, and
as different Languages.

Customs and Constitutions of the Mexicans.
Grotius scrues up his Arguments from the likeness of the American Speech and
Customs with the Norwegian: for (says he) there is little difference between
Pagod and by-God, or like God; Guaira and Waeijer, that is, A Fan; Ilama and
Lam, in English, Lamb; Peko and Beke, a Brook or Rivulet. Both Customs and
Constitutions have also great resemblance. The Mexicans relate, that their
Predecessors only followed Hunting; that they divided and reckoned the Time,
not by Days, but by Nights, and washed their Children as soon as they were born
in cold Water.

They are so much inclined to Gaming, that they venture their Liberty at it.
Every one is satisfied with one Wife, except some of the Nobility, which
oftentimes have more. They throw up high Banks in several places to damm out
the Sea; believe the Immortality of the Soul; every one eats at a peculiar
Table; most of them go naked, only caver their Pudenda with a Cloth; some
Sacrifice and eat Mans-flesh: all which, according to Tacitus, Pliny, Lucan,
and other Roman Writers, was observed by the ancient Germans; from whom those
that inhabit between the Norwegian Mountains were extracted.

These Allegations, to make the Norwegians to be the Parents of the Northern
Americans, John de Laet thus contradicts: It no ways follows that one People
take original from the other, because here and there are several words found,
that have the same signification and sound in diverse Countries; much less when
they must either add, change, or diminish several Letters. Moreover, there is
no small mistake in the compared words: for Pagod is not used all over America;
the East-Indians about the River Indus, call their Idol-Temples Pagod, or
Pagode; the word Guaira is no where used in America, but by the Peruvians, and
with them not signifying a Fan, but a little Oven; neither is Ilama a Lamb,
(for before the coming of the Spaniards thither, neither Sheep nor Lambs were
ever seen in Peru) but a Wool-bearing Beast, thus described by Joseph de Acosta:

A description of the strange Beast Ilama in Peru.
Ilama (says he) a four-footed Creature, furnishes its Master with Meat and
Clothing, and supplies the office of a Beast for Burdens, and at no charge for
Hay nor Provender, well satisfied with what he finds in the Ways or Mountains.
But the Ilama's are of two sorts, either woolly, or short-hair'd: the first go
by the Name Pacos, the other Moromoro, being not much less than a Calf, with a
long Neck like a Camel, but of several colors; for some are white, some black,
and others speckled, having an odd Look, especially when they are tied, and
stand still without any motion, staring with goggle-eyes on their Owners:
Sometimes in a moody humor, upon a sudden taking a freak, they run up to the
top of almost inaccessible Mountains, where both the frantic Beast and his
Burden are loft. The Pacos sometimes likewise takes sudden Pets, and fustian
Fits, often doing the forward Supersalt, tumbling over and over with their
Goods, and will not be raised, their moodiness continuing, with beating, nay
though they cut them to pieces: but the best way is to sit down by them, and
wait some hours till their humor being spent they rise again of their own
accords. These Beasts are much inclined to a Disease called Carashe or the
Mange, of which they generally die: and because the Disease is very catching,
they straight bury the infected alive, so the better to preserve the rest.

Grotius also mistakes, when he compares the Mexican Peke with the Dutck Beke;
for though many Mexican Places, Mountains, and Rivers, terminate in Peke, yet
it signifies not a Brook or Rivulet, for that they call Atlauhtli.

John de Laet tells also, De Orig. Gentium Americ.
That with great diligence he found a Mexican Dictionary, Printed by the
Spaniards in Mexico, to find if there were any words in it which agreed with
any of those European Languages that he understood, but found not one.

It is the same case with the Customs and Constitutions between the Norwegians
and Northern. Americans: for what concerns Hunting, how many People have
formerly lived by it? The ancient Germans, and to this day the Tartars make it
their whole business, excelling, in that Art all other Nations. Besides, that
the more serious sort of the Mexicans many Ages since scorned to derive
themselves from a Hunting Ancestry, but affirm that they found the Chichimecen
in those Countries, who were great Venators.

The accounting of Time by the Nights, extracted from the Hebrews, is observed
by diverse Eastern People: and although the Germans dipped and washed their
Children in cold Rivers, or Brooks, so soon as they were born, yet the Mexicans
never did it, but the Mother lays the Child on the fourth day after its Birth,
in an open place of the House; in the middle whereof stands a Pot full of Water
covered with Broom, in which they wash the Infant. Neither are the Americans so
much addicted to the Vice of Gaming as other Nations; Customs of the Americans.
so that Grotius taxes them too severely as to that point: as on the contrary,
he too much clears them of Polygamy, whereas the Mexicans Marry as many Wives
as they please, or are able to maintain. Father Martyn Perez relates the same
of the Cinaloans, and other Americans; as also Quarterius of the Natives in
Nova Francia, which lie nearest to Norway. And what need the Americans have the
Germans their Teachers, to make Dams and Banks against Floods, since Nature and
Necessity it self instructs it? and where are any People so ignorant, as to
ascribe the same event to Men and Beasts after death? It Is true, their manner
of eating in America is several, because the People do not much converse
together: but they did not go naked; Their Clothing.
for the Spaniards found them not only neatly Habited, but had a proper. Name
for every thing they wore. The Virginians used long Shirts; the Floridans Skins
of wild Beasts; and toward the North they covered themselves from Head to Foot
in hairy and undressed Hydes. The sacrificing of Men was in former Ages
spreading far and near over the World, and how far it was practiced here, has
been already declared at large. Lastly, all the Americans are not guilty of
eating of Man's-flesh, but that salvageness is confined to the Southern America.

Thus much we have said, to prove that the Norwegians had no hand in planting
the Northern America, we shall now proceed to enquire who planted the Southern
Parts, from the Straights between Panama and Nombre de Dios, to the Straights
of Magellan.

The Peruvians, possessing a large Tract of Land along the Coast of the
South Sea, Grotius would thus derive from China:

The Peruvians, being of a subtle Wit, and quick of Apprehension, argue
sufficiently that they are not extracted from the more Northern Americans, but
rather from the Chinese, which the several Wrecks of Chinese Ships found on
these Coasts sufficiently evidence: and no wonder, if curiosity or accident
brought the Chinese expert Navigators to this Country, separated only by one
Sea from them. To this we may add their Rites of Religion; for both worship the
Sun, and call their King the Son of the Sun; they write no Letters, but make
Characters downwards. Relation of Mancocapacus.
Mancocapacus was a Chinese of strange Policy; who being informed that his
Contrymen inhabited fruitful Countries on the other side of the South Sea,
but without Laws or Government, Sailed over thither, and gathered the scattered
Multitudes in a Body, and established an hereditary Kingdom after the Chinese
manner, to him and his Successors.

The Americans are not extracted from China.
To which John de Laet answers thus:

Though the Peruvians exceed the other Americans in Policy, and at the arrival
of the Spaniards lived in a handsome Order of Government, yet they can no ways
be compared to the sharp-witted, and noble-spirited Chinese; nay, there are in
no Place of Peru found such Artificers as those of China, that bear the praise
of all the World; no where such manner of Buildings or Cities, nor the least
likeness of the Chinese Curiosities. As concerning the Wrecks found in Peru, I
find no credible Author that gives an account thereof: for certainly the
Chinese could much easier, and a nearer way have come through the Atlantic
Sea to the Coasts of America, lying to the East of Peru, than steer along the
vast, and much greater South Sea, and endure the horrible Storms and vast
Waves, which the European Ships are scarce able to endure, much less the
Chinese Vessels, which are not so good. The Spaniards which Sail yearly from
Acupulco to the Philippines sensible of the great danger which they endure,
chiefly by the great gusts of Wind near California. Besides, the Peruvians
before the the arrival of the Spaniards, were utterly ignorant of great Ships,
and the use of Sails. How could they at once have forgotten that Art, which
they brought with them thither, Moreover, it is easier to Sail from Peru to
China, than from China to Peru; because the Winds under the Equinoctial Line
commonly blow Easterly. And it is the greater wonder, that the Chinese Jonks
accidentally by Storm should be driven to Peru, because they were never stored
with Provisions but for a short Voyage, whereas this asked nine Months. But if
any one will suppose, that they purposely directed their Course thither, how
came the Chinese to Sail just to Peru, and not to New Spain, which is much
closer to China? why were there no Merchandises of the Chinese found in Peru,
since they went thither for Trade? how came they to neglect that Navigation
they had once found? Nor is their Sun-worship (which was formerly practiced in
most Parts of the World) of any validity to derive them from China? But the
contrary is most apparent, for the Peruvians worship for their chief God,
Viracocha, that is, God Almighty, or The Creator of all things.

The Chinese, it Consutius an eyewitness may be credited, are divided into
three Sects of Religion: The first follow the Learned Trigantius, and
acknowledge a King of the Heavens, which must only be served as the Chinese
sole Governor; to which purpose, two Temples are built in the Royal Cities
Nankin and Pekin, one Consecrate to Heaven, and the other to the Earth. The
second Sect has the name of Sciequia, and serve the Idol Omyto. The third
named Lanzu, employ themselves in Magic and Exorcisms, Conjuring up, and
laying Evi-Spirits, whose horrid representations, when they have stuck upon the
Walls, they make an artificial and dreadful noise, as if Hell were broke loose,
and the House full of Devils; sometimes also force the Evil-Spirits to enter
into Images, from whence they receive no impertinent answers to their
questions: Therefore, who will compare this Superstition of the Peruvians
worshipping of the Sun, to the Chinese Religion, which do no such things?

The Peruvians called their King, A Lord of the Realm, and not The Son of the
Sun, as in China: Though the Mexicans otherwise worship the Sun, and in their
manner of adulation, styled Hernando Cortez, their Conqueror, Son of the Sun:
As to what concerns the manner of writing, it is very well known, that the
Chinese words are all Monosyllables, so that they have as many Letters as
Words, which they join so together, that they reckon eighty thousand, but with
ten thousand they are able to express themselves in most matters. These
Characters are contained in their Halpien or Dictionary. Embassy to the Cham,
l. 2. c. 2.
The ancient Chinese used seventeen several sorts of Characters in their
writing, some consisting of Serpents, that by several Wreathes and contortious
Windings, signified several things; others, of all sorts of agrestick Tools
belonging to Husbandry; some Characters of the Feathers of the Bird Fum-hoar;
others of Oysters and Worms, or of Roots, of Herbs, or Birds Claws, or of
Turtles, or of Herbs and Birds Feathers mingled, or of Planets, and such like;
but what manner of Writing or Hieroglyphick of theirs resembles those, who by
their own testimony know neither Pen, Paper, Ink, nor any manner of Writing,
but reckon the antiquity of time by strung Beads, which was observed many ages
since among several Nations.

Original of the Americans very obscure.
Hitherto we have discovered the several Opinions concerning the Original of the
Americans, or first Plantation of America, from all which, having received no
clear or demonstrative satisfaction, we must open our way to a further
scrutiny: But first, we must needs confess, that contradiction is not
difficult; but it is something of Work, when we have beaten down a
well-fortifi'd Opinion, to set up somewhat in stead thereof, to stand a
permanent and undeniable truth, which will be the harder, in regard the
Inhabitants of this new World have no old Chronologies concerning their
Antiquities, and first settling there; yet if we cannot go so far absolutely to
assert, yet some probabilities, grounded (as we suppose) upon better reasons,
may give more satisfaction; What we may believe concerning them.
for none will deny, but that the Generations of Mankind being strangely
multiplied after the Flood, they then living five times our Ages, and Wars not
beginning till the known part of the Earth was over-stock'd, justling for
Territories, and some thrust quite out, at last found America; which spreading
it self to a vast extent, and now found almost every where well inhabited, may
be guessed, that it was not only Planted from the first, but several times
replenished since by various Nations; Why may not several Planters, and at
several times make room for their Colonies, incroaching one upon another,
either by force or compact; The Americans are derived from several people.
as the French themselves upon the Gauls, the Normans upon them, the Goths
among the Spaniards, and the Saxons among the Britains, and the Normans again
upon them?

Several people may easily Sail over thither, the Azores or the Canary Isles
lie so, that they are ready (as if designed) for Transportation to America;
from whence Acosta made a Voyage in fifteen days. Also Pliny gives us an
account, that these Islands lay uninhabited in his time; yet is it well known,
that after Pliny's time, Ruins of Buildings were found there, signifying, they
had been formerly Planted; and why might not those ancient Inhabitants Sail
thence to the neighboring America?

Tercera lying half way between Spain and America, was frequented by Navigators
before the Birth of our Savior; and it seems as easy to Sail from thence to
America, as from the Main Land of Spain thither: Add this, that necessity
forced the Spaniards to look about them from other Countries, Marian. de Reb.
Hisp. l. 1. c. 18.
for since they lost their Victorious Champion Baucius Gapetus, they were every
where beaten, being tired out by the Phenician Forces, and that oppression
over, suffered as much under the Roman Yoke: Wherefore it seems not strange, if
a considerable number removed from thence, that they might live some where else
in quiet; for which purpose they wanted no conveniences to Rig and set forth
stout and sufficient Vessels, able to live in those Seas, having had long
experience from the Phenician Voyagers, whose Fleets Sailed daily to and again
in several Expeditions, from Cadiz and Gibraltar toward these Western
Countries: Nay, Hanno himself their first Navigator that way, who gives an
account of the Gorgons, or the Isles of Cape Verd, a good part of the way to
America.

English famous Seamen.
And though Britain, Ireland, and the British Orcades lay further from
America, yet something may be said particularly to prove, That many Ages since,
Expeditions had been made from thence to the New World; and that the
Inhabitants of these our Isles, in former Ages, were peculiarly famous for
their skill in Navigation; Barat-anne, or, Ti^land, the Phenician name, and
Brittania the Greek name of Britain.
insomuch, that the Cretans and Phenicians emulous of their skill, and jealous
of their danger, made several Attacques and Invasions upon these Isles, which
is the more probable, many remarks of the Phenician and Greek Language,
remaining in the denominations of the Country: Of which, take first this
account:

Old Voyage of Madok to America; for which see Vet. Hist. Brit.
Anno 1170. When Owen Guyneth, Prince of Wales, having Reigned long and happily
in his settled Dominions, dying, left several Sons, who quarrelling, their elder
Brother, as not contented with their shares of the Principality, nor to be
under him, having gotten no mean Interests and Claims to the whole by their
struglings, so weakened one another, that they opened a way to the loosing of
all.

Amongst these Brothers, Madok, a Prince of a milder disposition, weary of such
unnatural Dissentions, threw up his share, better contented to seek new
Fortunes abroad; David Powel in Historia Cambria.
whereupon there were many soon persuaded to venture their lives with him,
where ever he would please to Transport: So Rigging a small Fleet, he Sailed
Westward, far beyond Ireland, where at last he discovered an unknown and
un-inhabited Country, but wondrous pleasant, the Air being temperate, and the
Soil most fertile: Glad of this good success (as the Story says) he returning,
spreading the Fame of this his New Foundland, which they might exchange for a
barren Soil, hatter'd and harassed with an endless Civil-War.

No small number flocked to these Summons, as a most acceptable Undertaking; so
that soon after he was able to send forth ten good Ships, Ereighted only with
Men, Women, and Children, and all other Materials fit for a new Plantation;
which not long after Landed in Acuzamil, a Country in the North of America, as
Francis Lopez de Gomara believes, because there he only found some remaining
Tracks of Christianity, a People that worshipped the Cross, but knew no reason
why or wherefore they adored that sign of our Redemption. Now, some will say,
that this Worship of the Cross is no argument to prove, that the British
Christians first Planted in the North of America; but what will not time and
change of place do, where Transplanted People keep no Records, so they forget
not only Religion, Laws, and Customs, but who they were, and from whence they
came, Oblivion first mutilating, and at last swallowing up all; of which, take
this one late president.

Strange occasion of De la Roche.
Anno 1598. The Duke De La Roche obtained leave of the French King, to
transport a Colony of Volunteers to New France; in his way he Landed fifty Men
on the Island De Sable, to rest his Passengers, and that he might the better,
and with more ease explore the Country, and when resolved where to settle,
then to fetch them off; who accordingly, as designed, soon after, returning
thither, was met with so violent a Storm, that not being able to Weather the
Isle of Sable, where he left his People, he lost his whole Expedition, and was
driven back to a French Harbor, where no sooner arrived, he was so highly
charged, that he was cast into Prison, when those he had left neglected upon
the Isle, were not once so much as thought of; in this interim, they never
expecting to hear more of their Captain, lived in a wild and miserable
condition, feeding upon Fish, and sometimes wild Swine, without Bread, Drink,
or Salt.

When the Baron of Leri went with Letters Patents, to be Governor of Nova
Francia, and by stress of Weather in his Voyage, was forced to put in at Sable,
where he found the remainder of La Roches People, who being from fifty reduced
to twelve, having clad themselves in Sea-Wolves Skins, they had not only lost
their former French Civilities, but forgot in a manner their Religion, much of
their Language, and what they were, being as if Metamorphos'd into bestial
Salvages.

If some did not come accidentally to America.
And although we have already controverted the improbability of Peopling
America, either by accident of Storm, or set purpose; yet it may be possible
that so it might happen, for as the several virtues of Plants, Herbs,
Precious-Stones, and Minerals, though strangely occult, and so altogether
unknown, that what could never be found by Art, mere chance has brought to
light, and their wondrous qualities, some casual accident has made apparent;
so strange and remote Countries never to be found in our Charts, or Maps, nor
Registered in any Story, Seamen bound to their intended Harbors, have stumbled
on by chance, either Hood-winked by blind Mists, or forced upon by pertinatious
Weather; of which America may be her own witness, for how was Columbus stirred
up, but by incitations of the Journals of a Sea-Captain, dying in his House,
driven on the American Islands by foul Weather.

America was Peopled presently after the Flood.
Although from the forementioned places, and after the same manner, America
might be furnished with Inhabitants; so it also gives us a more certain
assurance, that the Planting of America was not only soon after the Flood, but
that they came also thither by Land: And how strangely would it be against the
Majesty and Wisdom of Divine Providence, to leave half the Universal Globe, a
World fully supplied with all sorts of Creatures, fit for Food and Service,
Plants, Herbs, and the richest Minerals, like a House new built, and well
fumish'd, Giants in America.
without a Master or any Inhabitant, viz. Man, who being of Celestial Extract,
should be able to acknowledge and glorify the Creator, by admiring the
Creature in his great Works: Besides, the confused Notions and Fables of
Giants, Perpetrators of all manner of Crimes, and wallowing in all kind of
sensual Debaucheries, are always remembered among the Antiquities of the
Americans, and that they had some slender hints of ancient Truth, not only of
the Giants before the Flood, but of those that soon after the rank fatness of
the Earth, produced and fed to that pitch of Arrogance, that the covenanting
Brethren defied God, Conjurati fratres, Virg. Georg. The Flood acknowledged
there.
fortifying themselves to fight him by the advantage of that their long
congested Pile, Babel, which in a short time was transverted by the Heathen
Poets into their Gigantomachia, heaping Hills on Hills, like the American
Traditions: From which we may conjecture, that they came thither in the time of
Noah; for why may not any believe, when Noah lived three hundred years after he
Landed on Mount Ararat, that he took care to People the World? And who will
make him ignorant of this New World, who living five hundred years before,
might not improbably by his own industry and the help of the former long-lived
Patriarchs, been well able to make a general Survey of the Old; and he could
better furnish America, it being nearer Mount Ararat, than supply Italy, Spain,
Germany, or any Northern Territories in Europe, so that America might be known
to the first people after the Flood, nay, inhabited by them, though since that,
the knowledge was lost.

Pliny complaining of the Supine negligence, and stupendous sloth which
reigned then and long before as he had observed, among all people, and in every
place, who were so far from making inquiry after discoveries of Lands for new
Plantations, that they lost the old, when they had begun to settle, though
under the greatest serenity of Peace; The Sea by that means lying open beyond
what any juncture of former times could be proud of.

Canary Islands, by whom discovered.
Yet the Fortunate, or Canary Islands were in the first ages after Noah,
frequented with Vessels, which in later times were altogether neglected, till
Guillaum Betancourt, a Gentleman of Picardye, brought them again to be taken
notice of by a fresh Trade. Kesperian Gardens, what they fignifie.
The Fable of the Hesperian Gardens, and the Dragon that kept the Golden Fruit,
with constant Vigils, is nothing but an allusion to the Sea, which with
Serpentine Embraces, not only secured these scattered Isles, but swallowed up
several Adventurers that too hardy made their unhappy approaches for discovery.

Another Allegation for the Planting of America by Land, both whose sides are
washed on the East and West, by the South and Atlantic Ocean, may be thus
probably made out: The Atlantic rowls over with almost Fathomless Waters,
three thousand Leagues of Ground; the South Sea not much less, which well may
be, being indeed but one continued Sea, encompassing, till meeting there, the
Universal Ball; whence springs a more likelihood, that America might be Planted
from the Southern parts, from the Straights of Magellan, and Le-Mayr.

Relatie de Terra Australe.
Peter Fernandes de Quir relates, That he and a Commander, Lodowick Paes le
Torres saw a part of the South Country, and in it innumerable Inhabitants,
Whites, The Description of the unknown South.
Blacks, Sallows, with long, black, curled, Woolly, and yellow Hair. They know
no Walls or Fortresses for Defense, Laws or Kings, but are divided into Tribes:
They use indeed Bows, Arrows, Clubs, and a kind of Spears: Their Houses are
covered with Palm-Tree-Leaves; their Housholdstuff consists only of a few
Earthen Pots, and such Trinkets; yet they have some little skill in Weaving,
and though they gonaked, pride themselves in Neck-Laces and Bracelets, made of
Mother of Pearl: But these for their Complexions and Constitution of Body,
Customs, and manners, are rather derived from the Americans, than they from
them, and therefore we must seek for their Original from the North; from which
are but two ways, one from Ysland and Groenland, which Grotius endeavors to
prove, but contradicted; the other out of Tartary, which certainly was the
first Nursery, from whence the Americans were Transplanted.

Description of Tartary.
Tartary or Tattary, so called from the River Tatter, which runs through the
Country Mongul into the Northern Ocean, covers a great part of the Terrestrial
Globe; the lesser Tartary makes out a considerable part of Europe; the greater
is Asia.

This great Tartary, which is a thousand Leagues long, and six hundred broad,
reckons five chief Provinces, viz. the wild Tartary, inhabited by Herdsmen;
Sagatai, of which the Metropolis is Samarcand, famous for the mighty Tamerlane;
next Turkestan; then Kitai, which the great Cham Commands; and lastly, Old
Tartary, according to Andreas Caesariensis, the habitation of Gog and Magog.

Now we must enquire from what Tartars the Americans are Extracted:

Mornaeus, Postellus, Genebrardus, Poterus, and others are of opinion, Thrian
l. 67.
That the Tartars, which about the year 1228. under the Command of Zingis Cham
overspread the Earth like a deluge, were the Successors of the ten Tribes of
Israel, which were carried into captivity to Assyria by Salmanazar. If the
Israelites were Tartars.
The name Tartary, or rather Tattaria, seems to be some testimony thereof,
because it signifies in the Syrian or Hebrew Tongue, Remnants or Remainders, as
seemingly, because these Tartarians were remainders of the forementioned
Tribes; nay, the Northern Tartary Herdsmen preserve to this day the Names Dan,
Zabulon, and Naphthali: Wherefore we need not to admire, why so many Jews are
found in Russia, Sarmatia, and Liefland; nay, the nearer to Tartary, the mote
Jews there are.

Circumcision has a long time been observed among them, before Mahomet brought
in his new Law; it seems, that Mahomet ordered the Circumcision and other Laws,
according to Moses, to be observed by the Northern people, because that in his
time, they began to Rebel, that so they might the better be kept in awe by
their new Religion.

Joannes Leonclavius relates, That in Liefland near Riga, Pand. Hist. Turtica.
he heard the wild Natives called Letti, not without great admiration, go
crying along the Highways and Fields, with a doleful voice, Jeru, Jeru, Masco
lou: It is believed that they mourn for Jerusalem and Damascus; but by their
long continuance in the vast Wildernesses, they have forgot their Religion and
Laws, and what else might enable to tell us who they were. Several learned
Authors question this removal of the Israelites out of Assyria to Tartary,
though to our Judgment their Arguments are too weak, to take from them of the
footing they have gotten there; yet nevertheless, the Israelites are not to be
taken for the Planters of America, for why else is not Judaisme as well found
in America as in Tartary. But it is already shown, that America was inhabited
long before the dispersion of the Israelites.

Americans are not derived from Africa nor Europe.
Now to shut up all, it is evident, that the first Planters of America were not
Europeans from the dissimilitude of the People, both in their Complexions,
Language, and Persons; nor Africans, because that in all the far spreading
Country of America, not one Negro is to be found, except a few near the River
Martha, in the little Territory Quarequa, which must by Storm be drove thither
from the Guinny Coast: But Asia, and chiesly out of Tartary.
So that Asia, the Mother of all People, only remains to be Implanter of our
America, whose Western Coast, opposite to Asia, is more inhabited than to the
East, where it respects Europe.

Tartary is not parted from America by the Straights of Anian.
Moreover, Armenia, out of which, by Noah's Progeny, the whole Earth was
re-peopled, borders on Scythia, now called Tartary, and Tartary faces America,
separated only by the Straights of Anian; though some are of opinion, that out
of the South into the Frozen Sea, there is no passage through these Straights;
else (as we have already proved the contrary) how came all those Voracious and
Poisonous Beasts into America, if it be clearly separated from Asia by Sea?

It deserves here to be related, what happened to Henry Cornelison Schaep, and
William Byleveld, Sailing from Batavia to discover the Tartarick River
Polysange, but were taken and carried Prisoners to the Japan Court at Jedo;
being Commanded there by Order of the Council to give an account of a Japan Map
or Card, which was laid before them, and contained the Provinces of Japan,
Amboina, the Molucca Islands, Manilha, the South Sea, Borneo, Celebes, Malacca,
Tartary, Formosa, Corea, and the vast and Mountainous Country or Desert of
Jesso, separated from Japan by the Straights of Sungar; though toward the
North, it joins to Japan in the Province of Ochio; and beginning in forty seven
degrees, run North-East toward America, but they could not possible find the
Straights of Anian; but on the contrary, the Promontory of Tartary, viz. the
Province Kataya or Katui lay in the same parallel with the Northern America.

Hereto may be added, that Asia has no Territory any where, which may more
easily with numerous Colonies supply America than this part of Tartary, as well
for the vastness of the Country, to which no other can compare, as for the
increasing of the Inhabitants: Who does not admire, that according to Michalon
Lithouwer, Ennead 9. l. 6. Testimonies that the Americans are Tartars.
there is scarce a City in Tartary that boasted less than a thousand Temples?
and to see Canguista first King of Tartary, about the Year 1200. in Arms; and
his Successor Hoccata following his Fathers bloody Footsteps, whilst he
prepared his Sons with three vast Armies? The eldest Son, Jachis, Marched
Westward with thirty thousand Horse; Batho drew with as great an Army toward
the North; Tagladais being the youngest fell into the Moors Country above
Egypt. Hoccata himself Marched victoriously into the North America, subdued
great part of the Persian Kingdom, and beat the Turks, led by the General
Goniata with a great Army, Anno 1241. as Jacob Planensis and Benedictus
Sarmata, two Monks, sent by Pope Innocent to Hoccata, witness: The great number
of the Tartars or Scythians, may appear by the several people, spread far and
near over Tartary; Pliny reckons some of them, viz. Auchetes, Neuri, Geloni,
Thussagetes, Budini, Basilides, Agathyrsi, Nomades, Anthropophagi, Hyperborei,
Arimphei, Cimmerij, Cicianthi, Georgi, Sacores, and others: What number would
the Inhabitants make up that live in America, in Teneneuf, Virginia, Florida,
New Spain, Guadalaiara, Guatemala, Terra firma, New Granada, Peru, Chili, Rio
de la Plata, Brasil, Guaiana, New Andaluzai?

It will be worth our time, to compare the likeness between the Scythians and
Northern Americans; both of them are differenced with special Marks of a more
than ordinary and natural distance between the Eyes, which much alters the
whole Air of the Face, and the plumpness and swelling of their Cheeks summits
above the Cheek-bone; most of these are of a middle stature, having downy Hair
upon their Chin, like the Callow Feathers of an unfledged Bird. Lastly, as the
Tartars, they differ amongst themselves in their Customs, yet in several things
they agree one with another, according as they are governed by others, and yet
other Princes, some powerful, and some weaker, according as every ones power be
more or less. The Inhabitants of Lucaja bear so great a respect, and stand so
much in awe of their Governor, that if commanded to leap, from a Rock, and
break their Necks, they instantly obey.

The same is observed by the Tartars; the first King Canguista Commanded the
seven Princes of his Realm to Murder their Sons with their own Hands, which
they all readily performed.

In Popaina they live to this day like some Tartars, Costitutions of the
Tartars and Americans agree.
without Laws or Lawgivers, who change their places by turns, from the great
increase or the Tartars, the Americans no ways differ.

Bartholomeus de las Casas writ to Charles the Fifth, That the Spaniards in few
years, only on the Islands Cuba, Hispaniola, Naco, Hondures, in Venezuela and
New Spain, destroyed above 2600000. Men, besides the slaughter that was made in
Peru, Brafil, Rio de la Plata and other places, which far exceed the
forementioned numbers.

Polygamy is still in use, both among the Tartars and Americans; both
adknowledge the Immortality of the Soul, both like Cannibals, Eating and
Sacrificing Man's flesh. How famous amongst the Ancients was the Altar of Diana
in Taurica Chersonesus, where several Men were daily Sacrificed? How delicate,
according to Sabellicus, did the Tartars account their Dishes, Sauc'd and
served with humane Gore?

Strabo relates, Grogr. l. 11. q. 7.
That the ancient People account it an honorable Death to be chopped in pieces,
and their flesh served up in Commons. Those that die by Age, a natural death,
are despised like Malefactors, and as a punishment according to their Demerits,
left in the open Fields, a prey to Birds and Beasts; some delight in that
loathsome gorging themselves with Men's flesh, others on the contrary, not only
detest humane, but all manner of flesh: And just so the Americans are
distinguished, for although the Caribes, Brasilians, the Inhabitants of New
Spain, New Granada, St. Martha, and others, Sacrifice and eat Men, yet as many
abhor and detest that odious Diet and abominable Custom.

Giles Flesher Queen Elisabeths Agent in Muscow relates, That Anno 1588. Kinach
Morsey, Grandson to the Governor of the Chrim Tartars, made his entrance there
with a Retinue of three hundred Noblemen, and two Ladies, of which one was the
Widow of his deceased Brother. The great Prince informed of their coming, sent
him two slaughtered Horses, whose sides and Hanches they feasted on, as we on
Fallow Deer.

Most of the Tartars use no manner of Letters or Characters; in the Voyage made
into Persia, they first learned to make Letters; just so it is in America;
their bemoaning of the dead ends in one Month, both by the Tartars and
Americans; with a Person of Quality, the Tartars bury a live Servant; the same
Custom is observed by some of the Americans; and so much do they agree in a
salvage and rude life, that Merchandising and Mechanics are little regarded,
Ayson the American acknowledges the Tartars for a rude People in their
Religion, Habits, and Dwellings, and yet in all these the Americans differ but
very little. Lastly, How common is it amongst them to worship the Devil?
Devil-worship in Amerrica.
Along the River Sagadahoc, the Inhabitants are every new Moon miserably
tormented by an Evil Spirit called Tanto. In the Temples in Virginia remain yet
the horrible Images of the Devils Oka and Menetto. Not a House in Mexico, but
has a peculiar Chapel, set apart for this their supposed holy, but damnable
Adoration of the Devil. Others in Virginia believe, That there is a great and
supreme Deity, which is Everlasting, and for ever. The Tartars also are of the
like persuasion.

But this Opinion Grotius has laid a strong and dangerous Battery against,
that America could not be Peopled by the Tartars, because the Americans before
the Spaniards coming thither, had never seen any Horses; whereas the Tartars
use no Beast more, either in Peace or War, nor can less want: For the Tartarian
Forces do not only consist in Horse; Tartarian Horses.
but the Wealth of this Country is reckoned up in the numerous Breeds of
Horses, and several Studs of Mares. Some of the Nobless keep a thousand Horse;
none, though never so poor, but keep two or three; and Beggars there mounted
crave Alms and Charity of the People. When they remove their Habitations, their
Horses carry their Provisions and Tents: If Provisions grow short, they eat
Mares Milk, high gusted with Garlic, which satisfies Hunger and Thirst; and
the red Liquor which they tap warm from their Veins, serves them to help
Digestion, and heighten their Humor, instead of the Blood of the Grape, our
sweet Wine. The swiftest Rivers, though raging and precipitated with
Land-floods, they dare adventure swimming their Horses over, hanging naked by
their Manes, and guiding them by a slipped Rein whither they please: To their
Tails they tie their Saddles, and other Necessaries, bound up in Rushes. When a
Person of Quality prepares to cross any River, they tie two Horses Tail to
Tail, and athwart both their Backs fasten a Mat pleited of Rushes, to sit on.
When they are stopped at any broad River, or standing Lake, they kill and flea
their worst Horses; then turning the Skins inside out, and well Liquoring, they
stretch them open with the Ribs, which stand like the Bayles of a Tilted
Wherry, and thus furnished, serves them for a Boat to carry eight Persons. When
they take the Field, going to War, not any but musters three Horses; which
makes their Armies, when drawn out in Campain, show much bigger than indeed
they are: And though many of them are killed in the Wars, or slain for Food,
yet the European Tartars pay yearly forty thousand Horses to the Russians from
whence Grotius thus argues, If America joins to Tartary, then the Horses which
run wild at Grass might easily have found America themselves, seeking to
improve their Pasture, and have gone from one Country into the other, as it
appears, that since the Spaniards transported Horses to America, they are
dispersed over the highest Mountains, out of one Province into the other: Or if
the Straights of Anian run between both, the Tartars never were Navigators; and
suppose they had been, they would not have crossed without Horses, without
which they knew not how to subsist. To which we only say thus, That although
Tartary now, and in former times, abounded in Horse, yet must we grant, that it
has been always so? or that the ancient Scythians, who we avouch first planted
America, had such frequent use of them as the Tartars now. This may be
controverted, for that these Scythians planting there in the Nonage of Time,
presently after the Flood, the use of Horses was unknown, which the Ancient
Poets testify by their Fiction of Centaurs, who when first seen, the Horse and
Rider were taken for one Creature. The like mistake the Mexicans had, when they
saw the mounted Spaniards, a thousand running away from one Cavalier.

portrait of Christopher Colombus CHRISTOFEL COLONUS.


As to their coming thither of themselves, it may easily be confuted: Who knows
not, that there is no Country a continued Pasture, but luxurious Vales
separated with inaccessible. Mountains, Lakes, and vast Wildernesses. But David
Ingram relates, That he saw some Horses in the Northern America, which the
Mexicans, and other Conquests of the Spaniards never heard of: Whereupon we may
conclude, and we suppose without all peradventure, That the Americans have
absolutely their Original from Tartary, which bordering Armenia, where Noah's
Ark first rested, has a convenient way, though beyond the Artick Circle,
through a temperate Climate betwixt Heat and Cold, to Cathay, in the same
Parallel with the neighboring America.

CHAP. III. First Discoverers of America. Christopher Colonus his Expedition.
Christopher Colonus, generally (though by mistake) called Columbus, Pet Bizari
Res Genoi^s. lib. 6.
was born in Arbizolo, a Village in the Dominion of Genoa, near Sovona; his
Father lived by Fishing in the Midland-Sea: So that Sebastian Schroter, Lib.
11. Hist. Georg.
and others besides him, are mistaken, saying, Colonus was born in the City
Cucureum, and descended of the Noble Family Pilistrelli: For Peter Bezarus,
Colunus his Countryman, gives unquestionable Proofs of his mean Extract;
Christoph. Colonus 's Birth.
and amongst other things, That the Commonwealth of Genoa refused to receive
the great Legacy which Colonus left them in his Will, because they fondly
thought it a derogation to their Honor, being so great a Republic, to take any
thing of Bequest from a Fishers Son: Yet his Majesty of Castile thought
otherwise, not only enriching him with Wealth, and a fair Revenue for his
Discovery of the West Indies; but also, though of a low derivation, raised him
to great Honor, Ennobling him the first of his Family with Dignities, Titles,
and Escutcheon, which ranked him in place among his Prime Nobility.

Colonus, whom we shall henceforth call Columbus, His Life.
spent his Youth neat the Sea, where he was busy exploring the Winds,
considering their Natures, and the Quarters whence the rose, especially with
the setting of the Current from the Atlantic to the Mediterrane. The Wescern
Winds, which often, as well as the Levant, blow several days together from the
great Ocean, much amusing him, hinted at last some Notions, that there might be
another World, and hew Places to be discovered, beyond the setting of the Sun;
and that the Ne plus ultra should not be, if he could help, it, the commanding
Terminary of the Earth that way. He also spent much time, being of a solid
Judgment, in the Emendations of Charts and Maps, then very much improvable: And
the Portuguese, who at that time had got the start in Navigation from all other
People, being the busy to find a way by the South of Africa to the
East Indies, not contented to go by hearsay, he went himself in Person a
Voyage with them. Soon after Columbus settled himself in the Island Madera,
where an Accident happened, Strange Accident. Hst. Peru.
which Francis Lopez de Gomesa relates thus: The Master of a Ship, whose Name
and Country lies buried in Oblivion (though some would have him to be of
Spain, some an Andalusian or Biscayner, and other a Portuguese) Trading to the
Canaries and Flemmish-Isles, was surprised by a hideous Tempest from the East,
which hurried him nolens volens through dreadful Waves, where at last he found
himself engaged upon a Western Coast, altogether unknown. The Storm ceasing,
without making further Discoveries, he picked his way homeward, at last Landing
in the Haven of Madera: All his Crew but three and himself, with hardship,
want, and the long Voyage having perished, himself dangerously sick, was
carried into Columbus his House; where lying on his Deathbed, he bequeathed to
Columbus his Maps, Journals, and other Observations of this his unfortunate
Voyage. Columbus being by these Papers more confirmed than ever in his Opinion
of a New World in the West, declared what he verily believed, Makes his Address
at Genoa
to the States of Genoa; but they looked upon him as a vain and idle Fellow;
yet Columbus full of his great Project, thus slighted and scornfully rejected,
sat not so down, but addressed himself to the King of Portugal, To the
Portuguese.
where they wearied him, spending long time with dilatory Answers, to ho
effect; the Opinion of a whole Court of expert Navigators having cast his
Declaration out, as a Chimera or mere Fancy. Soon after Columbus sending his
Brother into England, English.
to move the Business to King Henry the Seventh, he being taken Prisoner by the
way, and lying long er'e his Release, came too late to the English Court,
prevented by the News of Christophe's return with Success from his intended
Voyage: For mean while Ferdinando and Isabella King of Castile, And Castilian
King, concerning a New World.
having finished his Wars with the Moors, had furnished him out for the
Expedition; which he effected by the favor of Alfonso Mendotio and Alfonso
Quintavilia, both great Ministers of State under Ferdinand and Isabel, and
obtained so much at last, that he was sent with a hundred and twenty Soldiers,
besides Seamen, in two Ships, and one Pinnace. Thus supplied, Sails from
Cadiae to discover New Countries.
he set Sail from Cadiz upon the Kings account the fourth of August, Anno 1492,
and first reached the Canary-Islands, and from thence steering South-West, the
Wind in thirty three days scarce varying one Point: But though the Weather blew
so constant, yet the Seamen changed their Minds, and Stormed quite contrary,
crying, His People rebel.
That Columbus was guilty of all their Deaths: For (said they, after they had
lost sight of the Canaries so many days, nothing appearing but Sea and Sky) Who
can hope for any Success or happy conclusion of so desperate a Voyage, so
rashly undertaken, and found now so full of eminent danger? Yet Columbus bore
bravely up, and weathered all their Exclamations, although, they threatened no
less than his Murder: At last Articling, they came to this Agreement, That if
after sailing forwards three days more, no Land were discovered, they should
return: But about two a Clock the next Night, Columbus saw a glimmering like
Fire in the Sky, and in the Morning found himself close aboard a most pleasant
Coast, where Landing with twelve Men, he erected a Cross cut out of a Tree.
Thence he sailed over to Cuba, where the Sea was so rough, that he was forced
to stand off, fearing Rocks and Shallow Water. Soon after he got to the
Northward of the Island Haytin, Discovers Hispaniola.
which he called Hispaniola: Here his best Ship was bulged upon a Rock, on
which they had all perished, had it not been flat on the top, so that the
Soldiers and the whole Crew of Seamen were saved by the two Vessels. The
Inhabitants stark naked, seeing these Strangers, fled to the Woods; but the
Spaniards overtaking a Woman, they entertained her with Sweetmeats and Spanish
Wine, and putting her on a white Shirt, sent her again to the rest of the
Natives, where returned, she told what good Entertainment she had had to her
Companions; whereupon diverse of the Islanders came aboard of the Spaniards,
Trades with the Natives.
in Boats made of one piece of Wood, where they bartered Gold for Beads, pieces
of Glass, Knives, Shells, and other Trifles. The King of Guaccanarillo gave
testimony of peculiar inclination to the Spaniards, helping them to Fish up the
remaining Goods of the Wreck, and informed them, That some Rivers flowing, from
the tops of high Mountains, washed down the Gold amongst the Sand:
notwithstanding a strange Prophecy had been told to these Islanders, namely,
That Bearded Men out of remote Countries should destroy their Goods, take their
Land, and massacre their Children. He also told them what made them fly, and
betake them to their Heels at the arrival of the Spaniards, because they were
oftentimes surprised by the Cannibals, who snatched up all they could lay hold
on: Their Boys and Striplings they gelded, cooping and cramming them up, as we
our Capons, for Feasts: The young and well-grown Men they chopp'd to pieces,
salted, and Barrel'd up: Young Women they preserved for breed, and old ones
they made Slaves. These Cannibals were so terrible to the Inhabitants of
Haytin, that a thousand of them durst not venture to engage against ten, but
would run every way, dispersed like Flocks of Sheep before the Wolf.

Lastly, Their King permitted the Spaniards to build a Lodge or Hovel, wherein
thirty or forty of them might shelter; but indeed so taking possession in right
of the King of Spain.

Mean while Columbus returned in safety to Spain, Returns to Spain.
and was received with great joy, King Ferdinand making him Admiral of the Sea,
Is highly honored.
and sending his Brother Bartholomew Governor to Haytin, now called Hispaniola.
The Gold, Parrots, Mastick, Aloes, the strange Bread Jucca, whose extracted
Juice is rank Poison, but the Body makes good Meal, which kneaded and baked,
yields a fine Manchet and wholesome Food, they looked upon with great delight
and admiration; but two of the Natives being naked, with Gold Rings through
their Noses and Ears, Ornaments with them of high esteem, and signifying their
no mean Quality, the People old and young came in Throngs to wonder at, never,
weary of gazing upon them. But the King, encouraged by this Success, took no
dilatory Course, but suddenly, and before any could expect, built fourteen
stout Carvels, and three Frigates, Goes with seventeen Sail a second time to
Hispaniola
and as soon manned them with twelve hundred Soldiers, besides a great number
of Artificers of all forts, with their Wives and Children, freighting them with
Horses, Swine, Goats, Cattle for Breed, all sorts of European Corn to sow,
Fruit Trees and Vines to plant, and some Priests to instruct and convert the
Natives to their Religion.

The second of September, Anno 1493. they set sail from Cadiz, and Anchored
before Ferreo, the last and furthest of the Canary-Islands, where they could
get no Water, but what dropped from the Dew hanging on Trees into Troughs.
After that, Columbus came on the one and twentieth day amongst the
Caribby-Islands, where he dropped Anchor before one, which he Called Dominico;
The Barbados, St. Christophers, etc.
but finding it desolate, set sail further, and discovered several other
Coasts, where he likewise found nothing but very great Porcupines or Hedg-hogs,
arid sweetsmelling Trees. Steering forward, he found the Coasts of the
Cannibals, which inhabited along the Shore in little Huts or Hovels, built
round of Wood, The Huts of the Cannibals.
and staked about on the outside with long Poles, like Palisado's: They have
also Posts within, which are shorter, pleited and fastened together with Cotton,
or long Roots of Trees, plyant like our Osiars, over which they hang Cloths
painted with horrible Figures and strange Representations: The Roofs rise like
our Canopy'd Tents, highest in the middle, covered with Palm Tree, Leaves to
keep off the Rain: At the Entrances hang two Hairy Images on Poles, not for
Religion sake, but Ornament: Their Bed-steads being high from the Ground, are
filled with a kind of Straw; and in long Hovels fitted for that purpose they
store their Sugar.

Columbus landing here, found all the Cannibals fled; but their Houses full of
Stone Vessels, Cruises, Pans, and Pots, boiling with Men's Flesh, Parrots, and
Wild-foul; the Hanches and Sides of young Men, on Spits roasting at the Fire,
with the Splinters of whose broken Bones they headed their Arrows. This Island
by the Inhabitants called Carucueria, Columbus changed to Guadalupe, because
the Mountains rise up with their tops not unlike Estremadura in Spain, Island
Guadalupe.
famous there for the wonderful Representation of our Lady, as that of the Lady
of Loretto in Italy. Thirty Women which he had taken from the neighboring
Isles, he sent with Presents to the fled Canibals, which the next day returning
made a great appearance hear the Shore; but when they had gazed a while upon
the Spaniards, looking steadfastly on one another, they suddenly ran back again,
sheltring themselves in the Covert of the Woods. Columbus thinking it not worth
his while to expect their return, seeing their barbarous Life, burnt and
destroyed all their Boats, and spoiling whatever ht could, sailed to Matanino.

Strange Women in Matanino.
The released Women in Guadalupe, that came back again, informed the Spaniards,
That Matanino was an Isle only inhabited by Women, which at accustomed times
rowed over to these Cannibals, where a while they drove a Trade and Commerce of
Love, the Product of which, if Girls, they kept; but the Boys they sent over to
their Fathers. They live in Caves, the Mouths and Entrances of which they
maintain and stoutly make good with their Bow, shooting Arrows as thick as
Hail at the approach of Men, after their impregnating by the Cannibals.

From hence the Fleet passed by several other fruitful Islands, Columbus giving
them the Names of Montseratto, Rodondo, St. Martin, Santa Cruz, formerly by the
Inhabitants called Ayaya. On this last Island he landed thirty Men, who took
four Women, which held out their Hands before them, as if Petitioners that
begged Quarter, or praying, and then concealed themselves in Ambuscade, the
better to surprise more; when by chance they spied an Indian Canoo at Sea, with
eight Men, Remarkable Passage of Columbus.
and as many Women; whereupon those in Ambuscade made a Signal to the next
Ship, which immediately sent off some Boats well Manned; but before they drew
near them, or expected an Onset, one of the Spaniards was killed, and another
wounded with their Arrows; amongst whom a Woman, to whom all the rest showed
greatest Respect and Reverence, aimed very exactly. Their barbed Shafts were
poisoned; whereupon the Spaniards enraged, stemmed the Canoo, and oversetting,
rowed quite over; which little or nothing availed; for they all swam, and
though separated, shot their Arrows at them, as if the Boat had been a But. At
last the Indians got upon a blind Rock, covered with Shole Water, which gave
them fresh Courage; but the Spaniards having more aid sent them from the Fleet,
took them all Prisoners; but the Queens Son being wounded in the Scuffle, and
dying soon after, was thrown overboard. Salvageness of the Indians.
The Prisoners being brought before Columbus, foamed at the Mouth for raging
madness; and being afterward carried to Castile, so retained their fierce and
salvage Nature, that they scared away and frighted the safe Beholders.

Mean while the Spanish Fleet proceeded on their Voyage, between several
Islands, to Hispaniola, of which some appear desolate and barren, others green
and Woody; the small Vessels sailing close under the Shore, and the great ones
standing further off at Sea, which was very turbulent, and beat exceedingly
against the Shole Rocks. The Island Burichema, Columbus called St. John's, to
which belonged some of the Women sent forth in Guadalupe, who informed them,
That Burichema was well inhabited by a kind and hospitable People, who when the
Cannibals landed there fought them, and if Conquerors, were so much exasperated
with their inhumane Barbarisms, that they seized on them like Mastiffs
open-mouthed, and tore them piecemeal with their Teeth; yet themselves
abhorring the Custom of eating Men's Flesh. Here the Spaniards found only a
large House, surrounded with twelve lesser ones, all deserted; for the
Inhabitants with their King Chiasichio were then retired into the cool and more
sheltring Woods, from the midday Heat. All this the Indians told him, which he
brought back with him from Spain. Coming to an Anchor at Hispaniola, he sent
one of the Indians ashore, Columbus come to Hispaniola.
that he might tell what brave things he had seen in the Spanish Court; but the
remaining three took the advantage of the following Night, and leaping
overboard, swam to Shore. But this Accident he not much regarded, trusting to
have a sufficient Account from his eight and thirty Spaniards which he had left
in the Fort upon the Island; and the more, because King Guaccanarillo's
brother, in sign of Friendship, had presented him with two Golden Images: But
all these Conjectures failed him, so that hearing nothing, he landed, Finds the
Spaniards slain.
where he found the Spanish Garrison utterly destroyed, and the Royal Fort
burnt down to the Ground, and lying in a heap of Ashes. Then they fired several
Guns, to give notice, that if any of them had concealed themselves, and lay
sculking in the Woods, or otherwise, they should discover themselves, and come
to the succor of their Friends: But all in vain, for none came; for as they
were afterward informed, the Inhabitants had slain them, because of their
insupportable behavior, insolently committing Robberies, Rapes, and Murders:
Hereupon he sent Messengers to the King Guaccanarillo, to inquire why they had
fired his Fort, and what they had done with his Men, who brought him this
Return, That over that mighty Island were many Princes, of which two being
provoked by the reports of the Strangers that were entertained in the Island,
came marching upon them, each with their Armies; but that he endeavored what he
could, and came with a Power to assist the Strangers; yet all he got for his
Kindness, was a Wound in his Leg, which had been so sore and troublesome, that
forced him to keep his Bed, and no less than seven Concubines to attend him,
and dress the Wound: But he told his Tale so ill, and feigned his Lameness
worse, that Sibilius, one of the Messengers sent by Columbus, lifting up the
Coverlet, saw that he ailed nothing, which soon confirmed his doubt, that he
was confederated with the rest, and alike guilty of the Slaughter. At last
Guaccanarillo being desired, came in Person to Columbus, His Discourse with the
King Guaccanarillo.
in whose presence he held a long Discourse with an Indian Woman, which they
had brought from the Island of Santa Cruz, there Christened by the Name of
Catharine: At length Guaccanarillo was dismissed, and the Night following this
Catharine, with seven more of the Indian Women, leaped overboard, and swom
almost a League to Shore, so going thence directly to their King Guaccanarillo.
This Accident gave more suspicion to Columbus, who thereupon sent three hundred
Men, commanded by Melchior, Hoieda, and Gorvalano, to march through the Island
three several ways, and with special Commission to secure as their Prisoner
Guaccanarillo. Melchior discovered a wide River, full of Reaches and winding
Bays, gliding between high Hills covered with Woods, resounding with the
ecchoing noises of harmonious Birds, and disemboguing his Waters, enlarged by
two other Rivers, into the Sea, so making a convenient Harbor for Ships. Here a
hundred of the Islanders, well Armed after their manner, met them, crying
aloud, We are no Cannibals, but Taynos, that is, a People more civil than they
are cruel. The Spaniards making Signs of Peace, the Taynos approached, and
joined their Forces in a friendly manner. Near the place of this Meeting
appeared a House built in an Oval fashion, being thirty two Paces in the
Circumference, the Roof curiously pleited of diverse colored Rushes, round
about which stood thirty lesser Dwellings. Mean while, in his March Hoieda
discovered a River that descended from a high Mountain, where the Inhabitants
gathered much old after this manner: Strange gathering of Gold.
They dig a Hole about two Foot deep; then taking up their left Hand full, of
Sand, with their right Hand they cull out the precious Ingots, which little
accounting of, as they gathered they dealt away to the Spaniards. Most of the
Pieces were as big as Pease, yet some so large, that they weighed nine Ounces.
Dreas. 1. De Orb Novo.
Peter Martyr, Councellor to the Emperor Charles, tells us, That he has seen
of them in the Spanish Court, that were brought over thither by Columbus.
Moreover, Hoieda was informed here, That this Gold-River took its Original in
the Province belonging to Cacicus Caunaboa, signifying, The King of the Golden
Palace.

Columbus builds a City.
Mean time Columbus selected a piece of Ground on a rising Hill, on the North
part of the Isle, where he intended to build a City, because close by the Hill
on one side rises a Mountain, pregnant with Stone and Chalk; on the other, a
Plain, so exceeding fruitful and pleasant, that the Sun scarce shines upon a
more delightful and fertile Soil, which they found afterward by experience.
Here Melons are set and ripe in thirty six days; Corn, in two Months; Strange
fruitfulness there.
twice a Year the Trees and Plants bring forth their several Products; the
Vines come to maturity, and are laden with Clusters of Grapes, in two Years,
and Sugarcanes grow as thick as a Man's Arm in fifteen days. On this pleasant
Soil, accommodated with a convenient Haven, Columbus afterward built the City
Isabella, fortified with Walls and Trenches against all Invasions, over which
he made his Brother Bartholomew Columbus first Governor.

Mean while the Admiral Columbus himself marched up into the Country with
three hundred Men, in quest of the Gold Mines. Seventy two Leagues the Valley
Cibava lies distant from Isabella, to which Columbus passed over swift Currents
and high Mountains, where he built a Fort, which he called St. Thomas; and
exchanged with the Inhabitants Toys and Trifles, for Pieces and Ingots of Gold,
which the Inhabitants, as beforementioned, found in the Sand of their Rivers:
And besides, they informed him, That about half a days Journey further, greater
Quantities of Gold were to be found, in a browner colored Soil: Whereupon
Luxanus, one of his Officers, was sent with a sufficient Party thither, who
marched through a delightful way, cool with shady Boughs, and pleasant with the
prospect of spacious Meadows, where they mowed Grass for their Horses, which in
four days time grew up again higher than our tallest Wheat.

Goes to Sea to discover new Countries.
Mean time Columbus being returned with great Riches to his new City Isabella,
went soon after by Sea, with three Vessels, to discover new Countries more
remote; which his Design fell out also successfully; for he fell first upon
Jamaica, where he found more stout Opposition than elsewhere, by the Natives,
at his Landing; but finding themselves overpowered, they came to Agreement,
and accepting an amicable Composure, presently struck up a Peace. From thence
putting to Sea, he next discovered Cuba, which sailing round about, he found
also to be an Island; where Landing in a convenient Harbor, on each fenced with
a high and jutting Rock, he espied two little Hovels, wherein was abundance of
Fish, besides two great Snakes or Serpents, each having eight Feet, spitted,
and ready to be laid to the Fire to be roasted; but neither Man, Woman, nor
Child to be seen, they being gone with part of the Fish they had dressed, into
the adjacent Woods; whither the Spaniards following, saw hanging by small
Strings, on the Branches of Trees, abundance of Snakes, some of which had their
Mouths tied together, others their Tongue and Teeth pulled out. Hence marching
on, a little beyond they saw a Company of the Natives, which they judged to be
about seventy Men, covering the top or summit of a Hill, to whom the Spaniards
made Signs, and to entice them near, showed several of their gaudy Trifles; but
in vain, till at last one adventured, descending from the Hill, to whom one of
the Natives (who in the first Voyage that the Admiral made, was. taken from the
Island Guanahaini near Cuba, carried to Spain, and there Christened) called
aloud, telling him they need not fear, they should have no harm done them;
which said, they came down all together, and informed them, That they were sent
by their King to catch Fish for another King, which was with him at Dinner; and
if they had not eaten the Serpents, they gave them many thanks; for they were
provided for the second Course, and very scarce to be got, being a greater
Dainty than any Fish.

Discovers not without great Accidents; several New Countries.
Columbus From hence proceeding on further Westward, discovered a fruitful
Coast, verging the Mouth of a River, whose Water runs boiling hot into the Sea.
Somewhat further he saw very strange Fishes, especially the Guaican, not unlike
an Eel, but with an extraordinary great Head, over which hangs a Skin like a
Bag. This Fish is the Natives Fisher; for having a Line or handsome Cord fastened
about him, so soon as a Turtel, or any other of his Prey, comes above Water,
they give him Line; whereupon the Guaican, like an Arrow out of a Bow, shoots
toward the other Fish, and then gathering the Mouth of the Bag on his Head
like a Purse-net holds them so fast, that he lets not loose till haled up out
of the Water.

Here the Spaniards having Dined on delicate Fish, went on still Westward, and
came to an uninhabited Isle, but well stored with Geese, Pelicans, and ugly
Dogs that could not bark. Here they came amongst so many Shoals, that the Keels
of their Ships raked upon the Ground almost forty Leagues together, the Water
thick and white like Milk. Lastly, they came again into deep Water, and Landed
at the Foot of a high Mountain, on the Island Cuba; where they found two
Springs of very sweet Water. A Musqueteer going into the Woods whilst the rest
filled their Vessels with Water and cut Wood, he spied a tall Man in a Coat
like a white Fryer's Frock; behind whom came two more, and soon after thirty
more followed, all alike Habited: the Musqueteer running away, they beckned him
to stay, but he marched off; arid informing Columbus of his Adventure, he sent
a Party well Armed to see farther into the Country; but they neither saw nor
heard any Men, only found on the other side of the Wood a great Plain, but so
overgrown with deep Grass, that it was impossible to get through: The next day
he sent out twenty five more, which found nothing else than the Prints of the
Steps of great Beasts and Lions, and also abundance of large Grapes, which hung
on the Branches of Vines, clasping about the Bodies of the great Trees.

Hence Columbus again putting to Sea, and Sailing Westerly, found a Shore
overflowed with Water, and abounding with Pearl-Mussles, and after that the
whole Country full of Mountains, whose tops smoaked. By this time the Fleet
was much damnified by the Shole-water; where, as we mentioned before, they
often struck, and their Keels raked upon the Ground; so that having sprung
several Leaks, and their Provisions growing moldy with the Damp, they were
forced to return; and Tacking about they ran against Turtles, which lay as
thick in the Sea as if they had been sow'n.

Columbus now on his return home, and Landing once more on Cuba, found an
ancient Man stark naked, who speaking to him ( Didacus interpreted, the
Language in some part agreeing with that of Hispaniola) to this effect:

You have to all admiration come to see this Country from another World, my
advice to you is, That you hurt none; for the Souls of evildoers go to dark
places: But on the contrary, they shall enjoy the height of all Pleasures that
are Friends to Peace.

Columbus replied, That he came a Scourge for the cruel Cannibals, but a Shield
to protect the quiet and well-meaning Indians.

Great disturbance in Hispaniola.
After this, returning to Hispaniola, much contrary to his expectation, he found
all things which he had settled there turned topsie-turvy: for first the
Governors at Isabella jangled, and were at private contentions amongst
themselves, and the Benedictine Monk Boilus and Peter Margarites were returned
to Spain, there to make their complaints at Court: and besides, the Spaniards
had dealt very inhumanely with the Natives, by their frequent Rapes, Thefts,
and Murders; wherefore the Indians, not unjustly incensed, destroyed all the
Spaniards they found straggling in any part without the Lines of their
Fortification. Caunaboa also lay about the Fort St. Thomas, and closely
besieged Hoieda; but receiving intelligence of Columbus's arrival, he broke up
his Siege, and marched from thence, but soon after was taken Prisoner by the
Spaniards. Mean while upon Design (a Plot none of the wisest) the Natives of
Hispaniola had neither Tilled or Sowed the Ground, or used Agriculture the year
before, contriving by want of Provisions (not considering themselves) to starve
out the Spaniards; but the mischief fell upon the Contrivers: for so great a
Famine happened, that spreading over the whole Country, in a few Months fifty
thousand were starved to death; but the Spaniards made a saving, though hard
shift with their own store, then, though too late, the Islanders repented of
their folly, for they saw the Spaniards making an advantage of their misery,
not only built more Houses in their City Isabella, but prepared their
Weather-beaten Vessels, with which Sailing to, the Gold Mountains of Cipangi on
the Hill, whence sprung several Fountains, they raised the Castle of the
Conception. Great benefit they reaped by this Fort, to which they carried daily
abundance of Amber, Brimstone, mixed Ore of Silver and Gold, and Brazile-wood,
besides great store of Gold: and they might have gotten ten times more, had
they not been so much inclined to slothfulness, and minding other vain
pleasures: yet notwithstanding all, the Fleet carried that year above one
thousand two hundred pound weight of Gold to Spain.

Spaniards tyrannise there.
In the mean while the Natives complained to Columbus of the Spanish Soldiers,
which under pretense to seek for Gold, committed many insufferable Outrages;
therefore they desired that they might be retained in their Forts, and not
straggle so much abroad, and they would willingly bring them every three
Months a certain weight of Cotton; Amber, Brazile-wood, and Gold, more than
equivalent to what they snatched; but Columbus (whose Soldiers, notwithstanding
his severity, and using Martial Law upon some of them for their Crimes, and
proud with their success) yet prevailed at last, that they consented thereto;
but the Inhabitants never performed their promise, who being almost famished,
had much to do to preserve themselves alive, spending their time in picking
Sallads.

Whilst the Business remained in this ill posture, or rather confusion,
Cibanus, Their Conquest.
Brother to the imprisoned Caunaboa, raised an Army of five thousand Men: the
Spaniards, divided into five Companies, marched to meet him; and their Enemies
being naked, and having no other Arms than Bows, Arrows, and Clubs, after some
little resistance, were soon dissipated and put to flight, but overtaken by the
Spanish Horse, many of them were taken Prisoners, and others forced to skulk
and hide themselves on the tops of Mountains.

Shortly after this Battle happened a Huricane, mixed with Thunderclaps, Horible
Tempest.
renting great pieces from the Rocks, and the Wind blowing out of the East,
threw down Houses and Trees, some of which were carried a vast height into the
Air; three Ships that rode in the Harbor, broke their new Cables, and split
against the Rocks. The Spaniards expected naught else, but that with this
excessive Tempest the Day of Judgment was at hand. And on the other side, the
Islanders ascribed this raging of Heavens to the Spaniards wickedness. This
Storm past, and the Air settled, Columbus gave order for the building of two new
Ships there, with which in March, Anno 1495. he returned to Spain; where in
Medina del Campo he gave an account at the Court about the discovered
Countries; where also Sentence was passed on several Spaniards, and chiefly
concerning the Benedictine Monk Boilus, who out of mere malice passed by him at
Mass with the Host, while he gave it to others, without any distinction. Then
he gave a further account, that his Brother Bartholomew had found, A remarkable
passage concerning Eartholomew Columbus.
sixty Leagues beyond Isabella, several deep Pits, the uppermost Ground of
which Sifted, produced abundance of Gold. Moreover, that he had built the
Castle Aurea there in three Months time wish little trouble: but because
Provisions grew scarce there, he found himself necessitated to remove, but left
ten Men in the Garrison, and had sent three hundred of the Islanders with their
Governors to Spain. He also built the Castle Dominico, on the South Side of
Hispaniola; from whence he had traveled into the Country to the River Naiba:
where, upon this Shore the King Beuchio Anacauchoa Encamped himself against the
Naibans, to bring them, besides several other People, under his subjection.
That Bartholomew demanded Tribute of Anacauchoa, which he immediately promised
to pay, and disbanded his Forces, conducting Bartholomew above thirty Leagues
on his Way, along a Path on both sides sown with Hemp, and planted with
Cotton-Trees, Brave reception of a King in Hispaniola.
to his Palace Xaraqua, in the West of Hispaniola, where he was received in
great state: Thirty of the Kings Wives walked before, carrying in their Hands
Boughs of Palm Trees, and both Sung and Danced very strangely; behind these
came a considerable number of naked Virgins, very handsome; at last Bartholomew
entering the Palace with the King, found a Table furnished with all manner of
Dainties, and a very courteous Entertainment. The next day walking forth to a
large Plain, and looking about he saw two Parties that deeply engaged in Fight
behind a Hill, with great slaughter on both sides, and had not he desired that
they might be parted, there had been much more Blood shed. After he had been
several days friendly entertained, he returned to the Forts Isabella,
Sperancia, Catharina, St.Jago, Turrita, Conception, and Dominico; where he
found above three hundred Spaniards starved of hunger, besides many that were
sick.

At that time Guarionexius having been oppressed by the Spaniards, and a long
time watching for an opportunity, now thinking he had found it, raised an Army
of fifteen thousand Men, with which he was resolved to try his fortune against
Columbus; who privately receiving intelligence thereof, fell upon him so on a
sudden and unexpectedly, that he spoiled his Design, and took all his
Commanders Prisoners: But to oblige the Inhabitants, who begged for their King,
Columbus set him at liberty, advising him to be careful of raising a War view
ANGRA op TERCERA

against him any more. But he not being able to endure the oppressions of
Roldanus Ximenez, a Spanish Commander, fled to the wild Ciquano's, descended
from the Canibals, and living on steep Mountains: Of these he desired aid
against the Spaniards, and obtained not only their Promise, but some Men; with
which he robbed and pillaged the Country round about, and what Spaniards he
met with he killed, and with his Men did eat, as if a Venison Feast. Mean while
Ximenez made himself Leader of seventy Rebels, which like raging bloodhounds
fell upon the Natives after a terrible manner.

Columbus Sails the third time to Hispaniola.
Whilst all things were thus in disorder at Hispaniola, the Admiral Christopher
Columbus set Sail a third time with eight Ships from the Haven Barrameda, in
the Year 1498. To shun the French Pirates, which watched for the Indian
Treasures, he directed his Course to Madera, a fruitful Island of Corn, Wine,
Sugar, Wax, and Cattle, desolate till Anno 1420. Here coming to an Anchor, he
sent six Ships away to Hispaniola, which himself afterward followed with the
remaining two, steering by the Flemish Islands, or Acores, first so called from
the Flemings, the first Planters: Here he dropped Anchor before the City Angra on
the Isle Tercera, which is sixteen Leagues in circumference, Description of the
City Angra.
and very Mountainous; the tops whereof are like Spires, and abound with
Grapes: the Plain Country produces great store of Corn, but it will not keep
above twelve Months. The Ground is oftentimes terribly shaken by Earthquakes,
and between several sulphurous Places, both Flames and Smoke ascend up to the
Sky. Near the City Angra is a Fountain which turns Wood into Stone. The Winds
in this Place blow so fierce and strong, that they not only beat down Houses,
but wear out Iron, and all manner of Stone-work. In Angra the chief Commander
of all the Flemish Isles has his Residence. The City, surrounded by steep
Rocks, lies toward the Sea like a Crescent, or Half Moon; for at both ends
thereof the Mountains extend with deep Points into the Ocean. The uppermost
part toward the West stands likewise fortified by a high Rock, as also by
another on the East: on both are continual Watches kept; whereof those on the
first can discover Ships fifteen Leagues off at Sea, coming either from the
East or West Indies; and on the other, all those that come from Europe: When
they see above fifteen Sail, they put out the Kings great Flag upon the top of
all the Rock.

This City of Angra is divided into several Streets: the Governor and
Archbishop live each in a stately Palace; five handsome Churches are no small
ornament to it; the Sea before it abounds with Fish, but are not to be taken in
December, by reason of the turbulent Waves.

Christopher Columbus having refreshed at Angra, Sailed along the African Coast
between the Hesperides: under the Equinoctial he was so miserably tormented by
the Heat, that his Vessels seemed to burn, the Hoops sprung from the Casks, so
that the Water run about the Hold; and they could expect nothing but death from
the insufferable Heat, and want of Water: eight days they had endured this
hardship, when they met with a fresh Gale out of the South-East, so that they
made great Way toward the West. On the last of July he discovered three high
Mountains; and approaching near the Shore, he smelt as in a Posie, all the
sweet breathings of fragrant Flowers commix'd, and at last saw a convenient
Haven; where going ashore he found cultivated Grounds, and steps of Beasts, but
not a Man appeared: the next day they spied a Boat with twenty young Men come
rowing from the Shore into the Ocean. The Admiral haled them in vain to come
aboard, for they made the greater have ashore, still looking about continually
with great admiration on the Ships: whereupon he commanded them to beat their
Drums, and sound their Trumpets, that they might by that means entice them
aboard; but they rather taking it as a sign of War, made themselves ready for
resistance: mean while the Spaniards overtook the Indian Boat, into which they
threw a Hat, and other trifles; the Islanders amazed thereat, made signs to
them to row ashore; but soon after they fled.

Columbus proceeding on his Journey came to Paria, where he found a Fishers
Pink laden with Oysters; which opening and taking out the Meat, were found
full of Pearls, Abundance of Pearl.
which because of their abundance were not regarded there; for a broken Dish
and a rusty Knife, the Spaniards had four long Strings of Pearl,

From thence anchoring in the River of Cumana, several naked Men came aboard,
adorned with Golden Armlets, and Strings of Pearl, These informed him, that
they gathered their Gold from the Mountains and Rivers, and caught their
Pearl-oysters in the adjacent Seas. Some of the Spaniards were nobly
entertained by the King and his Son, who leading them into their Palace, placed
them on Benches of Ebony-wood, curiously wrought, and on a sudden several
Servants came in with variety of Dainties, and well-tasted Wine. But because
Provisions grew scarce amongst the Seamen, and their Meat tainted, Columbus
thought it convenient to leave the Pearl-trade till some better opportunity.
Then setting forward, the farther he went, the shallower he found the Sea,
insomuch that his Ship scarce had Water enough to swim. This inconvenience was
followed by a second; for the Sea being full of Weeds and Grass, scarce
suffered any Passage. A River thirty Yards deep, and twenty Leagues broad, came
rushing out betwixt two Shores into this Sea with such force, that the Waves
went high like Mountains, Columbus is in great danger.
which made Columbus judge himself in the greatest danger imaginable, and
withal Tack about; so that he came on the eight and twentieth of August Anno
1498. to an Anchor before Hispaniola, where all things were still in a sad
confusion, as we before related.

Roldanus Ximenes opposes Columbus.
Roldanus Ximenes refused to follow Christopher Columbus's, order and writ
Letters to the King of Spain, in which he exceedingly aspersed both the Admiral
Columbus and his Brother; who were not backward in giving an account quite
contrary by their Letters, of the horrid Villainies perpetrated by this Ximenes,
and desired aid, that so great an Offender might receive condign punishment.
Mean while the Ciquano's came marching down with six thousand Men, which
Bartholomew went to meet with eighty Foot and some few Horse: Strange Indians.
The Indians which he was to encounter with, rather seeming like Furies than
Men, for all of them were daubed over with black smuts on their bare Skins from
Head to Foot, and their hard Hair pleited in terrible, not in Lovelocks, hung
playing, or dangling over their Shoulders. When the Spaniards in their March
drawing up to a River where it was best fordable, had no sooner left the Bank,
and taken the Water, endeavoring to wade over, but the Salvages rushed forth
out of the Woods, and let fly a shower of Arrows, that had they not been
provided with Shields and Targets, to keep off such a deadly Storm, so thick
they flew, and so well aimed, most of them had perished there: but having
recovered the opposite Bank, the Enemy played all hid, and in a thought
sheltered themselves under the protection of the Woods; where the Conqueror
pursuing, found the Service very difficult and dangerous, for their Arms,
especially their Shields, stopping and intangling them as in a Net, among the
shrubby and twining Branches; which they passing, rigled themselves, and made
their way, like questing Spaniels following their Game, and still gawling them
with their Arrows: whereupon they left their vain pursuit, marching another way
to intercept Mayobanexius, who with eight thousand Ciquano's were then coming
down against them; which proved a harder task than was expected; for e're he
could reduce him and his stubborn Party, he spent three Months in the Service.

SECT. III.
But the great and worthy Service of these two excellent Brothers deserving
rather Statues and Trophies of everlasting Honor, Monuments never to be
demolished, in their due praise, who had found out after so many baffled Ages,
a new World, richer, and not much less than the old, by the aspersing
calumniations of one malicious Person, lost his whole Interest and Credit in
the Spanish Court, quite out of favor with his Prince, who by his insinuations
had hinted so much the matter of Gain among the Courtiers, that every one
studied no less than to get a Commission, and so going a Commander to the
Indies, make up his Mouth, and become suddenly rich. First Francisco Bombadilla
prevailing, was sent with full Commission to succeed Columbus in Hispaniola;
where no sooner Landing, but he exercised the extremity of his Authority, and
seizing the Admiral and his Brother, fettered their Hands and Feet, and put
them aboard on two several Ships for Spain: where no sooner arrived, but the
King, not altogether forgetting former Services, commanded them to be
unmanacled, and waited on, not as Prisoners, with a civil Retinue to his Court;
where they were well entertained three years. But they being active Persons,
weary of so long repose, got a second Grant to make farther discoveries, Has
very bad success in his fourth Expedition.
and set forth the ninth May, Anno 1504. with four Sail well appointed from
Cadiz, and had a fair Passage from thence to Hispaniola, where begun the Storm.
for Bombadilla, who had by the Kings Commission so evil treated Columbus and
his Brother, as aforementioned, would not suffer him, though reconciled to the
King, so much as to Land, and there refresh themselves and their Men; so he was
forced to steer on to the Islands Guamixa and Veragua, where a Huricane, or
sudden stress of Weather sunk two of his Vessels; the other two standing off to
Sea escaped bilging, but so shattered and leaky, having also shipped abundance
of Water, they were resolved to put in at Jamaica; where weary with the long
Voyage, and hatter'd with the Tempest, many of his Seamen, spent with
sickness, after their Landing, died. To these his sufferings from Wind and
Weather, and his Enemies abroad, a greater and intestine mischief happened:
Francisco Poresio, one of his chief Commanders, absolutely rebelled, and
deserting him, with another Party of his Seamen went into Hispaniola: which
the Islanders observing, resolved to famish him, keeping from him both Water
and all other Provisions; which had not Columbus stav'd off by a handsome
Invention, they had completed their Design, which was this: He told them that
he was the offspring of the Moon, and if they refused to supply his want, the
Moon, in vindication of her Son, would famish them, by spoiling what e're they
had planted or sowed; and that this would prove true they should know by a
sign, that on such a Night, she rising in her full glory, should first look
red, and afterward by degrees lose a great part of her light; which indeed so
happened, being Eclipsed, as he could well prognosticate; and after that, they
being ignorant of the cause, supplied him with all Necessaries. But Poresio,
not able to endure the Sea with his small Boats, resolved to surprise one of
the Ships that lay before Jamaica; but Columbus so much prevented him, Fights
with Poresius.
that meeting him in his return, after a hot dispute made him his Prisoner. But
thus ended not his misfortunes; for the Vessels which he fought in soon after
sunk, and no ship to be found in Jamaica to transport him thence. Lastly, he
agreed with some Indian Fishermen, to carry Didaco Mendoza to St. Dominica,
that there he might hire two Vessels to carry him back to Spain: which Design
taking effect, he arrived there in safety: where after he had refreshed himself
at the Spanish Court, Dies.
after his so long and unfortunate a Voyage he fell sick, and died on the
eighth of May 1506.

Mean while, the Affairs of Hispaniola grew more out of order: for Bombadilla
joining with Ximenes, resolved to hoard up a huge Treasure of Gold, though with
the infinite oppression of the Natives: of which King Ferdinand having
intelligence, sent Nicholas Olanda thither with thirty Sail; who being
nominated Viceroy, anchored in forty days before Hispaniola. No sooner
arrived, but Bombadilla and Ximenes fled, leaving their vast Treasure,
amounting to ten hundred thousand Ducats; which guarded with four hundred
Spaniards in twenty four Ships was sent to Spain: but so it happened, that they
were all swallowed up in the main Ocean, none knowing to this day in what
Latitude they were lost.

SECT. VI. Pietro Alponso Nigno his Voyage.
PIetro Nigno, encouraged by some of those that had been with Columbus at the
Isles of Pearl, Rigged out a Ship at his own charge, with special order in his
Commission, that he should not touch on any Coast within fifty Leagues of any
Place Columbus had formerly discovered. But he little observed his Orders, and
what he was commanded; for Sailing into the Haven Curiana, he bartered Shells,
Needles, Glass, and such like Trifles, for abundance of Pearls, which the
Islanders brought aboard, for he himself having but thirty Men, durst not
venture ashore. Twenty days this bartering Trade continued, Orient Pearls for
Toys; Description of Curiana.
but finding at last, that they were a civil and hospitable People, he Landed,
where they entertained him in Hovels built of Wood, and covered with
Palm-Leaves; before their Doors lay great Hills of Oyster-shells, the Fish
being eaten, and the Pearls used for an ornament; Conies, Hares, Pheasants,
Pigeons, Geese, Ducks, Deer, and wild Swine, are their usual Food; and their
Bread is made of the Roots of Trees. Moreover, Curiana abounds with thick and
shady Woods, which resound in the night with the cries and roarings of wild
Beasts: but though they are terrible fierce and voracious, yet the Natives
stoutly venture in amongst the thickest of them, armed only with Bows and
Arrows. The Inhabitants are of Complexion tawny, their Hair long and curled;
their Teeth they keep white with an Herb, which they continually hold betwixt
their Lips. The Women perform their business of Husbandry, Ploughing and
Sowing. The Men are Soldiers, following the business of War: but in Peace their
Exercises are Hunting and Dancing. They keep annual Fairs, where from all Parts
of the Country they bring their Commodities to buy and barter. They have their
Gold from Cauchieta, six days Sail Westward from Curiana.

Thither Nigno next directed his course, and came to an Anchor there on the
first of October, Anno 1500. The Inhabitants entered aboard without the least
shiness, or fear of danger, and brought with them to barter, Gold, Civet-Cats,
Parrots, and Cotton.

These People, though so civil, are extremely jealous of their Wives: for when
a Spaniard made address to one of them, and coming something close, her Husband
stepped in suddenly between, and seemed to forbid the Banns. But coasting onward
along the Shore from thence to another Isle, he found Natives far more wild and
salvage: for two thousand in a Body well Armed, stood ready to intercept their
Landing; wherefore he thought it his safest course to Tack about, and return to
Curiana whence he came.

Nigno Fights with the Cannibals.
In his Way not far from thence, he fell amongst eighteen of the Cannibals
Boats, which according to their custom had been a Man-stealing, and now were so
hardy, that setting upon the Spanish Ship, they suddenly clapped him aboard with
their Canoos on all sides; but being beaten back by the terror of their Guns,
they soon retired: yet the Spaniards took one of the Boats with two Men, all
the rest saving themselves by swimming. One of the two Men lay bound Hand and
Foot, who told them, that he was to have been killed the next day and eaten, as
he saw his Companions, with whose Flesh they banqueting kept a jovial Feast.
Nigno unbinding the Prisoner, gave him leave to do what he pleased with the
taken Cannibal, who falling upon him, cudgel'd and whipped him to death.

Strange Salt.
Then Nigno in his Way to Curiana touched upon the Coast of Paria, where he
found a strange kind of Salt, which the Sea in tempestuous Weather casts on the
Shore, which afterward hardens by the Sun. This Salt must be taken up before
any Rain fall, else it melts and soaks away into the Ground; yet sometimes
grows so hard as a Stone, insomuch that they make Pots and other Vessels of it;
which the Parians barter for foreign Commodities.

Nigno not making here any stay, returned a second time to Curiana, where he
spent twenty days in pleasant Pastimes, being Lodged in a Noble-mans House, at
whose Door was fixed a Cannibals Head, as a Trophy of his Victory. He saw there
also the dead Bodies of diverse eminent Persons set drying at a Fire, so hardened
to be set amongst their Idols. Strange Corpse.


At length Nigno set Sail homewards, and carried with him an invaluable
Treasure in Pearls to Spain: but by the way fell out with his Seamen, because
he kept most of the Purchase to himself, and would not give them their shares,
nay more than that, kept back the fifth part from the King; whereupon being
complained of by Ferdinando de Vega, Governor of Gallicia, he was put in
Prison, and at last sent to the Court, Nigno put in Prison.
where the Pearls were declared free Prize, because Nigno had bartered for them
at Curiana, contrary to the Kings Orders, not to touch at any Coast, within
fifty Leagues of what Columbus had discovered. But since he had no way regarded
those Commands to preserve that Pearl-Trade, King Ferdinand sent Governors to
Curiana, who in his Name should look after, and employ Men for the catching the
Pearl-Oysters. These, accompanied with a considerable number of Soldiers, Cruel
dealings in Curiana.
besides six Monks, forced the Inhabitants to furnish them with abundance of
Pearl: which oppression grew to such a height, that one Morning a great Party
of them conspiring together, fell suddenly upon them, most of them being
massacred: after they had a while insultingly triumphed over the dead Bodies,
and finished; as they thought, their good work (feasting on their Flesh at a
joyful Banquet) those few that escaped Sailed to the Island Dominic, the
Governor of which Didacus Columbus, Son to the famous Christopher, being
incensed, immediately sent Captain Ocampo with three hundred Men to Curiana;
where in his first fury, without distinction of Sex or Age, he slew all he met
with* But because they themselves could not follow the rich Oyster-catching, he
spared some for that purpose, whom he commanded to build twenty five little
Houses, or Hovels, on the Shore, which he called New Toledo. After this they
went on afresh in their Pearl-fishing.

SECT. V. The Voyage of Vincent Agnes Pinzon.
THe first of December, Anno 1499. Vincent Pinzon set Sail with four Vessels
out of the Haven Palos: he had been Commander of a Ship under Columbus in his
first Expedition, by which means he got great experience in Navigation. When he
came a little beyond the Hesperides, he was surprised by a great Storm, which
in three days drove him before a plain Coast; where Landing, he found nothing
but the Footsteps of Men; and in the night he saw great Fires, such as are
generally made in Camps; about daybreak twenty Spaniards marched thither, whom
thirty two Men, armed with Bows and Arrows, made ready to encounter; but as
they approached, the Spaniards proffered them Peace, but they refused all
Composition; yet having faced one another a while, they retreated without
fighting.

After this Pinzon discovered a wide, but shallow River; where Landing, on a
Hill he met a great company of Americans: He, to invite them to Trade, threw
them a Shell; in return for which they cast him a lump of Gold; which when the
Spaniard went to take up they all fell upon him; Pinzon's strange Fight.
and indeed he could not have defended himself long, had not some of his
Company quickly come in to his speedy rescue, which occasioned a bloody
Conflict, wherein several Spaniards were wounded, eight killed, and one of
their small Boats sunk; for the Americans fought so valiantly, that they
pursued the Spanish Ships into the Sea. Pinzon being at last freed of these
Assailants, got into a fresh water Sea, caused by the confluence of many Rivers
falling in there: from hence he got sight of the Parian Coast, and with
admiration beheld a Tree which sixteen Men could not compass: Between these
Trees he saw as strange a Monster, A remarkable Beast.
the foremost part resembling a Fox, the hinder a Monkey, the Feet were like a
Man's, with Ears like an Owl; under whose Belly hung a great Bag, in which it
carried the Young, which they drop not, nor forsake till they can feed
themselves. Pinzon caught one of them with three Young, which died in the
Voyage, but the Dam he presented alive Granada to the King.

This Captain having Sailed six hundred Leagues along the Parian Coast, Great
Storm.
in a great Tempest two of his Carvils in his view were overset, their Keels
turned upward; the third driven from her Anchor, and the fourth so shaken, and
full of Leaks, that ready to sink they ran her ashore to save their lives; and
though he escaped himself the danger of drowning, then being ashore, yet he was
no ways freed from far greater inconveniences; for he saw nothing but death
either for want of Provisions, or barbarousness of the Inhabitants: whereupon
they resolved to free themselves of their miseries by self-slaughter, killing
one another; but some better advised to spend their Lives like Christians upon
the unbelieving Salvages: Whilst they were in this desperate condition, the
Storm ceased, and Providence presented their safety, the Ship driving in before
the Wind; at which every one taking fresh courage, they mended the two
shattered Ships as well as they could; wherein venturing to Sea, and setting
Sail, they came on the last of September, Anno 1500. into the Spanish Haven
Palos.

SECT. V. The Expedition of Americus Vesputius.
AMericus Vesputius a Florentine, Commanded four Ships, fitted out at King
Ferdinand's Charge, set Sail the twentieth of May, Anno 1497. and refreshing at
the Canaries, from thence he steered to Paria; where he so much gained upon the
Inhabitants, that for Pins, Bells, Looking-glasses, and other Trifles, they
daily brought aboard in Barter great store of Gold, the best of Merchandise.

The manner of the Inhabitants in Paria.
These People, both Men and Women go stark naked, not so much as covering their
Pudenda; their Complexion swarthy; they shave off all their Hair, only some
Women leave a Tuft on their Heads. From their Faces, being broad and flat, one
may judge them to be derived from Tartary; they much exceed the Europeans in
Running and Swimming, insomuch that the Women oftentimes without any Boats, or
floating pieces of Timber, venture two or three Leagues into the Sea; they have
so great skill in Shooting, that they exceed almost all other Nations, having
Arrows headed with sharp Fishbones; they also use Lances and Clubs. The Women
follow the Men in the Wars, and serve in stead of Horses to carry Ammunition
and other Necessaries; to which Labor they are so used, that they will bear on
their Shoulders forty, nay fifty Leagues together, such Luggage, as three
Spaniards are scarce able to lift from the Ground. Their strange Customs.
They acknowledge no Commander or Superior either in Wars or Government; they
keep up old Feuds, fighting with an inveterate hatred against their Neighbors,
upon ancient scores and revenges, still kept in memory of their Relations slain
in former Battles; and also still creating fresh animosities upon their Losses
in later Engagements. Their Language is smooth and pleasing, being spoken with
a kind of lisping, and absolutely different from the neighboring Nations. When
they eat they sit upon the Ground, and sleeping lie in Hammocks, each end
whereof being fastened to a Post; underneath they kindle a Fire; over them they
hang Fish-nets and Hooks, Fish-baskets and Calabashes. When they have occasion
to ease Nature by evacuation, they retire into some private Place; but the
Women think it no immodesty to make Water, even in the presence of strange Men.
They observe riot single Matrimony; for every Man takes as many Women as he
pleases, under bonds of Wedlock such and so slight, that he turns them off at
his pleasure: and Women take the same liberty in casheering their Husbands when
not pleasing them. They bring forth Children with little or no pain, and wash
them in a River so soon as born; which done they return to their usual work and
business. When they are incensed against their Husbands, they revenge
themselves by poisoning their Children. Their Houses are built in the fashion
of a House-clock, with a Roof raised from the Wall upon four Pillars like the
Bell, and covered with Palm-Leaves; some of which are so big, that they afford
room for six hundred Men: every seventh or eighth year they remove, because (as
they say) the Air is oftentimes infected by Men's Breaths, by their long
continuance in one place. Their Riches consist in Feathers of diverse colors,
Strings of Fish-bones intermingled with green and white Beads, with which they
adorn their Heads, Arms, Legs, Ears, and Cheeks: Gold and Pearls they make
little account of; and as to Trade and Commerce portrait of Amerigo Vespucci
AMERICUS VESPUTIUS

with other People, they know not what belongs to it. Their greatest Friendship
consists in prostituting their Daughters or Wives to one another. Their Dead
they bury in moist Grounds, and put with them both Meat and Drink into the
Graves: When any Person grows very weak by lingering Sickness, they carry the
Diseased into a neighboring Wood, where they lay him in a Silk Hammock, tied
between two Trees; then dancing the whole day about him, at night they set
Bread and Water enough by him to last four days, and then departing look no
more after him, who thus neglected seldom escape: but if so it happen that one
recover, all his Relations for the future honor him as a god. When any one
falls into a Fever, his Friends immediately bathe him in cold Water, and
afterward set him before a great Fire, then drive him before them till he
falls down almost breathless, and at last put him to Bed. They neither Let
blood in the Arms nor Feet, but in their Sides and Calves of their Legs.
Sometime they fast four days together, which they suppose a great means to
preserve their Health. Their Bread consists of a sort of Fruit called Jucha,
Chambi, or Igname. Laftly, no Lion devours his Prey with more voracious
eagerness, than they their taken Enemies.

Vesputius being fully informed concerning the Situation of Paria, weighed
Anchor, and on the sixth day after entered a convenient Harbor, where going
ashore, he found twenty Houses built in the middle of a Lake on great Posts: A
very strange Village built on Poles.
every House had a Drawbridge, over which they passed from one to the other.
So soon as the Inhabitants set eye on the Spaniards, they immediately drew up
their Bridges: yet some of them in twelve little Canoos came toward the
Spanish Ships, but amazed to see their Looms so big, durst not, though haled
with signs, to come aboard, but hasted away to a high Mountain; yet seemed to
signify that they would return, as indeed they did, bringing sixteen Maids
along with them, of which they put four into a Spanish Boat, themselves in the
interim rowing between the Ships from one to another, showing all tokens of
friendship, Strange Fight.
when on a sudden a Company of old Women came running to the Shore, and tearing
the Hair from their Heads, made a terrible noise and exclamation, expressing
the greatest sorrow they could possible: whereupon the four Indian Maids
suddenly leaped overboard, and the Men shot abundance of Arrows out of their
Boats at the Ships; nay, some of them swimming under Water, endeavored to sink
the Cock-boats which were made fast behind their Ships. Upon this sudden Onset
the Spaniards making use of their Guns, quickly lessened the number of the
Assailants, insomuch that they fled to the Shore; yet five of them being
overtaken, were carried Prisoners aboard.

Vesputius observing these their misdemeaning Carriages, judged it no way
convenient to stay any longer among such barbarous and deceitful Salvages: but
having weighed Anchor, and Sailed eighty Leagues along the Coast, he ran into
another convenient Haven, whose Shore swarmed with People, which on a sudden
running away, hid themselves in a neighboring Wood.

Serpents strangely prepared for Food.
Here the Spaniards Landing were amazed, when in their Huts they saw Snakes and
Serpents roasting before a Fire, whereof one had Wings, and another whose Mouth
was tied together with a Rope, stared with open eyes in a frightful manner.

Here they left several Trifles to entice the fled Natives to correspond with
them. And this their Design proved successful; for the next day the Americans
came aboard without the least fear, and offered to show their hospitable
kindness to the Spaniards, if they pleased to travel three days Journey with
them up into the Country, telling them, they had only raised those few Huts
by the Seaside for a small time whilst they Fished in those Parts.

The remarkable reception of twenty three Spaniards.
About twenty of the Spaniards well Armed resolved to undertake the Journey; and
traveling over Hills, Dales, and Rivers, they came at last into a Village
consisting of nine of the forementioned Houses, but mightily peopled* where
they were in a wonderful manner received by their glad welcomes, by Dancing,
Singing, Hunting, and other joyful Acclamations, presenting their Wives and
Daughters, as the chiefest part of their hospitality, to caress the Strangers
at their pleasure. The news was no sooner spread, but the adjacent Villages
came in throngs to gaze upon, and salute the Strangers, inviting them also to
their Towns. The Spaniards taking it in good part, spent nine days among them,
highly treated with all manner of jollities, but especially at their choice
with the varieties of Venus: from thence then returning to their Fleet,
accompanied with thousands of the Natives, every one carrying Presents to the
Admiral Vesputius of whom as many as they could at once receive, they
entertaining aboard, then dismissed them, and admitted others; but the Guns
going off, they suddenly leaped from the Decks, and dived like Ducks under
Water: But afterward being informed, that such thunderclaps were sent them
from Heaven to destroy their Enemies, they were somewhat better satisfied, and
called the Spaniards, Charabi, that is, Wise Men.

This Island lying in the Mexican Bay, in twenty Degrees of Northern Latitude,
Vesputius left on his Starboard, and Sailed along a Meandring Coast (which he
always kept in sight) eight hundred and sixty Leagues, and at last entered a
Haven, the like whereof he had not seen before. Here he spent a Month in
repairing his Ships, to which the Inhabitants freely gave their assistance; and
among other things complained, that a salvage People came yearly thither from
an Island about a hundred Leagues distant, who fell upon them with horrible
rage, and whomsoever they took they eat, but first inflicted all manner of
tortures upon them, sparing none, but together murdering aged People and
sucking Infants; wherefore they craved assistance to be revenged, which if the
Spaniards would grant, they would follow the Fleet with their Boats. Vesputius
promised his aid to destroy such a blood-thirsty People; and to assure them
that he would perform his Word, he ordered seven of them to go in Canoos before
and show them the Way. On the seventh day they came to an Anchor before the
Island Hy, where the Shore was guarded with naked Men, whose Bodies being
strong and brawny, were painted, and their Arms, Legs, and Head, adorned with
diverse colored Plumes, having not only offensive Weapons, as Bows, Arrows,
and Lances, but also defensive, huge Targets, and square Shields. So soon as
they judged the approaching Spaniards to be within reach, A cruel Fight with
the Cannibals.
they shot a great flight of Arrows at them; but Vesputius lying close along
the Shore with his Ships, fired upon them with Chain-shot, which did great
execution: yet notwithstanding about forty Spaniards leaping ashore out of
their Boats, found themselves in no small danger; for the Cannibals upon the
sound of Horns flocking together, so pressed upon them that they were forced to
lay aside their Gans, and fall to Blows, and had not timely assistance come to
them, they had undoubtedly been all slain: two hours the Victory was doubtful
on whose side it would fall; yet at last the Cannibals quitting the Field, left
the Spaniards Victors; who the next day pursued their gotten Victory with such
success, that they drove their Enemies before them, burnt their Villages and
Boats, and carried two hundred and two and twenty of them Prisoners to Spain,
where they safely arrived the 15. of November, Anno 1498.

Vesputius second Expedition.
This good success so encouraged Vesputius, that having stayed scarce seven
Months ashore, he obtaining the Command over six Ships, with which he set Sail
from Cadiz, and touching upon the Canaries, Steered from thence Southerly; and
having Sailed five hundred Leagues, he discovered a Country overflowed and
made Marishy by great Rivers, and abounding with Trees, but saw no sign of any
Inhabitants; yet not long after, coming before an Island, he took a Boat with
two Prisoners, newly guelt, and sent as a Present to feast the Cannibals, which
refused to Treat on any other account whatsoever; wherefore he Sailed eighty
Leagues forward along the Shore of an unknown Island, where he Bartered for
some Gold, and got five hundred Pearls for one single Shell; these Pearls, the
Inhabitants said were not found there, but taken from their Neighboring
Enemies, which lived Westward, and had abundance of them.

Strange constitution of, a salvage people.
Nothing worthy of remark happened in this Voyage, only the strange
constitutions of a wild People, living on a barren Isle, deserve to be
mentioned.

About their Necks hung two hollow Vessels, the one full of white stamped
Worts, and Herbs; and the other, full of Grass, which they greedily crammed into
their Mouths, feeding like Cattle; then a Stick wetted with Spittle, they put
into the bruised Herbs, taking upon the end of it, as upon the point of a
Knife, some of the bruised to their Mouths, which (as if chawing the Cud)
turning therein, then taking out again, and strowing more of the same Herbs out
of the Vessel upon it, swallowed it down. No fresh Water was to be had amongst
them, but what they gathered from the Dew in great Leaves: Neither had they any
Houses, but dwelt under great Trees, and fed on dried Fish.

Strange adventure of nine Spaniards, meeting with great Giants.
The next remark in this Voyage, was the discovery of an Island not far from the
former, where he found the Footsteps of a Gigantick People, upon which nine
Spaniards went a League to search the Country, where they saw five great Huts,
standing in a spacious Valley, and in them two old, and three young Women, each
of them being twice as tall as an ordinary Man: The old ones invited the
Spaniards to eat, who when they were fat down, consulting how they might take
and carry one of these Giantesses to Spain, there to show her for Money, thirty
six Giants came in to them, (never did the Sun shine on a more terrible People)
which so amazed the Spaniards, that their Hair seemed to stand an end at the
fear thereof: Every Giant was armed with a Bow and Arrows, and a Club: They
wondering at the nine strangers, stood talking very earnestly one to another,
which gave the Spaniards time to think of making their escape; some judged it
convenient to discharge their Guns upon them, and in the Smoke to run away;
others thought, that it would be better to take a milder course, which they all
agreed on; and taking their leave, went out of the Hut, but were followed by
the Giants, who kept a Stones cast behind them, and went faster or slower, as
the Spaniards slackened or mended their pace; who at last getting to the Shore,
and from thence into their Boats, they suddenly put off; but the Giants then
pursued them with eager speed, all of them leaping into the Water, and
Swimming, shot abundance of Arrows after them; but frighted by the Thunder of
two great Guns that were discharged from the Ships, returned ashore, and fled
into the neighboring Hills.

Vesputius at last began to consider of returning home, his Provisions
beginning to grow scarce, and his Seamen faint, having continued in the
Equinoctial heats a whole year; wherefore he directed his course toward Spain,
in his Voyage, driving along the Coast an advantageous Trade, by bartering
Shells and Glass for Pearls. Description of the Pearl-Oysters.
The Inhabitants presented him with Oysters, of which some enclosed one hundred
and thirty Pearls; when they attain to their full growth, they fall out of the
Shells themselves, but those that stick, decay. So upon the tenth of November,
the Fleet came safe to an Anchor before Cadiz. After which, Vesputius third
Expedition.
Vesputius retired to Sevil, with intent to settle himself there, but he had
not long reposed, when Emanuel King of Portugal sent for him to Lisbon, and
gave him the Command of three Ships, to discover new Countries; between the
Canaries and Africa, they passed through so many Fishes (not unlike a Bream)
that in an hours time they loaded their Boats with them; this Fish has a
round, thin Scale, sharp Teeth, Stones in their Brains or Foreheads, a sharp
pointed Heart, a Bladder full of Wind, red Tail and Fins, feeds on Sea Weeds,
Gurnets and Oysters, and is of a delicious Taste.

From thence, five degrees Southward of the Equinox, he found a naked People on
the top of a high Rock, that beckoned the Spaniards to come toward them; upon
which, two of them resolved to venture thither, having order not to stay at the
most above five days: Cruel deed of some Indian Women.
The first encounter they had was of some Women, who offered their bodies to
prostitution; but a Youth, as if affrighted with some sudden danger, came
running amongst them, whom, whilst they stood gazing upon, and wondering at, an
old Woman with a great Club, running down the Hill overtook, and knocked him
down dead upon the ground; which done, the Women that were making Court to the
Spaniards, took him by the Heels, and dragged up the Hill, where soon after
they saw him chopped in pieces, Broyl'd, and eaten: They also made signs to the
Spaniards, that they would devour them also in the same manner. The Shore was
crowded with Men, which showered upon them several flights of Arrows; wherefore
they thought it best to Weigh Anchor, so taking Aboard their two Men, and
having Sailed 150. Leagues, they got sight of the Coast of Brasile, along which
he Sailed Southerly to fifty two Degrees, where three Brasilians came Aboard of
their own accord, and were easily persuaded to go with him to Portugal; but the
Weather growing very bad, and the Cold intolerable, the Storms swelling the
Waves into the bigness of Mountains, Vesputius left the Coast des Patagones,
and the Streights, afterward called Magellan, behind him, burnt one of his
Ships before Cape Sierra Leona, and brought two safe to Lisbon.

Vesputius fourth Expedition.
His fourth Expedition happened, May 10. Anno 1503. at which time he Steered
directly with six Sail to Sierra Leona, and approaching the Coast, could not
come to an Anchor, because of the strong eddying Currents: Three Degrees beyond
the Equinox appeared a rising Island, two Leagues long, and one broad,
destitute of Inhabitants; his best Ship being six hundred Tun, split here
against a Rock, and nothing of her was saved, but the Seamen: But Vesputius
Rowing ashore with a Boat, found a convenient Haven, with abundance of sweet
Water, Sea-Spiders, and Dragons.
high Trees, Sea-Spiders, and horrible Dragons, which have a sharp Head, round
fiery Eyes, and wide Mouths, Wings not unlike a Bats, a speckled Breast, curled
Tail, blew Back, and two Bags like a drawn Satchel Triangular, were under their
Bellies: No less strange are the Sea-Spiders, by their hard Feet, long upper
Teeth, two long Sheers or Pinchers, and double Belly; between the Head and the
Belly lies a black Skin, with which they darken the Water; when any one goes to
take them in the night, they make a great shadow; they feed on Fish, the Female
lays little white Eggs, not unlike ordinary Hailstones.

Vesputius having left this desolate Isle, three hundred Leagues a Stern,
entered a Haven, to which he gave the name of St. Abdy, where he stayed two
Months, expecting the return of those which he had sent into the Country; but
seeing it in vain to wait any longer, he proceeded on his Journey, and Sailing
in between the Abrelhos, in the River Curubabo, he built a strong Fort,
Garrisoned it with twenty four Men, twelve pieces of Ordnance, and Provisions
for six Months: Five Months Vesputius had spent in the building this Castle;
when he returned home with one Ship, laden with Brasill Wood, where approaching
Lisbon, beyond all expectation, the Inhabitants of the City ran to Congratulate
his happy return. And from this Americus Vesputius, the New World is to this
day called America.

SECT. VII. The Expedition of Alphonso, Fogeda, Diego Nicuesa, Ancisus, and
Roderick Colmenares.
AMericus Vesputius was scarce fitted out in Lisbon, when Fogeda set Sail with
three hundred Men from Beata, the chiefest Haven of Hispaniola, to the Island
Codego, inhabited by Naked People, but of comely Personage, and withal expert
and most excellent Archers: Here he found a very strange Tree, Wonderful Tree
on Codego.
which bears a Fruit not unpleasing to the Palate, yet deadly Poison, and
besides, whoever chances to sleep under their shadow, loose both their
understanding and Eyesight, and never attain to their former Senses, except
they take some Opiates, as dangerous, and so by long sleep, recover.

Fogedo's cruelty and destruction.
Here Fogeda set upon a poor Village near the Seaside, where without mercy he
put them all to the Sword, except a few Youths which were only saved, that
they might inform Fogeda, what was become of the slain and taken Spaniards; Who
told him, that according to their Custom, they had Roasted the dead, and also
their living Prisoners, and feasted on their Flesh. Here having burnt the
Houses, and sifting the Ashes, Nicuesa found some Gold. But now they began to
be distressed for Provisions; for prevention of which, Nicuesa had given order
to Ancisus, Marshal in Hispaniola that he should follow with a Ship of Victual,
Famine.
for the Army to Codega. But he being kept back by inconveniences, most of the
Spaniards were famished, so that the three hundred Men which Codega brought
from Hispaniola, were reduced to sixty. And he was already under-Sail to
Hispaniola, when Ancisus Anchored in the Haven of Codegoos, and sent some Men
ashore to mend his Boat, and fetch fresh Water, which whilst they were doing,
the Natives came flocking about them: Three days they faced one another,
Strange accident.
using no Hostility, when at last a Spaniard that understood the Codegan
Tongue, adventuring to fetch Water, he was immediately encompassed; when
speaking to them, and informing them in their own Language, That he was none of
Fogedas or Nicuesas People, which not long since had committed so great
slaughter, they left him, and the rather, because he told them, that Ancisus
would take revenge on them, if they did any wrong to him. Thus quieted, they
brought all sorts of Provisions Aboard. Mean while, Ancisus Sailed to the Main
Continent Uraba, Ancisus escapes great danger.
where in the Mouth of a Haven he ran his Vessel a-ground, which was bilg'd;
the Seamen taking some Arms along with them, saved their lives by swimming
ashore; where, their first sustenance they found was store of Peaches and
Cherries, which was a great refreshment in those hot Countries, but yet had
undoubtedly been starved, but that in searching the Wood for Fruits, they found
Wild-Swine, which preserved their lives; yet they were not free from apparent
danger, having to deal with a Salvage People, into whose hands they were so
unfortunately cast by Shipwreck; however Ancisus set a good face on the
business, marching with a hundred Men up into the Country, where some of the
Urabanners from an ambuscade unawares, with their Arrows wounded several of his
Men, hereupon they retreated to the Shore of the River Daria, whither also they
had brought the small Boats, saved from the Wreck; where whilst they were in
consultation how to return to Hispaniola, the Inhabitants having mustered
themselves, and making a Body of five hundred Men, set upon them, who after a
sharp Conflict, made them retreat, and at last to fly, whom Ancisus pursuing,
found in a Thicket of Canes or Reeds a great Treasure of Gold. Mean while,
Nicuesa Sailed to the plentiful Golden Country Veragua with three Ships, of
which, he lost two, the one Commanded by Lupus de Olana, and the other by Peter
Umbria Olana, which was stranded in the River Veragua, which gives name to the
whole Island, but he built a new Carvil, whereas that of Lupus Olana was bilg'd
among the Rocks. Little better success had Nicuesa, whose Ship over-turning
with a Tempest, he with a few of his Men made land upon Veragua, where he
ranged up and down in a miserable condition, on a barren, and in a manner
desolate Shore seventy days: All that time, finding no other Food than Wild
Roots, who wandering up and down, at last met with Olana, a little before cast
away on the same Isle, whom he secured, because he presumed to usurp the Title,
and be prime Commander of that Country. Upon which, the Spaniards being
divided, some for Ancisus, some for Olana, the difference more and more
increasing, would not be reconciled, till the Famine over-powering, mastered
both, so that not being able to handle their Arms, the Salvages slew them at
their pleasure, by this means in a short time, of seven hundred eighty five,
remained scarce ninety; yet did not all this misery work any thing upon the
ambitious humor of Vasques Nunnez, who rebelling against Ancisus, split that
small remainder of Men, and with the help of those he had drawn over to his
Party, made himself Governor of Uraba, not possible to be long enjoyed without
speedy supply, which soon after they received; for Colmenares Sailing from
Hispaniola with Provisions, Colmenares Expedition.
arrived there the 15. of October, Anno 1510. having been tossed twenty three
days at Sea; then making into the River Gaira, to furnish himself with fresh
Water, he lost forty seven Men; for whilst they were filling their Casks, seven
hundred of the Salvages came down upon them, and with their Poisoned Arrows
wounded and killed most of them. His strange reception.
Colmenares came in a good time to the remainder under Ancisus Command, being
in danger of death for want of Provisions, and finding the factions that were
among them about Superiority, he thought it fit, consulting with some of the
chiefest of them, to find out Nicuesa, who was indeed the Governor that had the
Grant from the King: This agreed, Colmenares went to search, and at last
lighted upon him, building a Fortress against the assaults of the Enemies on
the Promontory. Mormor, he was glad to find him, but grieved to see the misery
and hardship they endured, most of his Men being killed, partly by the
excessive Heats, partly by Famine, and partly by the cruelty of the Natives, so
that he had only sixty remaining, and those many of them also sick and weak.

Colmenares having delivered his Message, Nicuesa broke up his Quarters, and
sleighting the Fort, went with him, but both himself and his Men were opposed
from Landing by Nunnez; wherefore Nicuesa was necessitated to Steer for
Hispaniola; whom, or what became of him was never known.

Nunnez having thus quitted himself of Nicuesa, and now, more than ever,
wanting Provision, he resolved to take out his own Commission at large, and
setting up for himself, make no discrimination of Persons, Spaniards, or
Natives, but to make out his Fortune.

And first, he fell upon Careta King of Coita, whom he took Prisoner,
Plundering him of all his Treasure and Provisions; yet this sufficed not long,
for soon after, King Poncha invading Careta, Nunnez took hold of that
opportunity, and pretending to assist Careta, being well recruited with his
Forces, set upon Poncha, who immediately fled, and left all to the spoil of his
Enemies.

This News so amazed Comogrus, another King, that he proffered Peace;
Remarkable Palace of King Comogrus.
whereupon Nunnez going thither, was nobly entertained in his Palace, being one
hundred and fifty Paces long, and eighty broad, the Floors Paved with Stone,
and the Roofs Vaulted, his Cellars were stored with Wine, made of the Root
Jucca, Ages, and Mais; the Privy-Chamber was hung round with dead bodies,
Mummy'd artificially with Lent Fires, and were the Corpses of Comogrus
Ancestors, and others of the Royal Blood, and nearest Relations, of whom some
died at least four hundred years before; each of these fastened by Cordage made
of Reeds, were Habited in Cotton, richly adorned with Pearls and Gold. Mean
while, a Hurricane happening, terrible with Thunder and Lightning, and hideous
Gusts, swelled and so enraged the Sea, that breaking its bounds, overrunning,
drowned the whole Champain; thus the hopes of a fruitful Harvest being utterly
lost, they suffered under a great Famine.

The Spaniards which Encamped near the River Daria, on Uraba, perceiving this,
and knowing they had no manner of supply from Hispaniola, and having already
Pillaged the Neighboring Kings, that they had nothing left. Nunnez marching
thirty Leagues up the River, Nunnez Exploits.
Plundered the Village, of which Daibaiba was King, where he found an
unvaluable quantity of Gold, but little or no Provision. Here were many Flitter
Mice, or Bats, bigger than Turtle Doves, whose biting was mortal, unless
immediately washed with Salt Water, according to the information of the
Prisoners.

Now as Nunnez Uraba Pillaged toward the South, so did Colmenares, setting up
also for himself, make prize of all, to the East with sixty Men, Rowing against
the Stream up the River Daria, above twelve Leagues, where he found in several
Villages and Hamlets, and at King Turvi's Palace, abundance, both of Provision
and Gold; from thence he Marched to the mighty Province Abenamchei, which
though making some resistance, at last they subdued.

A strange Palace built on Trees.
And the neighboring King Abibeiba narrowly escaped the like fortune, whose
Palace was built on the tops of Trees, Plash'd, and Pleited together, Timber
Beams lying athwart; necessity forcing them to choose such high Habitations,
partly, to avoid the Inundations of Rivers, swollen above their bounds by sudden
and almost assiduous Showers from the Mountains; Turning the low Land into a
Sea.
and partly, to be free from the excursions of sculking Robbers; also being
better able to defend themselves in these Castles in the Air, and also secured
by their height from their Shot, being above the reach of their Indian Arrows:
The bodies of the Trees downwards, upon which the Houses are built, are
generally twenty four Fathom thick, so that they cannot easily be cut down, nor
fired; but Colmenares against these, as they supposed, impregnable Forts,
having made a Gallery with several great Hurdles, set his Men to work under
that safeguard, with Axes on the Tree whereon Abibeiba's House stood, who
seeing his imminent danger, wondering at this new manner of Storming, came down,
promising to furnish him with Gold out of the neighboring Mountains,
notwithstanding it would be with the danger of his Life; because the Cannibals
generally kill those that adventured to dig in the Mines: To this promise,
Colmenares hearkened, A Plot on the Sparniards, strangely discovered.
and having set him at liberty, for the performance, he in stead thereof, on
the contrary, stirred up, and joined with all the Conquered Kings, to destroy
him and his Men: Nor were they slack to have executed their design, five
thousand of them being already drawn together at the Village Tirichi, the
appointed place of Rendezvous, and so privately carried, that undoubtedly it
had been effected, if not happily discovered by this accident.

Nunnez, amongst his other Slavesses, had one exceeding beautiful, on which he
was much Enamored, and she likewise seemed to bear as great an affection
toward him, which she manifested, by declaring the secret to Nunnez which her
Brother had imparted to her, being an intended general Massacre the night
following, that so she might the better make her escape the day before; yet so
much she preferred the safety of her Lover, before the liberty of her Native
Country, that she discovered the Plot. Nunnez not sleeping on this advice, on
a sudden set so fiercely upon the Conspirators, that he utterly broke their
design; yet the Feuds and Contests for Superiority still continued amongst
them, which looked with so had a Face to the ruin of all, that news thereof
arriving in Spain, it was judged fit to send for Colmenares, and John Quicedo
to the Court, there to render an account of all their Transactions, Both going
Aboard a small Vessel, were by Storm driven on the Coast of Cuba, where they
were informed from a Prisoner, that Valdivia and Zamudio, driven ashore by
Shipwreck, and not able to defend themselves, were surpised by the Natives,
killed and eaten; that Fogeda driven up and down along the Coast, had lost most
of his People by hunger, and other hirdship, and himself with much ado getting
to Hispaniola, died as soon as Landed of the Wound which he received by a
Poisonous Arrow, near the River Daria.

Ancisus Voyage.
But much happier was Ancisus, who soon after Fogeda coming to Cuba, found a
King, who suffered himself to be Christened, and called Commendator; and
building a Church, Consecrated it to the Virgin Mary; A Temple dedicated to the
Virgin Mary on the Island Cuba.
in it he erected an Image of Clay, resembling a Woman, which he clothed in a
Cotton Garment; round about were placed Pots with Meat and Water, according to
their old Idolatrous fashion, otherwise, they believed their Idols would devour
the Souls of the Dead, and this, though Christians, they did not forget.

Nay further, when he went to War, he carried the Image of the Virgin Mary with
him in the Front of his Army, often saying, Ave Maria; and this was the end of
that Voyage: But afterward Ancisus complained against Vascus Nunnez in the
Spanish Court, where he received a Sentence very prejudicial to him. Colmenares
and Quicedo had also Audience there, whereupon matters being settled, a firm
Government was established in Uraba.

SECT. VIII. Peter Arias his Expedition, and remarkable Passages of Vascus
Nunnez.
PEter Arias Knight, accompanied with his Wife, Elizabeth Boadilla, set Sail
Anno 1514. but surpised by a violent Storm, lost two Ships, and returned to
Spain, yet not long after began his Voyage afresh, notwithstanding he had
lately had such bad success, and heard of the great hardship which Nicuesa
suffered, Nicuesa suffers hunger.
having not only kept himself alive a considerable time by feeding on flesh of
Dogs, and other such like Creatures; a great Frog being sold in Veragua for a
lump of Gold.

But Vaschus Nunnez informed of Arias arrival, the chief Governor of Uraba,
afterward called New Andaluzia, minding to enrich himself before he should
depose him, and hearing that several Gold Mines lay Southward from Uraba,
marched thither with a hundred and ninety Men, through great Rivers, Thickets,
and Woods full of Wild Beasts, deep Valleys, and broad Rivers, not without many
hazards and difficulties. In the Mountainous Territory Quarequan, the
Inhabitants engaged him valiantly, with Bows, Arrows, Clubs, Wooden Swords,
Pikes and Lances, but frighted with the mere report of their Muskets, like
flocks of wild Fowl, dissipated and fled, but not so fast, but that six hundred
of them fell by the hands of the Spaniards, or were worried by their Dogs,
trained up on purpose for the American Wars. Soon after, Dogs used in the Wars.
coming into the Palace, there sat his Brother dressed up in Women's Apparel,
whom the King kept to abuse, as if a Concubine; whereof Nunnez being informed,
in detestation of Sodomy, set the Dogs upon him, who suddenly tore him in
pieces. Sodomy horribly punished.
Amongst the slain were found several Negroes, which suffering Shipwreck had
been cast on the American Shore, and maintained a continual War with the
Quaraquanen, so that it seemed the Blacks which were found dead amongst them
were their Slaves: Yet Nunnez was forced to leave a considerable number of his
Men here, who being half starved, and quite tired out, were not able to follow
him; but with the remaining party he marched on, Nunnez first discovers the
South Sea.
and at last came to the high Mountains, from whence he saw the great
South Sea, and going thither, was met by King Chiapes, leading an Army of
thirty thousand Men, which great Body stood not long to make resistance, being
terrified with the Vollyes of Shot, whose Report the ecchoing Valleys presented
to their Ears, double and trebble: And that which most amazed and disanimated
them in the rout, were the Dogs, who fiercely pursued and seized the flyers,
tearing away great morsels of Flesh. After the Battle, the Conqueror proffered
Peace, which was agreed on, upon the delivery of several great Presents of
Gold. After that, Chiapes the King, accompanied with Nunnez the Spanish
Commander, and Marched with him over a broad River to Coquera, where at first
some Forces made resistance, but were routed; whereupon, they also suddenly
struck up a Peace, upon conditions, that the Prince, named also Coquera, should
return him a great quantity of Gold. Is in great danger on the South Sea.
Here he found a handsome Bay running up in crooked Reaches, above sixty
Leagues, which Nunnez called St. Michael, being sprinkled with Islands, and
treacherous with hidden Rocks. There Nunnez, (though dissuaded by Chiapes,
because he knew the South Sea at that time being the three last Months of the
Year, was exceeding turbulent, that no Vessel could hardly live in it, yet)
ventured with nine Indian Boats, and eighty Men from the Shore into the Offin;
where, notwithstanding the high rolling of the Waves, he got to an uninhabited
Island, on which, being necessitated to stay a night, the Tide flowed so much,
according to the property of the South Sea, that the highest Ground thereon,
lay almost covered with Water, every one of the Spaniards having enough to do
to save themselves from being washed away. Day approaching, discovered a second
inconveniency, for the Indian Canoos either were extremely Leaky, or else so
shattered, that they were unfit for service; yet notwithstanding all this, they
ventured to return, rather choosing to be devoured in the Waves, than die of
that hunger, whose misery they had sufficiently tasted, during the small time
they had been out. Not long after, Nunnez Conquered the King Tamaccus in a
Field Battle, who thereupon purchased his Peace with great Presents of Gold and
Pearl. He also showed the Spaniards an Island, whose spiring tops were seen
from the Main Land, which so abounded in Pearls, that in no place were either
more or fairer to be found: But the King who lived on it was exceeding powerful.

Nunnez immediately resolved to Sail thither, notwithstanding it was the middle
of October, when the South-East Winds make such a turbulent and hollow Sea, as
many times washed away Trees and pieces of Rocks: Besides, the Weather was more
terrible, by continual Lightning and great Thunderclaps; the Nights very cold;
the Days exceeding hot; yet all these difficulties could not prevail, for
Nunnez would not stay to expect fairer Weather, but went on, and coming
thither, he saw how the Indians Fish for Pearls, Manner of Fishing for Pearls.
which was Diving for Oysters; but the Weather being rough and foul, they durst
not venture for the best which lay far from the Shore.

Nunnez returns.
But Nunnez leaving his sick and wearied Men with Chiapes, Marched quite another
way back than he came; and crossing a great River, was received by Prince
Teaocha, who furnished him with Gold, Pearls, Provisions, and Guides, which
carried his Luggage and Goods.

Pacra, a great Oppressor of all his Neighbors, hearing of the approach of
Nunnez, fled, but terrified with threats, returned with three other Princes,
which were all so Deformed, that more horrible Monsters were never seen, scarce
any part about them resembling those of a Man: Pacra a tyrannous King, his
horrible death.
The Guides which Teaocha had provided for the Spaniard desired that he might
be put to Death, for the Cruelties which he had long committed; whose Request
being granted, he with the other three Princes, were given as a Breakfast to
the Spanish Dogs. Mean while, the Spaniards were in danger to have perished
for want of Water; yet at last, in a Thicket of Brambles, they found a small
Brook, but none of the Indians durst venture to go to it, for fear of Tigers,
and other Wild Beasts; relating, That the Tigers took many people in the nights
out of their Huts, if they were not careful in making fast their Doors.

Strange relation of Tiger.
John Ledesma had himself eaten part of a Tiger, which for six Months
together, had every night feasted on Man's flesh, or Beasts, which they caught
in this manner: In the Path along which he passed, coming out of his Den to
seek for Prey, a deep Pit was dug, and covered very slightly on the top,
into which the Tiger fell; yet though taken, so fiercely withstood the Pikes,
Darts, and Stones thrown at him, that every one was amazed to see the fury of
the Beast. After that they sought for the Female, but found only two young
ones without a Dam, which taking along with them, they put Iron Collars about
their Necks, intending to carry them to Spain; but seeing no likelihood of
breeding them up, they brought them back again, purposing to fetch them away
when grown somewhat older, and accordingly coming afterward to look for them,
they found the Den empty, so that it was supposed they had been devoured by
their Dam.

Nunnez further Journey into the Country, very remarkable.
In the Province of Bononiama, the Spaniards enriched themselves with Chains,
and Breast-Plates of Gold, which in great plenty hung on the Walls in every
House: At the River Comogrus, they discharged Teaocha's Guides, and made use of
Cotog and Ciuriza, two Governors of a barren Tract of Land, full of Hills and
Mountains, which they left on their right Hand, and wandered three days over a
Morasse, in which they often sunk to their Knees.

In all these Travels, Victual was so scarce that they were much weakened by
their wants; and though they took fresh courage when they got footing on King
Buchebua's Jurisdiction, yet they found nothing but empty Huts; and the like in
the Country of Chiorisus, both having a little before been pillaged by their
more powerful neighboring Enemies. But although they could not furnish Nunnez
with Provisions, they presented him with weighty Ingots of Gold: but this rich
Metal not able to purchase the least morsel of Bread, drove them into a great
strait; and indeed they had without doubt been all famished, had not
Pocchorosa, mother King, fed them forty days together with stamped Roots. Thus
refreshed, and instigated by Pocchorosa, they broke by night in Tubunama's
Palace, and took him Prisoner with eighty Concubines, who fearing to be put to
death, gave an incredible Treasure of Gold to purchase his Ransom.

Nunnez thus enriched came at last to his People which he had left on the River
Daria, where two Ships sent from Hispaniola rode at an Anchor.

Peter Arias his Voyage, and Fight in the Haven St. Martha.
Whilst things were thus carried in America, Peter Arias Sailed with fifteen
Ships, Manned with fifteen hundred Men, to New Andalusia, by the Islands
Martinina, Guadalupe, and Galanta, all in America: a considerable time he
Sailed through the Sea overgrown with Weeds. Afterward anchoring in the Haven
St. Martha, he received a great repulse from the Natives, who no ways daunted
at the bigness of the Ships, waded up to their Breasts in the Sea, and shot
many great flights of poisonous Arrows at the Spaniards, of whom two being
wounded immediately died. Arias sending some of his Men ashore, they found many
Boats lying full of Nets, made of tough Weeds, and Ropes pleited of Rushes.

In the Haven St. Martha, being three Leagues wide, are abundance of Fish,
which may be seen under Water twenty Fathom deep.

But now the Spaniards that were ashore breaking into the Houses, and taking
Women and Children Prisoners, the Americans prepared for another Fight, which
at the beginning was very fierce; but at last they were forced to quit the
Field.

Strange Houses and Household Stuff.
Their Houses and Furniture in them are worthy of observation: their Cielings
being covered with Shells strung on small Thread, which make a pleasing noise,
when moved by the least breath of Wind. The Walls are hung with fine Stuffs,
woven full of Imagery, as Cranes, Lions, Tigers, and some Figures of Men; the
Floors are covered with parti-colour'd Mats, made of Sea-Reeds, and several
tough Roots; and their Carpets beset with Pearl add also a great beauty to
their Rooms.

In the Valleys the Spaniards found several precious Jems, as Saphires, Jasper,
Emeralds, and great pieces of Amber, and in some Huts, Baskets, and Chests full
of dried Locusts, and Crabs.

Here also grows the Root Yuca, as also on several other West-Indian Coasts, of
which they make their best Bread, and is called in Hispaniola and Angola, Yuca;
by the Brasilians, Mandiba and Mandihoka; by the Mexicans, Quauhcamotli: it
grows with a thick or midling Body, according to the fruitfulness or barrenness
of the Soil; the Leaves are like those of a Tulip, and have small Flowers and
Seed, but no ways useful; the Root, not unlike Horse-Raddish, has a milky
Juice, which swells it exceedingly; the Sprigs, which in the eighth and tenth
Month shoot out of the Root, serve for new Plants; and if at any time it
happen, that either by a moist Season, or by Worms, or Pismires, the Plant is
spoiled, then it occasions such an inconvenience amongst the Inhabitants, that
half of them in that year die of Famine.

What use the Americans make of the Root Mandihoka.
The Leaves of the Mandihoka serve them for Sallads. Out of the Root, which they
lay soaking five days in Water, they make Meal, which the Cortuguese call
Farina fresca, but the Americans, Vipeba. Moreover, Mandihoka serves them to
make Bread, which they bake over the Fire; and mixed with Water, Pepper, and
the Flour Nhambi, makes an excellent Pud^ing, by them called Mingaude Carima,
no less pleasing to the taste than wholesome Food: and with Orange-Flour, Water,
and Sugar, it makes that excellent Julep Tipioca. The Powder of Mandihoka put
into a Wound, cures very speedily. It is very pleasant to see the Americans eat
this Bread; for they toss it by handfuls at a pretty distance from their
Mouths without letting fall the least Crum. Lastly, it requires great art and
trouble to make the Mandihoka fit for Bread: first they must peel off the
Shell, then put into a Mill turned by two Indians it falls, being Ground, into
a square Trough. The Juice proceeding from it is mortal, if eaten when raw, but
wholesome if boiled: the Meal they put in a Press, and when all the moisture is
drawn from it, they strew it in an Oven to dry. But the wild Mandihoka, by
those that live on the Seashore called Cuacu Mandiiba, and up in the Country,
Cuquacucuremia, differs both in shape and goodness from the first.

Arias 's Exploits in New Andalusia.
But to return to our matter: Arias coming to an Anchor in the River Daria, was
cheerfully received by Nunnez; his first Business which he undertook was the
building of three Forts, to secure the Passages to the South Sea; to which
purpose Joannes Aiora received the Command over four hundred Workmen. Moreover,
Arias took great dislike in the Place called Maria Antiqua, which the Spaniards
were forced by necessity first to Plant in: it lay in a deep Valley between
high Mountains, so that it not only wanted the benefit of the rising and
setting of the Sun, but when in or near the Meridian, it shined down upon them,
and scorched all their Plants, and the tepifi'd Morassy Grounds about the same
infected the Air, and the Water which they took up to wash their Houses,
immediately bred Frogs, the River Daria overflowed the Grounds with his muddy
Water three Leagues distance from the Sea; the Passage thither also was very
troublesome, because of the uneven Ways; and besides, the Tigers and Lions
devoured many People and Cattle.

A strange Accident.
The first Night that Arias lay in Maria Antiqua, the House wherein his
Surgeon Lodged was fired with Lightning, who running out with his Wife,
being both scorched by the Flames, saw a very great Crocodile, which snatching
up his Dog ran away with him toward the River.

Remarkable Trees.
The neighboring Territory Coiba produced Trees, whose Timber used for Shipping
never breeds Worms, because of its acerbity; whereas on the contrary, all other
Vessels in that Country are very subject to that inconvenience. Here also grow
those famous Plague-Trees, whose very Leaves, if but falling upon one, are like
Gods Arrows, mortal, and immediately kill, unless the Place whereon they light
be straightway anointed, with fasting Spittle: and the Coibensers say, that
they know another poisonous Wood, which they use to destroy their Enemies
withal.

Whilst Arias was consulting about the beforementioned Affairs, he sent several
Comanders to diverse Places, to take a survey, and give him an account of their
Return of all their Discoveries. Remarkable Journey of Moralis to the South Sea.
Amongst others Gasper Moralis was ordered to march toward the South Sea, to
confirm the Peace which Nunnez had begun with the Kings Chiapes and Tumaccus;
and chiefly to go to the Pearl-Island with sixty Men, which Nun, was forced
to leave, being stress'd by tempestuous Weather. Chiapes and Tumaccus were
according to their promise, to prepare an Army ^^ady for his assistance against
his coming; which indeed they performed, so t^^t they wanted nothing but
Vessels, for the biggest of theirs could not carry above three or four Men; yet
they undertaking their Enterprise, Landed seventy Men o^ the Island; upon which
the Inhabitants under their Kings Conduct ran to meet the new Landed Forces,
and crying out aloud Guazzavara, Guazzavara, they ran in amongst the
Musketeers with their wooden Swords; but the report of the Guns, mixed with
Fire, Smoke, and Bullets, soon amazed them: the King flying, thought by alarm
to raise all the Islanders; but they being informed, that no People whatsoever
could withstand the fire-spitting People, made Articles of agreement with
Moralis, and Conditioned to deliver a hundred pound weight of the choicest
Pearls to the use of the King of Castile; and as a testimony of his Friendship
he was Christened Peter Arias, from the Governors Name of New Andalusia.

Strange Pearl.
How great the Treasure was which Moralis brought from the Pearl Island may
appear by one of the Pearls, for which Pope Leo the tenth gave forty four
thousand Ducats to a Venetian Merchant.

Amongst the Commanders which were sent out by Arias, was also Johannes
Solisius, who Sailing six hundred Leagues Southerly, along the Coast of the
Caribbies, beyond Cape St. Augustine, he found the Inhabitants of Pernambuck to
be no less cruel than subtle; for being invited ashore, he with some of his
Men Rowed thither, Solisius his miserable end.
where no sooner Landing, but were all killed and eaten in the sight of the
other Seamen aboard; at which being amazed they weighed Anchor, and Sailed
away, Freighted only with Brasile Wood, to Cadiz.

Aso in an unhappy hour did Johannes Pontaeus put some of his Laundresses
ashore on the Island Guadalupa, to wash some Linen for him; for the Islanders
coming on a sudden out of the Woods surpised them, and forthwith killing
without mercy, cut them in pieces, and carbonadoing, eat their broiled Flesh
hot from the Coals, while Gonsalus Badajocius Sailed with eighty Men Westerly,
and having gone sixty Leagues he went ashore, and spent some days in vain, to
Court the Americans to a friendly correspondency; which whilst he was doing, he
was recruited with fifty Men from Daria, Commanded by Lodowick Mercado: so both
agreed together to travel over the Mountains to the South Sea.

The Governor Juana, whose Jurisdictions abound in Gold, flying with most part
of his Treasure, was never heard of, only they took some of his Slaves,
Strange Slaves.
whose Faces were strangely Carved with sharp Fish-bones, the Wounds filled
with red and black Powder, which so discolored the Flesh that it could never
be got out. After that they traveled through the Wilderness five days
together, being only met by some Indians carrying Maiz, who signified to them,
that King Periguete lived along the Seashore, and up into the Country the
blind Totonoga; of both which they got an unvaluable Treasure of Gold. Great
Booty.
Amongst other Pieces of that rich Metal was one which weighed two pound.

Taracura raised in this Expedition eighteen thousand weight of Gold: and
little less did they take out of the Territories belonging to the Princes
Pananome, Tabor, Cheru, and Scoria: The Prisoners served them in stead of
Horses, they not being able to carry all the Gold themselves, the meanest
Soldier having above three thousand Pounds Sterling for his share.

Destruction of the Spaniards.
They were now got to Panza's Kingdom, not without leaving sad remarks of their
avarice and cruelties. When Pariza surrounding this Party thus laden with
Gold, Charged so fiercely, that at the first Assault seventy of them were
slain; those few that escaped brought the tidings of their sad misfortune to
Peter Arias. Amongst those that escaping returned, was Franciscus Delapuente,
whose observations concerning catching Parrots and wild Fowl, we will briefly
relate, the digression being but short.

A strange way to catch Parrots.
The Indian where the Parrots are most frequent climbs into a Tree, and
chattering like them, with his Voice imitating their Notes, allures his
fellow-prater to draw near, and suffer him to take them in his Hands. But more
belongs to the taking of wild Fowl, as Geese, Ducks, Swans, and the like: From
the bottom of their standing Pools and Lakes in that Country grow Weeds, which
spreading upon the Water ripen, and rotting breed Water-Flies, Spiders, and
Frogs, upon which the Fowls feed. Near these Pools in the Gardens grow Cabbages
as high as Trees, which often dropping into the Water serve the Birds both for
Nests and Food: but the skilful Fowler finds it his best way to take one of
these Cabbages, and making it hollow in the middle, claps it on his Head like a
Helmet, then going into the Water up to his Chin, and passing softly along in
such manner, that nothing is seen but the floating Cabbage, and coming near the
Birds, he takes them one after another by the Legs, and puts them into a Bag
tied about his middle for that purpose.

Strange Bird Toucan.
But what is more worthy observation is the American Bird Toucan Xochitenachate,
having a fleshy Bill, like a Mouth full of Teeth, which continually opens and
shuts to draw Breath, having no Nostrils; the Back, Neck, and Wings, are black,
the Breast yellow like Gold, the Belly and end of the Tail of a Vermillion
color.

Evacuated Pepper.
This Bird Toucan feeds for the most part on Pepper, which tarries not long with
them, but muted almost as soon as swallowed: which Pepper thus evacuated the
Natives value above their common, because the unpleasing sharp acidity, or
biting quality is thereby much mitigated.

But to return: Whilst the Expeditions under the Command of Peter Arias had
such bad success, Arias himself and Vaschus Nunnez happened to clash: Nunnez who
since his discovery of the South Sea was held in some repute at the Spanish
Court, had built four Ships on the Shore of the same Ocean, to make farther
inspections along the Coasts thereof: but being commanded to come to Arias the
Governor, he was committed to Prison, and accused of high Treason, as if he had
intentions to settle himself in Peru, and absolutely to have left Daria: all
which though he disowned, and utterly denied with great protestations when
brought to a Trial, and no witness to affirm the contrary, yet was by Arias's
special Order Beheaded.

Not long after which Lupus Sosa, Governor of the Canary Islands, was sent to
succeed Arias in New Andalusia.

SECT. IX. The Expeditions of Francisco Fernandez, Lupus Caizedus, Christophero
Morantes, Bernardo Igniguez, and Juan Grisalva.
FErnandez, Caizedus, and Morantes, ancient Planters in Cuba, obtained a
License from the Governor Diego Velasques, to Rig out three Ships, with a
hundred and ten Men to discover new Lands.: Velasques thought fit to add one
more to their number upon the Kings account; which Trust he committed to
Igniguez: all of them consulted with the experienced Navigator Antonio
Alamines. Six days the Fleet had been at Sea, when they discovered Land, which
by a mistake was called Jucatan, Original of the Name Jucatan.
because the Inhabitants being asked what was the Name of the Coast, answered
Jucatan; which, as the Spaniards were afterward informed, signified, We
understand you not.

Stately City.
Upon the Shore they found a City, whose Stone Buildings, with stately Fronts
and high Turrets, showed most magnificently. Fernandez called this City for its
wonderful bigness, Cairo, from the Egyptian Metropolis, famous through the
World.

The Spaniards coming to Land were courteously received, and conducted into the
City; the neatness of whose Marketplaces, and exactness of their Streets, they
beheld with admiration; as also the costly Stuff Garments both of Men and
Women: but their wonder increased when they beheld very artificial Crosses,
concerning which upon inquiry they related, That a Man more glorious than the
Sun, being busy in erecting the Crosses, died. But these People, though so
courteous and civil at first, seemed in few days to be weary of their company;
which the Spaniards observing sounded a Retreat, and Sailing Westerly,
proceeded on their intended Design, and soon after anchored before Campechium;
Campechium a City.
the King of which conducted Fernandez and Morantes, with some others, into the
City, consisting of three thousand Houses. In his Palace they were entertained
with all manner of Fowl roasted: After which refreshment they surveyed the
City; in which, amongst other curious Buildings, was a high, Remarkable Images,
and strange Stage.
but square Theater of Marble, on which stood the Image of a Man, on all
corners assaulted by four wild Beasts, which were of a no less strange than
horrible shape. Not far from this Image they saw a Serpent fashioned up of
Chalk and little Stones, whose coyl'd up Tail was forty seven Foot long, and of
a proportionable thickness. This Serpent, sprinkled with Men's Blood yet warm,
seemed to prey upon a Marble Lion: both these were enclosed with a Stone Rail,
within which Malefactors were daily executed. Bloody Bows and Arrows broke in
small pieces lay between the Bones and dead Bodies. Igniguez called the King
Lazarus, because he discovered his Country on St. Lazarus's Day.

Making no long stay here, they returned to their Ship, and weighing Anchor
Sailed fifty Leagues more Westerly, the Fleet got sight of Moscobo, Moscobo a
City.
in the Territory Aguanil, whose King assaulted the Spaniards with so much
fury, that two and twenty of them were slain, Spaniards slain.
and scarce one escaped which was not wounded: wherefore they returned with bad
success to Cuba. Yet Velasques no ways discouraged thereat, not long after
fitted out four Vessels, Manning them with three hundred Men under the Command
of Juan Grisalva and Alamines; who having Sailed seventy Leagues, discovered
the fruitful Island Cosumella; Mighty Island Cosumella.
along whose Shore stood fair Stone Edifices, intermixed which Temples, whose
Steeples appeared above the Houses. Grisalva being led up into one of these
Steeples by a Priest, saw at a distance off at Sea the Territory Jucatan: and
in the Place where they were, there were spacious Halls, full of Marble and
Stone Images of deformed Men and Beasts, which with a murmuring noise, and
burning of incense they religiously worship. The Spaniards called this Island
Sancta Cruz.

Sailing from hence they directed their Course to Campechium, where the year
before they had been so civilly treated; where arriving, and without any fear
coming ashore, they found the Campechiums quite of another humor than they were
the former year, telling them, They would not suffer any Strangers to be
amongst them; and placing a burning Torch between theirs and the Spanish
Forces, threatened, That if they did not depart in quiet, they would force them:
which accordingly they endeavored, Spaniards fight with the Campechians.
making a fierce Onset upon the Spaniards; who being now come under their
Battlements, when they saw their advantage, poured what they had kept as a
reserve, whole Volleys of small Shot amongst them; which struck so much terror,
that they all ran away, shifting for themselves, and crowding into the City.

The Spaniards found afterward Jucatan to be but a Peninsula, and came before
a River which fell with so strong a Current into the Mexican Sea, that it
retained its sweetness for the space of two Leagues.

Strange passages on Tabesco.
This River, flowing out of the Province Tabasco, was called Grisalva: upon
whose Banks stood above six thousand Americans; and in the Water appeared a
hundred Boats with Armed Men, which Rowed aboard the Spanish Ships. The
Interpreters of Cuba, whose Language agrees for the most part with the
Tabascers, prevailed so much, that the King himself came to the chief Commander
Grisalva, and bartering with him, gave him as much Gold as his Iron Helmet,
Breastplate, and other Armor weighed.

Sacrifice-Island.
Soon after they Landed on the Island of Sacrifice, so called from the horrid
Sacrifices which the Inhabitants made daily.

Exceeding horrible Sacrifices.
Amongst other strange Images, there stood a great Lion of Marble, seeming
almost decollated with a great gash; into which Wound they poured humane Blood
warm, which was received into a Stone Trough set for that purpose underneath;
then the Figure of a Man Carved in Alabaster, bowing forward, as if looking
into the Trough upon the Blood. Those which were sacrificed were Prisoners
taken on the neighboring Coasts, whom bringing before their Idols, they ripping
open make no farther inspection, but only to whip out the Heart; with which
having smeared the Lips of their Idols, they throw it into the Fire: the Heads
and Corpse they let lie unburi'd; whose fleshy parts, especially their Cheeks,
they feast upon.

The next Island is inhabited by Women; Maiden-Island.
to which Annually their Neighbors go, pretending merry kindness, but upon
amorous inclinations: and Plough and Till their Ground, and Weed their Gardens.

Pontenchianum a City.
The chief City of Tabasco is Pontenchianum, and contains above fifteen hundred
Houses, all built of Stone hardened with baking after their manner; which in
some Places, besides their Turrets and Temples, yield a pleasant Prospect at a
great distance. Fourteen eminent Towns more did the Spaniards also see in
Tabasco.

portrait of Ferdinand Magellan FERDINAND MAGELLANUS.


Strange making of Obligations.
When in conversing with them they observed their strange manner of Sealing
their Bargains and Contracts one with another, they were amazed, for not using
Wax, they usually Sealed their Compacts with their own Blood, commonly drawn
with a Stone Knife, either from their Tongue, Hand, or Arms.

Their. Priests live single, and if found to be Unchaste, are punished with
Death. An Adulteress is sold for a Slave: Unmarry'd People may not frequently
converse with Married: Thirty five days in the year makes their Lent, in which
they abstain not only from Flesh, but Fish also, feeding only upon Roots and
Herbs. In this place the Spaniards were received in great, state, Canopy'd with
green Palm-Tree-Branches, and in like manner conducted aboard again, not
without many Presents, viz the Effigies of a Man curiously wrought in Gold,
wherewith they returned to Cuba.

SECT. IX. The Expedition of Ferdinand Magaglian, commonly called Magellane.
Bishop Casis sad effect concerning the Pearl catching.
THe Bishop Bartholomew de Casis, living a considerable time in Hispaniola, in
the City Dominico, being informed of the abundance of Pearls which were caught
before Cubagua, and the unsupportable cruelty of the Spaniards there under
Ocampus, used against the Inhabitants, went to Spain, with a design to obtain
of the Emperor Charles the Fifth, the Government over Cumana and Cubagua, under
pretense, to draw the ignorant Natives from their Idolatry, to Christianity;
which his request was especially promoted by William of Nassaw, the Emperors
prime Favorite; so that having his Letters Patents granted to that purpose, he
took Ship, and arrived with three hundred Spanish Gentlemen of Quality in
Cumana: And that they might have the greater respect shown to them there, they
had each a Red Cross given them, such as the Knights of Calatrava generally
wear. Yet little did Ocampus, the old Governor of Cumana, regard either them or
their Authority; for in stead of receiving and submitting, he kept the Bishop
de Casis out by force of Arms; who then made complaint to the Viceroy of the
West Indies in Hispaniola, and in the mean time, put his Cargo into a hew
Storehouse.

But whilst he made his Addresses, Ocampus having sufficiently enriched himself
departed, which encouraged the Cumaners, who already were incensed, and weary
of their former sufferings, to venture on a design, whereby they might revenge
themselves of the Spaniards, which their undertaking proved so successful, that
very few escaped the Massacre: Of which, de Casis being informed, and much
discontented thereat, betook himself to a Dominican Cloister in Hispaniola.

Cruelty of Castellio in Cumana.
Yet not long after, the Cumaners paid dear for that slaughter, for one
Castellio, though not without several Engagements, with various success,
lasting forty days together, having at last utterly vanquished them, put to an
ignominious Death, Hanging up seventy of their Princes, and to them of meaner
quality, showing as little mercy.

As little success had Lodowick Lampagnano, sent out by some Spanish Merchants,
with Letters Patents from the Emperor to Fish for Pearl, before the same
Cubagua; to which purpose he carried peculiar Nets and other necessaries with
him. But the Cubaguan Spaniards unanimously withstood him; Lampaguano
discontented.
so that not being able to effect his design, overpowered with a Melancholy
Distemper that broke his Heart, he died.

Magellanus Expedition, how it happened.
In the interim, while these scarce considerable Voyages turned to so small
account, Ferdinand Magaglianus (for so Peter Martyr calls him, and not
Magellanus, which herein deserves to be credited, because they were intimately
acquainted, and great friendship between them,) undertook to Sail round about
the World; the occasion of which we will here relate at large:

This Magaglianus, or Magellanus, a Gentleman of Portugal, having performed
things of great importance for his King, in Africa, although with no less
trouble than Charge, desired an addition of half a Ducket a Month added to his
Annual Pension; an inconsiderable Sum to make a Request for, yet though so
little, was as niggardly denied: Whereupon, highly incensed, he studied no
little revenge; to which effect, soon after an opportunity was presented, by
means of Franciscus Serranus, who writ from Ternata to him, that he should
speedily come thither, which he soon after did upon this account:

Pope Alexander the Sixth, having fixed Terminaries between the Kings of Castile
and Portugal, both busy at that time in discovering new Countries, Ordered,
That Castile should possess all the Coasts lying to the West of the chief
Meridian, and Portugal to the East: By virtue of this partition, the rich Spicy
Molucca Islands fell absolutely to the Portuguese: Now Magellanus persuaded
Charles the Fifth, that they might be Sailed to with a Westerly Course, and
therefore belonged to Castile; Which advice, Charles the Fifth considering, and
approving, Rigged out five Ships, with which Magellanus set Sail from Sevil,
the tenth of August, Anno 1519. five Months he plied up and down the Coast
inhabited by the Patagones, Strange Giant.
where he found none but one single Person, or rather a Monster, a Giant ten
Foot high, who coming Aboard his Ship, devoured a great Hamper full of Biskets,
and at one Draught drunk up nine Pottels of Water. He also saw several Trees
which had been Hew'n with Axes, and Crosses made on the tops of them. Whilst he
lay in that Harbor, which was called St. Julian, he Cashiered his Vice Admiral,
John Carthagena, with his Father Confessor, and sparing their lives, set them
ashore, and there left them to seek their Fortunes, though they had Conspired
to Murder him.

Streights of Magellan, how found.
Magellanus from thence Sailing afterward Southerly along America, to forty
two Degrees Southern Latitude, was engaged with the eddyings of a very strong
Current, which driving one of the Ships into a Bay, split against a blind Rock,
but the Men being saved in their Boat, were driven farther and farther into a
Channel, between high and Snowy Mountains; whereupon he immediately judged (as
the famous Negromancer Roderick Talerus had often told him) that there was the
Passage, through which the Northern Ocean flowed into the Southern; wherefore
he resolutely adventured to Sail into those Sraights, which in some places
narrow, and in others broad, is an hundred and twenty Leagues long, and full of
small Isles and dangerous Rocks. Whilst he still Sailed on, the Ship called
Antonio, Tacking about, returned to Cadiz.

But Magellanus entered the great South Sea with three Sail, on the 25. of
October, where the Seamen suffered extremely by excessive Heat, Drought, and
Famine, three Months and twenty Days, without sight of Land: And now, their
Shoes, and the Leather which covered their Shields, began also to grow scarce
(which before had been counted a Dainty) when they discovered two Islands lying
two hundred Leagues distance one from another, yet both Desolate and Barren,
wherefore they were called the Unfortunate Isles: After that, they came amongst
a great number of Islands, whose Inhabitants were much inclined to Thievery;
for which cause they Denominated them Ladrones, the chiefest Island called
Borneo, has two hundred fifty four Leagues in Circumference, whereon a Tree
grows, whose Leaves when fallen off, seem to be alive and creep like Worms. The
King of this Island entertained the Spaniards very courteously, two Elephants
bringing his Presents to them on the Shore, out of a City consisting of twenty
thousand Houses.

Near Borneo are two lesser Islands, called, Zubo and Matan; The King of Zubo
freely submitted himself to the Spaniards, Magellanus slain.
and Magellanus leaving his Fleet at Anchor in the Haven, went with his own and
other Indian Boats, and attended with some of the Zubensers to Matan, where
setting a Village on Fire, he carried great Riches from thence: This not
satisfying, he resolved within eight days to set upon the Royal Head-City; but
the King in his own Defense, Encountering with Magellanus, slew him, and seven
Spaniards more, besides twenty two dangerously wounded; those which escaped by
flight, got to Zubo, Spaniards murdered.
where being invited to Dinner by the King, they were all of them (in stead of
a second Course) Murdered at Table. The occasion of this was out of Revenge,
because the Spaniards had fallen too foul upon their Women and Maids,
Devirginating, and forcing them to their Pleasure, than which rudeness nothing
was among them more Detestable. The Seamen weakened by these Misfortunes, were
necessitated to burn their third Ship, called, St. Jago; but Sailing to the
Molucco Islands with the other two, they Freighted them both with Cloves; with
which the Ship Trinitas Sailed to New-Spain through the South Sea, and the
Victoria, An end of the Voyage about the world.
Commanded by John Sebastian de Lano went the same way which the Portuguese
used, and so to St. Lucar de Barrameda, near Sivile, where he came to Anchor
with his Ship and eighteen Men.

SECT. X. Ferdinando Cortez his Voyage.
ALthough several Expeditions of the Spaniards to America proved very
unsuccessful at the first, yet they still undertook them afresh, and with
renewing Courage: Ferdinando Sottus, Sottus cruelty.
though he Landed five hundred Men in Florida, yet brought no Treasure from
thence, only he cut off the Hands of fifteen Princes, because they would not
discover their Mines of Gold.

Miserable end of Narvaez.
Yet far worse success had Pamphilus Narvaez, who lost both his Fleet and Men,
saving only ten out of six hundred, in the River Palma, and they also
afterward died there, or eat one another to satisfy their raging Hunger.

Cortez his Voyage.
But much better was the fortune of Ferdinando Cortez, Sailing from Spain to
America, in the Year 1519. who having the Command given him over ten stout
Ships, and three Frigates with five hundred Foot, and an additional Force of
sixteen Horse, raised by the new Spanish Inhabitants on Cuba; with which Forces
Landing on the Island Cozumella, he prohibited Humane Sacrifice to their Idols,
and Erected a Cross with the Image of the Virgin Mary, in one of their Temples,
and released Hieronimus Aquilaris, after a seven years Slavery, Remarkable
delivery.
having suffered Shipwreck with Valdivia; at which time some that saved
themselves in the Boat, were by the Current in thirty days driven to Jucatan,
in which time seven died of Hunger; the rest going ashore, were no sooner
Landed, but Sacrificed by the Natives to their Gods or Zemes. Among the six
that remained, yet left alive, and to be offered after the same manner the next
day, was this Aquilaris, who with his Companions, breaking Prison, in the
following night fled to a Neighboring Prince their Enemy, and one that
maintained a continual War against these Cannibals.

Strange Battle.
Here Cortez sent Articles of Peace to Taxmarus the King of the Country, but he
sleighting his proffer, came down upon him into the Field with forty thousand
Men, drawn from the City Potanchanum, which contained above twenty thousand
Houses, all built of Stone: And indeed the Spaniards had here seen their last
day, had not Cortez drawn by a seeming advantage the Enemies under his Canon,
and sent his small Party of Horse to attend the motion of the Rear; when so
soon as they had fired their Canon, making great Execution, the Front routed,
and the Rear terrified with the noise and smoke of the Guns, they also broke,
being at the same instant Charged with the Horse, which were so terrible to
them that never saw Horses, nor such Service on Horseback before, that in a
short time the whole Body of so great an Army was utterly dissipated, and the
triumphing Conquerors took possession of the empty City Potanchanum,
Potanchanum, a City.
where Solacing, they staid a whole Month. Then from hence they Sailed to
Colvaca, where, upon the request of the Natives, they settled a Colony. Amongst
the Presents which were there given to the Spaniards, were some of their own
Volumes, Colvacana Books, of what fasahion, as also their Temples.
Books, whose Leaves were made of the innermost Rind of a Tree, and a kind of
Paste, made of their Meal, glew'd together; the Characters stood at some
distance one after another, ranged like our Christ-Cross Row, or A, B, C.

Here Cortez was amazed to behold their stately Temples, the Floors whereof
were covered with Embroidered Tapestry, beset with Precious Stones, to which
great multitudes flocked, being very zealous to perform their Devotions.

When their Seed is put into the Ground, or come to its full growth, they offer
young Children to their Zemez, richly Clothed, having been fatten'd some Weeks
before: When they want Children they kill their Slaves, and in default of them,
they pacify them with Dogs.

Strange Sacrifices.
The Victims that go to be Sacrificed, they Worship with all Adoration, Bowing
and Congying before them.

Strange Idol-Worship.
Their Zeal in this their Idol-Worship may appear from a strange Custom,
observed by them when they enter their Temple, viz. they either draw Blood out
of their Tongues, Lips, Ears, Breast, Knees, or Palm of their Hands, which they
throw into the Air, supposing thereby to be pardoned by their indulgent Gods.

Zempoal, a City.
In the City Zempoal, Cortez found five Slaves, who being kept close Prisoners,
were to be Sacrificed the next day; but he releasing them, did upon the
importunate request of the Quines, or Priests, and promises of great ransoms,
and their telling of him that the Zemez would spoil all their Seed and Plants
that year, if they did not go on with these Offerings, restored the Prisoners
again; who, though the enjoyments of all happinesses in the other World were
promised them by their Priest, and great assurance given thereof; yet they were
not forward, but returned, unwilling to suffer, though by so gainful a
Sacrifice.

Zemez wonderful Idols.
At the Zemez Feet hung abundance of Men's Bones bundled up together, and under
them were Written the Names of their Enemies, whose Flesh had been either
Sacrificed or eaten.

Twelve Leagues beyond Zempoal, Cortez built a new City near the River
Grisalva, and called it Vera Crux, which Diego Velasques resented so ill, it
being done without his knowledge, that he petitioned the Council of Cuba to
give Sentence of Death against the Founder: But whilst Cortez expected an
answer from the Ambassadors (which were sent to the Spanish Court to give
account of the necessity of building a City there) he traveled eighty Leagues
Westerly. The Zempoalensers accompanied him in great Troops, hoping by that
means to shake off the yoke of the mighty King Montezuma, against whom they
were then designed. Cortez coming into the Territory of Sincuchimalar, Cortez
his Exploits.
was in the Name of Montezuma, by one of his Princes, courteously entertained
in a great Village, situate on a steep Mountain, without any Path or Way
leading to it, but by two high Ladders. Sincuchimalar lies surrounded with
Hills, whose tops seem to touch the Clouds. Coming down from the Village, they
traveled through a barren and cold Valley, where they suffered such great
Inconveniences by want of Provisions and Water, and exceeding coldness of the
Weather, that many of them perished. After that, they ascended a pleasant Hill,
on whose summit stood a Chapel, with a handsome Steeple, and hedged about with
great heaps of Wood, brought thither by the Inhabitants for the use of their
Sacrifices. At the foot of this Mountain was a fruitful Valley watered by a
pleasant River, on whose Banks a certain Prince named Cacataminus had a Palace,
built of Stone, and containing many Rooms, and convenient Lodgings. Somewhat
higher to the Land, appeared more of the like Structures, which were all under
Montezuma's Jurisdiction; but the neighboring Country Tlaxcalla, whose
Inhabitants were famous for their Valor, would never receive any Laws from
Montezuma.

Remarkable War in Tlaxcalla.
Cortez no sooner set footing in this Country, but he was set upon by a
thousand of the Inhabitants, who at the first Assault killed two of the Spanish
Horse, yet after this bold Charge, the Assailants fled, and on the next day
desired Peace; whereupon the Spaniards marched quietly into the Country, when
a confused Company, or Forlorn-Hope, making a horrible Noise, set upon them;
but after a slight Skirmish, they fled to their Main Body, which immediately
drawing up, being at least a hundred thousand, hemmed in the handful of
Spaniards, and so were ready to swallow them, leaving them no Angle to escape
at. Thus environed, they were assailed on every side, fighting till Sunset,
and had undoubtedly been utterly destroyed, had not Cortez plied his six Pieces
of Cannon, discharging continually Volley after Volley upon them; and though
the Execution was very much, yet the Sound and report of their Ordinance was
more terrible to them that were out of the reach of the Bullet, and made more
to the gaining so great a Victory, Fear conquering more than Slaughter; so that
by the Evening, despairing either of their Safety or better Fortune, the whole
Army disbanding fled: But the pursuing Conquerors firing five of their
Villages, remained Masters of the Field; yet they, though thus totally routed,
taking fresh Courage (a wonderful thing!) reinforced them, and set upon the
Spanish Camp, with no less than 150000 Fighting Men: Yet notwithstanding so
vast an Army, Cortez so well ordered his small parcel of Men, and so valiantly
led on upon all Advantages, that he in like manner defeated this, as they
thought, Invincible Preparation. Thus fleshed with so much Blood of the
Natives, he raged every where, giving no Quarter wherever he went.

Mean while Quesitangal, a neighboring Prince, having also raised an Army with
which he designed, being assisted by darkness, craftily to fall into the
Spanish Quarters by Night, subtly dissembling, sent Ambassadors the day
before, with several Presents, and Overtures of Peace, which indeed were only
Spies, to take notice where they might best break in upon them; which Cortez
mistrusting, and soon being informed of the whole Design, he cut off the Spies
Hands, so sending them back to Quesitangal with Defiance: Hereupon the Indians
immediately setting forward, took advantage of the ensuing Night, and with
great fury fell upon the Spaniards, who preacquainted with the Design, were in
so good a posture to receive them, that not able to endure such hot Service,
they quickly retreated, and utterly gave over the Enterprise: But Cortez as
much encouraged by these Victories, pursued them, and the same Night Stormed
Tlaxcalla, a City containing above twenty thousand Houses, which in few Hours
he carried. This City was curiously built, of baked Stones, and a place of
great Trade; insomuch that the Marketplaces swarmed with Buyers and Sellers,
bartering one with another all manner of Provisions, as Fish, Flesh, and Bread,
also Plumes of Feathers, Pearls, imbroyder'd Tapestry, Chalk, Stones, Timber,
and Herbs.

Twenty days Cortez staid here to refresh his Army, and then marched to the
neighboring City Chiurutical, with the Auxiliary Forces of the Tlaxcallans, to
the number of above a hundred thousand; they told him, That the People of
Chiurutical had barricado'd up their Streets, laid upon the tops of their
Houses great heaps of Stones, that their upper Rooms were crammed with Archers,
and all things made ready both for Offense and Defense; which Advertisement he
not much hearkened to, because he was conducted into the City with all their
State-Formalities of Singing and Tabering upon their Tamboes, and every where
courteously entertained.

A Plot strangely discovered
Mean while Montezuma had raised a great Army, which were in their advance, not
only to the defense of his Border, but to surprise them them while they staid
in that City, the Townsmen having invited him thither to their rescue and his
own defense, had not the Plot been accidentally discovered by a Chirutecan
Woman, who giving advice to one of her Friends that followed Cortez, that he
should immediately make his escape, because that all the Strangers would be
destroyed within few Hours, who came and informed Cortez thereof whereupon he
desired all the Magistrates of the City to come and speak with him, Strange
Martial Affairs.
who no sooner entered the Hall where he was, but his Men by Command immediately
shot them to death, which terrible Rumor spreading, and alarmed with the report
of the Executing Muskets, the City was suddenly in an Uproar, gathering
thither Armed from all Places, and began a sharp Conflict, which lasted five
Hours; but then wearied out, and despairing of Success, loosing their Courage,
they desired a Cessation, and at last concluded Peace with the Spaniards.

This News of his discovered Intention, so startled Montezuma, that he supposed
it better to desist, and procure the Favor of Cortez by Presents; wherefore he
sent him 15000 Cotton Habits, trimmed up very richly, ten great Chargers of
Gold, and some Vessels of Wine, desiring him for a while to forbear his
Intentions of marching to Tenustitan his Chief City, Now Menico.
and that he would in the mean while treat with him for an Accommodation. But
Cortez, though he accepted of the Presents, yet nevertheless held his
Resolution of marching on.

Wonderful Mountain Popocatepeque.
Eight Leagues from Tenustitan he saw the double-spired Mountain Popocatepeque,
so called from the Smoke which continually ascends from its top; for Popoca
signifies A Smoke, and Tepeque, A Mountain. The Smoke rises upright, and with
so much strength, that by the greatest Wind it deviates not one jot from
mounting upwards in a direct Line, to whose forked Head ten Spaniards resolved
to climb; but having got scarce half way up, they were forced to return, the
Ashes lying knee-deep; Resolution of two Spaniards.
yet at last two more resolute conquered all those Difficulties, and got to the
top, where the mouth of the Cave, as they guessed, measured four Miles in
Circumference: The shaking of the Mountain, and roaring of the Flames,
frequently bursting forth, so much terrified them, that they staid not long
there; for, as we said, the Ground not only trembled under them, but the Fiery
Gulf ejected great Stones, which falling down on all sides of the Mountain,
rolled to the bottom; and without doubt they had there perished, had they not
speedily run to a hollow neighboring Hill, from whence they came at length to
the rest of their Company, where they were admired by the Indians for their
undaunted Resolution, and presented with several rich Gifts. These Indians had
a Tradition, That for wicked Princes, and such as had not governed the People
well, this was the Tophet appointed for their Torments.

Strange Cities in America.
Cortez being got through the poor Territory of the Guazazingers, and having
suffered great Cold upon the Mountains, discovered Amaquameca, the chief City
of the Province Chialco, seated in a great Lake, to which he rowed in a kind of
Boats, by the Inhabitants called Acales. Passing from thence, he was
courteously received in Iztapalapa, another City, which boasts above eight
thousand Stone Buildings, besides admirable Palaces, with spacious Rooms,
delightful Gardens, and Ponds full of Fish, and almost covered with Fowl; from
whence a Wall or Cawse-way of a great breadth, A very strange Cawse-way.
that crossed over both Land and Water, led from Iztapalapa to Tenustitan. This
Cawse-way has many Bridges, which are drawn up in time of War, under which the
Water runs out of a Salt Lake into a Fresh, that ebbs and flows, although lying
between high Mountains, and seventy Leagues from the Sea.

On both sides this Wall, being ten Leagues in length, appears three great
Towns, viz. Mesiqualisingo; Colvacana, and Vuichilabusco, all Populous, and
well built.

How they make Salt.
Colvacana is supplied by the Salt Lake, to its no small benefit and enriching;
for the Water being by Pipes conveyed into the City, in all the Places and
Cisterns for its reception makes a Scum, which being coagulated by the Sun, and
after boiled, becomes Salt, with which they drive a great Trade; for no Salt
being to be had in any place but here, all Foreign Merchants come thither for
Supply.

Cortez, being in his March within a League and a half of Tenustitan,
Montezuma, preceded with a thousand of his Nobless, came to meet and salute
him, all of them rather like Pilgrims, barefooted, and congying, kissing their
right Hands, with which they first kissed the Ground: After them appeared
Montezuma himself, who put a Chain of Gold, imboss'd with Pearls, about Cortez
his Neck, and immediately conducted him to the City, where having entered, and
being come into the Palace, Remarkable Passage of King Montezuma.
Montezuma placed Cortez on a Golden Throne, and surrendered up his Right to his
Catholic Majesty of Spain, in the presence of all his Peers, to their no small
amazement.

But whilst all things had a good face, and went on thus fairly beyond their
expectations, Cortez was informed, That King Coalcopoca had a Design on the new
City Vera Crux, and had treacherously murdered two of the Garrison, and wounded
two more: Whereupon Cortez having such fair beginnings, who had swallowed
already in his Hopes the whole Empire and Wealth belonging to Montezuma, laid
hold of this Occasion, pretending Treason, and breach of Contract; wherefore he
put Montezuma under Custody, notwithstanding he had cleared himself of the
Conspiracy, by bringing Coalcopoca, with his Sons, and fifteen of his Peers,
Prisoners to Tenustitan, who by the command of Cortez suffered a lingering
death, being all burnt with Green Wood. But in vain did Montezuma think to
reconcile himself with Cortez, since all he did could render no manner of
satisfaction; however he continued to oblige him by fresh Favors, whose
Relation we will be more particular in, as meriting the same.

Montezuma's Grandees seemed to be much disontented, because he had without the
least resistance or consideration settled a handful of Strangers to domineer
over his whole Dominions, by which his weakness and pusillanimity, he was now a
Prisoner, like a common Malefactor, who had formerly governed so mighty
Territories. Amongst several Princes which seemed thus to be concerned, was
Catumazin Governor of the Province Hacolvacan, who had he not been surpised
and attaqu'd the Night before by the information and discovery of Montezuma
himself, he would have hazarded the ruin of all Cortez his Successes: But now
Fortune still daily more smiled, giving wonderful Advantages to the Spaniards;
Silver and Gold continually flowing like Rivers from all Quarters, that their
only trouble and puzzle was where and how to dispose it: but yet for all this,
they were not free from jealousy, that Montezuma's Forces might swallow
theirs, though he was secured; of which you may judge by the vastness of his
Imperial City Tenustitan, (...) s^ription of the Roy-City Tenustitan.
seated in the Province of Mexico, where a Salt Lake mixes its Waters with a
fresh River, both which in circumference contain, as we said, seventy Leagues,
and distant from the Main Land five or six Miles; the Water about it
continually covered with small Boats rowing up and down. It has four Stone,
besides Draw-Bridges in several Places, and strengthened with view Vetus MEXICO
A. Piazza B. Tempio da Orare C. Argini adefensione delle Casa D. V^tapalapa*
E. Ilgiardino del S. F. Casa de li solazzi del S. G. Da questo siume Conducon^
lacqua nella Cita H. Tesqua


Gates (...) l^so artificial than costly, which lead from the City to the Main
Land. The Fresh Water is conveyed through the Salt in a Walled Channel, out of
which none may take up Water, except they pay Excise to the Kings Farmers. This
City boasts above sixty thousand Houses, all divided into Islands, but joined
with great Wooden Bridges: The Marketplace surrounded with Galleries, drives a
quick and constant Trade, being always full of Buyers and Sellers. In every
Street they have a public Inn, in each of which they keep Ordinaries, wherein
the Tables are stored with well-dress'd Flesh and Fish, not wanting plenty of
Wine. Their Trades are divided into several Companies, and they have their
peculiar Places to dwell in. They deal very much in Cacaos, a Fruit not unlike
an Almond, which beaten to Powder, Cacaos, what manner of Fruit.
and prepared with several other Ingredients, gives name to that excellent
Drink now in use with us, called Chocolate: They grow only on moist and warm
Grounds, and are used so currently in Trade, that they go in stead of Money.
Amongst many beautiful Edifices, their Guild is very magnificent, wherein
twelve Judges, attended by a considerable number of Officers and Servants, sit
daily, hearing and determining all manner of Causes. Stately Temple.
The next is their Chief Temple or Minster, built quadrangular, all of
Freestone, having four Portals, opening into the four principal Streets or
Triumphs, that end at the four Stone Bridges. On the Walls, being of an
exceeding height, stand several Turrets, so high, that they seem to hide their
Spires in the Clouds; and have Apartments, wherein the Priests Diet, Lodge, and
Study, which are ascended by Marble Steps. These Religious Persons are
generally of Noble Extract, which at seven years old are carried thither, where
leading a very strict Life, they never come forth to see the World, till they
enter the State of Matrimony. The famous Colossus, that stood over the Rhodian
Haven, between whose Legs all Ships did Sail, that came in or went out of the
Harbor, cannot stand in competition with the stupendous Idol Vuichilabuchichi,
whose Head touches the Arched Ceiling of the high Temple. Near his stand
several lesser Images, Horrible Images.
made of Meal and all sorts of Herbs baked together, and kneaded with Men's
Blood. Along the Walls are exceeding dark Vaults, in which the Priests only
walk; over them are large Halls, full of Presentations of their Gods, which
serve for the Burying-places of their Kings.

Whilst Cortez and Montezuma were viewing the Temple, two Spaniards rushed
suddenly into one of the Cells, where they found abundance of Lamps and Torches
burning, and the Walls bedaub'd two Inches thick with Humane Gore: Over-head
hung vast numbers of their Sacrificing Knives; and the stench of the place was
intolerable.

But Cortez going on, Montezuma and his Attendants resented it very hainously,
that he pulled down some of their Idols, and durst presume to look in the Kings
Face; for those People bear so great Reverence to their Kings, Grandeur of the
Kings in Tenustitan.
that none dares so much as once look up in their presence: His Council stand
barefooted, stooping with their Faces bowed almost to the Ground before him:
Four times a day they change their Apparel; and a Suit which they have once
worn, is put to no other use, but presented to such Soldiers as have done some
eminent Service. Whatever manner of Chargers, Dishes, Pots, Cups, and other
Vessels the Emperor is served in at his Table, are every Meal new. The King
has in Tenustitan three great Structures, whose Magnificence, Strange
Garden-houses.
for Cost and rare Architecture, can hardly be paralleled. The first is the
Residence for all deformed People: The second, an Aviary for all manner of
Birds and Fowl, being a spacious open place, Roof'd with Nets, and surrounded
with Marble Galleries. The third, being a Den for Wild Beasts, was divided into
several Rooms, wherein were kept Lions, Tigers, Wolves, Foxes, and all manner
of Four-footed Animals.

But whilst Cortez having staid waiting eight Months in Tenustitan, for the
return of the Messengers sent to the Spanish Court, received Tidings, That
Pamphilo Narvaecy, by order of Velasques, was come with eighteen Sail, Manned
with eight hundred Foot, and eighty Horse, from Cuba, and now riding before the
Mexican Coast; from whence soon after he received unexpected Command, to come
presently aboard unarmed, and resign up his Authority: But he in stead of
submission, compelled Narvaecy in a short time to relinquish his Title, and own
him for Superior. Mean while the Spaniards which remained in possession of
Tenustitan, ran the hazard of a general Massacre; for the Citizens much
stomacking the Oppressions of the Spaniards, who grew very insolent, inslaving
their King, bringing their inveterate Enemies the Tlaxcallans and Guazuzingans
into their City, exacting them to pay Tributes, pulling down their Gods, and
demolishing their ancient Idols, they brake out from all Parts in a tumultuous
manner, ran to Arms, and besieged them Day and Night in their Fort, although
Montezuma endeavored to persuade the contrary. Cortez hearing of it, came to
their relief with the New Forces Landed from Cuba; but he fighting his way ere
he could get in, was so roughly entertained by the Mexicans, that they killed
him forty Men, wounding as many more; and notwithstanding fifteen Fieldpieces
with continual Shot made foul Breaches, lessening the number of the Assailants,
yet they suddenly filled up their Vacancies again with fresh Men, which
clamber'd over the Heaps of those that lay slain. Three Days the Battle had
continued very fierce, when Montezuma being with the Spaniards in the Castle,
went to a low Window, to see if he could command his Subjects to retreat; but a
continual Cry so deafned their Ears, and showers of Arrows and Stones so took
away their sight, that he did nothing: Then Montezuma, thinking to be more
easily either heard or seen, went to a higher Window, where looking out, he was
unfortunately his with a Stone, of which he died three days after: Besides
their Enemies, the Spaniards suffered extremely by Famine; and though they had
beaten down a Tower, which had done the Castle great mischief, and set five
hundred Houses on fire, yet they Could discern no likely issue thereof, but
judged it best to make their escape by Night over the nearest Bridge: Cortez
therefore dividing his gotten Treasures, which amounted to above seven hundred
thousand Ducats, amongst his Soldiers, carried Montezuma's Son, and two
Daughters, Prisoners with him, though not without infinite danger and loss; for
the Tenustitans assailed him on both sides, and falling in also upon his Rear,
spared not to kill Montezuma's own Children. In this last Fight the Service was
so hot, Spaniards beaten aftersh.
that Cortez lost forty two Horse, a hundred and fifty Spaniards, and two
thousand Auxiliaries; and although gotten over the Lake, they were still
pursued by the Mexicans, who would then undoubtedly have made a general
Slaughter, had not Cortez amused the Enemies, by leaving in the Night great
Fires in several Places, his supposed Camps, whilst he silently stole away: Yet
the Tenustitans would have pursued the Spaniards, had they not wanted
Provisions: But Cortez sending his Treasure before him, through the Country
Colva, to Vera Crux, with a Convoy of five Horse, and forty four Foot, were all
cut off by the Colvaans, and feasted upon in a Thanksgiving Sacrifice. The same
misfortune befell twelve Spaniards in Tepeacu, which great City surrendered it
self up to Cortez, Remarkable Exploits of Cortez.
being assisted by a mighty Army of Tlaxcallans and others. But after all these
Losses, he took Guaccachiulla, and Izzuca, both fortified with strong Walls and
Gates; in which last he burnt above a hundred Temples, built for Humane
Sacrifices. All the Country through which he thus ransacked, he called
New-Spain. From the City Tazuco, which he had newly taken, intending to besiege
Tenustitan, he dug through the Lakes a broad Trench, of above three Leagues
in length, to bring up thirteen new Ships to Tenustitan; and the neighboring
People envying, that that City should not be conquered, as well as theirs,
raised an Army of above a hundred and fifty thousand Men, making Cortez their
General: Himself encamped on one corner of the City, appointing the other two
sides to be invested by Gonsales Sandovalo, and Pedro Alvarado; but the
Besieged resolutely broke out, and made a fierce Sally with five thousand
Boats, setting upon the thirteen Ships; but the great Guns made such execution
and havoc amongst them, that they retreated with great damage. Whoever were
taken Prisoners in this Fight by the Spaniards, the Tlaxcallans, being
Commissioned by Cortez, feasted upon. Tenustitan, or Mexico, taken.
On the seventh day the City was taken, but not without great Slaughter, and
the new King imprisoned.

After this mighty Conquest, Cortez resolved to discover those Territories that
lay Southward; and whilst he was making all things ready for the Voyage, he
sent two Ships with an invaluable Treasure to Spain, who fearing to be taken by
the French Pirates, ran in at Tercera, Sad accident occasioned by a Tiger.
where a miserable Accident happened to the Seamen of the biggest Ship, wherein
were carried two Tigers, which though taken young, and bred up amongst men, yet
had not so quite forgotten their natural ferocity, but that one breaking loose
in the Night, tore seven of them in pieces, hurting a far greater number, of
which some had the Brawns of their Arms, the Calves of their Legs, and fleshy
parts of their Thighs bit out.

Several Places in America breed Tigers, that far exceed Lions in fierceness;
so that where any considerable number of them frequents, though the Soil be
never so fruitful, yet it is left desolate and forsaken. But the Baboons that
frequent the Woods are more pleasant, Strange Battle with Baboons.
and less dangerous. Peter Arias relates, That his whole Army incountred with
these Beasts, which climbed from one Tree to the other, shrieking, and making
very strange Gesticulations to those that were gone before, and gathering their
Mouths and Hands full of Stones, which they threw as exact and strongly as a
Man. When one of these Baboons, shot by a Musket, fell to the Ground, the rest
gave such a horrible shriek, that the Woods resounding with the noise, struck a
terror into the Spaniards. Amongst several things that happened in this
Counter-scuffle, take this one: A Spaniard taking aim with his Musket at an
old Baboon, which sat pearch'd up in a Tree, and being now just ready to give
Fire, the Baboon Soldier, at the very instant, to break the Shot, taking a
Stone out of his Mouth, threw it exactly into the Man's Mouth, with such force
as beat out some of his Teeth; with which sudden blow surprised, he lost his
Mark; and the proud Foe, showing signs of Triumph, went his way.

But whilst Cortez staid in the Country of Tenustitan (now called Mexico)
Franciscus Garajus sailed out of the Haven of Jamaica, with eleven Ships, to
the River Panucus, there, according to the Command of the Emperor Charles, to
plant a Colony: Whereupon he went ashore, ordering his Fleet to sail along in
sight of Land: So wading through the River Montaltus, which glides between high
Mountains, he came to a Morassy Ground, in which he and they often sunk almost
up to the Middle, and lost his way in a Thicket of young Trees; yet at last
being come to the River Panucus, he found several high Walls, Great destruction.
being the Ruins of Fortresses, Temples, and Towers, destroyed by Cortez; so
that the City lay quite desolate. Twenty Leagues further, upon the Banks of the
same River, Cortez had in like manner sacked and destroyed Chiglia, a Town
which before its burning reckoned above twenty thousand Houses, besides many
fair Palaces, Walls, Towers, and Temples: Which Cruelties and Spoil had bred so
great an Odium in the Inhabitants against the Spaniards. that they immediately
sent an Army against Garajus, The unfortunate Expedition of Garajus.
who had only a few half-starv'd Men with him; yet he received the Enemy twice
in his Retreat to the new Colony St. Steven, raised out of Chiglia's Ruins;
but finding no Provisions wherever he came, he judged it fittest to send his
Horse into the Country to Forage; which Cortez meeting, took Prisoners, under
pretense that Garajus came to take Possession, where he had neither Authority
nor Right. Cortez also made himself Master of Garajus Ship and Fleet,
commanding him withal to appear in Tenustitan, which not knowing how to avoid,
he obeyed: His People mean time ranging up and down without a Head or
Commander, either died by Famine, or were murdered and eaten by the Natives;
for at one time the Americans made a general Feast with two hundred and fifty
roasted Spaniards: Spaniards tosted.
But their days of Triumph lasted not long; for Sandovalus, one of Cortez his
Prime Officers, set with so much fury upon those Cannibals, that he killed
several thousands of them, and burnt sixty Persons of Prime Quality, all
Commanders, in the sight of their Friends and Relations. But Garajus, whose Son
was married to Cortez his Daughter, lived not long after the Wedding, which
occasioned a murmur as if Cortez had poisoned him, to rid himself of a Partner
in his Government; Cortez his Ambition.
for it had been generally observed, that his Ambition suffered no Equal. The
Americans fell all down before him; all were Servants alike: The Court which he
kept swarmed with Attendance, on which he spent vast Sums of Money; yet his
Incomes were able to bear such excessive Disbursements. He kept in constant Pay
five thousand Soldiers, and several Ships ready rigged and prepared on all
occasions, to hold in awe the enslaved People, or else for the Discovery of New
Countries: Yet after all these extraordinary Charges defrayed, to show his
Wealth and Greatness, he caused a Piece of Cannon to be cast all of massy
Gold: for the Kings which formerly acknowledged Montezuma for their Sovereign,
gave him a yearly Revenue, most of which were valued to be worth twenty three
Tun of Gold; for so much the King of Tescuscus, a stately City, paid, whose
Houses Plastered with White-Lime, seemed afar off to be rather a Chalky Hill
or Mountain, covered with Snow: Full as much did the King pay which reigned in
Otumba, notwithstanding he had received with his Christianity the Name of
Ferdinand Cortez; yet others gave less: The King Guacinalgo, with his Mother,
and some Slaves, bringing Gold, came to present it to Cortez; and entering the
Palace, through a Guard of five hundred Horse and four Hundred Foot, which were
always ready Armed for fear of Insurrections, he fell down prostrate on the
Ground. Thus all things even out-went whatever he could desire, hope for, or
imagine: And Alvaredo, one of his Commanders, being sent Eastwardly, brought
great Treasures back with him, which the conquered Kings were forced to raise.

His Misfortunes.
But Fortune, who seldom continues her Favors long, at last began to frown; for
Cortez having sent an unvaluable Treasure of Gold and Pearls to the Emperor
Charles the Fifth, Floryn the French Pyrate met with and took it, which went so
much to his Heart, that for a considerable time he sent no Advice to the
Spanish Court, which made them grow jealous of him, doubting that he intended
to make himself King over New-Spain; and this Suspicion was not a little
augmented by his Enemies.

In the Neck of these, followed another Misfortune; for Christopher Olitus,
sent out by Cortez to discover new Countries, rebelling, took up Arms against
him, being then in the Haven Figueras, five hundred Leagues beyond.
Notwithstanding the Spaniards, although amongst a new-conquer'd People, which
without doubt longed for Revenge, were not to take notice of their danger, but
to go on with undaunted Resolution; whereupon Cortez drawing out a strong
Party, marched a long and troublesome way to meet Olitus, making great
Slaughters wherever he came. Francisco de las Casas was commanded to go upon
the same Account by Sea, and arriving first, found him settling his new Colony,
which he named Triumph de Sancta Crux; and notwithstanding the Water with a
Northerly Wind was very rough and boisterous in the Haven Figueras (which the
Spaniards called so, because they found Trees there, which growing at the Foot
of the Mountains, bore a Fruit not unlike a Fig) yet they came to a present
Engagement, wherein Casas worsting Olitus, having sunk one of his Ships, stood
out again to Sea; but surpised by a violent Storm, and driven on the Shore,
fell into Olitus's Hands, who had a little before also taken Egidius or Giles
Gonsales. A Plot of two Spanish Officers.
These two Prisoners consulted together how they might poison or murder Olitus,
which fell out according to their desires, because the Servants of the House
where they lodged sided with them; so taking hold of the first opportunity, as
they were at Supper together, they stabbed him with their Knives in several
places; yet the Wounds were not so great or mortal, but that he retained
strength to escape in the dark to a neighboring Hut; but the Assassinates
immediately sent out Messengers, publishing, That he who did not, knowing where
Olitus was, immediately bring him to them, should receive condign punishment;
which terrifying Olitus, he discovered himself, and was immediately beheaded.

During the time that the Spanish Officers had these Civil Broyls one against
another, Lodowick Pontaeus, a Man well experienced in the Law, came from Spain
to America, there in the Emperors Name to settle all things in good order;
having also particular Instructions, to show great kindness to Cortez, and to
make him a Knight of the Order of St. James, that by that means the Emperor
might be the more esteemed for his Noble Subjects and Servants, amongst the
Mexicans, who are themselves of a proud and ambitious spirit, and chiefly the
Nobility, which does manifestly appear by their Apparel, more gorgeous than the
meaner sort of Americans; and though the Slaves go stark naked (having only a
Cloth tied about their Privities) and with a Bow and Arrows walk before their
Lords, Mexicans Apparel.
yet the Better Sort go very costly Habited; for about their Necks they wear
Strings of Pearl; on their Heads, a Cap, from whence hang down two Scarfs, one
longer than the other; then a party-colored Cotton Coat covers their whole
Bodies to their Knees, under which they wear a Vest girt about their Middle.

But at last, after all these Services, Cortez disagreeing with the Viceroy
Don Antonio Mendoza, being about that time sent over, went male-contented into
Spain.

SECT. XI. Diego Gottierez his Expedition.
ANno 1540. Gottierez being chosen Governor of New Carthage, weighed Anchor
from Cadiz, and sailing to Nombre de Dios, upon his Landing clash'd with
Roderick Contreras, Gottierez contests with Contreras.
in whose Place he was sent to succeed. Two Years he spent without effecting
any thing; but at last coming to Agreement with Contreras, he took the
Governorship upon him, having first forewarned him not to depend too much upon
his Authority; for the Country being full of Woods and Mountains, might hide
many of his Enemies: But he not regarding the Advice, went a Journey from New
Granada, and having marched fifty Leagues Easterly, he crossed into the River
Suere, with sixty Spaniards, and was presented by the Princes of the Country
with as much Gold as amounted to seven thousand Ducats. Here he spent some
Weeks, effecting little; but now all things growing scarce, though he was very
earnest with the Natives for Provisions, yet he could get little; which kind of
Life the Soldiers disliking, and growing weary of, went away in the Night to
Nicaragua. Is forsaken of all.
Gottierez thus left alone, got into a Boat, with intent to follow them; and
being just put off from the Shore, was met by Captain Barjanto, who brought new
Forces and fresh Provisions with him: This wrought upon him to stay there. Not
long after Alphonso de Pisa went with twenty seven Men from Nombre de Dios to
the same River Suere; but it being then very rough at the Entrance, he was
necessitated to pass on to a small uninhabited Isle, where whilst he lay at an
Anchor, the Weather began to grow worse and worse; the Gusts of Wind, Great
Tempest.
mixed with Showers of Rain, Thunder, and Lightning, seemed to threaten a
general Destruction; for in the Ship two Spaniards and one Moor were killed by
the Lightning: In seventy two Days, the Sun did not shine four Hours: At last
weighing Anchor, he sailed over to the Main Land, where he saw nothing but vast
Mountains and Wildernesses. Here for a time they lived upon Cockles found on
the Shore, and wild Fruits in the Woods: At length coming to Gottierez, he sent
him with his People in five Boats to fetch new Forces from Nombre de Dios. In
his way thither he saw a House built of Canes, covered with Palm-leaves, forty
five Paces long, and built after an Oval fashion: Round about it stood several
lesser Hovels, all which making up a Village, the Spaniards named Francisco,
because they came thither on St. Francis Day. Village Francisco
About half way they met with the Lords of Suere and Chiuppa, going to attend
Gottierez, to whom being admitted, and sitting with him at Table, he gave them,
as a Dainty, roasted Chickens and fresh Pork; but they gave it to their
Servants, Strange manner of eating.
not delighting in the taste of such Victuals. Gottierez, by means of an
Interpreter, told them concerning the Christian-Religion, at which they bowed
their Heads, without making any Answer: But how little mind they had to embrace
it, quickly appeared; for not long after, they set their Villages on fire, and
all the Provisions which they could not carry with them, they spoiled, and so
retiring, hid themselves upon inaccessible Mountains. Another Incentive leading
them to this Fight, was, because the Governor Camachiren, and his Deputy
(notwithstanding he had given Gottierez as much Gold, when he came first into
the Country, as amounted to seven thousand Ducats, as we mentioned before)
yet was put in Prison by his Order, contrary to all Promises: Nay, Gottierez
threatened to burn him (not regarding, that he had besides received of him
several Pieces of Gold, resembling all manner of Beasts, as Tigers, and others;
and also Fishes and Fowls curiously wrought, which were valued at two Tun of
Gold; yet this Present seemed too little for him, whereupon bringing the
Prisoner to a Chest, Unsatisfied Covetousness of Gottierez.
he swore that he would roast him by degrees, if in four days time he did not
furnish him with four times as much more Gold as that Chest would hold:
Whereupon Chamachiren's Servants went away to get the required Gold; but he,
through carelessness of the Watch, made his escape in the Night, so that
Gottierez lost his Booty. But the other Prisoners, though threatened to be torn
asunder with Dogs, remained firm, disowning that they had any Gold; and among
the rest, one speaking boldly to the Spanish Officer said, That he stood amazed
at his treacherous dealings, why did he keep him Chained against Law and
Promse, and often threatened him with death, but yet would not kill him, for
he, said he^, had rather choose to die, than live so miserable a life.

Gottierez's Conscience troubling him, he would willingly have released the
Indian, and the rather, because he promised to procure a great ransom of Gold;
but the inferior Commanders would not consent to it. After this they marched
six days through great Wildernesses, and over high Mountains, finding no
Footsteps of any People. Lastly, They came down a very dangerous and steep
Mountain, where had not the Shrubs and jutting Stones served them to hold by,
they had all broken their Necks.

Dangerous Mountains,
Fifteen Leagues, the hanging of this Mountain spread it self along a sweet
River, Strange Huts.
on whose opposite Shore stood strange Huts full of dead Tigers, Deers Heads,
and Legs; here they staid two days to rest themselves, where the Trees Mamei
and the Cazabi Plants yielded them good Food.

Traveling forward, Gottierez asked an Indian which was the nearest way to a
Village, but he pretending not to know any near hand, had his Head immediately
cut off. In like manner, and for the same reason the Indian Prince should also
have been Executed, had not Gottierez given order to the contrary; seeing his
resolution, that with no less Patience than undaunted Courage, stretched forth
his Neck to the Executioners. Mean while, their Provisions decreasing, they
suffered extreme hunger; insomuch, that some fainted quite away. The Soldiers
also rebelling against Gottierez for Food, he commanded them to kill their
Dogs, and stamp the Barks of Trees; two days they traveled much discontented
in this manner, and at last came to the entrance of a Wood, where they espied
an Indian standing behind a Tree, which on a sudden ran away with incredible
swiftness: early the next morning, above four thousand Indians came Marching
against the faint Spaniards, making a terrible noise with Horns and Drums; they
were all except their Princes Painted black and red; some wore Plumes of
Feathers on their Heads, and Collars of the same about their Necks; the fight
began very fiercely, by casting abundance of Stones, and shooting of Arrows,
wherein, though Gottierez was at first Wounded, Valiant fight.
yet after half an hour the Assailants fled, but recruited with fresh Forces
renewed the fight, breaking into their Ranks, and making so great slaughter
amongst them with Wooden Swords, and Palm Tree Clubs, knocking down, and
dealing such deadly Wounds, that of the Spaniards, three only escaped, saving
themselves by flight, who two hours after, much amazed and terrified, came to
their reserve, consisting only of twenty four Men, which Alphonso de Risa
Commanded; the insulting Enemy at their Heels, waving over their Heads the
Swords, Shields, and Cross-Bows which they had gotten from the slain Spaniards;
and some withal crying in the Spanish Tongue, Come Christians, come, and take
Gold. But de Risa, for all their pride, set them going with some Volleys of
Shot; after this, escaping innumerable other dangers, he came to Nombre de
Dios, without having effected any thing of Note.

SECT. XI. The Expeditions of Peter Alvarado, Francisco and Gonzalvo Pizarro,
and Diego de Almagro.
Pizarro's and Almagro's remarkable exploits.
IN the City of Panama, in New Spain, lived three eminent Spaniards, called
Francisco Pizarro, Diego de Almagro, and Ferdinand de Luque a Priest, which
jointly designed to discover farther Southerly along the rich Gold and Pearl
Coast, and inspect the Southern Ocean. De Luque was to look to home-affairs,
and Pizarro set Sail first with a Ship Manned with one hundred and fourteen Men,
which Almagro followed with seventy more, yet both were valiantly repulsed by
the Peruvians; but although they returned the first time with bad success, yet
they undertook their business once more, but with no better fortune; whereupon
discouraged, the undertaking seemed to be totally laid aside, and the American
Viceroy, Peter de Rios forbad any to attempt a farther Discovery concerning
Peru.

The former difficulties with this Edict easily wrought upon Pizarro's men, all
but twelve, to leave him, for the rest went over with the Ship fitted out by
Rios with succors to the Island Gallo, where Pizarro resided, having also
failed in his second Expedition. But although he had made two bad Voyages, yet
having an inclination to a third attempt, he went to Spain, desiring of the
Emperor to be Governor of Peru, which he had discovered; for besides his Plea
of Merits he had taken possession of the Country twice by Landing there,
intended for the use of his Imperial Majesty; one of his Seamen to that
purpose flourishing his two-handed Sword over his Head, the glistering of which
Sword so frighted the Natives, that none of them durst come near him.

His request being consulted upon, was at last granted, the Government of Peru
being conferred upon him; but Almagro took it very ill, that Pizarro went to
the Emperor on such a design for himself; yet by the mediation of his Friends
the difference was reconciled, then Pizarro setting Sail with one hundred and
fifty Foot besides Horse, and Landing at the Island Puna, Pizarro's fight on
Puna.
at first was courteously entertained, but the Spaniards by extravagant hunting
and searching every where their Houses for Gold, and committing several other
outrages, incensing, changed the humor of the Inhabitants so much, that they
fell upon them. In stead of Ensigns, Standards, and Warlike Trophies, they used
long Canes, at the end whereof were tied the Bones of their ancient Hero's,
honored by them after their death: But these Relics saved not the Indians
from slaughter, so well as the coverts of a neighboring Wood.

From this Isle, lying three degrees Southward of the Equinoctial, Pizarro
passed over to the Main Continent, where they were all in a great confusion,
upon the report of the Spaniards cruelties committed in Puna; Comes to Peru.
yet all the preparations of the Indians to withstand, stopped not Pizarro from
his intended course; for first, having the success to master Tampez, thence he
made nothing to march his Forces over the River Ambato, there burning a Temple
Dedicated to the Sun. The Portico stood toward the East, the rising of their
God, Peruvian Temple.
before which hung a Curtain of their fine Cotton Stuff, within stood the
presentations of two Golden Rams, shaded with Black, and as many Dragons,
before which the Fire never went out, continually supplied with Offerings of
burnt Incense; on the Pillars hung several Men flead, their Flesh kept firm,
and free from all Putrefaction, with the infusion of a sharp Juice.

Here Almagro coming to Pizarro with fresh Forces, they made no little
penetration into Peru, satisfying every where their thirst of Gold, and
slaughtering the Toothless Tombezes, a people who having offended their King,
had by his order the upper Teeth of the whole Nation beaten out.

Alvarado's Exploits.
Peter Alvarado informed concerning the Riches of Peru, and well knowing how to
insinuate with the Emperor in his fawning Letters, at last by his Friends so
prevailed, that he also got leave to go thither; in pursuance of which, Anno
1534. he Weighed Anchor with seven Ships from Guatimala, a City built by him
between two Mountains. But Landing at Puerto Viejo, and Marching Easterly over
Snowy Mountains, he was met by Almagro, between whom a bloody encounter was
like to have happened, but after some time, a Treaty being set a Foot, they
came to a Composition on these Articles: That Alvarado upon the receipt of a
hundred thousand Ducats, should leave his Men with Almagro, and depart from
Peru; with which sum, being enriched, he soon after fitted out fourteen Sail to
discover new Countries to the West; but being busy in his preparations, was
sent for to Mexico by Don Antonio Mendoza the Viceroy, to undertake a Voyage
with him to the new-discover'd Country of Sibolla, abounding in Gold and
Saffron, according to the report of four Dominican Monks; and having already
raised seven hundred Men, news came to Mexico, that Peter Zunica had received
an overthrow by the Indians of Salisco; to whose assistance Alvarado Marched
with all speed, and found the Indians encamped on a high Mountain, fortified
with conjoined Trees, and great Stones tied together with Rushes, behind which
they were secure from Shot. The Spaniards climbing up the Mountain, approached
their Works, when on a sudden the Defendants giving a great Shout, cut the
Cords which held their Fortification together, Notable Stratagem of the
Peruvians.
whereupon the Stones and Trees tumbled down with such force, that they killed
both Men and Horse, few escaping alive: In this conflict Alvarado himself was
lost. Wickedness of a Woman.
His Wife Beatrix Cuova made a stately Funeral for her Husband, and caused her
House to be Painted black, refusing either to Eat or Drink for a set time, yet
notwithstanding, all her pretense of sorrow, she so minded her business, that
she took the Government of Guatimala into her own hands; but her Dominion
lasted not long, for on the eighteenth of September, Anno 1541. happened a
hideous Tempest of Wind and Rain, mixed with continual Lightning, and horrible
claps of Thunder, and what was more terrible, Guatimala destroyed by a stood.
was answered with roars and horrid bellowings from the caverns of the
Mountain, at whose foot Guatimala stood. About midnight the Mountain was
delivered, whose Birth was the irruption of an Inundating River, a precipitate
torrent tumbling down full of Rocks and Stones, which carried all before it, so
that in few minutes Guatimala was utterly swept away, not the least mark
remaining, nor any left alive except Alvarado's Bastard Daughter by an Indian;
and in the adjacent Fields, some few, and they maimed, with broken Arms or
Legs; after this utter destruction, they rebuilt another Guatimala, three
Leagues more Easterly. But though Alvarado was lost in this Enterprise, yet the
Voyage to Sibolla was not laid aside, for Francisco Velasques Marched thither
with eight hundred Men, Velasque's Journey.
of which most were Horse, but found naught else but Snowy Mountains and barren
Plains, insomuch, that his Men and Horses were starved for want of Provision;
wherefore he returned without success to Mexico, having only burnt some
Villages, and had several Rencounters with the Natives.

portrait of Atahualpa ATHABALIBA ultimus Rex Peruanorum



But Attabaliba a Peruan Prince, informed of Pizarro and Almagro's coming,
commanded them both to depart out of his Kingdom; but they not regarding it,
marched directly to Caxamalca, where Attabaliba kept his Court, who again sent
other Messengers to them with command to leave his Dominions. Attabal^ba's
message to Pizarro.
Pizarro made answer, that he could not obey any Commands but those of his
Master the Emperor, who had ordered him to speak with the King himself at his
own Palace.

Attabaliba hearing that Pizarro resolved to come forward, sent him a pair of
Painted Shoes and Armlets, that he might put them on when he appeared before
his Throne: Captain Ferdinand Sotto marched before with twenty Horse, passing
close on the Flank of Attabaliba's Army: The Indians amazed at the prauncing of
their Horses, retreated into their Fortifications, but were for their cowardice
immediately slain by the King's Order.

Sotto sent a Message to Attabaliba, That the Spaniards desired peaceably to
Treat with him, to which he received answer, That no Peace could be made,
unless they restored the Gold and Silver to the Owners, which they had
Plundered from them, and forsook his Territories; which so doing, they should
have Audien^^ the next day: His discourse with a Spanish Bishop, and his
apparel.
Hereupon the Bishop Vincent de Villa Viridi was conducted into the Royal
Palace, in the City of Caxamalca, and brought before Attabaliba, who came
thither in great State, with a Guard of twenty five thousand Men; he was
carried on the Shoulders of his prime Nobles in a Sedan, about which hung
Garlands of Gold, and diverse colored Feathers; himself was clothed in a white
loose Vest, without Sleeves; his Temples were bound with a red Ribbon, with a
long Tassel on his left Cheek; on his Forehead stuck three curious Feathers;
before him Marched three hundred of his Lifeguard, all in one Livery, who
cleared the way through which the King was to pass. The beforementioned Bishop
carried in one Hand a Cross, in the other a Book, discoursing with the King to
this effect; That God is the Trinity, Adam the first Man; Christ Born of a
Virgin, died on the Cross; the Pope God's Vicegerent, who according to the
Power he had from Heaven, had given Peru to the Emperor Charles, as also all
other Countries in America; and if he should prove obstinate, and resist, he
must expect nothing less than utter ruin. Attabaliba replied, That he served
Pachamaca, being the Creator of all things; and next to him the Sun and Moon:
How glorious do they appear (said he) in comparison of a Crucified God? To make
Peace and Alliance with mighty Princes, was the true Foundation of wise
Government: But the Pope must needs be senseless, devoy'd of all reason, and
withal highly unjust, to give away what was none of his own, viz. other men's
Kingdoms, in which he never had the least or smallest concern. Moreover, he
would not desert that Religion which he and his Ancestors had maintained so
many Ages, and the rather, because there are no apparent or sufficient
Testimony of the truth of Christianity. The latter clause was thus answered,
saying, This Book, O King, which I hold in my hand, proves and declares all
that you question. Attabaliba looking upon it, turned it over Leaf by Leaf,
then looked more intentively upon the Print, which done he clapped it to either
Ear, and at last as altogether unsatisfi'd, in disdainful manner threw it away.

But Pizarro gaining time while the King and Bishop thus discoursed, had drawn
his Men in Battel-Array, his sixty Horse he divided into three Wings, Commanded
by his three Brothers, Ferdinand, John, and Gonzalvo Pizarro, left the Captains
Sotto and Bavalcazar in an Ambuscade; Peter de Canada marched in the Van, and
he himself in the main Body, leaving Sotto in the Rear.

So soon as the Bishop could acquaint them in what scornful manner Attabaliba
had thrown his Holy Book, Pizarro fights with Attabaliba.
The Word of God, upon the ground; both Armies were Engaged, whilst their
Trumpets sounded, their Drums beat, their Canons roared, the Horses neigh'd,
and the Dogs barked, they made a speedy march up against the Walls of
Taxamalca, which dreadful mixture of terrible noises struck such a Pannick fear
into the hearts of the Indians, that they all presently broke, in their flight
crowding one another to death at the Gates of the City, which being too narrow
to receive them, they themselves made breaches in their own Walls to enter;
which opportunity the Spaniards no ways neglected, but entering with them, shot
and killed all they could reach; their Dogs also having no little share in the
slaughter; whole companies of Indians were trod under the Horses feet, yet
near Attabaliba's Chair was the greatest resistance, for no sooner fell one of
the Bearers, but immediately another supplied the place; so that the King was
surrounded with heaps of his own slain Subjects, to whom Pizarro himself
Charged up so close, that having seized him by his long Hair, he pulled him out
of his Throne, and having gotten him under him, secured immediately in Fetters;
whereupon all his Lifeguard forsook him, Attabaliba taken prisoner.
and fled: But the loss of the Battle, which was Attabaliba's utter ruin, was
laid upon Runninagui, a Captain appointed to lie in Ambush, so to fall in the
Rear of the Spaniards with five thousand men; but was so far from performing
his Orders, that terrified at the uncouth noise of the Guns, and the rest, that
he fled one hundred and fifty Leagues Southerly, before he stopped, or scarce
ever looked behind him in so long a flight. Bids for his ransom an unvaluable
treasure.
Mean while, Attabaliba compounded with Pizarro for his Ransom, viz. to pay him
as much Gold as that Hall in his Court (where they made the Agreement) could
hold to the top; they first measured the height, then the length, which was
found to be fifty four Foot, and the breadth nine: In pursuance of this
composition, Gold was brought thither from all places, according to
Attabaliba's order; yet he could not raise so much as would perform h^^
bargain, which made the Spaniards to grumble: But Attabaliba desiring some
longer time to perform it, telling Pizarro, that most of the Gold was brought
on Slaves Shoulders, a long and troublesome way, of two hundred Leagues long,
from the City Cusco, and if this would not satisfy, Pizarro might send some of
his own people thither, to inform him, that he need not fear the least danger,
as long as he was Prisoner with his Wife and Children.

The two Captains, Sotto, and Peter del Baro being sent away to that purpose,
met after some days Journey with one of Attabaliba's Leaders, who was bringing
the King's Brother Guascar with a Party, Prisoner to Caxamalca.

Guascar had now a fair opportunity to crave assistance of the Spaniards,
telling them, that he and Attabaliba were the Sons of Guaynacava, so that the
Kingdom was to be divided betwixt both. But Attabaliba had by force made
himself Master of all, whereas he being the youngest, ought to be satisfied
with that share which Guascar, being the eldest, would assign him; for the
right of Inheritance belonged justly to him, and yet he was carried away bound
to slaughter* But if Pizarro would do justice in delivering him out of his
Brothers bloody Hands, he would raise him thrice as much Gold as Attabaliba had
promised: To which purpose he desired Sotto and Baro to put off their Journey
to Cusco; which they not daring to do, went on their way, Burns his Brother
Guascar alive.
and Guascar descending the Valley Sucsuhuana, was burnt alive by Attabaliba's
Soldiers.

Mean while, Almagro came with fresh Forces to Taxamalca, which occasioned no
small trouble in Pizarro, who was only thirsty after Gold: On the other side,
Almagro as greedy, grew jealous that Pizarro should keep the promised Hall full
of Gold for himself, and he should have no share, because Attabaliba was his
Prisoner; therefore he earnestly desired that Attabaliba might privately be
made away, and that the Booty might be divided to one as well as the other.

An incredible sum of Money given to the Soldiers.
Pizarro to prevent all inconveniences that might happen from his dissenting,
gave in the presence of the King to every private Soldier a thousand Ducats in
Gold, and six thousand five hundred twenty five Silver Crowns; the inferior
Officers received four and thirty thousand Crowns, and the others sixty
thousand; the fifth part of the Booty he reserved for the Emperor: And
notwithstanding Attabaliba performed his promise in filling the Hall full of
Gold, yet he had the sentence of Death pronounced against him, neither would
his excuse of Innocence serve, or his Requests to be sent to Spain, there to
clear himself before the Emperor; but sighing, and lamenting his misfortunes,
was tied to a Post, and Strangled in the presence of Pizarro. Attabaliba
strangled.
For whose Death, though a Heathen, Divine Vengeance pursued these cruel and
unjust Arbitrators that thus made their Will a Law, none of them dying a
natural Death.

Moreover it was observed, that a few days before this Execution a blazing Star
appeared, which Attabaliba seeing, presaging sadly of himself said, That a
great Prince would die in a short time; but Pizarro's chief pretenses for the
Kings just suffering was, that he had cruelly murdered his Brother Guascar: But
this was a mere blind, for that that incensed them against Attabaliba, was,
that he knowing where the unvaluable treasure lay, which Guascar had buried,
would not discover it to them.

Attabaliba, before his death, desired that he might be buried in the Territory
Quito, by his Father Guaynacava, whom the Peruvians for his great Justice and
Prudence in Government, believed that he would arise, and settle the World so
troubled and full of disorder in peace and quiet: The Corpse was accordingly
carried thither in great State after their manner, Cruelty of Ruminagui
attended by his Brother, whom Illescas Ruminagui which ran from Attabaliba in
the Battle, where he lay in ambush when he might have done them good service;
in the way to his entertainment, received with all shows of sorrow; but when
they were feasted to excess, buried in sleep and Wine, he Massacred and flayed
Illescas the Kings Brother alive, and made a Taber of his Skin. Whilst
Attabaliba's Funeral was thus bloodily solemnized, Pizarro puts Quizquiz to
slight.
his General Quizquiz raised a great Army, which Pizarro encountering after a
valiant resistance, totally routed; then marching victoriously to Cusco, And
takes Cusco.
he saw great Fires in the City, and the Citizens fighting with the Spaniards,
sent before; but the Horse breaking in upon them, most of them fled the next
morning to the Mountains: Thus the Spaniards became Masters of the City, where
they inflicted the most cruel tortures on all Sexes, by that means to force
them to discover, if they knew of any hidden Treasures, being not satisfied
with what they found there, although they had gotten a greater Treasure in
Cusco than that that they had extorted from Attabaliba before: Unvaluable
Treasures taken.
Nay, they gave those that were murdered for Food to their Dogs: Among the
rest, Didacus Salazar having a very fierce Dog called Bezerril, had also an old
Indian Woman his Prisoner, to whom he gave a Letter to deliver to the General
Pizarro; the Woman had not gone many Paces before the was set upon by Bezerril,
whom Salazar let loose, that he might delight himself in seeing the Dog tear
the poor old Woman; but she observing him come running at her with so great
fierceness, fell down upon her Knees, and holding forth the Letter, Remarkable
passage of a Dog.
cried, Good my Lord, good my Lord Dog, I must carry this Letter to General
Pizarro, whereupon the furious Curr having more compassion than the Spaniard,
stood still a little, and at last lifted up his Leg in a scornful manner,
Urin'd upon her, and returned satisfied; at which sportive behavior of the Cur
and the Chrone, Salazar laughing, was so well pleased, that he gave the Woman
her life.

Almagro's unhappy Journey.
After Cusco had been sufficiently Plundered, Pizarro made Almagro Governor
thereof, with the Territories belonging to it, and built near the River Lima a
Town, King's Town.
which they called Los Reyes. Mean while, Almagro received Letters Patent from
the Emperor, in which he was nominated Marshal of Peru; encouraged by that
honor, he took a great design in hand, for the Peruvians had reported, that the
Golden Chili lay to the South; and Almagro being encouraged, and assisted by
Pizarro, Marched inquest thereof with two Troops of Horse, and five hundred
Foot: But mean while there happened so great Rains, and such foul Weather, that
the Ways were almost unpassable, so that the Expedition grew very troublesome;
yet however he went on, in which hard March he lost both Horse and Men.

Whilst Almagro was upon this undertaking, Francisco Pizarro received Letters
Patent from the Emperor, in which he was Intitul'd Duke of Peru, but with a
Salvo for the honor before given to Almagro; yet these balanced honors bred
great dissension between the Duke and Marshal, which Mango Inga another of
Attabaliba's Brothers observing, laid hold of the opportunity, and setting upon
the Spanish Garrison in Cusco, Mango Inga takes Cusco.
took the City. Whereupon Pizarro immediately sent his Horse thither, under the
Command of Alphonso Alvarado, and Gomes de Todoya, against whom the Indians
fought very valiantly, insomuch, that the Battle was a long time doubtful; yet
at last the Spaniards got a bloody Victory, and regained Cusco; hither after
some time, Almagro returning with ill success, having effected nothing, was
kept out by Ferdinand Pizarro, under pretense that he could not open the Gate
without Order from his Brother the Duke. Contest between Almagro and Pizarro.
Almagro much offended thereat, yet saying little, was so privately let into
the City, that he surpised the Governor Ferdinand Pizarro, and his Brother
Gonsalvo, with Alphonso Alvarado Prisoners, swearing that he would not rest
before he had rooted all the Pizarro's out of Peru. But whilst he was passing
the intended Sentence of Death upon them, Gonsalvo and Alvarado broke Prison,
and got away to the Duke, who troubled for his Brother Ferdinand there in
custody, and in danger of his life, came to Composition; whereupon Ferdinand
was also released: But this was no sooner done, and he had got his Brother safe
there, but the Duke regarding nothing less than the keeping of the new-made
Peace, sent to Almagro, that the Emperor having given him the prime Command
over Peru, he required him to leave Cusco, or else he would force him. Almagro
sent answer, That if he could see the Emperor's Hand, he would immediately
obey, otherwise not; whereupon both Parties prepared for War, wherein they had
many sharp bickerings in a short time: Almagro strangled.
But Almagro being too weak fell into the Dukes hands, who ordered him to be
strangled in the Gaol, and his body afterward to be drawn to the Marketplace,
and there publicly Beheaded.

Ferdinand Pizarro being not long after sent to Spain, with the fifths of the
gotten Treasure for the Emperor, was Imprisoned in the Castle Motto, for
Almagro's Death: But what further happened to him there, or became of him, has
never been Recorded by any Pen.

Ferdinand Pizzarro never obtains his liberty.
But young Almagro, instigated by his Guardian John Rada, resolving, to be
revenged for his Fathers Death; to that purpose he went to Los Reyes, where by
the help of some hired Malcontents, Young Almagro stabs the Duke.
he designed to Murder the Duke upon St. John's day, in the Church at high
Service: But this business was not so closely carried, but the Duke had some
inkling thereof, who therefore stayed at home, and went not to Mass that day.
The Conspirators doubting the event, hearing that their Plot was discovered,
though defeated in their purpose, yet not failed in their Courage, ran at noon
day to the Palace, crying, Kill the Tyrant, kill the Traitor. But Pizarro being
so much forewarned, had locked up the Gates, and armed himself, which when they
could not enter, yet they went back through the City, and waving a bloody
Sword, cried, Pizarro is slain; this being believed, above two hundred private
Friends to Almagro appeared, who all ran to the Palace, crouding about the
Gates: And Francisco de Chares coming out at a private Door, hoping to pacify
the Mutineers, was immediately Stabbed; but they rushing in the way he came,
found some stout opposition, for seven Halberdiers of his Guard fought till
they were all killed in the Dukes presence; but Pizarro was taken alive, and
being brought before Almagro, he Savagely Butchered him with his own hands;
which done, they ran crying along the Streets, Long live the Emperor, and
Didacus Almagro. Great slaughter in Los Reys.


But after all this, Pizarro's Party joining together, valiantly withstood the
Conspirators, so that a considerable number were slain on both sides, yet
Almagro at last getting the better, confiscated the Goods of all those that
were against him; and now every one showed him the respect of Chief Governor,
till the Emperor should either settle him, or send another.

From hence Marching to Cusco, he had like to have paid for all, but prevented
by private intelligence thereof; which happened thus,

Garcias Alvarado and Christopher Sotello were Joynt-Governors of Cusco; but
quarrelling, and coming to Blows in like manner, Sotello was slain: This
Almagro took very hainously, Strange Transactions between Alvarado, Sotello,
and Almagro.
as being his intimate Friend, giving forth threatening Speeches of Revenge;
which Alvarado informed of, and intending some way or other to prevent all
Dangers, and save himself, he invited Almagro to a Feast, but privately
resolving to make it a Bloody Banquet, by his Death at the Table. Of this he
being informed, as we mentioned before, staid at home; and privately sent for
some Soldiers that had belonged to Sotello, sending word that he was
indisposed: Alvarado, under a show of Kindness, goes to Almagro, hoping to
persuade him to come to his prepared Treat; but so soon as he was entered the
Hall, they clapped to the ^a^e, and the Soldiers falling upon Alvarado, slew
him: But soon after Almagro was called in question, and not long enjoyed this
his usurped Authority; for the Emperor Charles sending the Learned Vacca de
Castro with full Authority to Peru, to settle that disturbed Kingdom, Almagro
now used to Govern, had no Ears to become a Subject; therefore he marched with
an Army to meet Castro, by whom, after a bloody Fight, Fight between Castro and
Almagro.
being beaten and put to flight, having four thousand Men, he fell into the
Victors Hands near Cusco, where he was treated very severely; for shortly after
he was condemned to be Beheaded; Castro's Cruelty.
others were strangled, and some torn in pieces with Horses.

Not long after this great Execution, Blasco Nunnez Vela came to Peru, and
being appointed Viceroy, Vela Viceroy of Peru.
had four Counselors assigned him, with whom he was to consult in all Affairs;
and especially to set the Indians at liberty, which till then had suffered much
misery under the Spanish Tyranny: To perform which, the Emperor had given an
Order under his Great Seal, which was to be published and proclaimed in all
Places. Vela at his arrival faithfully performed all his Commands, seized upon
Vacca de Castro, because he had Executed Almagro without any Examination or
Trial; yet by this means he got the hatred of all, so that most of the
Spaniards chose Gonsalvo Pizarro for their Chief, whereby Affairs grew daily
more and more out of Order. Nunnez Vela laid all the blame thereof upon William
Xuarez Governor of Lima, Murders Xuarez.
whom he sent for in the Night, and correcting over-severely, gave him also two
mortal Wounds, of which he presently died: The Body was in the Morning drawn
along the Streets, which caused so great a murmuring amongst the Inhabitants,
that soon after they seemed to make a general Insurrection: Wherefore Nunnez
Vela fearing the worst, resolved to convey himself from thence incognito, and
pass to Truxillo: But his four Counselors advised him to the contrary; yet he
took his own way, causing all his Treasure to be sent aboard; and having made
ready his Horses to depart, the Common People in a tumultuous manner set upon
the Palace, catching, snatching up, and carrying away all the Silver they could
find, Is taken and put in P^ison.
and meeting the Viceroy, seized, and thrust him into a Dungeon; which done,
they fell at variance amongst themselves; for some would have him executed, but
others insisted to have him sent Prisoner to Spain; which last being the more
moderate, getting the upper Hand, Vela was put aboard, and committed to the
custody of Didacus Alvarez, who Anchoring in the Mouth of the River Tombez
(kindness growing betwixt them) released the Viceroy his Prisoner, and set him
ashore, who not long after got some Forces together.

Mean while Pizarro was every where acknowledged for Supreme Governor, who
having Intelligence of the Viceroys Design, sent Francisco Carvayales thither,
between whom and Vela was a sharp Encounter; but at last being worsted, and
retaken by Carvayales, Is Beheaded.
he was soon after executed, and his Head placed on a Pole near the Gallows.

The Emperor Charles turmoil'd with Wars at home, saw no likelihood to settle
the confused Affairs of Peru; yet at last he thought it convenient to send one
Peter Gasca thither, an Ecclesiastic, of a subtle and ingenious Wit, who
landing Anno 1546. in Lima, with no other Title than Chief Councellor to the
Emperor, took quite another course than Vela, persuading them all, that Affairs
should be settled in order, according to their own desires, and former
Miscarriages never be remembered, being utterly deleted by an Act of Oblivion.

The News of this General Pardon spreading it self far and near, wrought a
great change; for Pizarro's Intimates, and those nearest of Concern, shrunk
daily from him; which Gasca observing, marched against him; Gasca's murderous
Exploits.
and that they might make the more haste, they loaded several Peruvians,
chained, with their Arms, whom when they lagg'd, they switch'd and whipped
before them. And now both Armies being met, and discharging their Cannons at
one another, with considerable loss to each side, whole Regiments came running
over to Gasca; so that Pizarro being quite forsaken, yielded himself to the
mercy of the Conqueror, who accused him of High Treason, Gonsalves Pizarro
strangled.
and caused him to be strangled in a Dungeon, and fixed his Head on a Marble
Pillar in Lima, environed with Iron Rails, and inscribed with a brief Account
of all his Offenses. But Gasca not thus satisfied, hanged up several
Commanders, and whipping and stigmatizing others, condemned them after to the
Galleys: But his greatest spite was against the Field-Marshal Carvayales, a
Person of the Age of fourscore years, whom tying to a Horses Tail, Cruelty used
on Carvayales.
he caused a whole Hour to be drawn up and down the Marketplace, scorned and
derided of all People; which done, he was quartered alive.

Not long after Gasca surrendered the Command of Peru to the Learned Cianca, and
carried an unvaluable Treasure to Germany, for the Emperor Charles, who gave
him in requital for his faithful Service, the Bishopric of Valentia.

SECT. XII. The Expeditions of John Stade, and Nicholas Durando Villegagnon.
ABout the same time that Gasca arrived in Spain, John Stade had the Command
over a small Fort raised of Stone and Earth, on the Island Maro, adjacent to
Brasile, because the Salvage People of Tupin Imba sailed twice a year from the
Country of Brikioka, to Maro, at the time when the Plant Abbati was ripe, of
which they made the Liquor that they generally drink at their Humane Banquets:
They also landed on Maro about the Bratti-Fishing. This Bratti is a Fish of a
very delicious taste, either caught in Nets, or shot by the Tupin Imba, and
carried to their several Habitations. Against these People Stade kept a
continual Guard, when Heliodorus Hesse, Son to Eobanus Hesse, the famous Latin
Poet in Germany, came to visit him. Stade to entertain his Guest the better,
went into the Woods to hunt for Venison, Stade taken by the Cannibals.
where he was taken by the Tupin Imba, of which the King marched in the Rear
with a great Palm Tree Club, and carried him toward the Sea side, that he,
with others that waited on the Shore, might make up a Kawewipepicke (that is, A
Feast of Roasted Men) But because Stade being a German of a large Body,
well-skinn'd, young, plump and fat, they all concluded to spare this Dainty,
and carry him alive to Brikioka, His strange Entertainment amongst them.
that with such a Banquet they might highly caress their Wives: But the Journey
being long, and a just melancholy possessing him with fear, and the terror of
certain death, and to be Food for such ravenous Cannibals, so macerated and
consumed him, that he was almost dwindled away to Skin and Bone; whereupon
thinking him thus lean to make but few savory Morsels, they changed their
resolutions, and growing better acquainted, he having learned their Tongue, and
being able to discourse with them, they liked his company so well, that they
let him live amongst them. Nine years Stade had been a Slave amongst these
Man-eaters, when the French coming thither, bought him for a few Trifles, and
carried him to Normandy, where landing Anno 1555. he went from thence to
Hamburgh, being his Native Country.

Durande's Expedition.
Nicholas Durande a Frenchman set Sail from Havre de Grace, at the same time
when Stade came thither. This Durande having lost a Castle in Britain, to the
great prejudice of the French, out of a pretense of advancing their Affairs,
and to fill up their almost exhausted Treasury, reported, That the Spanish and
Portuguese Forces were driven out of India, where they had gathered so much
Wealth; and it would certainly redound to the Honor and Profit of France, if
they could become Masters of the Gold and Silver Mines. King Henry the Second
approving of the Proposal, and the more because the Admiral Gasper Coligni was
also very earnest, looking upon it as a fafe Retreat for the Protestants, at
that time cruelly persecuted: and Durande, sensible of the Admirals thoughts,
privately informed him, That in his American Design he chiefly aimed to plant a
True Church of God in America, where the Professors might enjoy themselves
peaceably. This Report being spread amongst those that called themselves
Protestants, (fled from Switzerland in great numbers to France) made many of
them venture upon the Design; who having fitted themselves, and setting sail
with three Ships, after some time arrived on the Coast of Brasile, and landed
on the Rock-Island, in the Haven Januario: Here Durande built several
Watch-houses, and the Fort Coligni, which he fortified with a considerable
number of Guns: Not long after he writ to John Calvin, That he would please to
furnish this new Plantation in Brasile with good and able Teachers of the
Gospel; which Request being immediately taken into serious consideration by the
Classes, one Philip Corguileray, a Gentleman near Geneva, set Sail out of the
Haven Honfleurs, with three Ships, freighted with some Provisions, several
Persons of diverse Trades, and two Ministers, Peter Richer, and William
Chartier: But he had scarce made Africa, Dissension in the new Colony.
when they began to have a scarcity of Victuals; wherefore they turned their
Design of settling the Gospel in America, to Pyracy, where they made small
scruple or difference, whether Friends or Foes, but made Prize of all they
could light upon, though indeed their Ministers both preached and persuaded the
contrary, amongst whom a Controversy happening, put other Business into their
Heads; for one John Cointak, formerly a Parisian Sorbonist, was also amongst
those that removed from Geneva, who pretended that Coligni had promised him a
Ministers place, so soon as he landed at Brasile; but Richer and Chartier, not
satisfied that there was any such Promise, and consequently thinking themselves
not obliged by his bare Assertion, told him, That themselves being able, under
God, to perform the Work, they needed no such Coadjutor: This bred so great a
Rancor between them, that Cointak accused them for teaching false Doctrine,
Wickedness of Cointak against the Ministers.
and chiefly that they did not mix the Wine at their Sacraments with Water,
which Father Clemens had strictly commanded. Durande, being prevailed on by the
Cardinal of Lorein, joined with Cointak, and thereupon so sharply persecuted
the Protestants, that he starved several of them, which others to escape fled
to the Brasilians: Nay, he took John Du Bordell, Matthias Vermeil, and Peter
Bourdon, out of their Sick-Beds, Durande drowns three Religious Men.
and tying their Hands and Feet, threw them headlong from a Rock into the Sea:
Soon after which, the bloody Persecutor returned with ill success to France,
where he wrote a Book against the Reformed Religion; but all the Honor which he
gained was, that all Parties on both sides accounted him a distracted Person.

SECT. XIII. The Expeditions of John Ribald, Renatus Laudonier, and Gurgie.
Florida unhappily discovered.
FLorida being upon the Continent of America, and so called by John Pontaeus,
who landed there upon Palm Sunday, though Sebastian Gaboto a Venetian, employed
by Henry the Seventh King of England, landed there before, may well be termed
the Europeans Bloody Stage, Pontaeus being slain here: But Ferdinand Sotto
exercised against the Inhabitants inhumane Cruelty five years together; yet at
last died of a deep discontent, because he could not reach his Aims, having
condemned so many Floridans fruitlesly to dig for Gold in the Mines. However,
since that, Julian Sumanus and Peter Ahumada undertook the Work anew, but with
the like bad Success. Auno 1545: one Lodowick Cancello, a Dominican, thought to
effect great things with four of his Associates; but landing on Florida, was
destroyed by the Natives. But Gasper Coligni the Marshal, neither discouraged
by these miserable Proceedings, nor the former Treachery of Durande, prepared
for a new Expedition thither; Ribald's Voyage.
and accordingly John Ribald was fitted with two Ships from Diep, at the Charge
of Charles the Ninth King of France, wherewith having sailed thirty Degrees
Northern Latitude, he came before the Promontory of Francisco, where he ran up
into the Mouth of a wide River, to which he gave the denomination of Dolphin,
upon whose Banks were whole Mulberry-Woods, which nourished Silkworms in
strange abundance. From hence he sailed by the Wolves Head (a Point so called,
because great numbers of Wolves breed there) and leaving the Cedar-Island,
landed on Florida, where he built a Triangular Fort, and having furnished it
with Men, Guns, and Provisions, sailed back for more Supplies to France; but
coming thither, found all things in disorder, occasioned by a War amongst
themselves; so that the French which guarded and dwelt in the Fort, The
Garrison in Florida in great want.
waited in vain for Relief, and their Provisions growing scant, thought it
fittest and their best way to build a Vessel, and sail from thence; which
having effected, and being gone about the third part of their Voyage there
happened such a Calm for twenty Days, that they made not the least way, which
drove them to so great extremity, their Provisions being spent, that they drank
their own Urine, and fed upon their old Shoes, which also in a short time
failing, they agreed amongst themselves to kill and eat one of their Seamen,
called Henry Lacher, Unheard Of Hunger.
on whose Flesh they lived some days; but being again driven to the greatest
want imaginable, in this extremity of Desparation, their Condition being
altogether hopeless, an English Frigate discovering them, and observing by their
manner of Sailing that they were in some great want, drawing near, sent their
Longboat aboard, and found them so weak, that they were not able to handle
their Tack; whereupon generously taking pity of them, they relieved them, and
conducted them to the Coast of England, and then brought them to Queen
Elizabeth, who had formerly designed to rig a Fleet for Florida.

Mean while, no News having been heard of the forementioned French Plantation
in Brasile, and Coligni's Difference with the King being decided, he prevailed
so much, Laudonier's Voyage.
that Renatus Laudonier should with three Ships sail to relieve the Garrison in
the late deserted Fort. Laudonier landing in Nova Francia, found a Stone with a
French Inscription, placed on the Shore by Ribald, and hung full of Laurel
Garlands: Then he visited the King Saturiona, whose Son Atorcus had several
Children by his own Mother, according to a Salvage Custom observed in that
Country. Whilst they stayed here, a Fiery Meteor appeared in the Sky, with
such fervor, that some Rivers boiled with the heat of it, and the Fish
parboyl'd, died; nay more, it scorched all the Plants far and near: The Natives
ascribed this Plague to the French Cannons, by which means they stood in great
fear of the French, who might have done great things had not they differed
amongst themselves; Remarkable difference in the French Fleet.
For a Seaman named Rubel Patracon, pretending to have skill in Necromancy,
would undertake to show the Places where the Gold and Silver Mines were, which
the rest of the Seamen believing, rebelled against Laudonier, and though sick,
imprisoned him, forcing him to sign a Writing to this effect, That the two
Ships, of which the Rebels made Vassar and Trincant Commanders, should with his
leave and permittance sail to New Spain for Provisions. Whilst they were
preparing for their Voyage, Rupiferrir having been sent to the King Utina, came
back with many rich Presents, and withal brought Information of the Gold and
Silver Mines Apalatica; but Vassar and Trincant taking no notice thereof, set
forth, and took a Spanish Carvel, richly laden before Havana, whose Commander
they agreed to release on the payment of a great Ranson; but the Masters Son
being sent ashore to fetch the Money which they had agreed for, in stead
thereof, made his Fathers Mischance known; whereupon two great Frigates and a
Galley were the next Morning very early sent to attaque the French, between
whom was a sharp Encounter; but in a short time the two Pirates were sunk, and
the Prisoners sold for Slaves, excepting a few that escaped in their Longboat.

In this interim Laudonier receiving no Supply from France, was brought to
great extremity; for the Rebels had carried great part of his Store with them.
In these straights he was forced by those that staid with him, contrary to the
Articles of Peace lately made with King Utina, to take him Prisoner, in hopes
that for his Liberty he would procure them some Provisions; but the Inhabitants
incensed at the baseness of so unexpected an Action, could not be wrought upon
by any means to give them Relief; but grown more perverse than before,
appointed a general Meeting to elect another King; so that out of all hopes,
they utterly gave themselves over for lost. In this desperate condition, John
Haukins, a great Sea-Captain, came thither with four English Ships, who pitying
their misery, furnished them with Necessaries, and having only four Vessels,
lent them one, because Laudonier was at that time too weak to endure the Sea;
but not long after recovering strength, and all things ready to set Sail,
Ribald came to an Anchor before Charles-Fort, with seven Ships from Diep:
Within few days after, the Spanish Admiral Peter Melandez arrived with eight
Frigates, whereof the French having Intelligence, cut their Cables, and stood
out to Sea, whom the Spaniards chased, but could not reach; whereupon leaving
them, they landed in the Mouth of the River Dolphin, where by help of the
Moorish Slaves they began to entrench themselves; of which Ribald having
notice, immediately sailed thither, at least to disturb, if not absolutely
drive them from their Work; but surpised in the way by a great Storm, lost
most of his Fleet, engaged among the Rocks; yet the Men were most of them
saved. In this Storm the Spaniards also suffered great damage, yet made an
Advantage of the Frenchmens Misfortune, marching with all speed to
Charles-Fort, in which were only two hundred weak Men, Ribald having taken the
primest Soldiers along with him. In the Morning before Sunrise the Spaniards
made a fierce Assault, and in a short time became Masters of the Place, which
Laudonier seeing, fled in a Boat; others leaping from the Walls into the Moat,
saved themselves by swimming: Whoever fell into the Victors Hands, Great
cruelty of the Spaniards against the French.
was without mercy slain; nay, such was the Spaniards inveterate malice to the
French, that wanting living Bodies, they exercised their Cruelty upon the dead,
pulling out their Eyes, and cutting off their Members, carrying them in Triumph
on the Points of their Swords. In the interim, the Storm ceasing, Ribald
approached Charles-Fort, with his shattered Fleet, but was so amazed when he
saw the Spanish Flag set upon the Walls, and Vallemond marching toward him
with a Squadron of Spaniards, that although a River lay between them, yet he
presently came to a Treaty, and delivered up all his Men, being above sour
hundred, upon promise of good Quarter; but the Spaniards in stead of keeping
their Agreement, bound them, leading them all to the Castle, where, both
against their Articles, and the Law of Arms, they massacred them, and burnt
their Bodies; but Ribald being quartered, they fixed his Limbs upon Poles about
the Walls, sending his Head to Sevil. When Charles the Ninth, King of France,
received notice hereof, he was not in the least concerned at the Spanish
Cruelty used to his Subjects, out of a particular hatred to Coligni, the first
Promoter of the Voyage. Gurgie's valiant Exploits against the Spaniards.
But though the French Crown so little regarded the inhumane Usage committed by
the Spaniards in Charles-Fort, yet Dominicus Gurgie showed himself so highly
concerned thereat, that turning all his Goods into Money, he levied two hundred
Soldiers, and fourscore Seamen, which he put aboard three small Ships,
pretending that he would only touch at Brasile; but sailing beyond Cuba, he
stood directly for Florida, where after his Landing he was kindly received by
Saturiona the King, who complaining much against the Spaniards Oppressions,
sent to join with him his Kinsman Olotocara, having the Command of a great Army.

The Spaniards by this time had not only strengthened Charles-Fort, but also
raised two others on each side of the River Mayo, in which three Holds lay
Garrisoned above four hundred choice Soldiers. Those in the new Forts made
little resistance; but quitting the same, and flying into a neighboring Wood,
fell into an Ambuscade of Indians, who slew thirty of them, and preserved
ninety for a Public Execution. Thus they marched on victoriously to
Charles-Fort, where by the way sixty Spaniards sallying out, were every one cut
off, which much facilitated the Frenchmens Work. The Governor Melandez, seeing
a certain mine attend him, fled into the Woods; but met there by the Floridans,
returned to the French, of whom he begged Life for himself, and some of his
People: Yet Gurgie deaf to all intreacies, would hear nothing, but pressing on,
took them all Prisoners, and as a just Reward of their Cruelty to his
Contrymen; hanged them on the next Trees: After which Execution, it can
scarce be expressed how kindly the Natives entertained the French, because they
had freed the Country from the Spanish Oppressions. Thus having accomplished
his Design, and returning home, he was nobly received at Rochel, but had not
the least Countenance for all his trouble from the King; the Cardinal of Lorein
telling him, That for his good Service he ought to suffer death, Is ungrat
fully rewarded.
because he had fitted out three Ships upon his own Account, without Authority.

SECT. XIV. Four English Expeditions, under the Conduct of our Famo^^ (...)
Martin Forbisher, Sir Francis Drake, Thomas Candish, (...) Smith.
CAptain Forbisher sailing to the Northern Parts of America, Forbisher's
Expedition.
Anno 1576. choosing a bad time, the Year being too much spent, and the Ocean so
full of Ice, that it forced him to return to England: Not many Months after, he
renewed his Voyage, Queen Elizabeth having rigged out, and sent under his
Command one Frigate and two Ketches; Manned with a hundred and forty Men: The
twenty sixth of May h^ weighed Anchor, and sailed to the Orkenies, lying to the
North of Scotland, where landing, he found the poor Islanders fled out of their
Huts, into Caves and Dens among the Rocks. From thence he steered
North-North-West, through abundance of floating Pieces of Timber, which
oftentimes gave him great stops. The fourth of July he made Friezland, where he
met with a great Storm of Hail, mixed with Snow: Before the Shore lay a great
Ridge of Ice, which hindered for a while their Landing: Here he saw several Wild
People, but could not come to speak with them; for upon the least approach they
fled; yet when they saw any advantage, made resistance: At last, three of them
came unarmed to the Shore, beckoning Forbisher to come to them; which he had
done, had not great numbers of the Natives appeared too soon from an Ambuscade
in a Wood, and behind a Hill, who seeing themselves discovered, marched up into
the Country, three only staying on the Shore, of whom the middlemost feigning
to be lame, at last fell down, whom his Companions took up, and carried a
little way, but then forsook, by which the English observing their Design, shot
that the Sand flew all about him; whereupon forgetting his Lameness, he ran as
swift as a Deer up a Hill.

Forbisher's Men had by this time filled two Barrels with a Mineral not unlike
Gold, but was afterward found to be of little value. Nothing else of Remark
did he find here, except great long-hair'd Men, who being exceeding salvage,
subtly plot nothing else but to murder, lurking for Men, like Wild Beasts for
their Prey, whom, when caught, they tear in pieces. Close fitted to their
Bodies, they wore the Skins of several Wild Beasts, priding in the Tails which
hung down betwixt their Legs. Their Tents are of conjoined Whalebones, covered
over with the like Skins, the Entrance always facing the South. They use Bows,
Arrows, Slings, and two sorts of Boats: In the biggest they can carry seventeen
Men, which are made of several Wooden Planks clinch'd together, and cased on
both sides with Leather: The smallest ones are covered just in the same manner,
much resembling a Weavers Shuttle, having in the middle a Hole, wherein a Man
sits, who drawing the Cover of the Boat about his Waste by Strings, with one
Oar makes swift Passage.

The Country it self is barren, yet feeds abundance of Deer, Hares, Wolves,
Bears, and Dogs like Wolves, whose Flesh serves the Inhabitants for Food.

This Country seems to be exceedingly troubled with great Earthquakes, because
several pieces of Rocks, and whole Mountains rent asunder, may be seen in
diverse places.

The fourth of August, Forbisher having elevated the Pole to sixty eight
Degrees, beyond what Sebastian Gabot, the first Discoverer of those Parts, and
set out by Henry the Seventh, had done (for America Northward never before had
been so far penetrated) and laden with a sort of shining Sand, which he
believed might contain much of a Golden Oar, having with him three of the
Natives, viz. a Man, a Woman, and a Child, set Sail for England, and the
seventh of September came to Milford-Haven, and not long after arrived in
London, where in short time the Salvages died.

Sir. Francis Drake's Expedition.
At the same time when Forbisher sailed Northerly, Sir Francis Drake also,
fitted out by Queen Elizabeth, steered another Course, sailing by Cape Blanko
and Cape Verde, along the African Coast, to Brasile, where he caught several
Sea-Wolves, and Anchoring in the River La Plata, furnished himself with Fresh
Water: Then proceeding on his Voyage through the crooked Straights of Magellan,
he came to an Anchor before Moucha, washed by the South Sea. The Islanders
received him very courteously, because they were informed that the English were
at great Wars with the Spaniards, to avoid whose Cruelties, they had deserted
the main Continent, and settled on Moucha. One of these Mouchaners going aboard,
served them for a Pilot to the Haven Valparizo, where Drake burnt the St. Jago,
a small Village, and plundring all the Country about it, got together a great
Treasure of Gold and Silver. Before Arica he took three Spanish Ships, richly
laden; and before Lima, four more, having an unvaluable Treasure of Pearls and
Gold aboard them. Thus enriched, he steered his Course Northerly to forty two
Degrees; but the Cold forcing him to fall four Degrees to the Southward, he
discovered a very pleasant and inhabited Coast, the People whereof showed him
great kindness: The King himself coming aboard with a great Train, set a Crown
of Gold upon Drakes Head, and gave him a Golden Scepter, and an Ivory Chain.
After this he inspected the Islands Tidor, Ternata, Java, Zeilon, and Cape de
Bona Esperanza, from whence, after a three Years Voyage, having encompassed the
World, he came safe to London, where he rested not long; for sailing Anno 1585.
to America, he took great Prizes from the Cities St. Jago, St. Domingo, St.
Augustine, and Carthagena, setting them all on Fire. Thus again returning home
victoriously, and after the famous defeat of the Spanish Armado, he rigged out
a new Fleet, having for his Vice Admiral Captain Hawkins: Their Design was to
have sailed to Panama; but both dying, and so the Commission ceasing, the
expected great and golden Project also died with them.

Candish his Expedition.
A Year after the death of these famous Navigators, Captain Thomas Candish
Manned with a hundred and twenty Men, and Provisions for two Year, setting sail
in a lucky Hour, a second time encompassed the World, passing the Straights of
Magellan; in which Voyage having got above ten times the value of his Charge,
by taking the Spanish Carrack St. Anna, valued at twenty Tun of Gold; and at
last freighted with a Mass of Treasure, he came safe into the River of Thames.

But much worse success had Captain John Smith, Smith's Voyage.
who weighed Anchor Anno 1614. with two Ships, fitted out by several Merchants
in London, for New England, and on the Island Monachigga to load Copper, Gold,
and other Minerals that were to be had there, and also to fish for Whales: But
there were no such Minerals to be found there, nor any Whales to be taken on
the Coast, because the time of the Year was past; so that he returned home
without Success. However, not long after, they undertook the same Expedition a
second time, but with worse Fortune; for being gotten in sight of Virginia, he
was treacherously set upon, and taken by the French, who accused him, that he
had destroyed the Plantations in Nova Francia, and unless he would make
satisfaction for the Damage, they threatened him with death. He was carried
Prisoner to Rochel, in a French Ship; but not far from thence surprised by a
mighty Storm, Smith finding an opportunity, leaped into the Boat, and driving
betwixt the Waves, at last, half dead, was thrown upon the Island of Oleron,
whom afterward, having lost all, an English Ship took in, and brought to his
Native Country.

SECT. XV. Netherland Expedition by Jaques Mahu, and Simon de Cords.
FIve Ships being fitted out at Rotterdam, Mahu's Voyage.
the Command of them was given to Jaques Mahu and Simon de Cords, who on the
twenty seventh of June, Anno 1598. weighed Anchor from the Goree, and sailed on
an immense Voyage; at last landing at the Island St. Jago, they won a strong
Castle there, and took two Barques; but at last Articled with the Portuguese,
that they might undisturbed supply themselves with Fresh Water, yet they, as if
they minded no Agreements, whilst the Dutch were filling their Casks, came down
upon them with two hundred Horse, each having a Foot-Soldier behind him; but
the Hollanders made so stout resistance, that they put them all to flight.

The City of St. Jago, which gives Denomination to the whole Island, is built
long-wise, having a convenient Haven, like a Crescent: Through the City glides
a River, on both sides of which, beyond the Town, arise several high Mountains:
That part which faces the Sea, has Fortifications, defended with strong
Bulwarks. The Portuguese had brought all their Guns to bear toward the Sea, to
sink the Holland Ships, which they invited thither under pretense of kindness;
but a great Storm hindered the Fleet, that they could not Anchor at the
appointed place; only two of the Ships sailed pretty near, but not within Shot.



From hence fleering to the Desolate Island Brava, they saw nothing but five
ruined Houses, the Door of one stopped up with great Stones, which being taken
away, was found full of Turkish Wheat, which proved a great kindness to the
Seamen.

Mean while the Admiral Mahu died, Mahu dies.
and his Body put into a Chest filled up with Stones, was thrown overboard;
Cords his Voyage.
so that Simon des Cords carrying the Flag, steered his Course to Guinee,
there to refresh himself; for most of his Men were so weakened by the Scurvey,
that they were scarce able to hand the Sails.

Arriving at their intended Port, the Sick were carried ashore; and the
Vice Admiral Beuningen, being conducted by a French Guide, went to the Viceroy
of that Country, who sat on a low Bench, Strange King in Guinee.
with a Sheeps-skin under his Feet, in a Violet-colour'd Cloth Suit, without
any Linen, Shirt, Shoes, or Stockins; on his Head a Cap made of yellow, red,
and blue Eastern Cloth; his Face whitened with Ashes, showed in several places
its natural blackness, appearing through the Colors; about his Neck a Collar
or Chain of Glass Beads: Behind him sat his Nobles, with Cocks Feathers on
their Heads, and their Skins painted Red.

Beuningen placed by the King on a Mat, complained to him, That the Guineans
fled from him wherever he came, though in Friendship, to barter European
Commodities with them, against Fruits, Poultrey, Sheep, and other Provisions:
Whereupon the King promised to furnish him therewith, and invited Beuningen to
Dinner. After some stay, the Kings Wives entered the Palace, a very mean and
ill-favored Building, more like a great Barn than a Kings House, and placed a
kind of nasty Trough on the Ground, in which lay nothing but some wild Herbs,
and a piece of a smoked Sea-Calf; and though he was a Person of the largest
size, and corpulent, yet he eat sparingly. Beuningen, though exceeding hungry,
found little relish in such kind of Meats; wherefore spreading a Napkin, his
Attendants brought him some Biscuit and Spanish Wine, whereof after the King had
tasted, he liked so well the relish, that it rocked him asleep, whilst
Beuningen walked to the Seaside to refresh himself; but the Guineans coming
about him, he was forced to return to the King, who waking at the noise,
appeared highly incensed at his People, and took Beuningen into his House:
However the Subjects, notwithstanding the Kings Commands, when Beuningen was
sent into a neighboring Hut, kept Watch about it all Night: The next Morning
early an old Woman entered, muttering to her self, and went out and in to
Beuningen three times one after another, knocking on a Box not unlike a Pair of
Bellows, out of which flew abundance of Dust about Beuningen, which caused a
great Laughter amongst the Guineans. The King also coming to him, presented him
with two Goats, and four Hens, and so conducted him back to the Ships.

Beuningen seeing that there was no good to be done, set sail from thence, and
coming before the River La Plata in America, Bloody Sea, very strange
it appeared Blood-red. Out of the Water which was taken up in Buckets, started
a sort of Insects like Fleas, which caused a strange and sad Distemper amongst
the Seamen, that when any Meat was offered to them, so soon as ever they put
it to their Mouths, they would fall down backwards in a swoon, foaming and
frothing at the Mouth, and turning up the White of their Eyes, die distracted.
Suffering under this Disaster, they hasted from thence with all speed, and
sailing into the Straights of Magellan they killed above fourteen hundred
Penguyins, which is a Bird that preys on Fish, and lives in Holes under Ground;
they somewhat resemble a Goose, only they stand more upright, and are
double-crested, with two plumy Combs. Coming to an Anchor in the Green-Bay,
there arose a great Storm, which continued several days, so that they were
forced to moor their Vessels with four Anchors, extremely afflicted both with
Hunger and Cold, preserving themselves alive by eating young Grout, at that
time not above a span high from the Ground; but this course Food bred an
incurable Dropsy, that posted them on to a sudden death. Afterward, when the
Weather grew more pleasant, Salvages in the Straights of Magellan.
the Inhabitants being Giants, most of them eleven Foot high, grew more
troublesome, oftentimes assailing them, and throwing Darts pointed like
Harping-Irons, at which they were very expert. Their Salvage Natures may appear
by their Dealings with the dead Hollanders, cutting off their Heads, and
bruising them to pieces, sticking Darts through their Hearts, and cutting off
their Privities.

At last the Fleet getting into the South Sea, were by stress of Weather
separated one from another: Two Ships, being the Faith, and the Good Tidings,
were driven back into the Straights of Magellan, where they suffered the
uttermost extremity of Hunger: A wild Woman.
Here they took a wild Woman, and two Children, who being of a sallow
Complexion, had a great hanging Belly, a wide Mouth, crooked Legs, long Heels,
and Breasts like Cows Udders; about her Neck a String of Snail-shells, and upon
her Back a Beasts Skin, fastened about her Neck with the Sinews of it; her Food
naught else but live Fowls: The same Diet the Children fed upon: The youngest
being but six Months old, had his Mouth full of Teeth, and ran without any
help: The eldest they carried to Amsterdam; but having kept the Woman aboard
two Nights, they gave her several Trifles, and set her ashore. Here they found
old Ice in the middle of Summer, four Foot thick.

Beuningen lingered in the Straights of Magellan, and being tired out with
Hunger, Cold, and Storms, returned home; and had they not by accident taken
abundance of Coneys, they had all perished. Above two Years had this unhappy
Voyage lasted, when they arrived at their Native Country, with six and thirty
Men, being all that remained alive of a hundred and five.

SECT. XVI. The Expedition of Oliver van Noord.
TWo Months after Mahu, Oliver van Noord set sail with four Ships, and two
hundred forty eight Men, from the Maes. Having reached the Princes Island, he
lost seven of his Men by the Treachery of the Portuguese; and Anchoring before
the City Javeiro, he was no better entertained by the same Nation: Here having
a Rencounter, and both Sides receiving considerable Loss, he steered for St.
Sebastian, a fruitful Island, producing an Herb very wholesome against the
Scurvey: Here the Seamen found great store of Sea-Mews, and Parrots, besides
several sorts of delicious Fish. The approaching Winter advised them from
entering the Straights of Magellan so late; wherefore they judged it best to
seek a convenient Harbor, to put their Sick ashore to refresh themselves. The
Island St. Hellen, for its fruitfulness, seemed to be the most convenient for
this purpose; but a great Storm preventing them, they came to St. Clara, where
taking in Fresh Water, they cast Anchor in Porto Desire. Porto Desire.
In this Haven they saw a kind of Sea-Dogs, Sea-Dogs.
whose fore-parts being overgrown with long Hair, seemed like a Lion, and the
Feet like Men's Hands; over their Eyes and Upper-lips grew black and white Hair,
which in Stormy Weather stands staring upright, but in Calm, lies flat and
smooth; they Urine backwards, sleep very soundly, and cast their Young every
Month: Their Flesh well-boyl'd proved a savory Dish.

Van Noord going ashore here, saw not a Man; Strange Tombs.
but only Burying-places on high Rocks, built of red Stones, and adorned both
within and without with Bows, Arrows, and other strange things: Under the
Heads of the Dead lay apiece Shells, and other things artificially carved.
Curiosity made them desirous to make a further search into the Country;
wherefore he rowed during a whole Tide up a River; and when their Boat ran
aground at the time of Ebb, he walked several Leagues up into the Country,
where he saw nothing but Deer, Buffles, and Ostriches: and because he saw no
People, he judged the Coast to be uninhabited; but returning again, he found it
otherwise; for the Seamen, though commanded to stay in the Boat, which lay in
the middle of the River, went ashore, where they were so fiercely set upon by
thirty of the Natives, that three of them were killed, and another wounded in
the Leg. These People are very strong and Salvage, with painted Faces, and long
Hair; but after this Encounter, they saw no more of them.

But van Noord having spent fourteen Months in search, and lost a hundred Men,
set sail again with three Ships; for one of them, being the Unity, he burnt at
the Island Clara, where he Wintered, because of a great Leak which could not be
stopped. Here they brought five thousand Fowls aboard, which much increased
their Stock of Provisions.

From hence passing the Wide Ocean, into the Straights of Magellan, four times
the Fleet attempted to go into the South Sea, and was as often driven back by
cross Weather into the Straights; but the fifth time proved more successful;
for having got through, and left the Straights a handsome way astern, they
discovered two Islands, from one of which the Seamen going aland, brought four
Boys and two Girls; who afterward instructed in their Tongue, informed them
concerning the situation of the Countries thereabout.

Philip-Stadt forsaken through famine.
After that, the Fleet Sailed into Hungers Haven, where they found the ruins of
the deserted Philip-Stadt, which Captain Thomas Candish had seen fourteen years
before, fortified with four Bulwarks; but now only some Houses, a Church, and
a Gibbet were standing: Four hundred Spaniards built that City, as a Key to the
Straights of Magellan. But all their Provisions being spent in three years
time, and no relief coming from Spain, and what they Sowed expecting the hopes
of a Harvest, the Salvages coming down by night destroyed; which caused so
great a Famine to rage amongst them, that many died, not so much as putting off
their Clothes, who lying in the Houses unbury'd, occasioned such a stench in
the City, that the remainder fled into the Field; where they lived a whole year
by the Fruits of the Trees, Herbs, and Roots: At last, three and twenty of
them, amongst which were two Women remaining yet alive, resolved to travel to
the River La Plata, and accordingly set forward, bur what became of them could
never yet be heard, only one Ferdinando that was of that company, accidentally
wandering from the rest, happened to light upon Candish's Fleet.

Here Van Noord set on Shore the Vice Admiral Jacob Claeszoon Ilpendam, for
some crimes which he had committed; and leaving him behind, Sailed from thence
through the South Sea along the Coast of Chili and Mocha; Mocha, what kind of
Island.
which Island, of a considerable bigness, rises in the middle with a forked
Mountain, from which a convenient River comes flowing down into the Country.

The Inhabitants conducted the Hollanders to their Village, consisting of about
fifty Houses built of Straw, but were forbid to go into their Huts: Upon the
Men's call the Women appeared, which being divided into three parties, humbly
kneeled down before them; and soon after an old Woman brought an Earthen Can
full of Cica, Cica, a strange Drink.
a Liquor made of Mays, whose extracted Juice, boiled and put into Tubs,
ferments like our Beer or Ale, with a cap of Barm, with which they treated the
Hollanders, who drinking moderately, were well refreshed; but the Natives will
ply this Liquor, till they make themselves Distracted, and are mad Drunk.

Van Noord takes a Spanish Ship.
From hence Van Noord steered his course to Sancta Maria, where in his way he
took a Spanish Ship, called Buon Jesus, that is, Good Jesus, and received
intelligence from the Prisoners, that the Admiral Simon de Cords, with twenty
three Men was killed by the Americans on the Promontory Lavapia, being the head
Land or Point opposite to St. Mary's; that a year since, tidings were brought
to Lima of his Fleet; so that they had made all things ready to withstand him.
But Van Noord hindered by strong contrary Winds, not able to reach Sancta
Maria, stood directly for St. Jago, in whose Haven lay a great Spanish Ship
full of Indians, and two other going in, which two he set on Fire, and the
third he Towed toward his Fleet; repenting extremely that he had given
liberty, and set Francisco de Ivarro Commander of the Buon Jesus ashore;
because he afterward understood from the Spanish Pilot, that Ivarra threw ten
thousand two hundred pound weight of Gold, packed in fifty two Cases,
overboard, when he observed that he was like to loose his Ship.

The Fleet Sailing forward came to an Anchor before the Thieves-Island, whose
Inhabitants are very light Fingered, go stark naked, and are of great strength;
they found the Women much Disfigured, their Noses, Lips, and Cheek-bones eaten
by the French Pox.



In the Bay La Baya, the Dutch Admiral, with a Spanish Flag on his Topmast,
Performs great things.
sent one of his Seamen in a Friars garb ashore, if possible under that
disguise, to get Provisions; which falling out according to their Design, they
were supplied with all manner of Victuals: After that, the Hollanders burnt
five Villages on the Island Capull; took a Chinesy Vessel, one Spanish Barque,
and a Carvel Laden with Brandy from Cocos; and after a great and bloody Fight
sunk the Admiral of the Manilla's, and so at last with various fortunes arrived
at Rotterdam, having in three years encompassed the World.

SECT. XVI. The Expedition of George Van Spilbergen.
ANno 1614. the eighth of August, the East India Company of the United
Netherlands set out seven Ships under the Command of George Spilbergen, who
coming to Cape St. Vincent, and engaging with the Portuguese, took one of their
Ships, and so proceeded on his Voyage to the Straights of Magellan, but by a
huge Storm, the Fleet was separated. Amongst those that were scattered was the
good Ship called Meruw, in which some of the crew had conspired to have killed
the Master, and seized the Vessel; but he having some inkling thereof, set so
stoutly upon two of the chief Contrivers with his drawn Hanger, that he forced
them to leap overboard, and as stoutly ordering the rest, set all to rights.

But Spilbergen Landing on one of the Penguyn Islands, Strange Corpse.
found two Dead Bodies just covered with Earth, about their Necks was a Chain
of glistering Snail Shells neatly strung; the Grave stuck full of Bows and
Arrows, was pleasant to look upon, between several high Mountains, whose tops
lay buried in Snow: The Fleet came out of the Straights of Magellan, but not
without great danger, for the South Sea much disturbed by tempestuous Weather,
seemed to raise its Waves up to the Sky, so that they had enough to do, from
being engaged among the Rocks: But at last with great difficulty, wonderfully
escaping all danger, they Anchored before La Mocha, an Island which on the
North side lies low, and on the South defended by Rocks.

Spilbergen in great danger.
Spilbergen seeing abundance of Men standing on the Shore, Rowed thither to
Barter for Merchandise, Strange sheep.
amongst them was a Sheep with a long Neck, bunch-Back'd like a Camel, a little
Mouth, and long Legs; which Beast serves them in stead of Horses, to carry
their burdens, and perform their Tillage. The Americans breed up these Sheep
every where, by reason of the extraordinary benefit they receive from them,
some of them keeping no less than eighteen hundred. Their Shepherds ride upon a
Beast almost like an Ox, and carry in their hands Copper Plates, hung round
about with Bells, which they shake, making a different noise when their Sheep
shall go in or out; and on their Heads wear Feathers like Coronets, standing
upright.

From thence, St. Mary's burnt.
Spilbergeon departing, Landed at last on the Island of St. Mary, where he
burnt all the Spanish Villages; And also Val. Parysa.
as he did also in Val Parysa.

After going ashore, in the Haven Quintero, he saw abundance of Wild Horses
drinking out of a Rivulet, supplied with fresh Water from an adjoining steep
Mountain; so soon as they espied Men, they instantly running away, were seen no
more.

Having left Quintero, and spent a Month in Sailing farther, they discry'd
eight great Ships; whereupon the Prisoners informed them, that it was the
Spanish Fleet, of which Roderigo de Mendoza was Admiral, fitted out on purpose
to fight Spilbergen, whose coming (as we said) was known a year before. At
midnight Mendoza Boarded Spilbergen, Bloody fight between the Hollanders and
Spanish Fleet.
but was so roughly received, that he was forced to Retreat with the loss of
the Ship St. Francisco. At Daybreak, the Holland Admiral fired at Mendoza, who
answering with equal courage, occasioned a smart Engagement, wherein the
Spaniards were so hard beset, that they put forth a White Flag; but it was
immediately taken in again by the Commanders aboard, choosing rather to die,
than surrender, because they had mocked at Mendoza, when he hinted the
difficulty of the Enterprise in the Grand Peruvian Council, saying, They went
out, only to take a few disabled Hollanders, and tying them hand and feet,
carry them to Execution. Yet their high and proud Stomachs proved very fatal to
them, for afterward totally routed and put to flight, most of them sunk by the
way.

This done, Calyow de Lima.
the Hollanders victoriously Sailed to Calyow de Lima, having a convenient
Haven: The City adorned with curious Houses and Temples, is strengthened by a
Platform, Planted with great Guns toward the Sea, and the Shore was guarded by
eight Troops of Horse, and four thousand Foot; whereupon Spilbergen, who was
yet to go so great a Voyage, judged it no way convenient to adventure the loss
of all on the good or bad event of a Battle, especially being so much
overpowered by the number of the Enemy: Wherefore seeing no hopes of Victory,
setting forward to Guarma, he got some fresh Provisions.

Against the City Peyta, Peyta burnt.
he played his Cannon with such fury, that the Townsmen deserted the place,
which he observing, set it on fire, and Sailed to Aquapulque, where from the
Fort at first the Spaniards fired some Guns at them; but soon after changing
humor, they came to an Accommodation, furnishing the Hollanders with convenient
Provisions. Passing on, and coming to Selaques; both Natives and Spaniards
having suffered some of the Hollanders to Land; after set upon them
treacherously in a Thicket, but to their little advantage, for they made so
good a Defense, that the Assailants not able to bear the brunt, fled with great
loss.

Spilbergen Sailing from hence to the Manilla's, waited there for the Spanish
Admiral Juan de Silva, who had made (is was reported) great preparations for
him long since; but seeing it was in vain, at last he returned to Zealand,
where he came to an Anchor, laden with Riches, in the middle of Summer, Anno
1617.

SECT. XVII. The Expedition of William Corneliszon Schouten, and Jacob Le Maire.
SOme Merchants that were called the Austrian Company, fitted out one Ship with
sixty five, and a Ketch with two and twenty Seamen, giving the Command thereof
to the Captains Schouten and Le Maire: Anno 1615 they Weighed Anchor from the
Texel; the first took a view of one of the three Islands, called Mabrabomma,
lying before Cape Sierra Leona. Mabrabomma, what manner of Isle.
This Island appearing a great height out of the Sea, was not inhabited, they
seeing only three Wild Buffles, many Wild Cats, Birds which barked like Dogs,
Wild Palm Trees, Lemon-Trees, Turtles, Crocodiles, Partridges, and Storks: From
hence, passing by the dangerous Shelf Abrolbos, they ran into Porto Desire,
where on the Rocks they found abundance of Eggs, and Spierings, or Smelts, and
Spiregrass sixten Inches long, wherefore they called that Inlet Spierings-Bay.
Their Sloop also brought two Sea-Lions, and one hundred and fifty Penguins from
the Penguin Isles, having Sailed two Leagues up the River; in the interim, the
ground being mere Stone, and their Anchors coming home, Schouten in great
danger.
the great Ship drove against a Rock, and at Ebbing Water, broke off the
outermost Planks and Iron-Work, and the Ketch also striking on a high Shelf,
was at low Ebb two Fathom with her Keel above the Water, and had without
peradventure been overset, and bilg'd, but a fresh North-West Wind kept her
upright, yet at last, the Weather growing calm, she leaned, but the Tide coming
in very fast, set her afloat, so that she was miraculously saved; then setting
Sail again to King's-Island, they found so many Eggs of black Mews, Incredible
many Eggs.
that one without stiring from his place, might reach above fifty Nests, and in
each of them at least three Eggs, which they carried aboard by thousands. Their
Boat Rowing Southerly down the River, found some Ostriches, and Beasts not
unlike Stags, but with exceeding long Necks. On the Hills lay Stones heaped one
upon another, which removing, they found Dead Bodies of eleven Foot long; here
Great Corpse.
here they spent their time in cleansing their Ships, and new Sheathing the
Ketch, but as they were Tallowing, Kotch burnt.
the Flame accidentally got between the Crevisses which immediately taking
Fire, in a short time consumed it to Ashes: The great Ship had gotten a Horn in
her Bow, seven Foot under Water; Strange Horn.
this Horn being firm without any hollowness, and not unlike a great Elephants
Tooth, struck through two Ashen and one Oaken Plank, sticking in a Rib of the
like Wood, and yet above half a Foot remained out to be seen.

At length Schouten Weighing Anchor from Porto Desire, Great Mews.
and Sailing to four and fifty Degrees Southern Latitude, met whole Shoals of
Whales, insomuch, that he was fain to Tacque to and again to shun them.
Sea-Pies, bigger than Swans, came flying in great numbers aboard, suffering
themselves to be taken with the hand. On the North-side they spied a high and
scraggy Coast spreading it self to the East South-East, which they called, The
States Country, that which lay to the Westward of it, Mourice of Nassau, the
Islands in fifty seven Degrees Barnevield's-Isles, and the sharp Point in which
lay the Snowy Mountains, Southward of the Magellan Straights end the Cape of
Hoorn.

Schouten had now gotten the height of fifty nine Degrees, when he entered the
South Sea, through the new passage between Mauritius and the States-Countrey,
which was called from his Partner, Straights Le Maire.
The Straights of Le Maire.

Isles in the South Sea.
Near the two Isles Juan Fernando, they found great store of Fish, after that
they viewed these Islands, that lay scattered up and down the South Sea, each
of them they named according to their several occasions, calling the first, The
Isle of Dogs; because they have abundance of Dogs there that could not bark:
Another, The Bottomless Island, because the Sea was so deep about it, that they
could not come to an Anchor. The Inhabitants who go naked, with their Skins
pounced full of strange shapes, of blue Snakes, Dragons, and such like
Creatures, Salli'd out of the Woods upon the Hollanders with great Clubs, to
which was fastened the Sword or Snout of a Sword-Fish, and also with Slings.

Somewhat further they came to Water-Land, and Flyes-Island, the first so
named, because the Shore round about was planted with Trees, but in the middle
all lay covered with Salt Water; the other from the Flies, which with
incredible numbers troubled the Seamen four days together.

Strange entertainment at the Horn Islands.
Moreover, the Reception or Entertainment which Schouten was welcomed withal, at
the Hoorn-Islands, being very remarkable, we will in brief relate:

Anchoring in nine Fathom Water, Shelly ground, before a fresh Rivulet, three
Hollanders sent to the King were by him courteously entertained, who with
strange humility, not bowed, but kissing their Feet fell flat on the ground,
and put the Hollanders Feet upon his Neck; and after this manner of Salutation,
waited upon them aboard: Yet although this King fawned so much, and seemed so
humble, yet he was very severe over his Subjects, for finding one that had
filch'd a Sword, he not only brought and restored it, but immediately Executed
the Thief before their Faces.

Le Maire and Arias Claeszoon were much honored here, for the old and young
King put their Crowns on their Heads, curiously Wrought of fine White Feathers,
and the end adorned with small Red and Green Feathers; they gave also to each
of them a Pigeon, White to their Wings, the hinder part Black, and under their
Bellies Red.

In the interim, the King of Water-Island visited the other, by whom Le Maire
was treated: When they met, they made strange shows of Honor to each other, but
at last showed their Salvageness by eating raw Fish, and rudely Dancing before
the Hollanders. Le Maire going into the Country, and climbing up a high
Mountain, saw nothing but Morass Wilds, and Valleys, lying under Water: The
King and his Retinue here kept him company, during his stay there, when weary
with walking, they sat down together under Coco-Nut-Trees; the young King
tying a String about his Leg, climbed with exceeding dexterity up a high Tree,
bringing several Coco-Nuts down with him, which he opened very expeditiously.

Arias Claeszoon, Rowing ashore one night, found the King sitting under a Roof,
resting on four Pillars, where several Naked Women Danced before him according
to their Music, which was Taboring upon a hollow Piece of Wood, which yielded
a murmuring sound without any distinct Tune.

But the two Kings meeting again, the next day Complemented one another with
more antic and ridiculous Postures, sitting side by side under the Roof,
imploring their God, with their Hands folded, and their Heads bowed to the
ground: At this interview, four Holland Trumpeters and Drummers stood playing
before the King, to the great admiration and amazement of the Islanders, which
were near ten thousand gathered together upon the News of the strangers to
attend the two Kings. Soon after a great company of Rusticks came running
thither, which had a green Herb called Cava, Cava a strange Liquor.
tied about their middle; on a sudden they began all to chaw this Cava,
throwing that which they had chaw'd into a large Wooden Trough, then putting
Water to it, they Kneaded it together; which done, brought the Liquor on their
Heads to the two Kings, before whom they kneeled when they gave them any: Yet
notwithstanding they received such honor from their Subjects, they showed
servile respects to the Hollanders, for every King presented them with a Pig,
which they first laid on their Heads, then kneeling, put it down at Le Maires
Feet, and bowing their Heads to the ground, rose again. They wear their Hair
long, which Brayded, hung on the left side of their Heads down to their Hips,
tied at the end with two Knots; but the Nobility had two such Locks: All of
them went naked, their Privities only covered. The smallest of the Men
exceeded the biggest of the Hollanders in tallness. Impudent Women.
The Women had long Breasts hanging like Satchels down to their Bellies, and so
unshamefac'd, that they prostituted themselves to any, in sight of all Men; and
still at low Water, their business was to catch Fish, which they greedily eat
raw.

After all this Entertainment, Weighing from hence, Strange wi^d men.
Schouten Sailed along the Coast of New-Guiny, where three Boats full of
Negro's came Rowing toward them, Slinging very fiercely Stones at them, and
hovering about, attended their motion all night. Next morning, seven Boats more
coming to their assistance, they set upon the Hollanders, but soon fled from
their Bullets; yet two of the Negro's were taken, that in each Nostril wore a
Ring. Sailing further, several Boats came aboard of them, whereof those that
Rowed, breaking their Assagays or Lances over their Heads, entered the Ship;
the Hair of their Heads and Beards bedawb'd with Lime, Deformed people.
flew about, whilst they Danced on the Decks, after they had eaten a good Meal:
But they endeavored to reward this their kind Entertainment with Treachery, for
going ashore, they soon after returned in greater numbers, and sat upon the
Anchors which lay over the Bows of the Ship, and there being a great calm,
endeavored to Towe the Ship toward the Shore, whilst others threw Stones and
Arrows. But so soon as the Hollanders firing their Guns Wounded several of
them, they all fled, except some which they took Prisoners, whereof one whom
they afterward called Moses, did them great service.

But Le Maire was amazed at nothing more, than when on the next Coast he saw
several little Houses built about nine Foot high, out of which many People
Issued, which were all deformed, either having Wry Noses, Bow Legs, Squint
Eyes, or crooked Backs, and all in one part or another misshapen.

At last, Anchoring before Jacatra, the Ship was stopped there by order of the
East India Company, and the Men divided and put aboard those Ships that Sailed
from India to Holland, and arrived in safety at Flushing, after they had Sailed
about the World, in two years and eighteen days.

SECT. XVIII. Voyage of the Nassavian Fleet, under the Command of Jaques L'
Heremite, and Geen Huigo Schapenham.
Remarkable Exploits of L' Hermit.
THe United Netherlands, to abate the Spanish Greatness, set out a considerable
Fleet, which they sent to try their fortune, in making Prize of what ever they
could light upon in any of their Havens washed by the South Sea.

Jaques L' Hermit had ten Ships under his Command, Manned with sixteen hundred
thirty seven Men, and two hundred ninety four Brass and Iron Guns, with which
he set Sail from Goree, Anno 1623. and coming before Cape Vincent, he
discovered eleven Turkish Pirates, whom fighting, he beat, and re-took the
Holland Ships they had made Prize of.

At Roxents Head, L' Hermit gave chase to fifteen Spanish Ships, and coming up
with them, sunk eleven, and took four laden with Sugar. Afterward Anchoring at
Safia, he sent the Ship Over-yssel, and a Frigate called the Gray-Hound, to
Convoy home the Prizes; afterward being informed, that thirty Spanish Ships
were making to them, Sailing into the Haven St. Vincent, the Spring Water that
he supplied his empty Cask with being brakkish, caused an excoriation of the
Guts, which brought the Bloody Flux, whereby he lost many of his Seamen; being
well entertained by the Salvages of Antonio, they went on to Sierra Leona, a
Mountainous Point full of Lime-Trees, here they found the Names of Sr. Francis
Drake, and other English cut in a Rock.

After that he put in at the fruitful Island Annabon, where he caused his
Surgeon to be Beheaded.

Vegar a wicked man.
This wicked Man being brought to the Torture, would confess nothing concerning
the Crimes objected against him, but being stripped for Execution, they found a
small Bag hanging on his Breast, in which lay a Serpents Skin and Tongue, with
which he had Poisoned several Men, but he confessed nothing.

The first of February, the Fleet came to Cape de Pemias, which they know at a
great distance, by its high Mountains covered with Snow.

In short time after, Sailing by the Mouth of the Straights of La Maire, they
met with very tempestuous Weather, and seventeen of their Men going ashore,
were devoured by the Cannibals of Terra del Fuogo. These People being all
Whites, and of a large Stature, Paint themselves Red, and go stark naked,
except some of highest quality who tie a Deer Skin about their Necks; and the
Women cover their Nakedness with a piece of Leather: They live in Bowers made
of the Branches of Trees, Staked three Foot deep, in a round, at bottom, and
above like our Tents, Canopy'd, the top of which open, to carry out the Smoke
like a Chimney; and have no other Household Stuff than some Baskets, in which
they lay their few Fishing Implements. They go continually Armed with Clubs,
Arrows, Slings, and Stone-Knives: Their Boats being only the Trunk of a Tree
made hollow, rise up before and behind like a Half Moon, and are fourteen, and
some sixteen Foot long, and two broad, and Row swifter than a Pinnace with many
Oars. Lastly, they are so Salvage, that they seem rather to be Beasts than Men,
knowing no Religion, ill Natured, cruel and Treacherous.

From hence, passing on, L' Hermit refreshed at the desolate Isle Fernando,
and so Steered his Course to Calla de Lima, on whose Coast, taking a Spanish
Vessel, the Prisoners told him, that their Plate-Fleet had Weighed Anchor, and
were gone to Panama; only the Admiral which carried forty Brass Guns, with
fifty Merchantmen, lay close under the Shore, Guarded by three Stone Bulwarks,
Fortified with fifty Guns.

L' Hermit having a design upon these, took three Spanish Vessels that were
going thither, and at midnight, sent Captain Adrian Tol, Peter Slobbe, and
Meindert Egbertszon, with twelve well Manned Boats, furnished with Brass
Drakes, and Hand-Granado's, to Attaque the Spanish Fleet that lay hard by; and
whilst some gave a false Alarm on the North of Callao, the Boats Rowing from
Ship to Ship, in short time fired forty of them; although the Spaniards from
the Shore endeavored by their Shot to drive back the Enemy, neither the Fort or
Admiral sparing Powder nor Ball.

In this valiant Exploit the Hollanders had only seven Men killed, and fifteen
Wounded: About break of day, seven of the Spanish Ships floated, burning
toward the Dutch Fleet, which were as terrible as now Fireships, which forced
them to Weigh Anchor to shun them.

After that, L' Hermit took two Ships laden with Wine, a third full of Wood,
and a fourth with Wheat: One of these Prizes he fitted and prepared for a
Fire-ship, and sending her to Board the Spanish Admiral, it ran aground within
shot of him; whereupon being battered by the Admirals Guns, and those from the
Bulwarks, and at last taking Fire gave but a small blow, because most part of
the Powder had taken Wet.

In this interim, while thus their design went prosperously on, their Admiral
L' Heremite died, whom they Buried on the Island Lima, and Schapenham, in
defiance of the Viceroy in Callao, caused one and twenty Spaniards to be
hanged at the Yard-Arm, because he had sent him a scornful Answer on the
Proposals concerning the delivery of the Prisoners.

Cornelius Jacobszoon Sailing to Pisco with four Sail from the Fleet, could do
no good there, for he not only found the City to be surrounded with a Wall of
fifteen Foot high, but having also many Earthen Redoubts, behind which lay
above two thousand armed Men, wherefore he deserted the same after some
Rancounters: Vershoor's Expl^it.
But the Rear-Admiral, John Williamszoon Vershoor, who was sent to Gainquil,
had much better luck; for he not only took that Metropolis, but also burnt a
new Royal Gallion, and two lesser Vessels; carried a conquered Vessel to Lima;
slew above a hundred Spaniards, and threw seventeen overboard, because they had
shot Poisoned Bullets against the Law of Arms; of which Conquest Captain
Engelbert Shut had the greatest honor: But the Seamen grew weaker and weaker
by the Scurvy, and all of them would have perished, had they not found a
sovereign Herb on the highest Mountains of Lima, Schapenham being chose Admiral
in L' Heremites place, Schapenham's remarkable Exploits.
Weighed Anchor from Callao, and ran into the Inlet Piscadores, where on the
shore he raised a Sconce; yet not long after departed from thence without any
effect, but lost twenty eight Men, through the bad Conduct of their Commanders;
the like number he lost also at Aquapulque, on the side of which City stands a
Castle with four strong Bulwarks; the Holland Fire-ship lay just without the
reach of the shot, the rest lay along the shore in a row, there to seize upon
the Vessels expected thither from the Manillaes: But because the Scurvy raged
amongst the Seamen, and disabled them, they waited in vain, Schapenham Sailed
through the South Sea to the Ladrones, where he found store of Provisions. Anno
1625. in March, he dropped Anchor before Maleye, and from thence went with
Herman Spiult, the Governor for the East India Company in Amboina, to Ceram,
where they Conquered the Fort Lochoe, and soon after Cambella; then the Fleet
being divided, Schapenham carried home two Ships from Batavia, and the
remainder returned at several times, they being hired to serve the East India
Company to Surratta, Malacca, Schapenham dies.
Coromandel, and the Molucco Isles: Schapenham Deceasing near Bantum, and being
Buried on Pulo Boftok, the Ships arrived at the Texel in July, Anno 1616.

Henry Brewer his Voyage.
ANno 1643. Brewer set Sail with four Ships from Reciffo, and ran close along
the States-Isle, so dangerous and Rocky, that he durst not put in to the Land;
from which flew great abundance of Party-colored Ducks, with sharp Bills,
about the Ships, and under the Keels swam also Whales.

On the West side of the Straights Le Maire, Brown ran into Valentine's Inlet,
where he was much troubled by the Winds which came whistling through the hollow
Mountains with great and sudden gusts: The shore afforded red and black
Strawberries, Carville and Muscles, to the great refreshment of the Seamen,
who daily saw Sea-Lions, Sea Lions.
but could not come to shoot one of them, for no sooner they perceived any
body, but they Diving under Water, swam away; and though they saw Men's
Footsteps of eighteen Inches long, yet they never found any Men. Thence
Sailing into the South Sea, along the Coast of Chili, they entered a Bay which
they named Brewer's-Haven; Brewer's Haven. Remarkable Exploits.
where Landing, they walked toward a great Smoke which they saw afar off, but
coming near it, found only two Houses within a large Plain, full of Sheep,
Oxen, and Horses; before the Houses stood Wooden Crosses.

The Dolphin Pink and a great Boat being sent to the Inlet, lay the following
Night at an Anchor near a high Mountain; from whence, in the Night, two great
Guns were fired, whereupon, Lieutenant William Ter Bergen Landed with sixteen
Musketeers, and climbing up the Mountain, found a Village behind the same,
where all things were in Alarm, Drums beating, Trumpets sounding, Ter Bergen's
Exploit.
Bells ringing; the Villagers suddenly firing their Guns on Ter Bergen, who
being supplied with thirty four Men, Encountered the Enemy so Valiantly, that
he fled into the Woods, not without the loss of Men and Horses: The Guns with
which they had shot in the Night lay only on a Redoubt: Ter Bergen persuing
this Victory, Marched into the Woods, and shot the Spanish Commander Andreas
Munes Iserrera from his Horse, got great store of Treasure which lay hid under
the Tree, being brought out of Carelmappa, which Village he set afire, and
killed all the Horses, and Weighed Anchor with the Admiral Brewer to Michael de
Cabuco, where not being able to Land, because of the many obscure Rocks and
Shoals, they set Sail to Castro, Castro a City.
which they conquered and burnt without the least resistance: This City situate
on a Mountain is stately built among Flowery Meadows, delightful Orchards, and
brave Fountains; Stream Chili.
the Sea before it flows daily fourteen Foot. Brewer also burnt a Spanish Ship,
and set some Houses afire, took three Spaniards Prisoners on Las Bahias, who
informed him, that the Winter Season was almost over, but that it was never
known by any to pass over so mildly, ill Weather generally using to blow down
Houses, Trees, and rend Rocks asunder; that there was much Gold in Osorno and
Baldivia; which last they had some years since deserted for hunger, but it was
since Garrisoned by three hundred Castilians, that none could get at the Fort
Conception (which lay a League Westerly from thence) but in a small Boat, that
there were on the place near two thousand Inhabitants. Moreover, an ancient
Matron called Lovysa Pizarra, from Quintian, one of the Isles in the Chilean
In-Land-Sea, being fetched from thence, gave information, that forty years
since, before the Indians took up Arms, the Spaniards were quietly settled in
Osorno, and in so good a condition, that an ordinary Planter had at least three
hundred Slaves, of which, every one was to procure a certain quantity of Gold;
that the Isles Chiloves were divided into above a hundred Colonies or
Plantations, the Chileses serving the Castilians as their true Governors; those
that do good Service, the King of the Colony makes them Commanders; and that
the Chinese had Rebelled in several places. Brewer on the Chileses request
took some of them, with their Wives and Children into his Ship, furnished with
Arms, he dug a Chest of Silver and a Brass Gun out of the Earth, and soon
after being sick, Brewer dies.
died. His Successor Elias Herkmans prosecuting those Public Affairs, sent the
Pilot of the Unity out of Brewer's Haven, and some Seamen, with two Chilean
Casiques with a Boat to Carelmappa; but being surpised by a violent Storm,
Strange accident.
stood in for Horse-Island, where he and the Casiques Landing, he ordered seven
Seamen to carry the Boat to a safer Harbor; but being driven from the shore by
strong Winds, it took in so much Water as filled and sunk it, so that all of
them were drowned. Horse-Island being destitute of Provisions and Lodgings,
those that were Landed expected nothing but Death, till they found out a small
Hut, and in the same six brave Sheep, and a good quantity of Potatoe Roots,
which served for Bread: But when this their newfound Store was almost spent,
they happily were fetched off by the Boat belonging to the Ship Amsterdam, and
with the whole Fleet came to an Anchor before Baldivia. Baldivia, a brave City.
This City built by the Castilians, consisted formerly of five hundred and
fifty fair Houses, and was divided into Streets and cross Ways, with two large
Markets, and as many costly Churches.

The Chileses unsufferably oppressed, slew all the Spanish Garrison, and into
the Governor's Mouth and Ears poured melted Gold; of his Skull they made a
Drinking-cup, and of his Shin-bones, Trumpets; after this, the City fell almost
to decay, only a great part of the Wall remained yet standing: The Chileans
hereupon flocked hither by thousands, some on Horses, others on Foot, all Armed
with Lances of a Foot long: Herkman hereupon informing them by an Interpreter,
that they being mortal Enemies of the Spaniards, would join with the Chileans
against that common Foe; and desired, that they might build a Fort on the
Marketplace in Baldivia, for a defense against all Invasions, and that they
might be supplied with Provisions which the Fleet wanted; all which the
Chileans granted, and accordingly brought in store of Sheep, Hogs, and Cattle:
But so soon as Herkman began to make the least mention of Gold, they were all
abashed, and said, that they knew of no Gold Mines, nay, their Hair stood an
end, when they heard the name of Gold; so horribly the Spaniards had dealt with
their Parents: Why the Chiloses grew strange to the Hollanders.
After this, the Chileans growing more and more strange, did not in the least
countenance the building of the Fort, and the longer the Fleet staid, the less
Provisions they brought aboard; upon which, the Ships were necessitated,
without any remarkable Exploits, to set Sail and return to Reciffo.

The Second Book, CONTAINING A DESCRIPTION OF Northern America.
CHAP. I. Of the Bounds of America, and of the Division of the Mexican or
Northern part thereof.
The Bounds and Division of Northern America.
HAving in the first Part of this Volume discoursed at large concerning the
Original of the Americans, and whether that part of the World called India
Occidentalis, or America, were known to the Ancients, or own its Discovery
wholly to the Moderns, as also of all the Discoveries that have been made of
the several parts thereof, and by whom, we shall now pass on to the
Topographical part, describing every particular Province or Region, by giving
an Account of their Situation, Temperature, Productions, Nature of the Soil,
and Quality of the Inhabitants.

America, lying Westward of the Azores, and the Worlds Meridian, is by some
supposed to consist of one vast Island, and several lesser ones scattered about
it: Nor can this Supposition be thought improbable, if, as many think, it be
environed with Sea on the North side, as toward the East, South, and West it
is known to be; East, by the Atlantic Ocean; South, by the Magellanick
Straight; and West, by Mare del Zur. But because the North-West Passage, though
attempted by many, as Nelson, Davis, Forbisher, Button, Smith, Hudson, and
others, has not yet been fully discovered by any, so that it is not certainly
known whether America be joined to Groenland and the Arctick Region, by a
continued Tract of Land, or severed by the Ocean, we shall follow the method of
those Geographers, who reputed sufficiently authentic, have divided this New
World into Islands, and two grand Peninsula's, joined together by an Isthmus,
or Neck of Land, called The Straight of Darien, by some The Straight of Panama,
lying almost under the Equinoctial Line, and extending in length from Nombre de
Dios Southward, above a hundred English Miles, and from East to West seventeen
Miles over in the narrowest place. Of these two grand Peninsula's the Northern
is generally called America Mexicana, from Mexico, the chief City of the
Province, properly called Mexicana; which without doubt was heretofore the most
potent, rich, and flourishing of all the Kingdoms of the Indians, at least on
the North side of the Isthmus. In the Division of the several Provinces of
America, as well those of the Northern as of the Southern Continent, we find so
various an Account among the several Geographers that have written of them,
(not any two of them agreeing in one and the same order) that to reconcile the
differing methods of so many disagreeing Authors, would be an endless Work;
wherefore we shall pitch upon the surest course, and not omitting the mention
of any of the Provinces taken notice of by the said Authors, hereby endeavor to
take in whatsoever material has been observed by all of them, and by the way
take occasion to show how one differs from another in the distribution of them.
Those therefore of the Northern America (that as near as can be we may bring
many into one) seem most fitly described in this following order: 1.
Estotiland. 2. Terra Laboratoris, or Nova Britannia. 3. Canada, or Nova
Francia. 4. Nova Scotia. 5. Norumbegua. 6. New England. 7. New Netherland, now
called New York, as being in the possession of the English. 8. Maryland. 9.
Apalchen, now called Virginia. 10. Carolina. 11. Florida. 12. Jucatan. 13.
Guatimala, containing Chiapa, Vera Paz, Honduras, Nicaragua, Costarica,
Veragua, Guatimala, properly so called. 14. The Kingdom of Mexico, or New
Spain, containing the Archbishopric of Mexico, Mechoacan, Tlascalla, Guaxata,
Panuco, Tabasco. 15. New Gallicia, containing Guadalajara, Xalisco, Chiametla,
Couliacan, Cinoloa, Zacatecas. 16. New Biscay. 17. New Mexico. 18. Cibola,
wherein are mentioned Tontonteac and Nova Granada. 19. Quivira; to which by
most Authors is added California, which being an Island, we thought fit to
reserve to be spoken of among the Islands, as also Terra Nova, or Newfound
Land; which last lies utmost East, as the other West of Northern America. Some
there are also (and particularly Monsieur De Martini) who among the
abovementioned Provinces have inserted Groenland, though doubtless with little
reason, since should it be granted that it is not divided by any Sea, yet it is
evident, if any credit may be given to all modern Maps and Globes, that the
greatest part of Groenland lies in the Hemisphere of the known World, and
therefore we have judged it most convenient to refer the particular mention
thereof to the Description of the Arctick Region.

The Islands of Northern America are 1. Terra Nova, or Newfound Land. 2. The
Island of Assumption. 3. The Bermudas, or Summer-Islands. 4. Hispaniola. 5. St.
John Porto Rico. 6. Cuba. 7. Jamaica. 8. The Lucayes. 9. The Caribbees, being
twenty eight in number. 10. The Isles of Sotavento. 11. Trinidado; and 12.
California, the biggest of all the American Islands.

The Extent and Circumference of the West Indies.
The length of the West Indies is generally computed to be from the utmost South
of Terra Magellanica, to the farthest North of Estotiland, about six thousand
English Miles, reaching from about sixty Degrees of Northern, to fifty three of
Southern Latitude; the breadth from St. Michael or Piura Westward, to Parabaya,
a Town on the Coast of Brasile Eastward, three thousand nine hundred Miles, and
the whole compass thirty thousand.

SECT. II. Estotiland.
THat the English have been very great Undertakers of Voyages and Discoveries
toward the North-West, appears by the Denomination of diverse Places, both from
the Persons which have Sailed thitherward, and also from such of our own
Country Names as were thought fit to be there fixed, as beyond the Arctick
Circle, are Sir James Lancaster's Sound, Sir Dudley Diggs's Cape, Queen Annes
Foreland, Cumberland Isles, Davis's Straight, etc. on this side toward the
Arctick Circle, Button's and Brigg's Bay, Hudson's Sea, otherwise termed Mare
Christianum, out of which more Westerly runs a narrow Sea called Hudson's
Straight: beyond Hudson's Sea toward the Arctick Circle is a place called New
North Wales; and on this side answerable to it, between Button's Bay and the
Christian Sea, lies New South Wales; all which places we find generally set
down in the American Hemisphere, but in the Geographical Discourses thereof
little is said of them, if so much as named. The farthest part of Land
Northward, between Hudson's Gulf and Hudson's Straight, betwixt fifty seven
and sixty Degrees of Northern Latitude, goes generally by the Name of
Estotiland, I mean that properly so called (for Estotiland is by some as
largely taken as Canada, by Cluverius, Golnitzius, Peter du Val, and others,
namely for all that Tract of Land extending from that supposed Straight of
Ansan, which divides America from Asiatick Tartary, as far as the utmost point
of Land that shoots toward the Atlantic Ocean) which Southerly toward Terra
Laboratoris is bounded with a River vulgarly called Rio Nevado, or The Snowy
River. Estotiland seems to have derived its Name from its lying more Easterly
than the rest of the Provinces, and, according as Nova Britannia is placed in
some Charts, might very well be taken for the same, though it has not been so
termed by any Author, but rather Terra Laboratoris, Cortereatis, and Nova
Britannia are generally received to be all one.

First discovery of Estotiland.
This Province is affirmed by Matthias Quadus, and J. Antonius Maginus, to have
been the first discovered Country of the new World, and that by Antonius Zeno,
a Patrician of Venice, in the Year of our Lord 1390. which was long before the
Expedition of Columbus, through the encouragement of Zichmus, King of the Isle
of Friezland; but by whomsoever found out, or at whatsoever time, it is
commonly affirmed to be not ill furnished with Provisions of all sorts, as
Beasts, Birds, Fish, Fowl, and Fruits, having a Soil indifferent fertile, in
respect of the coldness of the Climate. The Nature of the People.
The People in general (for some there are that live wild and salvage up and
down the Woods, and go naked, whereas the Clothing of the Country is the Skins
of Beasts and of Sea-Calves, called Morses) are reported not only tolerably
civil, but also ingenious and expert both in mechanic Arts, and other
necessary Faculties, insomuch that the first Voyagers to this place are said to
have observed of them upon this first Discovery, That they sowed Corn, brewed
Beer and Ale, and Traded by Sea to Greenland, Friezland, and other places, to
the distance of fifteen hundred Miles; and that they were not altogether void
of the use of Letters, but that their Character was only proper to themselves
and not intelligible by any other Nation: Moreover, there is a certain
Tradition, that there was here and there some little knowledge of the Latin
Tongue amongst them, and that there were found diverse Latin Books in a Library
of one of their Kings; the reason of which, if true, is conjectured to be from
certain Europeans who understood that Language, having in Ages past suffered
shipwreck upon those Coasts, where chancing to abide either through constraint
or choice, they might happily at their Decease leave behind them some Books and
other Monuments of the Latin Tongue. They were observed to use such a kind of
Javelin or short Dart, as was known to be used by the People of Java, and some
other Islands of the East Indies; whereupon it seems not wholly improbable,
that they might for a long time have entertained Traffic and Correspondence
with them.

Description of the Morses
The Morses, or Sea-Calves before mentioned, are about the bigness of a young
Heifer, the Hunting of which by the Natives, who take them in great numbers, is
to them in the stead of Whale-fishing, which is not there so good, for they
draw a great quantity of Train-Oyl out of them. On each side of the Jaw of this
amphibious Creature (for it is said to live very much on the Land, as well as
in the Water) there sticks out a crooked Tusk, winding downward like an
Elephants Proboscis, above a Cubit in length, and as white and hard as Ivory:
It is esteemed of great venue, at least it passes for such among those who take
it for other than what it is, for it is frequently vended for Unicorns-horn; of
which imposture Dr. Brown takes notice, and gives a Caution against in his
Vulgar Errors.

This Country is supposed, and that probably enough, to have store of Brass
and Iron Mines; but for the Mines of Gold and Silver, which some have imagined
there, the Northerly Situation of the Country, and by consequence the coldness
of the Climate, give sufficient cause to question the truth of any such
assertion. What chief Towns, Cities, Rivers and Mountains there are in this
Province, is not yet delivered by any, only Maginus and Quadus make mention of
four principal Rivers, which disperse themselves through the Country, and take
their source out of a great Mountain in the midst thereof.

SECT. III. Terra Laboratoris.
TErra Laboratoris, Situation.
by some called Nova Britannia, by others Corterealis, (though there are some
who make Laboratoris and Corterealis two distinct Countries, comprehended,
according to Peter du Val, under Nova Britannia, as the more general Province;
or, according to Cluverius, under Canada) lies from about fifty four to fifty
seven Degrees of Northern Latitude, between Estotiland and the River Canada,
which Maginus and some others, though for what reason is not expressed, name
Fretum trium Fratrum, The Bay of the three Brethren; others, The River of St.
Laurence, and is, according to the said Author, of so vast a bigness, that the
Mouth of it extends it self thirty five Italian Miles wide; likewise of such a
length, as to have been navigated a continued Voyage of eight hundred Miles.
The denomination of Terra de Laborador, or Laboratoris, seems probably enough
conjectured to be from the cultivability (if one may so term it) of the Soil,
or its aptness for Cultivation or Tillage; that is, because by the painful Hand
of the Labourer or Husbandman it may be rendered so fertile, as to yield all
sorts of Grain and Fruits; happily in allusion to that fruitful Country of
Campania in Italy, vulgarly known by the Name of Terradi Lavoro. As for the
Appellation of Terra Corterealis, it need not be questioned, but that it
derives it self from Gaspar Corterealis, a Portuguese Gentleman, who about the
Year of our Lord 1500. is thought by some to have made the first discovery of
these Parts; though Sir Sebastian Cabot a Venetian, is more generally believed
to have been the Man that (under the favor and countenance of Henry the
Seventh, King of England) first discovered them, at least the adjoining Island
Terra Nova, or Newfound Land; but just only discovered, being hindered the
farther prosecution of that Design, by the important Affairs in which the said
King was about that time involved; neither did Corterealis, whether he was the
first, or came after, do any more, for returning within a year after his first
setting out, he was never heard of; nor, as Osorius a Portuguese Historian
writes, any of his Company, being all supposed to have been drowned by
Shipwreck; and in like manner Michael Corterealis, who the year following set
forth with two Ships in quest of his Brother Gaspar. Upon which series of
Misfortunes the Portuguese being wholly discouraged, and giving over this
Design, the French of Armorica or Bretany succeed them in it with somewhat
better success about the Year 1504. whereupon it came to be termed Nova
Britannia, or New Britain. The ancient Inhabitants of this place were formerly
of a Nature, like the generality of the American People, somewhat brutish and
salvage, but by long conversation with the French, are said to have cast off
their original wildness, and become more civilly manner'd: they are very
jealous of their Wives, by report much addicted to Soothsaying, though
otherwise having little of Religion, or of any other kind of Learning; they
dwell for the most part in Caves under Ground, feed chiefly upon Fish, and are
accounted most expert Archers. Whatever places the French have built here
besides, those of chiefest note are St. Mary's, Cabo Marzo, and Breast.

SECT. IV. Canada, or New France.
CAnada, as it is taken for one and the same Province with New France, contains
New France, properly so called, Nova Scotia, Norumbega, and some adjoining
Islands, as the Canada of Cluverius, lying more North-Westerly, comprehends (as
we have already intimated) Estotiland, Laboratoris, and Corterealis, and,
according to the most modern Division (for that of Cluverius neither consents
with the latest Authors, nor agrees with exact Survey, it being named Canada,
in respect the River Canada runs through it) has on the North Terra
Corterealis, on the South New England, and on the East the Ocean, and has
between forty five and fifty two or fifty three Degrees of Northern Latitude.
Situation.
The River Canada is judged to be the largest of all the Rivers of America, as
those Rivers generally the largest of all in the World besides; it rises in the
Western parts of this Province which remain yet undiscovered, and in some
places spreads it self into huge Lakes, some of them a hundred Miles in
compass, with many little Islands dispersed up and down in them, and so running
from the West about a hundred Leagues, falls at last into the North part of St.
Lawrence Bay, being that wide Emboucheure of thirty five Miles breadth already
mentioned. This River is extraordinary full of Fish, among which there is one
sort more remarkable than the rest, called by the Inhabitants Cadhothuis,
having Heads resembling the Heads of Hares, and Bodies as white as Snow; they
are taken for the most part before the Isle de Lievres. The Country on both
sides of the River is pleasant and indifferently fertile, especially toward
the South-West, where upwards from the River the Ground rises into many little
Hills, invested most of them with Vines, with which and several other sorts of
Trees this Country abounds, being well watered with a great many lesser
Streams, all of them falling into the River Canada.

That this Country is termed New France, First discovery.
from having been discovered by the French, at least more fully than before,
there needs no question to be made; but whether Joannes Verrazanus, under
Francis the First of France, or Sebastian Cabot before spoken of, were the
first in this Discovery, may admit of some dispute: the Cabots indeed, (for
John the Father is by some mentioned to have accompanied his Son) who by all
are owned the first Discoverers of New Foundland and Terra de Baccalaos, are
also commonly reputed to have first found out the Province of New France,
together with some parts adjacent, though perhaps it might be upon this Ground
that Terra de Nova, or New Foundland, not being known at first to be an Island
New France and that might be taken for one continued Province; and it appears
so much the more probable, because Canada, or Nova Francia, is by some called
Terra Nova; however it be, or whoever were the first Adventurers, Quarteri and
Champlain are the two Frenchmen that have gained so much fame by making a more
ample and particular search into these parts, that this Province may seem from
thence to have sufficient claim to the Title of New France, whereof that part
more especially so called, lies on the North-side of the River Canada, and
Southward to Terra Corterealis. The Winter is here very long, and so much the
more severe by reason of a cold North-West Wind which blows most part of the
Winter Season, and brings with it so thick a Snow, that it continues upon the
Ground most commonly till after May. The Country is for the most part woody,
but in the Champain parts thereof very fruitful of Corn, and all sorts of
Grain, especially Pulse: It has also Fish, Fowl, wild Deer, Bears, Marterns,
and Foxes in abundance, and of Hares such plenty, that one of the little
Islands belonging to this Province, is by the French named L' Isle des Lievres,
or The Island of Hares: But the most peculiar Commodity belonging to this
Country is the Esurgnuy, a kind of Shellfish, extraordinary white, and
approved of singular virtue for the stanching of Blood; to which purpose they
make Bracelets of them, not only for their own use, but also to vend them to
others; but John de Laet and others have observed no other than a superstitious
use of them amongst the Salvages, in their Funeral Rites for the Dead: the
manner of their taking it is very remarkable; for when any one is condemned to
die, or taken Prisoner, they cut off all his fleshy parts in long slices, and
then throw him into the River, where they let him lie twelve hours, and at last
pulling him out again find his Wounds full of Esurgnui. Quadus and Maginus make
mention of three ancient Towns, namely Canada (denominated as the Province,
from the River) Hochelai and Hochchelaga, giving Name to a Territory about it,
which Geographers either take no notice of, or make some question of the being
of such Towns; however, a late Describer of the West Indies, not mentioning the
other two, gives this description of the last, viz. Hocbchelaga:

This City (says he) said to be the Seat and Residence of a King of this
Country whom the Natives, at least some of them, acknowledge and reverence,
carrying him sometimes in great pomp upon their Shoulders sitting upon a Carpet
of Beasts Skins, is situate far within Land, at a distance of six or seven
Leagues from the River Canada, and is a kind of fortified place, encompassed
about with a threefold Range of Timber Ramparts one within another, of about
two Rods high from the Ground, with cross Planks, or pieces of Timber jutting
out, on purpose to hinder an Enemy's Scaling or getting up; toward the top
there is as it were a Scaffold or Gallery framed, from whence they may throw
down Stones (of which there is always good store ready, or what else to annoy
the Assailants: It has one only Gate for Entrance, and that likewise well
fortified after their manner: There are guessed to be in it fifty or sixty
great Houses, built (as the manner of the Americans that live in Houses usually
is) in a square Figure, each side being about fifty Foot long, or more, and
sixteen or twenty broad, but not many Stories high; and in the midst of the
Court or void space; a place to make their Fire, and do other necessary work
about it. Moreover the Territory round about this Town is both rich in Soil,
and pleasant in Prospect.

Besides these three abovementioned Towns there are several others, which are
not untaken notice of in the most modern Descriptions and Maps, viz. 1. Stadac,
or Stadacone, somewhat Westward of a small Isle called The Isle d' Orleance; 2.
Quebeque, which being made a Colony of the French, and the Natives expelled,
came to be Entitled St. Croix; 3. Tadoussac, which lies in that part of the
Country denominated from the River Saguenay, and by some called at this day
Nouvelle Biscaye, a delightful place, and full of stately Trees, and has
likewise a good and safe Haven, capable of receiving twenty Ships; 4. Trois
Rivieris, or three Rivers; 5. Monreal; 6. Sillery; 7. Richelieu; besides two
strong Castles or Forts, Franceroy and St. Lewis; the First built by Monsieur
Robeval at his Landing here, about the Year 1540. the other designed for a
Colony, in the Year 1611. by Monsieur Champlany, but hindered by the Invasion
of the Iroquois. The smaller Rivers that run out of the Gulf of St. Lawrence,
and the grand River Canada toward the North, on which side chiefly lies this
Province, are, 1. Chichesedec, 2. St. Margarite, 3. Lesquemin, 4. Saquenay,
beforementioned, 5. Montonne; and on the South side, the River Mary. The
principal Tribes of the ancient Natives of this Country were; on the North
side of Canada the Canadans, the Betisiamites, the Hurons, the Algoniquins, the
Quenongebins, the Algoingequins, the Attagopantans, the Atticameques, the
Nipisiriniens; and on the South side, the Etechemins, and the chief Heads or
Princes of these Tribes were called Sagamores.

Jaques Quartier Complementing their King Agouthanna, took up his Quarters a
whole Winter at St. Croix, a Sandy Promontory, overflowed by the River Canada,
into which falls the Lake de Champlain, grown round about with Chestnut Trees;
in it breeds the strange Fish called Chaousarou, generally ten Foot long,
Strange Fish named Chaousaron.
with Heads like Sharks, and two rows of Teeth-in their Mouths, their Skins
full of strong Scales, which are sufficient Shields against Swords and Lances,
are great devourers of other Fish and Fowls, which they take after this manner,
viz. they swim amongst Reeds or Canes, and lie still with their Mouths open;
whereat the Birds sitting down upon them, are immediately swallowed.

The Natives of Nova Francia anoint their bodies with Oil; in the Summer they
go naked, and in the Winter mantle themselves in Furs. Their Warlike
Accoutrements are Darts and Clubs, but chiefly great Shields. They are
revengeful, cruel, and fraudulent; their Women common to all Men, from fifteen
to twenty, after which, Marrying, they become very Chaste. Their Diet is Indian
Corn, fresh and salt Fish, Venison, Buffalo's and Beavers flesh; wiping their
Fingers (when greasy) on their Heads, or their Dogs backs, which wait for the
Scraps.

At that season when the Corn covers the ground, to any height, they eat
Cockles, Dogs, dead Caryon, and the Skins wherewith they Clothe themselves.
When they have eaten their fill, they tabering on their Bellies, cry, Tapoue
Mikispoun, that is, Verily I am satisfied. They give their Sick a speedy Cure,
either immediately killing them, or inhumanely exposing them to the Woods, to
be devoured by ravenous Beasts, but if they die suddenly, they in howling tone
pronounce Ove, Ove, thereby to chase the Souls of the Deceased out of their
Huts; they stick the bodies on Wooden Prongs, cover them with Bark, and lay
their Clothes and Arms by them; all what remains of the Funeral Feasts is
burnt, whereas at other times, what e're is brought on their Table they eat,
though ready to burst. They make the first Proofs of their Valor by undergoing
a most prodigious Torment, in this manner; Strange proof of Valor.
Two by consent tie their naked Arms together, on which they suffer burning
Sulphur to be poured, till the flesh starts from the bone; if either of them
shrink, or pull back his Arm, he is accounted by them ever after as an
ignominious and base Coward. They call God Atahocan, and believe that one
Messou first drowning the world by a general Deluge, restored it again after a
wonderful manner, Wonderful opinion of God.
viz. Messou hunting with Wolves, they scented a Deer which being closely
pursued, leaped into a neighboring Pool, the Wolves following it, were drowned;
Flood.
Messou coming thither, stood amazed at a Bird, which informed him, that the
Wolves were plucked down, and held fast in the bottom by horrible Monsters,
whereupon he diving, the Pool immediately began to swell, and at last the whole
surface of the Earth to be overflowed. Messou afterward let a Raven fly to
fetch a Clod of Earth, but in vain, for all the Land lay drowned in Water; at
last a Rat diving to the bottom, brought a lump of Earth, out of which Messou
restored the World; shot Arrows into Trees, which became fruitful Branches.
Here also reside an innumerable many Sorcerers, Sorcerers.
called Pillotoa's, which sometimes being possessed with a Frenzy, scourge
themselves in a terrible manner, insomuch that the Blood runs down by their
sides: These People are held in great esteem, for they boast themselves to have
their Original from Heaven upon this occasion, They boast their Extract from
Heaven. Their strange Relation concerning it.
viz. Ataensic, a certain great Queen or Goddess, residing above the Stars, had
a sick Husband, who Dreamt that he should be restored to his former health so
soon as he could but taste of the Fruits which grew on a Tree, whereby the
Family of Heaven were kept alive, but that the Tree must needs be cut down,
which Ataensic obeying, gave only two blows, when the Tree, to her great
amazement, fell out of Heaven down to the Earth; there being by this means
nothing more left to eat in Heaven: Ataensic followed the fallen Tree, and
being big with Child, bare a Daughter, which growing up to years, was Delivered
of two Daughters, viz. Taoviscaron and Jouskeha, the eldest of which slew the
youngest: By these Fables we may discern their obscure knowledge of Noah's
Flood, Eve's Fall, and Cain's Murder. No less ridiculous is that which they
believe concerning the Creation, viz. That the Waters were enclosed within a
Frog, which Jouskeha causing to be cut open, all Streams and Rivers issuing
out, had their Original from thence: This done, Jouskeh^ opened a Pit, out of
which came all sorts of Beasts; they ascribe a Bodily shape to the Soul, As
also of the Creation, and Souls of the Deceased.
as also Immortality, but that they live together in a great Village toward
the West; from which removing sometimes, they knock at the Doors of their
former Friends in the Night, and sow deserted Grounds: That the Journey toward
the Village in which the Souls reside is very strange; the Highway thither
beginning at a Rock named Ecaregniendi, where they first Paint their Faces,
which done, they go to a Hut inhabited by an old Man, named Osotrach, who takes
the Brains out of the Souls Head; after which they walk to a broad River, which
they cross on a narrow Plank or Bridge, on which a Dog encountering, forces them
to leap into the Water, which carries them down to the forementioned Village.
They acknowledge one Oki for the Governor of the Sea, and seasons of the Year:
Strange Rock.
They also Religiously Worship the Rock Tsankchi Arasta, which they believe
some ages ago was once a Man, but afterward Transformed into a Rock, in which a
Demon resides, who can make their Journies either successful or dangerous,
wherefore they offer him Tobacco. Thunder.
Their opinion of Thunder is likewise very ridiculous, for they say that the
Devil endeavoring to vomit a horrible Serpent, by straining to evacuate the
same, rents the Clouds, and occasions Thunder. Lastly, Thakabech Idol.
They relate of a Dwarf called Thakabech, who climbed on the top of a Tree,
which by his blowing thereon grew so high, that it touched the Clouds, and
Thakabech easily stepped into them, where he found all sorts of delight and
pleasure; but having a Sister on Earth, descended again along the Tree, and
fetching his Sister, conducted her above the Stars; mean while, Thakabech going
in the Night to see if he had taken any thing in his Net which he had pitched,
found it full of Fire, and observing the same very narrowly, saw that he had
taken the Sun, but durst not approach the same, by reason of its great heat;
but making a Mouse, sent her to gnaw the Net in pieces, and set the Sun at
liberty. Every twelfth year they keep an extraordinary great Funeral-Feast;
Funeral-Feast.
for on the Set-time they flock from all parts to the appointed place, every
one carrying thither the Bodies or Bones of their Deceased Friends, wrapped up in
Clothes, and hang them over their Meat, which they eat singing; such fond and
Superstitious Conceits make up the Religion of these poor deluded People.

SECT. V. Accadia, or Nova Scotia.
NOva Scotia, or New Scotland, formerly called Accadia, is commonly accounted a
part of New France, ( viz. that part which lying on the South side of the River
Canada, and shooting South-Easterly into a bosom of the Sea, forms it self into
a Peninsula, between the Gulf of St. Lawrence; and the Bay Francoise)
nevertheless, because of the different concernments of this part of the
Country, in regard the right of claim to several places in this district; most
especially of all Nova Francia besides, has been long in dispute between Us
and the French, it will be most convenient to Treat of it apart; and because
the Series of Affairs, from its first discovery, till of late years, appears
faithfully represented on the English part, in a Remonstrance Addressed to the
King and Council by Sir Lewis Kirk, and his Brother John Kirk Esquire; it will
not be amiss (only adding some few things upon occasion) to follow exactly the
Narration of Affairs, delivered in the said Remonstrance to this effect.

1. THe whole Tract or Space of Land in America, lying on either side of the
River Canada, which a long time since were known by the Names of Nova Francia,
and Nova Scotia, were at first discovered and found out by the English, in the
time of Henry the Seventh, King of England; which Expedition was first
undertaken at the Command and Charges of that King; afterward furthered and
carried on by the favorable Aspect of Queen Elizabeth; so that in process of
time, for many years together, the said Tract of Ground, with absolute
Privilege of free Commerce, fell under the Jurisdiction and Power of the Crown
of England: Neither was it unto any other Christian Princes, or their Subjects
more clearly known or discovered, until about the year 1600. some of the
French understanding the benefit arising by Traffic in the River of St.
Lawrence, having formerly seized upon that Tract of Land, situate on the North
side of the said Flood or River Canada, did afterward, in Anno 1604. ( under
the Conduct of Peter de Gua, Lord of Monts, who in the year 1606. was followed
by Monsieur de Pourtrincourt) Possess themselves of L' Accadie, lying on the
South side of the said River, naming the whole Nova Francia, challenging to
themselves for many years, at least de facto, the Possession thereof, with sole
liberty of Commerce there.

2. In Anno 1621. King James of England looking upon the Possession gotten
there by the French, as upon an Invasion, did by his Letters Patents Grant unto
Sir William Alexander a Scotchman ( Created afterward Earl of Sterling, by
King Charles the First) L' Accadie, by the Name of Nova Scotia; who in the year
1622, and 1623. after Sir Samuel Argal had driven out Biard and Mass, and
demolishing their Fort, carried them Prisoners to Virginia; having obtained the
Possession thereof, they Planted a Colony therein, and kept Possession for
about two years after, until such time, as upon the Marriage of his Majesty
King Charles the First, with the Lady Henrietta Maria, the said L' Accadie, or
Nova Scotia, was by Order of the King of England returned into the Possession
of the French.

3. Afterward a War arising between his Majesty King Charles the First, and
Lewis the XIII. Anno 1627, and 1628. Sir David Kirk and his Brethren and
Relations of England, did by virtue of his Majesty's Commission, send to Sea
(at their great charge) first three, afterward nine Ships, with Warlike
Preparations for recovering of the Possession of the said Lands, lying on
either side of the said River Canada, and to expel and eject all the French
Trading in those Parts, wherein they had good Success; and in Anno 1627. did
there seize upon about eighteen of the French Ships, wherein were found a
hundred thirty five Pieces of Ordnance, designed for relief of the Royal Fort
in L' Accadie, and Quebeck in Nova Francia, under the Command of Monsieur de
Rocmand, and Monsieur de la Tour, Father of de la Tour, Governor of the said
Royal Fort, whom, together with the said Ships and Guns, they brought into
England; and in the year 1628. they Possessed themselves of the whole Region of
Canada or Nova Francia, situate on the North side of the River, together with
the Fort or Castle of Quebeck, Sir Lewis Kirk being then constituted Governor
of the place, the French being then either expelled or conveyed into England,
and the Arms of the King of England being publicly there erected, and every
where placed; and before the year 1628. it was brought to pass by the said Sir
William Alexander, (assisted both by the advice and charge of the said Kirk)
that in the parts of L' Accadie, or Nova Scotia, on the South side of the River
Canada, the whole place, with the Forts thereon built, being by him subdued,
presently came under the Power of the King of England; that Region on the South
side falling into the Possession of the said Sir William Alexander, and that on
the North side, into the Possession of the Kirks.

4. On March 29. 1632. a Peace being concluded between King Charles the First,
and Lewis the XIII. it was amongst other things on the part of the King of
England agreed, That all the Forts, as well in L' Accadie as in Nova Francia,
should be restored into the Possession of the Subjects of the French King,
which was exactly performed on the part of the English, though to the great
damage of the Kirks; but on the part of the French, although it was agreed, as
in the fourth and fifth Articles of Peace is set down, (to which reference is
had) yet nothing was ever performed of their parts; so that the Kirks did
thereupon suffer loss, to the value of five thousand Pounds Sterling. which were
to be paid them by Monsieur de Cane a Frenchman, but remain unpaid to this day.

5. Anno 1633. the King of England taking notice, that although the Forts and
Castles, according to the League, were delivered up into the Possession of the
French, (especially such as had been erected during their Possession thereof)
yet that his English Subjects were not to be excluded from Trade or free
Commerce, in those Regions that were first Discovered and Possessed by his
Subjects, did, with the advice of his Council, by his Letters Patents, Dated
May 11. 1633. upon consideration had of the Expenses, which the said Kirks had
laid out upon the reducing of that Country with the Fort of Quebeck, to the
value of 50000lb.; and also of their ready obeisance in resigning up the same
on his Royal Command, Grant unto Sir Lewis Kirk, and his Brother John Kirk and
his Associates, for the term of thirty one years (not yet expired) full
Privilege, not only of Trade and Commerce in the River Canada, and places on
either side adjacent, but also to Plant Colonies, and build Forts and Bulwarks
where they should think fit.

6. By virtue of which Commission, Sir Lewis Kirk and his Brother John Kirk,
and his Associates, in the Month of February next following, viz. in 1633. set
forth a Ship called The Merry Fortune, Laden with Goods of a considerable
value, consigned to those parts, where during her Trading there, without any
just offense given; and in time of Peace, she was by the French forceably
seized on, and carried into France, and her Lading, as if she had been lawful
Prize, Confiscated; whereupon the Kirks suffered loss, to the value of twelve
thousand Pounds. And although the Lord Scudamore, Ambassador in France, by the
King of Englands special Command, and the said John Kirk being there in Person,
by the King's Command, did often earnestly urge, that the Moneys due to the
said Kirks, and the said Ship, with her Lading, might be restored, which for no
other cause had been seized upon and sold, but only for that by the King's
Commission she was found Trading at Canada; yet he could obtain nothing, but
after some years fruitless endeavors returned into England without
accomplishing his desires.

7. In the year 1654. Cromwell, although an unjust Usurper of the Government,
yet upon consideration of the Premises, taking a just occasion for requiring
the Possession of L' Accadie, sends forth several Ships under the Command of
one Sedgwick, who by virtue of the Authority granted him by Cromwell, assaulted
and subdued the aforesaid Forts in Nova Scotia, and restored them into the
Possession of the English: And although in the year 1655. a League of firm
Peace and Amity being concluded between Cromwell and the French King, the French
Ambassador did often urge the Restitution to the Possession of the French; yet
for the same causes aforesaid, which had moved Cromwell to seize upon them, it
was thought fit still to retain the Possession of them; and although according
to the purport of the twenty fifth Article of the Peace, Commissioners on both
sides were to be appointed for the deciding and determining that Controversy;
yet nothing was done therein, neither did the Commissioners ever meet within
three Months, as in the twenty fourth Article of the Treaty was provided and
agreed: So that now the case is very clear, that the Possession to the English
remains firm and just, and that the Forts and Bulwarks before specified, are
without all peradventure under the Power and Jurisdiction of the King of
England.

Since the Restoration of his present Majesty, the French Ambassador
representing unto the King the Pretensions of the French unto the several Forts
and other places in Accadie, and urging the nonperformance of the Articles of
Agreement between Oliver Cromwell and the French King, moved the King of
England, As a professed Enemy to all Violence, for a Restitution of all the
Forts and other places which were then in the possession of the English: Not
long after which, whether upon the Ambassadors request, or upon other important
Affairs intervening, or upon what other ground soever it were, the French were
suffered to re-enter on the foresaid places, and do yet keep Possession of
them, till such time as the English claim under the just Title of the Kirks,
shall meet with some fit occasion of being revived.

That which we suppose gives the French so much the more confidence in their
claim of this Country, is their presumption upon the Expedition of James
Quartier, whom they will have to be the first Discoverer, if not Possessor, not
only of the Isle of Assumption, but also of this Coast of Nova Francia, not
taking notice it seems of Sebastian Cabot, under Henry the Seventh.

The chief places of Note in this Country, are, 1. Port Royal, a Colony of
French, said to have been Planted there by Monsieur de Montz in 1604. by
report, capable of receiving a thousand Ships; and in 1613. (the French being
driven out by Sir Samuel Argal, Governor of Virginia, who took Prisoners Biard
and Mass, and demolished the Fort at Port Royal) given by Patent, as
aforementioned, to Sir William Alexander; afterward by him sold again to the
French; then in the time of Oliver Cromwell re-taken by Major Sedgwick; lastly,
re-possess'd by the French. 2. St. Luke's Bay, or Portua Mouton. 3. Gasp, or
Gachepe. 4. The Haven of Passepay. 5. The Bay de Toutes Isles. 6. The Fort de
la Heve. 7. The Cape of Sable. Within the Southern Point Forchu, lies the Isle
Longu, which boasts of a Silver Mine.

The most noted People of the ancient Inhabitants of Accadie were the Iroquois,
lying most South-Westerly upon the Sea Coast, who used to drive a great Trade
in Beavers and other Commodities.

Westerly before the River Chovacoet lies Bacchus Isle, full of Vineyards.

Remarkable manner of living.
The Inhabitants thereof differ very much from other Salvages, for they shave
all the Hair from the Crown of their Head, wear long Locks behind, pleited
together, and stuck full of Feathers, Paint their Faces black and red, go armed
with Clubs, Bows, Pikes, and Arrows pointed with Fish-bones: They Till their
Ground very handsomely, and divide their Fields with Hedges; they Plant Tob^cco,
Vines, Cabbages, Maiz, and diverse Colored Beans; the stalks of the Maiz serve
in stead of Poles for their Beans to run up upon.

Beyond Cape de Rocher lies the brave Harbor Beauport, which is secured from
all Winds by an Isle which lies in the midst of it. The Country Manured in
most places, and Fruitful, feeds store of Men and Cattle.

The Haven of Malabar is surrounded in a manner with little Huts, covered with
Mats, which in the Middle of the Room have a hole for the Smoke to go out at.
The Southern shore is Sandy, and very dangerous.

For the more full exemplification of what concerns this part of Nova Francia,
we shall conclude with an account of all Material Passages relating to the
French, from their own Narrations as follows.

THe first discoverer of this Coast was Jaques Quartier, Quartier's Expedition.
sent out Anno 1534. by the French King, Francis the First, in which Expedition
he spent five Months; and going from thence to St. Male, discovered the Inlet
Lawrence, Terreneuf, and Natiscotec. The following year prosecuting his Voyage,
he Sailed into the great River Canada, and Wintered near St. Croix, Scurvy,
when known.
where he lost diverse of his Men by the Scurvy, a Distemper till that time
altogether unknown; and such was his condition, that none of his Men had
escaped with life, had not the Inhabitants taught him to cure the same with the
Bark and Leaves of the Tree Annedda; with which many recovering, Quartier
Weighed Anchor, and treacherously carried the King Donnacona with many of his
Nobles, Prisoners to France; but most of them dying, Quartier brought only a
few of them back with him in his third Voyage, six years after the first, when
arriving in the Haven St. Croix, he cast up a strong Fort, which he named
Charlesbourg Royal, where he staid a whole Winter. Joan de la Roque, whom the
French King had made Governor of Quartier's new-discover'd Countries, Sailing
thither with three Ships, met with Quartier's Fleet near Terreneuf; from whence
he was then going home, because he saw no hopes of subduing the Salvages with
so small a Force as he had brought with him from France. Exploit of de la Roque.
But de la Roque endeavoring to make a further discovery of Canada, Sailed up
the River Saguenay, where spending both time and Money, he was Commanded home
by the French King, and the fruitless Expeditions lay dead till about 1604.

Of de Monts.
When Peter de Monts obtaining Letters Patents to Trade for Furs in the
forementioned Countries, Sailed with two Ships beyond Accadie, up St. Lawrence
Bay, where he Landed on the Isle St. Croix, where of ninety seven Men, with
which he staid there a whole Winter, he lost thirty five; but having fresh
Supplies sent him from France, he removed to Port Royal, where leaving forty
Men, he returned home; these forty being reduced to twenty three, and in great
want, walking along the Seashore in a despairing condition, espied a Ship
coming up with full Sail, which upon nearer approach, proved a French Vessel,
Of Poutrincourt.
of which Poutrincourt was Commander, who receiving his wretched Contrymen
with great joy, took them with him to Port Royal, being sent thither on purpose
to settle a Plantation in Accadie: Mean while the Letters Patent granted to
Monts, being called in, the first Planters in Port Royal were forced to desert
the same, and return home; and also Poutrincourt returning, came back again
three years after to Port Royal, where finding the Houses standing as he had
left them, he Manured the Country all about, and endeavoring to Plant
Christianity among the Natives, Christened among others an Accadian Lord, who
was above a hundred years old; all which Poutrincourt Sailing back to France,
related at the Court.

Remarkable Transactions of some Jesuits.
The Jesuits being also informed thereof, obtained leave of the Queen to send
Peter Biard and Euemond Mass thither, on pretense, that Henry the Fourth had
himself promised them the same Privilege in his Life time. But the Merchants
at Diep, which were concerned in the new Plantations with Poutrincourt,
opposing the going over of the forementioned Jesuits, expressed themselves very
violent against them, and laid to their charge the Blood of the late King,
which they said was yet reaking in Paris: What assurance (alleged they) had
their Goods which were in the Custody of Men inclined to the Spaniards? Must
the Christian Religion be promulgated? There are so many Orders of Monks which
may easily produce two Men; but if the Queen was resolved to send Jesuits
thither, they desired restoration of the Moneys which they had disburs'd: To
which Biard and Mass harkening, gathered up the demanded Moneys, under
pretense of being required toward the Preaching of the Christian Religion
amongst these remote Heathens; by this means getting great Sums, they bought
out the forementioned Merchants, so that the new Plantations fell half to the
Jesuits, who setting Sail, and arriving at Port Royal, turned all things
topsiturvy, and so thwarted Poutrincourt in his designs, that he was forced to
complain to the French Court of the Jesuits oppression, whose aim it was to get
all things into their own Possession; whereupon they Excommunicated
Poutrincourt's Son (who served in his Father's place at Court, and gained the
Duke Guereheville in France to be of their Party, by promising him, that he
should share in the new Plantations for a contracted Sum of Money: After this
they received all sorts of Arms and Ammunition, with several Brass Guns, of the
then King Lewis the XIII. and other gifts Collected and gathered out of their
several Societies, for two new Accadian Apostles. Gilbert du Thet, a subtle
man of the same Order, transported their Necessaries.

At this time all things going favorably with the Jesuits, they made themselves
Masters of Port Royal, and began to raise a Fort on the River Pemtagovet; but
there their happy Proceedings were stopped, for Captain Argal beforementioned,
Sailing thither in vindication of the English, was encountered by du Thet, (who
firing the first Gun on Argal, was by him taken off with Chain-shot) and taking
Biard and Mass, carried them Prisoners to Virginia, and dismantled the Fort
built at Port Royal, after which it was by King James given by Patent to Sir
William Alexander, as has been already related, together with what of most
remarkable has happened since.

SECT. VI. Norumbegua.
NOrumbegua, Whence denominated.
lying between Nova Scotia Northward, and New England Southward, is so utterly
not taken notice of by many as a distinct Province, that it might seem to be
swallowed up and lost in the two Countries between which it lies, or at least
to be thought a part of Virginia or New England (for Virginia largely taken is
said to contain New England, Novum Belgium, and Virginia, especially so called)
and that so much the rather, because the Bessabees, accounted by Sanson d'
Abbeville an ancient People of New England, are written to have lived near the
River Penobscot, which is reckoned to be the same with Pemtegovet, or (as some
will have it) Norumbegua, from which, or from a certain great City of that
Name, the Country for fancy's sake must needs be denominated; but since most
commonly we find it named and treated of apart, it will not be improper to
follow that method, carrying the Bounds of New England no farther Northward
than the River Quinnebequi or Sagadahoc, and so determining the main part of
this Country to that space between the aforesaid River and Pemtegovet,
excepting a small Southerly portion upon the Banks of the River Chovacovet; so
that it appears chiefly situate under the forty third Degree of Northern
Latitude.

Towns and Cities not certainly known.
As for the Towns or Cities of this Province, there is but a very uncertain
account to be given, forasmuch as the pretended great City Norumbegua, from
whence the Province should take its Appellation, is not acknowledged by any of
the most authentic modern Writers, nor in any late Voyage or Discovery any
mention made either of that or any other considerable Town or City. Dr. Heylin
supposes it to be no other than Agguncia, a poor little Village, that seems
composed of a company of Hutts or Sheaves, covered with the Skins of Beasts, or
the Barks of Trees. But the most favorable conjecture is, that it might happily
be the Ruins of an ancient Town, which the Natives called Arambeck, and had
probably deserted it long before the arrival of the Europeans in those parts;
however, it is not very probable that the Name of the Country should be
derived from this City, if ever there were any such, or from the River, which
appears to have been termed Norumbegua on purpose to make way for this
derivation, whereas Pomtegovet is the ancient Appellation that properly belongs
to it; nor has any modern one been applied to it but that of Rio Grande, by
Buno in his Comment upon Philip Cluverius, upon what ground is hard to tell,
since it is observed by Heylin and others, to be neither large, nor otherwise
much to be commended, being Navigable not above twenty or thirty Miles, in
respect of its many great Cataracts and Falls of Water, an Inconvenience with
which many other Rivers of America are prejudiced, and rendered impassable.

Before and about the Mouth of this River, which is judged to be about eight or
nine Miles broad, lie many small Islands, or rather Hills, environed with
Water, the chiefest of which is by the French called La Haute Isle, from the
high and Mountainous appearance of it to those that see it from afar off at Sea.

The aforementioned Buno, though he names, as belonging to Norumbega, these
several places, viz. Porto del Refugio, Porto Reale, Paradiso, Flora, and
Angolema, from some obscure French testimonies, without particularising any
Author, yet he afterward confesses, that the Names given by the French, and
those applied by the Spaniards, are so various and disagreeing, and breed such
a confusion, that no Charts or Descriptions had concluded upon either.

As for those who will have Norumbega derived from Norwegia in respect of a
Colony brought thither from Norwey, if the Etymology be not a little too much
forced, the Invention may pass well enough till a better be found out.

The temperature and nature of its Soil.
In this Country the temperature of the Air is not bad, nor the Soil
unfruitful, if it were well cultivated, chiefly toward the Rivers, and where
it is not either overgrown with Woods, or craggy with Hills and mountainous
Rocks: neither are the Woods unprofitable, for they afford good Timber, and all
kind of necessary and useful Wood, especially Beeches, Fir-trees,
Wallnut-trees, and other Nuts: The Plains are very pleasant, and yield good
Pasturage, only the Maritime Coasts are so shallow and full of Sands, that the
Sailing near them is accounted somewhat dangerous; and this may be imagined to
be the reason that no Authors have yet met with any Ports or Havens belonging
to this Country, which they have thought worthy their notice.

CHAP. II. New England.
AS Canada is by some accounted a general Province, containing New France, L'
Accadie, Norumbega, and other places, so under Virginia largely taken, are
comprehended New England, New Netherlands, and Virginia properly so called;
however, since that part which vulgarly goes under the Name of Virginia and New
England were possessed, if not discovered, at several times, and their
Plantations promoted and propagated upon several occasions, and by distinct
Interests, and since New England has been looked upon as a place considerable
enough for Persons of very eminent quality to concern themselves in it, we
rather are induced to consider this Country as a principal part, than as any
way depending on, or being any Branch or Portion of Virginia.

Situation of New England.
It lies between Norumbega, which it has Northward, and New Netherlands
Southward, from forty one to forty five Degrees of Northern Latitude, in the
midst of the temperate Zone, and parallel to France and some part of Italy in
the Western Hemisphere, so that one would think it should enjoy the same
temperature of Air; but the contrary is found, for that part which borders upon
the Sea is colder, partly by reason that the Sea-waves break the reflection of
the Sunbeams, partly by reason of the abundance of Vapors, which mounting
upward, abate the ardor of them; but the more Inland parts of the Country are
indifferently warm: Moreover it has been found by certain experience, that
those Countries which look to wards the East, or Sunrising, are colder than
those which lie toward the West, or Sunsetting, and those that have the
Evening Winds on them, warmer than those which have the Morning Winds; which
being so, it should follow, that the temperature of the Air in those Regions is
peculiar to the Bodies of those of our Nation, who being accustomed to a
Climate somewhat temperate, are neither able to endure extremity of Cold, nor
immoderate Heat: Yet there are who affirm, that New England, though situate in
the midst of the temperate Zone, nevertheless feels both extremities of the two
opposite Zones, in the Summer the heat of the Torrid, and in the Winter the
cold of the Frigid.

As for the first discovery of this Country, First discovery.
it is not to be expected otherwise than that of the discovery of those other
Countries hitherto discoursed of, that is to say very uncertain; but because
the French boast of Joannes Verrazanus (who though an Italian, was employed by
the French King Francis the First) as the first Discoverer, not only of Nova
Francia, as has been already intimated, but also of this Country and the
adjoining Coast and Regions, we shall not think it impertinent to give from
their own Relations, a brief view of his Voyage, and afterward a particular
Description of the English Plantations there, and of their Transactions, both
one with another, and between them and the Nations. The Narration of
Verrazanus's Voyage is as follows:

Remarkable Voyage of Verrazanus.
ON command of the French King Francis the First, John Verrazanus, Anno 1524.
setting Sail Westward from the Canary Isles, discovered a low American Coast,
in thirty four Degrees North Latitude, inhabited by naked People, which behind
the sandy Hills facing the Sea, Manured many fruitful Plains. Then Sailing a
hundred Leagues along the Shore Northerly, he viewed a Country full of Vines,
which grew up amongst the Boughs of high Trees; and Sailing up a pleasant
River, Landed on the Island Clandia, full of woody Mountains: thence he stood
for the main Continent; where after having visited a King, Clad in wrought
Deer-skin, he Sailed by a Bay, at whose Mouth appeared a Rock in an Inlet,
twenty Leagues; where appeared five small Isles, all of them exceeding
fruitful. After this (being got a hundred and fifty Leagues to the Northward)
he found very salvage People, whose Heads appeared through Bear-skins and
Sea-Calves. By this time having Terreneuf on his Starboard, he returned back to
Diepe.

Thus far Verrazanus made some discovery of the Coast, which has since not
only been* farther inspected by the English, but also by them Planted and
called New England.

The settling of Plantations.
This Country, whether first discovered by the said Verrazanus, or together
with the rest of largely-taken Virginia, by Sir Walter Raleigh, or, as some
say, by Captain Gosnald, in the Year 1602. was so well known to the English in
the beginning of King James's Reign here, that the settling and carrying on of
Plantations id this part of America, was vigorously promoted by many of the
most eminent Persons in England: whereupon it was about the Year 1606. being
the fourth Year of the said King, granted by Patent to several Lords, Knights,
Gentlemen and Merchants, under the denomination of The Plymouth Company, both
in favor of those generous Spirits, who studied and endeavored the good of the
Public by foreign Plantations, and indulgence to those, who not well satisfied
with the Government of Church and State, and willingly transporting themselves
and Families thither, as to their Asylum, could more conveniently be spared
than the better affected part of the People: And although the Colonies at first
sent over succeeded not according to expectation, yet in a short time there
Plantations were brought to very great perfection. Captain Weimouth, who had
been employed there by the Lord Arundel of Warder, for the discovery of the
North-West Passage, falling short of his Course, happened into a River on the
Coast of America, called Pemmaquid; from whence he brought five of the Natives
for England, three of whose Names were Mannida* Skettwarroes, and Tasquantum,
and Landing at Plymouth, presented them to Sir Ferdinando Gorges, whom he made
use of as Instruments for the farther advancement of these Plantations: they
were all of one Nation, but of several parts, and several Families; he kept
them with him three years, and observing in them an inclination to virtuous
Designs, and Spirits above the Vulgar, he gained information from them what
great Rivers ran up into the Land, what Men of note were seated on them, what
Power they were of, how Allied, what Enemies they had, and the like; and taking
some light from thence, sent away a Ship, furnished with Men, and all kind of
Necessaries convenient for the Service intended, under the Command of Captain
Henry Chaloung, a Gentleman of a good Family, and very capable for Undertakings
of this nature; and giving him sufficient Instructions what to do, sent along
with him two of the said Natives for his better Conduct and Direction, ordering
him by all means to keep the Northerly Gage as high as Cape Briton, till they
had discovered the Main, and then to beat it up to the Southward as the Coast
tended, till they found by the Natives they were near the place to which they
were assigned. By that time they were about a hundred Leagues off the Island of
Canara, the Captain fell sick of a Fever, and the Winds being Westerly, his
Company shaped their Course for the Indies, and coming to St. John de Porto
Rico, the Captain went ashore for the recovery of his Health, whilst the
Company took in Water, and such other Provisions as they had present need of,
and spent some time in Hunting, and other Recreations; after which steering
their intended Course, they were met with by the Spanish Fleet that came from
the Havana, taken Prisoners and carried into Spain, the Ship and Goods being
confiscated, the Voyage overthrown, and the Natives lost.

Not long after the setting out of Chaloung, Thomas Haman was sent by Sir John
Popham, Lord Chief Justice of England, toward the River of Sagadehoc, to the
succor of Chaloung, if need were; but not finding him, after he had scowr'd
the Coast all about, he returned back into England.

Captain Prinne was likewise sent from Bristol, who arriving happily in those
Parts, brought back with him at his return the most exact Discovery of that
Coast that ever had been gained till then.

A while after, at the Charge of the said Sir John Popham, a hundred Men were
sent to settle a Colony at Sagadehoc, under the Command of George Popham,
Raleigh Gilbert, Master of the Ship, who seated themselves in a Peninsula, at
the Mouth of this River; which attempting to discover, they met with a Wood
near to an Island, distant from the Line about forty five Degrees, and some odd
Seconds, where they easily went on Shore. In the Year 1608. the Commander of
the Colony deceasing, and not long after him the Lord Chief Justice, who had
been the chief that had furnished them with fresh Supplies, they returned for
England in those Ships that had been sent them with Succors: At which
unexpected return, the Patrons of the Design were so offended, that for a
certain time they desisted from their Enterprises. In the mean while the French
making use of this occasion, Planted Colonies in diverse places, when Sir Samuel
Argal from Virginia disturbed their Designs, and brought away Prisoners all he
could lay hold on.

Suddenly after Captain Hobson and diverse others were set out with very great
Preparations, and with them two of the Natives which had been detained for some
time in England, whom they thought to have made use of, the better to draw the
rest of the Natives to their Commerce; but because a little before twenty four
of them had been treacherously dealt with by one Hunt, they contracted from
thence so great an animosity toward the English, that Captain Hobson was
constrained to return without effecting any thing.

In the Year 1614. Captain John Smith being sent to Fish for Whales, and seek
after Mines of Gold and Silver, Landed upon the Island of Monahiggan, where he
found some store of Whales, but not such as those by whose Oil they use to make
so much profit.

About the same time (two of the Natives being recovered, Erpenow of Capawick,
that had escaped from Captain Hobson, and Assacumet of Pemmaquid, one of those
that had been taken Prisoners with Chaloung) Captain Harly, with Necessaries
convenient for such a Voyage, was dispatched away by Sir Ferdinando Gorges, the
Earl of Southampton favoring the Design, and furnishing him with some
Land-Soldiers under the Command of Captain Hobson; who not discouraged with his
former ill Success, resolved upon a second Adventure.

In the Year 1615. Sir Richard Hakings undertook a Voyage into those Parts by
authority of the Council of the second Colony, but by reason of the great Wars
among the Natives, his Observations could not be such as might give any farther
light than what had been already received.

Soon after which Captain Dormer coming for England from New Foundland, and
Landing at Plymouth, applied himself to the Governor, by whom he was dispatched
away, with Direction to meet Captain Rocroft, sent away a little before; but
Rocroft being dead by that time Dormer could come after him to Virginia, where
he heard he was, he returning to Capawick, was there set upon by Erpenow, the
forementioned Salvage, and other Indians that were Conspirators with him; and
within a short while after at Virginia, whither he went to be cured of the
Wounds he received in that Assassination, he fell sick and died.

About the Year 1623. Captain Robert Gorges, newly come out of the Venetian
War, was employed by the Council of New Englands Affairs as the
Lieutenant General, to regulate the Abuses of diverse Fishermen and other
Interlopers, who without License frequented those Coasts: for which Service he
had assigned to him all that part of the main Land situate upon the North-East
side of the Bay of the Messachasets.

By these several Colonies sent so thick one after another, both a full
Discovery of the Country came to be made, and a large gap opened to the free
possession thereof; yet in regard of the many disappointments and misfortunes
the several Companies sent over met with, and counting the vast Charges their
setting forth cost the Undertakers, which would have been still increased by
the need of continued Supplies, in all probability New England would have been
but thinly peopled to this day, had not a great Tide of People, possessed with
an aversion to the Church Government of England, and fled into Holland for
Liberty of Conscience, eagerly taken hold of this opportunity to make
themselves Masters of their own Opinions, and of a Place where they might erect
a Government suitable thereunto: and though at first there were some Exceptions
taken, as if this Country was to be made a Receptacle of Sectaries, and such
as condemned the Ecclesiastical Government of the Nation, insomuch that Sir
Ferdinando Gorges, to whom they applied themselves, desiring him to mediate for
them to the Council of New Englands Affairs, when they perceived the Authority
they had from the Virginia Company, could not warrant their abode there, had
enough to do (notwithstanding his Apology, That these things happened contrary to
his expectation) to wipe away the jealousy which was entertained of him, it
being Ordered, that no more should be suffered to pass into New England, but
such as should take the Oaths of Allegiance and Supremacy: yet at last there
was little notice taken who went, perhaps upon consideration, that the vast
resort of People thither would be of greater advantage to the Plantations, than
their different Opinions, at so remote a distance, could be prejudicial, so
long as they acknowledged Obedience to the King and Civil Power: However, Sir
Ferdinando, to clear himself the better, moved those Lords that were the chief
Actors in the Business, to resign their Grand Patent to the King, and pass
particular Patents to themselves of such part of the Country along the
Seacoast, as might be sufficient for them: To this Motion there being a
general Assent given by the Lords, and a Day appointed for the conclusion
thereof, an Act was made for the Resignation of the Patent, alloting to each
Man their several Bounds. From the uttermost parts began the Limits of the Lord
Mougrave, and ended at Hudson's River. To the Eastward of which River, for the
space of sixty Miles in length, was placed the Duke of Richmond's Assignment:
Next to him was settled the Earl of Carlisle: Next him the Lord Edward Gorges:
Next the Marquess of Hamilton: Then Captain John Mason: And lastly his own,
which extended to the great River Sagadehoc, being sixty Miles, and so up into
the Main Land a hundred and twenty Miles, which he was pleased to call by the
Name of The Province of Main.

The Landing of the English in Plymouth Plantation was very much facilitated by
the great Mortality that happened amongst the Indians about that time, amongst
the Pecods, Narragansets, Nianticks, Tarantines, Wippanaps, and those of
Abargini, Agissawang, and Pockanekie, their Powwows, or Doctors, seeing with
amazement their Wigwams, or Streets, lie full of dead Bodies, and in vain
expecting help from Squantam their good, or Abbamoch their bad God. Not long
before, that blazing Comet, so much talked of in Europe, apppear'd after
Sunsetting in their Horizon South-West for the space of thirty Sleeps, (for so
they reckon their Days). They Landed at first with little or no resistance, a
handful of Men only being sent before to keep possession for their Companions,
who arrived eight days after; when the Natives appearing with their Bows and
Arrows, let fly their long Shafts amongst them; whereupon one Captain Miles
Standish with his Fowling-piece shot the stoutest Sachem amongst the Indians,
as he was reaching an Arrow from his Quiver; which the rest seeing, fled into
the Woods and Thickets.

The same Year the Merchant-Advenurers in England sent forth store of Servants
to provide against the Wants of that place; amongst whom came over a mixed
Multitude, who settled themselves in the Bosom of the Cape now called Gloucester.

About the Year 1651. there fled to the English at Water-town the Indians that
dwelt thereabouts, for protection against the Tarratines, a sort of cruel and
salvage Cannibals, by whom near the Town of Saugust, in the very dead time of
the Night, one Lieutenant Walker being on a sudden alarmed, was shot through
his Coat and Buff Jacket with two Indian Arrows. That Night the English stood
upon their Guard, and the next Morning sent word to other parts; who gathered
together, and taking counsel how to quit themselves of these Indians, agreed to
discharge their great Guns; whose redoubled noise, rattling in the Rocks, struck
terror into the Indians, and caused them to betake themselves to flight. The
Autumn following, others of the Indians, who till then had held a good
correspondence with the Planters, began to quarrel about the Bounds of their
Land; but a great Mortality, by the raging of the Smallpox, breaking out
amongst them, put an end to that Controversy: There died amongst the rest one
of the chief of the Sagamores of the Mattachusets, called Sagamore John, who
before his Death had been instructed in the Christian Faith, and took care that
his two Sons should be nurtured therein.

In the Year 1635. there arrived several Ships with great plenty of Provisions,
and many Persons of good Quality, and amongst the rest Sir Henry Vane.

The same Year the People of Cambridge, otherwise called New-town, hearing of a
fertile place upon the River Canectico, removed thither, and erected anew
Corporation by the Name of Banectico, being encouraged thereunto by the Lord
Say and the Lord Brooks, and planting a Forest at the mouth of the River,
called it Saybrook Forest.

About the Year 1638. the Pequods, a stout and Warlike Nation, lying to the
South-West of the Mattachusets, were discovered upon their March within some
few Miles of Hartford: Their coming very much terrified all that inhabited
thereabouts; but they took only three Women and returned; one of whom making a
violent resistance, had her Brains beaten out; the other two they carried away
with them, without abusing their Persons, as it was supposed they would, for
they esteemed their own Shaws, being black, beyond our Women. Their chief
Design was to learn to make Gunpowder; which seeing they could not effect, they
looked upon their Prize as nothing so precious as they imagined.

A little after another Indian War threatening the English, they resolved
together to send an Ambassador to Cannonicus, chief Sachem of the Naragansits,
endeavoring to prevent him from confederating with the Pequods, who (as they
had Intelligence) were about sending to him to join with them: Cannonicus being
grown old, had resigned the Government to his Nephew Mantinemo, a stern Man,
and of a cruel Nature. The Ambassadors arriving at his Court, which was about
eighty Miles from Boston, the Indian Prince assembled his chief Counselors,
and having Entertained the Ambassadors Magnificently, and Feasted them Royally,
gave them Audience in his State-house; where the Sachem, to manifest his
greater State, lay along upon the Ground, with all his Nobility sitting about
him, with their Legs doubled up, and their Knees touching their Chin: The
English Interpreter having made his Speech in the Name of the rest, both
Cannonicus and the young King gave discreet Answers, signifying their
Resolutions to keep a fair Correspondence with the English, and yet not to fall
out with the Pequods: Who a little after making also their Addresses to the
same King, he dissuaded them by many Reasons from making War with the English,
and to deliver into their hands those Persons that had murdered any of them.
The Pequods nevertheless, though they seemed inclinable to his Counsel, yet
they acted as Enemies; for when the English sent a Company of Soldiers into
their Country to treat with them about delivering up the Murderers, they made
show of willingness, but spying their advantage, betook themselves to their
Heels; and whomsoever they took straggling by surprise, they reviled and
insulted over in a most cruel manner, vilifying the Christian Religion, and
uttering all the Blasphemies they could invent. Whereupon they raised fresh
Soldiers for the War, to the number of four score, out of the several Towns in
the Mattachusets, and with some Indian Guides came to their Fort, within which
they had pitched their Wigwams, the Entrance being on two sides, with intricate
Meanders to enter; at which were placed Indian Bowe-men, who shot the foremost
of the English; yet they had little to boast of in the end, for the English
rushing in through the winding Ways, and placing themselves round the Wigwams,
made a very prosperous Shot, by directing the Muzzles of their Muskets against
the Indians which lay sleeping on the Ground: In the midst of which rouzing
terror and confusion they were defeated with little ado, most of them being
either wounded, killed, or taken. The English thus animated with the first
Victory, send their Prisoners to the Pinnaces, and prosecute the War in Hand,
marching against the next Body of the Indians, which lay Encamped on a Hill
about two Miles distant, where they gave them a second Overthrow, slaying many
more than in the first Engagement; the rest flying to a very thick inaccessible
Swamp or Bog, were there besieged by the English; and skulking up and down, as
they saw their opportunity they would Shoot at them with their Arrows, and then
suddenly fall flat along in the Water; at last the English finding out a
Passage into the Swamp, utterly defeated them, and put an end to the War with
the loss of few Men's Lives, and not many wounded.

In the Year 1640. there came over a fresh Supply of People into New England,
and finding no place to settle in within any of the former erected Colonies,
they repaired to a place called Long Island, severed from the Continent of
New Haven, about sixty Miles off the Sea.

The Year following the four Colonies, namely the Massachusetts, Plymouth,
Canectico, and New Haven, taking into consideration the many Nations that were
on all sides of them, as the French, Dutch, Jews, and native Indians; as also
how the three first went to lay claim to Lands they never had any right to, and
the last to be continually quarrelling and contending, where they saw any hopes
of prevailing, by Commissioners chosen from the respective Colonies, concluded
a firm Confederation to assist each other in all just and lawful Wars; upon
which there came in certain Indian Sachems, as Pomham, Miantonemo, Soccanocoh,
and Uncas, who not only submitted to the English Government, but also, if
occasion were, in matters of Controversy submitted to their Arbitration: But
the Contest between Miantonemo and Uncas was too hot to be appeased, (though
the English were not wanting to interpose) unless by the Blood of one of them,
as will appear by the Consequence: Uncas was a Prince of For, whose Life
Miantonemo, though a much more potent Prince, sought to take away by treachery,
hiring a young Man of the Pequod Nation to murder him, as the following Story
renders suspected; for one dark Evening this Sachem passing from one Wigwam to
another, was Shot through the Arm with an Arrow; but recovering the Palace, had
the Arrow pulled out, and his Arm cured: the young Man that was suspected being
examined, how he came by that great store of Wampompeage which was found about
him, and being able to give no good account, it increased the suspicion, and
induced Uncas to complain to the English at a General Court held at Boston:
Whereupon the young Man was Examined in the presence of Miantonemo, who came
thither with his Attendants; but the young Man tutored, as supposed, by
Miantonemo, pretended that Uncas had enjoined him to feign that he was hired by
Miantonemo to kill him: To which Tale of his little belief being given, it was
concluded upon farther Examination of him in private that he had done the Fact:
nevertheless they let him depart with Miantonemo, advising him to send him home
to Uncas; but he in stead of returning him cut off his Head, and forthwith
gathered an Army of a thousand Men to fight with Uncas; who met him with half
the Men: the Battle being joined, the Narragansets, though the far greater
multitude, were beaten by the Wawhiggins, through the Valor of Uncas their
Prince; who perfected his Victory by possessing himself of the Person of
Miantonemo, whom, having put his Lifeguard to flight, he carried away with him
in triumph to the Town of Hartford, desiring to have the advice of the United
Colonies what to do with his Prisoner: Whereupon the Commissioners having had
sufficient proof of Miantonemo's treachery toward this Prince, advised Uncas
to put him to death, but not to exercise that barbarous kind of cruelty which
is usual amongst them in these Cases. The Sachem, upon this advice, not long
after pretended to remove him to a safer place, but by the Way caused him to be
Executed: His Subjects and Kindred were troubled at his Death, but the little
Princes his Neighbors, over whom he had tyrannized, rather rejoiced.

In the Year 1645. the Sons of old Canonnicus, their Father being dead, began
to fall into hot Contentions with their Neighbors, and being forbidden by the
United Colonies, they did not stick to threaten Wars to the English also.
Whereupon the Commissioners raised an Army of Horse and Foot, and made Major
General Edward Gibbons Commander in Chief over them. But the Indians hearing of
this Preparation, sent some of their chief Nobility to the Commissioners of the
United Colonies, who were assembled at Boston, to Treat about Peace; to which
the Commissioners agreed, upon condition they should pay a part of the Charges
of the War; and that they should send four of their Sons for Hostages till the
Sum was paid; and the Hostages being sent back before the Wapom was all paid,
the two Princes, Pesicus and Mexanimo, upon the sending a Company of Armed Men
to demand it, sent the remainder of the Money.

In the Year 1647. diverse Persons of Quality ventured their Estates upon an
Iron Mill, which they began at Braintree, but it profited the Owners little,
rather wasting their Stock, the price of Labor in matters of that nature, being
double or treble to what it is in England.

These are the most material Transactions we find delivered by any one which
happened from the first discovery till the Year before mentioned: what has
happened from that time to this, chiefly relates to the several Revolutions that
have been in England, and shall be therefore taken notice of when we come to
speak of the Government of these Plantations.

The Commodities of this Country, together with the Trees and other sorts of
Plants.
Though there are, who having remained some time, and been concerned in those
Parts, affirm the Soil of New England to be nothing so fruitful as it is
believed and commonly delivered to be, yet we think it not improper to give a
brief account of the Trees and other Plants; also the Beasts, Birds, Fishes,
and other Commodities which most Writers will have to be the production of this
Country, especially since we find them compactly summed up by an unknown
Writer in the Language of the Muses. The recital of the Plants and Trees, which
(excepting the Cedar, Sassafras, and Dyers Sumach) are all of the same kind
with those that grow in Europe, only differing in nature, according as the
Epithets of many of them declare, is as follows:

Trees both in Hills and Plains in plenty be;
The long-lived Oak, and mournful Cypress Tree;
Skie-towring Pines, and Chestnuts coated rough;
The lasting Cedar, with the Walnut tough;
The Rozen-dropping Fir, for Mast in use;
The Boat-men seek for Oars light, neat grown Sprewse;
The brittle Ash, the ever-trembling Asps;
The broad-spread Elm, whose Concave harbors Wasps;
The Water-spungy Alder good for naught;
Small Eldern by the Indian Fletchers sought;
The knotty Maple, pallid Birch, Hawthorns;
The Horn-bound Tree, that to be cloven scorns;
Which from the tender Vine often takes his Spouse,
Who twines embracing Arms about his Boughs.
Within this Indian Orchard Fruits be some;
The ruddy Cherry, and the jetty Plumb;
Snake-murthering Hazle, with sweet Saxafrage,
Whose Leaves in Beer allay hot Fevers rage;
The Dyers Shumach, with more Trees there be,
That are both good to use, and rare to see.
The Beasts peculiar to this Country are the Moose, Beasts.
the Rackoon, and the Musquash; the two first Land-Animals, the last
Amphibious, which with others, common to them with us, are thus versifi'd by
the abovesaid Author:

The Kingly Lion, and the strong-arm'd Bear;
The large limbed Mooses, with the tripping Deer;
Quill-darting Porcupines, that Rackoons be
Castled in the hollow of an aged Tree;
The skipping Squirrel, Rabbet, purblind Hare,
Immured in the self-same Castle are,
Lest red-ey'd Ferrets, wily Foxes should;
Them undermine, if Ramper'd but with Mold;
The grim-fac'd Ounce, and ravenous howling Wolf,
Whose meagre Paunch sucks like a swallowing Gulf;
Black glittering Otters, and rich Coated Beaver;
The Civet-scented Musquash smelling ever.
Of such of these as are altogether unknown to us, take these brief
Descriptions.

The Beast called a Moose, The Moose.
is not much unlike red Deer, and is as big as an Ox, slow of Foot, Headed like
a Buck, with a broad Beam, some being two Yards wide in the Head, their flesh
is as good as Beef, their Hides good for Clothing; if these were kept tame, and
accustomed to the Yoke, they would be a great Commodity: First, because they
are so fruitful, bringing forth three at a time, being likewise very uberous:
Secondly, because they will live in Winter without any Fodder. There are not
many of these in the Massachusetts Bay, but forty Miles to the North-East there
are great store of them.

The Rackoone is a deep Furred Beast, not much unlike a Badger, The Rackoon.
having a Tail like a Fox, as good Meat as a Lamb: These Beasts in the day time
sleep in hollow Trees, in a Moonshine night they go to feed on Clams at a low
Tide, by the Sea side, where the English hunt them with their Dogs.

The Musquash is much like a Beaver for shape, but nothing near so big; The
Masquash.
the Male has two Stones, which smell as sweet as Musk, and being killed in
Winter, never lose their sweet smell: These Skins are no bigger than a
Coney-skin, yet are sold for five Shillings apiece, being sent for Tokens into
England; one good Skin will perfume a whole house full of Clothes, if it be
right and good.

The Birds both common and peculiar are thus recited. Birds.


The Princely Eagle, and the soaring Hawk,
Whom in their unknown ways there is none can chawk:
The Humbird for some Queens rich Cage more fit,
Than in the vacant Wilderness to sit.
The swift-wing'd Swallow sweeping to and fro,
As swift as Arrow from Tartarian Bow.
When as Aurora's Infant day new springs,
There th'morning mounting Lark her sweet lays sings:
The harmonious Thrush, swift Pigeon, Turtle-dove,
Who to her Mate does ever constant prove:
The Turky-Pheasant, Heath-cock, Partridge rare,
The Carrion-tearing Crow, and hurtful Stare,
The long-lived Raven, th'ominous Screech-Owl,
Who tells, as old Wives say, disasters foul.
The drowsy Madge that leaves her day-lov'd Nest,
And loves to rove, when Day-birds be at rest:
Th'Eel-murthering Hearn, and greedy Cormorant,
That near the Creeks in morish Marshes haunt.
The bellowing Bittern, with the long-leg'd Crane,
Presaging Winters hard, and dearth of Grain.
The Silver Swan that tunes her mournful breath,
To sing the Dirge of her approaching death.
The tattering Oldwives, and the cackling Geese,
The fearful Gull that shuns the murdering Piece.
The strong-wing'd Mallard, with the nimble Teal,
And ill-shape't Loon, who his harsh Notes does squeal.
There Widgins, Sheldrakes and Humilitees,
Snites, Doppers, Sea-Larks, in whole million flees.
Of these the Humbird, Loon, and Humility are not to be passed by without
particular observation.

The Humbird is one of the wonders of the Country, The Humbird.
being no bigger than a Hornet, yet has all the Dimensions of a Bird, as Bill,
and Wings with Quills, Spider-like Legs, small Claws: for Color, she is as
glorious as the Rainbow; as she flies, she makes a little humming noise like a
Humble-bee, wherefore she is called the Humbird.

The Loon is an ill-shap'd thing like a Cormorant, The Loon. The Huntility, or
Simplicity.
but that he can neither go nor fly; he makes a noise sometimes like
Sowgelders Horn. The Humilities or Simplicities (as we may rather call them)
are of two sorts, the biggest being as large as a green Plover; the other as
big as Birds we call Knots in England. Such is the simplicity of the smaller
sorts of these Birds, that one may drive them on a heap like so many Sheep, and
seeing a fit time shoot them; the living seeing the dead, settle themselves on
the same place again, amongst which the Fowler discharges again: These Birds
are to be had upon Sandy Brakes, at the latter end of Summer before the Geese
come in.

No less Poetical a Bill of Fare is brought of the Fish on the Seacoasts,
Fishes.
and in the Rivers of New England in these subsequent Verses.

The King of Waters, the Sea shouldering Whale,
The snuffing Grampus, with the Oily Seal,
The-storm presaging Porpus, Herring-Hog,
Line-shearing Shark, the Catfish, and Sea Dog,
The Scale-fenc'd Sturgeon, wry-mouthed Hollibut,
The flounsing Salmon, Codfish, Greedigut:
Cole, Haddock, Hage, the Thornback, and the Scate,
Whose slimy outside makes him'seld in date,
The stately Bass, old Neptune's fleeting Post,
That Tides it out and in from Sea to Coast.
Consorting Herrings, and the bonny Shad,
Big-belly'd Alewives, Mackrills richly-clad
With Rainbow colors, Frostfish and the Smelt,
As good as ever Lady Gustus felt.
The spotted Lamprons, Eels, the Lamperies,
That seek fresh Waterbrooks with Argus Eyes,
These watery Villagers, with thousands more,
Do pass and repass near the verdant Shore.
Kinds of Shellfish.
The luscious Lobster, with the Crabfish raw,
The brinish Oyster, Muscle, Periwigge,
And Tortoise sought for by the Indian Sqaw,
Which to the Flats dance many a Winters Jigge,
To dive for Cocles, and to dig for Clams,
Whereby her lazy Husbands guts she crams.
To speak of the most unusual of these sorts of Fish; The Seal.
First the Seal, which is called the Sea-Calf, his Skin is good for diverse
uses, his Body being between Flesh and Fish, it is not very delectable to the
Palate, or congruent with the Stomach; his Oil is very good to burn in Lamps,
of which he affords a great deal.

The Shark is a kind of Fish as big as a Man, The Shark.
some as big as a Horse, with three rows of Teeth within his Mouth, with which
he snaps asunder the Fishermans Lines, if he be not very circumspect: This Fish
will leap at a Man's hand if it be over board, and with his Teeth snap off a
Man's Leg or Hand if he be Swimming; these are often taken, being good for
nothing but Manuring of Land.

The Hollibut is not much unlike a Pleace or Turbut, The Hollibut.
some being two yards long, and one wide, a Foot thick; the plenty of better
Fish makes these of little esteem, except the Head and Finns, which Stewed or
Baked is very good; these Hollibuts be little set by while Basse is in season.

The Basse is one of the best Fishes in the Country, The Basse.
and though Men are soon wearied with other Fish, yet are they never with
Basse; it is a delicate, fine, fat, fast Fish, having a Bone in his Head which
contains a Sawcerful of Marrow, sweet and good, pleasant to the Palate, and
wholesome to the Stomach: When there be great store of them, we only eat the
Heads, and Salt up the Bodies for Winter, which exceeds Ling or Haberdine: Of
these Fishes some are three, and some four Foot long, some bigger, some lesser;
at some Tides a Man may catch a dozen or twenty of these in three hours; the
way to catch them is with Hook and Line: The Fisherman taking a great Cod-line,
to which he fasteneth a piece of Lobster, throws it into the Sea, the Fish
biting at it, he pulls her to him, and knocks her on the head with a Stick.

Alewives are a kind of Fish which is much like a Herring, Alewives.
which in the later end of April come up to the fresh Rivers to Spawn, in such
multitudes as is almost incredible, pressing up in such shallow Waters as will
scarce permit them to Swim, having likewise such longing desire after the fresh
Water Ponds, that no beatings with Poles, or forcive agitations by other
devices, will cause them to return to the Sea, till they have cast their Spawn.

Clamms or Clamps, Clamms or Clamps.
are a Shellfish not much unlike a Cockle, they lie under the Sand, and have
every one of them a round hole to take Air, and receive Water at. When the Tide
ebbs and flows, a Man running over these Clamm banks will presently be made all
wet, by their spouting of Water out of those small holes: These Fishes are in
great plenty in most places of the Country, which is a great Commodity for the
feeding of Swine, both in Winter and Summer; for being once used to those
places, they will repair to them as duly every Ebb, as if they were driven to
them by Keepers: In some places of the Country there be Clamms as big as a
Penny white Loaf, which are great Dainties amongst the Natives, and would be in
great esteem amongst the English, were it not for better Fish.

Other Commodities which this Country is said to yield, are, in downright
Prose, Furrs, Flax, Linen, Iron, Pitch, Masts, Cables, and some quantity of
Amber; so that if what many Authors have consented to assert concerning New
England be not a mere Fiction, what e're has been affirmed of the
unfruitfulness of the Country will demonstrably be found invalid.

There are also to be found here some hurtful Creatures, Noxious Creatures.
of which, that which is most injurious to the Person and Life of a Man is the
Rattle-Snake, which is generally a yard and a half long, as thick in the middle
as the small of a Man's Leg; she has a yellow Belly, her Back being spotted
with black, russet, yellow, and green colors, placed like Scales; at her Tail
is a Rattle, with which she makes a noise when she is molested, or when she
sees any approach near her; her Neck seems to be no thicker than a Man's Thumb,
yet she can swallow a Squirril, having a great wide Mouth, with Teeth as sharp
as Needles, wherewith she biteth such as tread upon her, her Poison lies in
her Teeth, for she has no Sting. When any Man is bitten by any of these
Creatures, the Poison spreads so suddenly through the Veins, and so runs to the
Heart, that in one hour it causes Death, unless he has the Antidote to expel
the Poison, which is a Root called Snake-weed, which must be champ'd, the
Spittle swallowed, and the Root applied to the Sore; this is present Cure
against that which would be present death without it: This Weed is rank Poison,
if it be taken by any man that is not bitten; whosoever is bitten by these
Snakes, his flesh becomes as spotted as a Leopard, until he be perfectly cured.
It is reported, that if the Party live that is bitten, the Snake will die, and
if the Party die, the Snake will live. This is a most Poisonous and dangerous
Animal, yet nothing so bad as the report goes of it in England; for whereas it
is said to kill a Man with its breath, and that it can fly, there is no such
matter, for it is naturally the most sleepy and unnimble Creature that lives,
never offering to leap or bite any Man, if it be not trodden on first; and it
is their desire in hot weather to lie in Paths, where the Sun may shine on
them, where they will sleep so soundly, that I have known four Men stride over
one of them, and never awake it; five or six Men have been bitten by them,
which by using of Snake-weed were all cured, never any yet losing his life by
them. Cows have been bitten, but being cut in diverse places, and this Weed
thrust into their flesh, were cured; A small Switch will easily kill one of
these Snakes. In many places of the Country there be none of them, as at
Plymouth, New-town, Igowamme, Nahant, etc. In some places they will live on one
side of the River, and swimming but over the Water, as soon as they are come
into the Woods, they turn up their yellow Bellies and die. Up into the
Country, Westward from the Plantations, is a high Hill, which is called
Rattle-Snake-Hill, where there are great store of these Poisonous Creatures.

There are likewise troublesome Flies.

First there is a wild Be or Wasp, which commonly guards the Grape, building
by Cobweb habitation amongst the Leaves: Secondly a great green Fly, not much
unlike our Horse-Flies in England; they will nipp so sore, that they will fetch
Blood either of Man or Beast, and are most troublesome where most Cattle are,
which brings them from out of the Woods to the Houses; this Fly continues but
for the Month of June. The third is Gurnipper, which is a small black Fly, no
bigger than a Flea; her biting causes an itching upon the Hands or Face, which
provokes scratching, which is troublesome to some; this Fly is busy but in
close Mornings or Evenings, and continues not above three Weeks; the least Wind
or heat expels them. The fourth is a Musketor, which is not unlike to our Gnats
in England; in places where there is no thick Woods or Swamps, there are none
or very few. In the new Plantations they are troublesome for the first year,
but the Wood decaying they vanish: These Flies cannot endure Wind; heat or
cold, so that these are only troublesome in close thick Weather, and against
Rain, many that are bitten will fall a scratching, whereupon their Faces and
Hands swell.

The nature of the ancient Inhabitants.
As touching the Nature of the ancient Inhabitants, they are to be considered
according to their several Shires or Divisions; those that inhabit to the East
and North-East bore the name of Churchers and Tarrenteens; these in the
Southern parts were called Pequods, and Narragansets; those Westward,
Connectacuts and Mowhacks; to the North-West, of whom were the Aberginians.

The nature of the Mowhacks.
The Mowhacks were ever accounted a cruel bloody People, which were wont to come
down upon their poor Neighbors, with more than brutish Savageness, spoiling
their Corn, burning their Houses, slaying Men, ravishing Women, yea very
Canibals they were, sometimes eating on a Man one part after another before his
Face, and while yet living; insomuch, that the very Name of a Mowhack would
strike the Heart of a poor Aberginian dead, till they had the English on their
sides to succor them; for these inhumane Homicides confess that they dare not
meddle with a white Faced Man, accompanied with his hot-mouth'd Weapon.

These Indians are a People of tall Stature, long grim Visages, slender Wasted,
and having exceeding great Arms and Thighs, wherein they say their strength
lies; which is such, that one of them has been known to kill a Dog with a
fillip of his Finger, and afterward to have flead and sod him, and eat him to
his Dinner. They are so hardy, that they can eat such things as would make
other Indians sick to look upon; being destitute of Fish and Flesh, they
suffice Hunger and maintain Nature with the use of Vegetatives; but that which
they most hunt after, is the flesh of Man: Their custom is, if they get a
stranger near their Habitations, not to Butcher him immediately, but keep him
in as good plight as they can, feeding him with the best Victuals they have.

These Indians are more desperate in Wars than the other Indians, which
proceeds not only from the fierceness of their Natures, but also in that they
know themselves to be better Armed and Weapon'd; all of them wearing Sea Horse
Skins and Barks of Trees, made by their Art as impenetrable, it is thought, as
Steel, wearing Head-Pieces of the same, under which they March securely and
undantedly, running, and fiercely crying out, Hadree Hadree succomee succomee,
We come we come to suck your Blood, not fearing the feathered shafts of the
strong-arm'd Bow-men, but like unruly headstrong Stallions, beat them down with
their right hand Tamahawks, and left hand Javelins, being all the Weapons which
they use, counting Bows a cowardly fight. Tamahawks are Staves of two Foot and
a half long, with knobs at one end as round and big as a Football; a Javelin
is a short Spear, headed with sharp Seahorse Teeth; one blow or thrust with
these sharp Weapons, will not need a second to hasten death from a Mowhacks arm.

The nature of the Indians inhabiting Eastward.
The Tarrenteens saving that they eat not Man's flesh, are little less Salvage
and cruel than these Cannibals; our Indians do fear them as their deadly
Enemies, for so many of them as they meet, they kill. Take these Indians in
their own proper and natural disposition, and they are reported to be wise,
lofty-spirited, constant in friendship to one another, true in their promise,
and more industrious than many others.

The nature of the Pequods and Narragansets.
The Pequants are a stately Warlike People, just and equal in their dealings;
not treacherous either to their Countrymen, or English, to whom (except in
time of War) they were not any ways uncivil. Their next Neighbors the
Narragansets, are the most numerous People in those Parts, the most rich also,
and the most industrious; being the Storehouse of all such kind of wild
Merchandise as is amongst them. These Men are the most curious Minters of their
Wampompeage and Mowhakes, which they form out of the inmost Wreaths of
Periwinkle-shells. The Northern, Eastern, and Western Indians fetch all their
Coin from these Southern Mint-Masters. From hence they have most of their
curious Pendants and Bracelets, from hence they have their great Stone Pipes,
which will hold a quarter of an Ounce of Tobacco, which they make with Steel
Drills and other Instruments; such is their Ingenuity and dexterity, that they
can imitate the English Mold so accurately, that were it not for matter and
color, it were hard to distinguish them; they make them of green, and
sometimes of black Stone; they are much desired of our English Tobacconists,
for their rarity, strength, handsomness, and coolness. Hence likewise our
Indians had their Pots, wherein they used to sees their Victuals before they
knew the use of Brass. Since the English came, they have employed most of their
time in catching of Beavers, Otters, and Musquashes, which they bring down into
the Bay, returning back laden with English Commodities, of which they make
double profit, by selling them to more remote Indians, who are ignorant at what
cheap rates they obtain them, in comparison of what they make them pay, so
making their Neighbors ignorance their enrichment: They were never known to be
desirous to take in hand any Martial Enterprise, or expose themselves to the
uncertain events of War; wherefore the Pequants call them Women-like Men,
resting secure under the conceit of their popularity, and seeking rather to
grow rich by industry, than famous by deeds of Chivalry.

The nature and complexion of the Aberginians.
Most of these Northward Indians are between five and six Foot high, straight
Body'd, strongly composed, smooth Skinned, merry Countenanced, of Complexion
more swarthy than the Spaniards, black Hair'd, high Foreheaded, black Eyed,
out-Nos'd, broad Shouldered, brawny Armed, long and slender Handed, out
Breasted, small Wasted, lank Bellied, well Thigh'd, flat Kneed, with handsome
grown Legs, and small Feet: In a word, take them when the Blood skips in their
Veins, when the Flesh is on their Backs, and Marrow in their Bones, when they
frolic in their antique Deportments and Indian Postures, they are more amiable
to behold (though only in Adam's Livery) than many a trim Gallant in the
newest Mode; and though their Houses are but mean, their Lodging as homely,
Commons scant, their Drink Water, and Nature their best Clothing, yet they
still are healthful and lusty. Their smooth Skins proceed from the often
anointing of their Bodies with the Oil of Fishes, and the fat of Eagles, with
the grease of Rackoons, which they hold in Summer the best Antidote to keep
their Skin from blistering with the scorching Sun; it is their best Armor
against the Musketoes, and the surest abrasour of the hairy Excrement, and
stops the Pores of their Bodies against the nipping Winters cold. Their black
Hair is natural, yet is brought to a more Jetty color by Oyling, Dying, and
daily dressing; sometimes they wear it very long, hanging down in a loose
disheveled Womanish manner, otherwise tied up hard and short like a Horse Tail,
bound close with a Fillet, which they say makes it grow the faster; they are
not a little Fantastical in this particular; their Boys being not permitted to
wear their Hair long till sixteen years of Age, and then they must come to it
by degrees; some being cut with a long foretop, a long lock on the Crown, one
of each side of his Head, the rest of his Hair being cut even with the Scalp;
the young Men and Soldiers wear their Hair long on the one side, the other
being cut short like a Screw; other cuts they have as their Fancy leads them,
which would torture the Wits of the most exact Barber to imitate. But though
they are thus proud of the Hair of their Head, you cannot woo them to wear it
on their Chins, where it no sooner grows, but it is stubb'd up by the roots,
for they count it as an unuseful, cumbersome, and opprobrious excrement,
insomuch as they call him an English Man's Bastard that has but the appearance
of a Beard.

The Apparel, Omaments, Paintings, and other artificial Deckings of the Indians.
The Clothing of the Indians is only a pair of Indian Breeches to cover their
secret Parts, which is but a piece of Cloth a yard and a half long, but between
their Groins, tied with a Snakes Skin about their middles, one end hanging down
with a flap before, the other like a tail behind. In the Winter time, the more
Aged of them wear Leather Drawers, in form like Irish Trouses, fastened under
their Girdle with Buttons: They wear Shoes likewise of their own making, cut
out of a Mooses Hide; many of them wear Skins about them, in form of an Irish
Mantle, and of these some are Bears Skins, Mooses Skins, and Beaver Skins sewed
together, others Otter Skins, and Rackoon Skins; most of them in the Winter
having his deep Furred Cat Skin, like a large Muff, which he shifts to that Arm
which lies most exposed to the Wind. Although they are poor, yet is there in
them the sparks of natural Pride, which appears in their longing desire after
many kind of Ornaments, wearing Pendants in their Ears, in form of Birds,
Beasts, and Fishes, Carved out of Bone, Shells, and Stone, with long Bracelets
of their curious wrought Wampompeage and Mowhackees, which they put about their
Necks and Loins; these they count a rare kind of Decking; many of the better
sort bearing upon their Cheeks certain Pourtraitures of Beasts, as Bears,
Deers, Mooses, Wolves, etc. some of Fowls, as of Eagles, Hawks, etc. which is
not a superficial Painting, but a certain Incision, or else a raising of their
Skin by a small sharp Instrument, under which they convey a certain kind of
black unchangeable Ink, which makes the desired form apparent and permanent.
Others have certain round Impressions down the outside of their Arms and
Breasts, in form of Mullets or Spur-rowels, which they imprint by searing
Irons: W^ether these be Foils to illustrate their unparalled Beauty (as they
deem it) or Arms to blazon their antique Gentility, cannot easily be
determined: But a Segamore with a Humbird in his Ear for a Pendant, a black
Hawk on his Head for his Plume, Mowhackees for his Gold Chain, good store of
Wampompeage begirting his Loins, his Bow in his Hand, his Quiver at his Back,
with six naked Indian Lacquies at his Heels for his Guard, thinks himself
little Inferior to the great Cham.

Their Diet, Cookery, Meal-times, and Hospitality at their Kettles.
In Winter time they have all manner of Fowls and Beasts of the Land and Water,
Pond-fish, with Cathaires and other Roots, Indian Beans and Clamms; in the
Summer they have all manner of Seafish, with all sorts of Berries. For the
ordering of their Victuals, they Boil or Roast them, having large Kettles which
they Traded for with the French long since, and do still buy of the English as
their need requires, before they had substantial Earthen Pots of their own
making. Their Spits are no other than cloven Sticks, sharpened at one end to
thrust into the ground; into these cloven Sticks they thrust the Flesh or Fish
they would have Roasted, behemming a round fire with a dozen of Spits at a
time, turning them as they see occasion. They seldom or never make Bread of
their Indian Corn, but seethe it whole like Beans, eating three or four Corns
with a mouthful of Fish or Flesh, sometimes eating Meat first, and Corns after,
filling the Chinks with their Broth. In Summer, when their Corn is spent,
Sqoutersquashes is their best Bread, a Fruit like a young Pumpion: But as all
are fellows at Football, so they all meet Friends at the Kettle, saving their
Wives, that Dance a Spaniel-like attendance at their Backs for their Fragments.
If their occasions cause them to Travel, the best of their Victuals for their
Journey is Nocake, (as they call it) which is nothing but Indian Corn parched
in the hot Ashes; the Ashes being sifted from it, it is afterward beaten to
Powder, and put into a long Leathern Bag, trussed at their Back like a
Knapsack, out of which they take thrice three Spoonfuls a day, dividing it into
three Meals. If it be Winter, and Snow be on the ground, they can eat when they
please, making use of Snow for their Drink; in Summer, they must stay till they
meet with a Spring or Brook; with this strange viaticum they will travel four
or five days together. They keep no Set-Meals, their Store being spent, they
champ on the Bit, till they meet with fresh Supplies, either from their own
endeavors, or their Wives industry, who trudge to the Clam-banks when all other
means fail. Though they are sometimes scanted, yet are they as free as
Emperors, both to their Countrymen and English, be he stranger, or near
acquaintance; counting it a great discourtesie, not to eat of their
high-conceited Delicates.

Of their hardiness.
Their hardiness is much to be admired, no ordinary pains making them so much as
alter their countenance; beat them, whip them, punch them, if they put on a
resolution, they will not winch for it; whether it be their benumbed
insensibleness of smart, or their hardy resolutions, is hard to resolve; It
might be a Perillus his Bull, or the Rack might force an outcry from them, but
a Turkish drubbing would not move them, the unexpected approach of a mortal
Wound by a Bullet, Arrow, or Sword, striking no more terror, nor causing no
more exclamation in them, than if it had been a shot into the body of a Tree;
such Wounds as would be sudden death to an English Man, would be nothing to
them; whether it be, that by their rare skill in the use of Vegetatives, or by
Diabolical Charms, they cure them; nevertheless, the very name and thoughts of
death is so hideous to them, or any thing that presents it so terrible, that a
hundred of them will run from two or three armed with Guns. In the Night they
need not to be feared, for they will not budge from their own Dwellings, for
fear of their Abamacho (the Devil) whom they much fear, specially in evil
enterprises, they will rather lie by an English fire than go a quarter of a
Mile in the dark to their own Dwellings; but they are well freed from this
Scarecrow since the coming of the English, and less care for his delusions.

Of their Kings, Government, and Subjects obedience.
Now for the matter of Government amongst them; it is the custom of their Kings
to inherit, the Son always taking the Kingdom after his Fathers death. If there
be no Son, then the Queen rules; if no Queen, the next to the Blood Royal; who
comes in otherwise, is but counted an usurping Intruder, if his fair carriage
bear him not out the better, they will soon Unscepter him. Some say the chief
Powahe is next in Dignity and Authority to the King, and when he dies, Marries
the Squasachem, or Queen.

The Kings have no Laws to Command by, nor have they any annual Revenues; yet
commonly are they so either feared or beloved, that half their Subjects estate
is at their Service, and their Persons at his Command, by which Command he is
better known than by any thing else; for though he has no Kingly Robes to make
him glorious in the view of his Subjects, nor daily Guards to succor his
Person, nor Court-like attendance, nor sumptuous Palaces; yet do they yield all
submissive subjection to him, accounting him their Sovereign; going at his
Command, and coming at his Beck, not so much as expostulating the cause, though
it be in matters thwarting their wills; he being accounted a disloyal Subject
that will not effect what his Prince Commands. Whosoever is known to Plot
Treason, or to lay violent hands on his lawful King, is presently Executed.
Once a Year he takes his Progress, accompanied with a dozen of his best
Subjects, to view his Country, to recreate himself, and establish good Orders.
When he enters into any of their Houses, without any more Complement, he is
desired to sit down on the Ground, (for they use neither Stools nor Cushions)
and after a little respite all that are present come in, and sit down by him,
one of his Seniors pronouncing an Oration gratulatory to his Majesty for love,
and the many good things they enjoy under his peaceful Government. A King of
large Dominions has his Viceroys, or inferior Kings under him, to agitate his
State Affairs, and keep his Subjects in good Decorum. Other Officers there are,
but how to distinguish them by Name is something difficult. For their Laws, as
their Vices come short of many other Nations, so they have not so many Laws,
though they are not without some, which they inflict upon notorious
Malefactors, as Traitors to their Prince, inhumane Murderers, and, some say,
Adulterers: for Theft, as they have nothing to steal worth the Life of a Man,
therefore they have no Law to Execute for Trivials, a Subject being more
precious in the Eye of his Prince, than, where Men are so scarce, to be cast
away upon so slight a matter. A Malefactor having deserved Death, and being
apprehended, is brought before the King, and some other of the wisest Men,
where they enquire out the original of the thing, after proceeding by
aggravation of Circumstances he is found Guilty, and Cast by the Jury of their
strict Inquisition, he is Condemned and Executed in the following manner: The
Executioner comes in, who blind-folds the Party, sets him in the public view,
and Brains him with a Tamahauke, or Club; which done, his Friends bury him.

Of their Marriages.
Now to speak something of their Marriages, the Kings and the Powwows, or great
Doctors, may have two or three Wives, but seldom use it, Men of ordinary Rank
having but one; which dilproves the report, that they had eight or ten Wives
apiece. When a Man has a desire to Marry, he first gets the good will of the
Maid or Widow, after, the consent of her Friends for her part; and for himself,
if he be at his own disposing, and if the King will, the Match is made, her
Dowry of Wampompeage paid, the Sagamore or King (who for every Marriage has a
Fathom of Wampompeage, which is about the value of seven or eight shillings)
joins their Hands, never to part till Death, unless she prove a Whore, for
which they may put away their Wives.

Of their Worship, Invocations, and Conjurations.
As it is natural to all Mortals to worship something, so do these People, but
exactly to describe to whom their Worship is chiefly bent, is very difficult:
They acknowledge especially two, Ketan, some say Tantum, their good God, and
Hobamocco, some say Squantum, their evil God; to Ketan they Sacrifice (as the
ancient Heathens did to Ceres) after their Garners be full with a good Crop.
They likewise Invocate this God for fair Weather, for Rain in time of Drought,
and for the recovery of their Sick; but if they do not hear them, then they
verrifie the old Verse, Flectere si nequeo Superos Acheronta movebo, their
Powwows betaking themselves to their Exorcismes and Necromantick Charms, by
which they bring to pass strange things, if we may believe the Indians, who
report of one Pissacannaw, that he could make the Water burn, the Rocks move,
the Trees dance, and metamorphose himself into a flaming Man. In Winter, when
there is no green Leaves to be got, he would out of the Ashes of an old Leaf,
calcined and put into the Water, produce a new green Leaf: And of a dead Snakes
Skin, a living Snake, both to be seen, felt and heard. The manner of their
action in their Conjuration is thus: The Parties that are sick or lame being
brought before them, the Powwow sitting down, the rest of the Indians giving
attentive audience to his Imprecations and Invocations, and after the violent
expression of many a hideous bellowing and groaning he makes a stop, and then
all the Auditors with one voice utter a short Canto; which done, the Powwow
still proceeds in his Invocations, sometimes roaring like a Bear, other times
groaning like a dying Horse, foaming at the Mouth like a chased Boar, smiting
on his naked Breast and Thighs with such violence, as if he were mad: Thus will
he continue sometimes half a day, spending his Lungs, sweating out his Fat, and
tormenting his Body in this diabolical Worship. Sometimes the Devil, for
requital of their Worship, recovers the Party, to nuzzle them up in their
devilish Religion. But since the English (upon whom, and in whose presence it
is said the Powwows could never work their Witchcrafts) frequented those Parts,
they daily fall from his Colors, relinquishing their former Fopperies, and
acknowledge the Power of the English-man's God, as they call him. And it is
reported of them, that at the very first they were so tractable to the
Christian Religion, that they would say King James was good, and his God good,
but their Tanto naught, though of their two Gods he was accounted the good one.

Of their Wars.
They use no other Weapons in War than Bows and Arrows, saving that their
Captains have long Spears, on which, if they return Conquerors, they carry the
Heads of their chief Enemies that they slay in the Wars, it being the Custom to
cut off their Heads, Hands and Feet, to bear home to their Wives and Children,
as true tokens of their renowned Victory. When they go to their Wars, it is
their Custom to paint their Faces with diversity of Colors, some being all
black as Jet, some red, some half red and half black, some black and white,
others spotted with diverse kinds of Colors, being all disguised to their
Enemies, to make them more terrible to their Foes, putting on likewise their
rich Jewels, Pendents, and Wampompeage, to put them in mind that they Fight not
only for their Children, Wives and Lives, but likewise for their Goods, Lands
and Liberties. Being thus Armed with this Warlike Paint, the antique Warriors
make toward their Enemies in a disordered manner, without any Soldier-like
Marching, or Warlike Postures, being deaf to any word of Command, ignorant of
falling off or on, of doubling Ranks or Files, but let fly their winged
Shaftsmen without either fear or wit: Their Artillery being spent, he that has
no Arms to Fight, finds Legs to run away.

Their Games and Sports of activity.
They have two sorts of Games, one called Puim, the other Hubbub, not much
unlike Cards and Dice, being no other than Lottery. Puim is fifty or sixty
small Bents of a Foot long, which they divide to the number of their Gamesters,
shuffling them first between the Palms of their Hands; be that has more than
his Fellow, is so much the forwarder in his Game: Many other Whimsies be in
this Game, which would be too long to commit to Paper. He that is a noted
Gamester has a Hole in his Ear, wherein he carries his Puims in defiance of
his Antagonists. Hubbub is five small Bones in a small smooth Tray; the Bones
be like a Die, but something flatter, black on the one side and white on the
other, which they place on the Ground, against which violently thumping the
Platter, the Bones mount, changing colors with the windy whisking of their
Hands to and fro; which action in that sport they much use, smiting themselves
on the Beast and Thighs, crying out Hub, Hub, Hub; they may be heard play at
this Game a quarter of a Mile off: The Bones being all black or white make a
double Game; if three of one color, and two of another, then they afford but a
single Game; four, of a color, and one differing, is nothing; so long as the
Man wins he keeps the Tray, but if he loose the next Man takes it. They are so
bewitched with these two Games, that they will lose sometimes all they have;
Beaver, Moose-skins, Kettles, Wampompeage, Mowhacks, Hatchets, Knives, all is
confiscate by these two Games. For their Sports of action they have commonly
but three or four, as Football, Shooting, Running, and Swimming; when they play
Country against Country, there are rich Goals, all behung with Wampompeage,
Mowhacks, Beaver Skins, and black Otter Skins: Their Goals are a Mile long
placed on the Sands, which are as even as a Board; their Ball is no bigger than
a Hand-ball, which sometimes they mount in the Air with their naked Feet,
sometimes it is swayed by the multitude, sometime also it is two days before
they get a Goal, then they mark the Ground they win, and begin there the next
day. Before they come to this Sport they paint themselves, even as when they go
to War, in policy to prevent future mischief, because no man should know him
that moved his patience, or accidentally hurt his Person, taking away the
occasion of studying revenge. Before they begin, their Arms are put off, and
hung upon some neighboring Tree, after which they make a long scrowl on the
Sand, over which they shake Hands, and with loving Hearts scuffle for Victory.
While the Men Play, the Boys Pipe, and the Women Dance and Sing Trophies of
their Husbands Conquests; all being done, a Feast summons their departure.

Such is their dexterity in Shooting, that they can hit a running Hind, or
flying Pigeon, without a standing pause or left-ey'd blinking; they draw their
Arrows between their Fingers and the Thumb; their Bows are quick, but not very
strong, not killing at above six or seven score distance: Shooting at one
another, they have a trick with swift conveyance to shun the Arrow; this they
do to make them expert against time of War. They are trained up to their Bows
even from their Childhood; for little Boys with Bows made of little Sticks,
and Arrows made of great Bents, will hit down a piece of Tobacco-pipe every
time a good way off. As these Indians are good Marks-men, so are they well
experienced where the very Life of every Creature lies, and know where to
smite him to make him die presently. Their Swimming is not after our English
fashion, of spread Arms and Legs, which they hold too tiresom, but like Dogs,
their Arms before them, cutting through the Liquids with their right Shoulder:
In this manner they will Swim very swift and far, either in rough or smooth
Waters, sometimes for their ease lying as still as a Log; sometimes they will
play the Dive-doppers, and come up in unexpected places.

Of their Huntings.
For their Hunting, it is to be noted, that they have no swift-footed Greyhounds
to let slip at the sight of the Deer, no deep-mouthed Hounds, or scenting
Beagles, to find out their desired Prey; themselves are all this, who in that
time of the year when the Deer comes down, having certain Hunting-houses in
such places where they know the Deer does usually frequent, in which they keep
their Rendezvous, their Snares, and all their Accoutrements for that
Employment: when they get sight of a Deer, Moose, or Bear, they study how to
get the Wind of him, and approaching within shot, stab their Mark quite
through, if the Bones hinder not. The chief thing they Hunt after is Deer,
Mooses and Bears: It grieves them more to see an Englishman take one Deer,
than a thousand Acres of Land. They Hunt likewise after Wolves, wild Cats,
Rackoons, Otters, Beavers, and Musquashes, Trading both their Skins and Flesh
to the English. Beside this Artillery they have other devices to kill their
Game, as sometimes Hedges, a Mile or two Miles long, being a Mile wide at one
end, and made narrower and narrower by degrees, leaving only a Gap of six Foot
long; over against which in the daytime they lie lurking, to shoot the Deer
which come through that narrow passage; so many as come within the
circumference of that Hedge, seldom return back to leap over, unless they be
forced by the chasing of some ravenous Wolf, or sight of some accidental
Passenger: In the Night, at the Gap of this Hedge, they set Deer-traps, which
are Springes made of young Trees, and smooth wrought Cords, so strong, that it
will toss a Horse if he be caught in it.

Of their Fishings.
In the Trade of Fishing they are very expert, being experienced in the
knowledge of all Baits for several Fishes, and diverse Seasons; being not
ignorant likewise of the removal of Fishes, knowing when to Fish in Rivers, and
when at Rocks, when in Bays, and when at Seas: Since the English came they are
furnished with English Hooks and Lines, for before they made them of Hemp,
being more curiously wrought, of stronger Materials than ours, and hooked with
Bone-Hooks; but laziness drives them to buy, more than profit or commendations
wins them to make of their own. They make likewise very strong Sturgeon-nets,
with which they catch Sturgeons of twelve, fourteen, and sixteen, and some
eighteen Foot long in the daytime, and in the nightime they betake
themselves to their Birchen Canoos, in which they carry a forty-fathom Line,
with a sharp-bearded Dart fastened at the end thereof; then lighting a Torch
made of Birchen Rinds, they wave it to and again by their Canoo side, which the
Sturgeon much delighted with, comes to them tumbling and playing, turning up
his white Belly, into which they thrust their Lance, his Back being
impenetrable; which done, they hale to the Shore their struggling Prize. They
have often recourse into the Rocks whereupon the Sea beats, in warm Weather, to
look out for sleepy Seals, whose Oil they much esteem, using it for diverse
things. In Summer they Fish any where, but in Winter in the fresh Water only,
and Ponds; in frosty Weather they cut round Holes in the Ice, about which they
will sit like so many Apes with their naked Breeches upon the cold Ice,
catching of Pikes, Pearches, Breams, and other sorts of Fresh Water Fish.

Of their Arts and Mantifactures.
Their Arts and Manufactures are diverse, as first their dressing of all manner
of Skins, which they do by scraping and rubbing, afterward painting them with
antique Embroiderings in unchangeable Colors; sometimes they take off the
Hair, especially if it be not killed in season. Their Bows they make of a
handsome shape, strung commonly with the Sinews of Mooses; their Arrows of young
Elder, feathered with Feathers of Eagles Wings and Tails, headed with Brass in
shape of a Heart or Triangle, fastened in a slender piece of Wood six or eight
Inches long, which is framed to put loose in the pithy Elder, aftewards bound
fast for riving: Their Arrows are made in this manner, because it might shake
from his Head, and be left behind for their finding, and the Pile only remain
to gaul the wounded Beast. Their Cordage is so even, soft, and smooth, that it
looks more like Silk than Hemp. Their Sturgeon Nets are not deep, nor above
thirty or forty Foot long; which in ebbing low Waters they stake fast to the
Ground where they are sure the Sturgeon will come, never looking more at it
till the next low Water. Their Canoos are made either of Pine-trees, which
before they were acquainted with English Tools, they burned hollow, scraping
them smooth with Clam-shells and Oyster-shells, cutting their outsides With
Stone Hatchets. These Boats are not above a Foot and a half, or two Foot wide,
and twenty Foot long. Their other Canoos be made of thin Birch Rinds, close
Ribb'd, and on the inside with broad thin Hoops, like the Hoops of a Tub;
these are made very light, a Man may carry one of them a Mile, being made
purposely to carry from River to River, and from Bay to Bay, to shorten
Land-passages. In these cockling Fly-boats, wherein an Englishman can scarce
sit without a fearful tottering, they will venture to Sea, when an English
Shallop dare not bear a Knot of Sail, scudding over the overgrown Waves as
fast as a wind-driven Ship, being driven by their Paddles, being much like
Battle-doors; if a cross Wave (which is seldom) turn her Keel up-side down,
they by swimming free her, and scramble into her again.

Of their Language.
Their Language, is only peculiar to themselves, not inclining to any of the
more refined Tongues. Some have thought they might be of the dispersed Jews,
because some of their words are near unto the Hebrew; but by the same rule they
may conclude them to be some of the gleanings of all Nations, because they have
words which sound after the Greek, Latin, French, and other Tongues. Their
Language is hard to learn, few of the English being able to speak any of it, or
capable of the right pronunciation, which is the chief grace of their Tongue:
They pronounce much after the Diphthongs, excluding L and R, which in our
English Tongue they pronounce with as much difficulty, as most of the Dutch do
T and H, calling a Lobster a Nobstann. Every Country does something differ in
their Speech, even as our Northern People do from the Southern, and Western
from them; especially the Tarrentine, whose Tongue runs so much upon R, that
they wharle much in pronunciation. When any Ships come near the Shore, they
demand whether they are King Charles's Torries, with such a rumbling sound, as
if one were beating on an unbrac'd Drum. In serious Discourse our Southern
Indians use seldom any short Colloquies, but speak their minds at large,
without any interjected Discourses from any, the rest giving diligent audience
to his utterance; which done, some or other returns him as long an Answer: They
love not to speak multa, sed multum; seldom are their words and their deeds
strangers. According to the matter of their discourse, so are their acting
Gestures in their Expressions.

Of their Deaths, Burials and Mourning.
The Indians are of lusty and healthful Bodies, not experimentally knowing those
Diseases which are incident to other Countries, as Fevers, Pleurisies,
Calentures, Agues, Consumptions, Convulsions, Apoplexies, Dropsies, Gouts, Pox,
Measles, or the like, but spin out the thread of their Days to a fair length,
numbering sixty, eighty, some a hundred years: But when any one lies a dying,
the doleful cries, and throbbing sighs of the Friends and Relations, express
unspeakable sorrow; and when the Party is dead and laid in the Ground, they not
only weep and howl for a good space over the Grave, but also keep Annual
Solemnities of Mourning, rubbing their Faces with black Lead all about the
Eyebrows, and part of their Cheeks; yet do they hold the Immortality of the
Soul, in which their Indian Faith jumps much with the Turkish Alchoran,
dreaming of a certain Paradise, or South-West Elysium, wherein they shall
everlastingly abide, solacing themselves in odoriferous Gardens, fruitful
Cornfieldsd, green Meadows, bathing their tawny Hides in the cool Streams of
pleasant Rivers, and sheltering themselves from Heat and Cold in the sumptuous
Palaces framed by Nature, concluding, that neither care nor pain shall molest
them, but that Natures bounty will administer all things with a voluntary
contribution from the Storehouse of their Elysium; at the Portal whereof, they
say, lies a great Dog, whose churlish snarlings deny admission to unworthy
Intruders: wherefore it is their custom to bury with them their Bows and
Arrows, and good store of their Wampompeage and Mowhacks, the one to affright
that affronting Cerberus, the other to purchase more immense Prerogatives in
their Paradise. For their Enemies and loose Livers, whom they account unworthy
of this imaginary Happiness, they say that they pass to the infernal Dwellings
of Abamocho, to be tortured according to the Fictions of the ancient Heathen.

Dispositions, Employments, Usage by their Husbands, Apparel, and Modesty of
the Women.
The drudgery of all laborious sorts of Work, and the management of all
domestic Affairs, lies wholly upon the Indian Women, who are made mere Slaves
by their Husbands; they build the Houses, sow and reap the Corn, provide
Lobsters for their Husbands to bait their Hooks when they go a Fishing for
Basse or Cod; and for these Lobsters they are many times forced to dive in the
extremest Weather, then lug home a great weight of them upon their Backs, as
also all the Fish which their Husbands catch for pleasure, from the places
where they were caught: They dress all the Meat, serve it up to their Husbands,
and waiting till they have filled their Bellies, are glad of their leavings. In
Summer they gather Flags, of which they make Mats for Houses, and Hemp and
Rushes, with Dying Stuff, of which they make curious Baskets, with intermixed
Colors and Pourtraictures of antique Imagery. These Baskets are of all sizes
from a Quart to a Quarter, in which they carry their Luggage. In Winter they
are their Husbands Caterers, trudging to the Clam-banks for their Belly-timber,
and their Porters to lug it home. They likewise sew their Husbands Shoes, and
weave Coats of Turkey Feathers, besides all their ordinary Household drudgery
which daily lies upon them, insomuch that a great Belly hinders no business,
nor does a Childbirth take much time, but the young Infant being greased and
sooted, wrapped in a Beavers Skin, bound with his Feet up to his Bum, upon a
Board two Foot long and one Foot broad, and his Face exposed to all nipping
Weather, this little Pappouse travels about with his barefooted Mother to
paddle in the Icy Clam-banks, after three or four days of Age have confirmed
her recovery. For their Carriage, it is very civil, Smiles being the greatest
grace of their Mirth. Their Music is Lullabies in Rocking their Children, who
generally are as quiet as if they had neither Spleen or Lungs. Their Voices are
generally both sweet and well ordered, so far as pure Nature teaches them.
Their Modesty drives them to wear more Clothes than the Men, having always a
Coat of Cloth or Skins, wrapped like a Blanket about their Loins, reaching down
to their Hams, which they never put off in Company.

Towns buile by the English in New England.
There are to be reckoned up forty five chief Towns, besides what others there
may be of less note, built or made habitable by the English since their first
arrival in New England, till about the Year 1650.

First, St. Georges Fort, where the first Plantation was settled, St. Georges
Fort.
at the Mouth of the River Sagadebock, in a kind of Peninsula, or half Island.

The second, New Plymouth, seated no less commodiously upon a large Bay, New
Plymouth.
called by the Natives Pautuxed; where they first settled that went over out of
dissatisfaction to the Church Government of England.

The third, Salem, called by the Indians, Mahumbeak; Salem.
which stands on the middle of a Neck of Land very pleasantly, having a South
River on the one side, and a North River on the other side. This Town seems to
have been built in the Year 1628. by a part of that Company, who, being sent
over by the Merchant-Adventurers, settled themselves in this Cape.

The fourth Mashawmut, or Charlestown, Charlestown.
situate on a Neck of Land on the North-side of the River Charles. The form of
this Town, in the Frontispiece of it, resembles the Head, Neck, and Shoulders
of a Man; through the right Shoulder whereof runs the Navigable River Mistick,
which by its near approach to Charles River in one place, makes the chief part
of the Town a Peninsula: It consists of a hundred and fifty Dwelling-houses,
many of them beautified with pleasant Gardens and Orchards: Near the Waterside
is a large Marketplace, forth of which issue two fair Streets; and in it
stands a large and well built Church.

The fifth, Matapan, or Dorchester, a Fronteer Town, Dorchester.
standing over against the Island near the Seaside: It is watered with two
small Rivers, and is built in the form of a Serpent turning its Head Northward;
it has Orchards and Gardens full of Fruit Trees.

The sixth is Boston, anciently Accomonticus, the Center and Metropolis of the
rest, Boston.
built in the form of a Heart, and fortified with two Hills on the Front-part
thereof, the one having great store of Artillery mounted thereon, the other
having a strong Battery, built of whole Timber, and filled with Earth: At the
Descent of the Hill lies a large Cave or Bay, on which the chief part of this
Town is built, over-topp'd with a third Hill, all three like over-topping
Towers, keeping a constant Watch to foresee the approach of foreign Dangers.
The chiefest part of this City-like Town is crowded upon the Sea Banks, and
wharf'd out with great Industry and Cost, the Edifices large and beautiful,
whose continual enlargement presageth some sumptuous City.

The seventh, Roxbury.
Roxbury, situated between Boston and Dorchester, watered with cool and
pleasant Springs issuing from the Rocky Hills, and with small Freshets watering
the Valleys of this fertile Town: The form of it resembles a Wedge double
pointed, entering between the two abovementioned Towns; and in the room of
those Swamps, or tearing Bushes which were there before, they have now goodly
Fruit Trees, fruitful Fields and Gardens.

The eighth is Lynne, Lynne.
or (according to the Indian Name, Saugus) situated between Salem and
Charlestown, near a River, whose strong Freshet at the end of Winter fills all
her Banks, and with a violent Torrent vents it self into the Sea. This Town is
almost square, consisting many years ago of above a hundred Dwelling-houses,
having also an Iron Mill in constant use: The Church being on a level Land,
undefended from the North-West Wind, is made with Steps descending into the
Earth.

The ninth is called Water-town, Water-town.
anciently Pigsgusset, situated upon one of the Branches of Charles-River,
watered with many pleasant Springs and small Rivulets, running like Veins
throughout her Body. This Town began by occasion of Sir Richard Saltingstall,
who arriving with store of Cattle and Servants, Wintered in these Parts.

In the Year 1633. there was erected between Charlestown and Water-town,
New-town.
a Place called New-town, and by the Indians, Amongcangen, since named
Cambridge, being the tenth in order: It is in form like a List of Broad-cloth,
reaching to the most Southerly part of Merrimeck River; it has comely and well
ordered Streets, and two fair Colleges; Harverd College.
the first called Harverd College, from Mr. John Harverd, who at his Death
gave a thousand Pounds to it; to the other Mr. John Harnes was the chief
Benefactor. This Town was appointed to be the Seat of the Government, but it
continued not long.

The eleventh called Ipswich, Ipswich.
or Sawacatuc by the Indians, is situated on a fair and delightful River,
issuing forth from a very pleasant Pond, and afterward breaking its Course
through a hideous Swamp of large extent; it lies in the Sagamoreship, or
Earldom of Aggawan, now by the English called Essex.

Twelve Miles from Ipswich, Newbury.
near upon the Streams of Merrimeck River, is situated the twelfth, called
Newbury.

The People of New-town, Hartford.
or Cambridge, upon their removal of the Plantation of Canectico, passing up
the River, built a Town, which they called Hartford, the thirteenth in number,
diverse others coming in the room of those that departed from Cambridge.

The fourteenth, Concord.
seated upon a fair fresh River (whose Rivulets are filled with fresh Marsh,
and her Streams with Fish, it being a Branch of that large River of Merrimeck
Allwives) is built in the Inland Country, and called Concord: It consisted at
first of above fifty Families: Their Buildings are for the most part
conveniently placed on one straight Stream under a Sunny Bank, in a low Level.
The People that first set forth to build this Town, sustained great hardship
and misery, by reason of the uncouth Ways, and extremity of the Weather, it
being the first Inland Town that was built.

South-East of Charles-River, upon the Seacoast, Hingham.
is situated the fifteenth Town Hingham; the form whereof is somewhat intricate
to describe, by reason of the Seawasting Crooks, where it beats upon a
moultring Shore; yet in some places the Streets are complete: It consisted at
first of about sixty Families.

The sixteenth is in Plymouth Government, situate upon the Seacoast,
Dukesbury, or Sandwich.
first named Dukes-bury, afterward Sandwich.

About the year 1617. a new Supply coming over into these Parts, Newhaven.
and not finding in the Mattachusets Government any commodious place to settle
in, they after much search took up a place somewhat more Southerly, near the
Shalles of Capecod, where they found a commodious Harbor for Shipping, and a
fit place to erect a Town in, which they built in a short time, with very fair
Houses and complete Streets; and shortly after several others: Amongst which
they erected a new Government, which from their first Fronteer Town, being the
seventeenth, was called Newhaven.

The eighteenth is in the Government of the Mattachusets, and called Dedham,
Dedham.
being an Inland Town, situate about ten Miles from Boston in the County of
Suffolk, well watered with many pleasant Streams, and abounding with Gardens
and Fruit Trees: It consisted at first of about a hundred Families, being
generally given to Husbandry.

The nineteenth being also in this Government is called Weymouth, Weymouth.
battered on the East with the Sea Waves; on the South-West Rocks and Swamps
make it delightful to the Deer, as the ploughable Meadow-Lands to the
Inhabitants.

About the Year 1638. Printing was brought over into New England.

About six Miles from Ipswich, North-Eastward, Rowly.
was erected another Town called Rowly, being the twentieth.

About the Year 1639. began the one and twentieth Town Hampton, Hampton.
in the County of Norfolk, to be built: It is situate near the Seacoast, not
far from the River of Merrimeck: The great store of salt Marsh did entice the
People to set down their Habitations there.

Not far from this Town of Hampton, was erected the two and twentieth,
Salisbury.
called Salisbury, seated upon the broad swift Torrent of Merrimeck-River: It
lies on the Northern side, over against the Town of Newbury, the River between
them being about half a Mile broad, but has an Island in the midst thereof,
which makes it the more easily passable. The situation of this Town is very
pleasant, the Skirts thereof abounding in fair and goodly Meadows, with good
store of stately Timber in many places upon the Uplands.

Long Island. Southampton.
About the Year 1640. by a fresh Supply of People that settled in Long Island,
was there erected the twenty third Town, called Southampton; by the Indians,
Agawom.

The same Year also the Town of Sudbury, being the twenty fourth, Sudbury.
began to be built in the Inland Country: It is furnished with great store of
fresh Marsh, but lying very low, it is much endammag'd with Land-floods.

About this time there was built at Mount Wollestone, Braintree.
by some old Planters and certain Farmers of the great Town of Boston, a Town
named Braintree, being the twenty fifth, within the Mattachusets Government: It
is well peopled, and has great store of Land in Tillage.

In the Year 1641. Mr. Richard Blindman coming from Green Harbor, Gloucester.
a Place in Plymouth Patent, with some few People of his acquaintance, settled
in Cape Anne, where they built the twenty sixth Town, and named it Gloucester.

There is also situate upon Puscataque River, to the North-East of Boston,
Dover.
a Town called Dover, being the twenty seventh, the People by voluntary
resignation being under the Mattachusets Government.

In the Year 1642. was erected the eight and twentieth Town, Wooburn.
called Wooburn.

In the Year 1644. Reading the nine and twentieth Town was built, Reading.
being in the Government of the Mattachusets; it is well watered and situated
about a great Pond, having two Mills, a Saw-Mill, and a Corn-Mill, which stand
upon two several Streams.

A little after was built the thirtieth Town in this Colony, Wenham.
called Wenham, situate between Salem and Ipswich; it is very well watered, as
most Inland Towns are, and the People live altogether on Husbandry.

About the Year 1645. one Mr. Pinchin, having out of desire to improve his
Estate by Trading with the Indians, settled himself in a place very remote from
any of the Towns of the Mattachusets Colony, yet under their Government, and
great store of People still resorting to him, they at last erected a Town upon
the River Canectico, Spring-field.
calling it Spring-field, being the one and thirtieth Town; it is very fitly
seated for a Beaver Trade with the Indians, in regard it is situate upon this
large Navigable River, and upon some Rivulets of the same.

In the Year 1648. was founded the Town of Haverhill, Haverhill.
being the two and thirtieth, about a Mile or two from the place where the
River of Merrimeck receives into it self the River Shawshin, which is one of
her three chief Heads.

Not long after, Malden.
the Town of Malden, being the three and thirtieth Town, was built by certain
People that came out of Charlestown; these two Towns being severed the one
from the other by the large River of Mistick.

The rest we shall only name, as 34. Berwick, alias Chawun. 35 Oxford, alias
Sagoquas. Falmouth, alias Totam. 36. Bristol. 37. Hull, alias Passataquack. 38.
Dartmouth, alias Bohanna. 39. Norwich, alias Segocket. 40. Taunton, alias
Cohannet. 41. Greens-Harbour. 42. Yarmouth. 43. Northam, alias Pascataqua. 44.
Exeter. 45. Weymouth.

The chief Rivers of New England are, Pascataway, Sagadahoc, Pemmaquid,
Agamentico, Merrimeck, Tachobacco, Mistick, Narraganset, Mishuwin, Connectacut,
Newichwavoch, Kynebequy.

The present state of the Natives.
The Indian Natives are now become so weak in number, and in some measure
reduced to a dread of the growth of the English, that of late years they have
not practiced any thing against them, or at least, not justified them by
numbers in open Hostility, willing rather to purchase their Peace and buy off
Injuries committed by them at the Price of their Lands and Possessions.

And although care and expense has been many years applied to the Conversion
of Indians to the Faith, however inclinable they seemed at first to the
embracing thereof, not then so well discerning the insincerity of its
Professors; yet there are so few of late who do embrace it or persevere in it
(wanting a good Foundation for instruction in Moral Honesty, and perhaps the
example of it in those that undertake to instruct them in Religion;) that
Christianity to them seems a Chimera, Religion a design to draw them from the
libidinous Pleasures of a lazy Life; however, some there are who make
Profession of Christianity, and some who are educated in the Schools of New
Cambridge, to entitle them to Preach the Gospel in their own Language.

One great hindrance to the Propagation of the Faith amongst those Heathens, is
the diversity of their Languages; for it is commonly known, that the Natives
themselves do not understand one another, if their Habitations are but at forty
Miles distance.

Church Government among the English.
Their Church Government and Discipline is Congregational and Independent, yet
in some places more rigid than others, for in many Towns there yet remains some
leaven of Presbytery, from which Sects our Independency had its Original;
insomuch, that one of the most remarkable Opposers of Episcopal Government,
Doctor Bastwick (who, spoiled so much Paper in railing at the Church Government
of England, and crying up Liberty of Conscience) finding the Apostasy of his
own Brethren of Boston from their first Principles, and his, generally prevail
over them, even to the denying that liberty to others, which they seemed only
to aim at, did write a large and vehement Dehortatory Epistle to them from
their New Lights or Paths, saying, That according to their present Tenants,
they could not pretend to be better, or other than a Christian Synagogue.

Their. Civil Government and Laws.
Their Laws and Methods of Government are wholly of their own framing, each
Colony for themselves, makes an Annual choice of Governor, Deputy Governor, and
a certain number of Assistants, by the plurality of Suffrages collected from
their several Towns, the Electors are only Freemen and Church Members; for he
that is not a Member of their Church, can neither choose, nor be chosen a
Magistrate, nor have his Children Baptized; besides the loss of many other
Privileges, and liable moreover to frequent, if not constant Mulcts for
absenting themselves from Divine Worship (so called) in their Meeting Houses.

Since the transmitting of the Patent in New England, the Election is not by
Voices, nor erection of Hands as formerly, but by Papers, thus:

The general Court-electory sitting, where are present in the Church, or
Meeting House at Boston, the old Governor, Deputy, and all the Magistrates, and
two Deputies or Burgesses for every Town, or at least one; all the Freemen are
bid to come in at one Door, and bring their Votes in Paper for the new
Governor, and deliver them down upon the Table, before the Court, and so pass
forth at another Door; those that are absent, send their Votes by Proxies. All
being delivered in, the Votes are counted, and according to the major part, the
old Governor pronounces, That such an one is chosen Governor for the year
ensuing. Then the Freemen, in like manner, bring their Votes for the Deputy
Governor, who being also chosen, the Governor propounds the Assistants one
after another. New Assistants are, of late, put in nomination, by an Order of
general Court, beforehand to be considered of: If a Freeman give in a Blank,
that rejects the Man named; if the Freeman makes any mark with a Pen upon the
Paper which he brings, that elects the Man named: Then the Blanks and marked
Papers are numbered, and according to the major part of either, the Man in
Nomination stands elected or rejected; and so for all the Assistants. And after
every new Election, which is, by their Patent, to be upon the last Wednesday in
Easter Term, the new Governor and Officers are all new Sworn. The Governor and
Assistants choose the Secretary. And all the Court consisting of Governor,
Deputy, Assistants, and Deputies of Towns, give their Votes as well as the
rest; and the Ministers and Elders, and all Church Officers, have their Votes
also in all these Elections of chief Magistrates: Constables, and all other
inferior Officers, are sworn in the general, quarter, or other Courts, or
before any Assistant.

Every Freeman when he is admitted, takes a strict Oath, to be true to the
Society or Jurisdiction.

There are two general Courts, one every half year, wherein they make Laws or
Ordinances: The Ministers advise in making of Laws, especially Ecclesiastical,
and are present in Courts, and advise in some special Causes Criminal, and in
framing of Fundamental Laws.

There are besides four Quarter-Courts for the whole Jurisdiction, besides
other petty Courts, one every quarter at Boston, Salem, and Ipswich, with their
several Jurisdictions; besides every Town, almost, has a petty Court for small
Debts and Trespasses, under twenty Shillings.

Actions and Causes.
In the general Court, or great quarter Courts, before the Civil Magistrates,
are tried all Actions and Causes Civil and Criminal, and also Ecclesiastical,
especially touching Non-members: And they themselves say, that in the general
and quarter Courts, they have the Power of Parliament, King's Bench,
Common Pleas, Chancery, High Commission, and Star Chamber, and all other Courts
of England, and in diverse Cases have exercised that Power upon the Kings
Subjects there, as is not difficult to prove. They have put to death, banished,
fined Men, cut off Men's Ears, whipped, imprisoned Men, and all these for
Ecclesiastical and Civil Offenses, and without sufficient Record. In the lesser
quarter Courts are tried, in some, Actions under ten Pounds, in Boston, under
twenty, and all Criminal Causes not touching Life or Member. From the petty
quarter Courts, or other Courts, the parties may appeal to the great quarter
Courts, from thence to the general Court, from which there is no Repeal.

Twice a year, Grand-Juries.
in the said quarter Courts held before the general Courts, are two
Grand-Juries sworn for the Jurisdiction, one for one Court, and the other for
the other; and they are charged to enquire and Present Offenses reduced by the
Governor who gives the Charge.

Matters of Debt, Trials.
Trespass, and upon the Case, and Equity, yea and of Heresy also, are tried by
a Jury.

The Parties are warned to challenge any Jury-man before he be sworn; but
because there is but one Jury in a Court for trial of Causes; and all Parties
not present at their Swearing, the liberty of challenge is much hindered, and
some inconveniences do happen thereby. Jurors are returned by the Marshal, he
was at first called The Beadle of the Society.

The Parties in all Causes, speak themselves for the most part, and some of the
Magistrates where they think cause requires, do the part of Advocates without
Fee or Reward.

Though among the several Colonies which were founded here by the confluence of
dissenting Zealots, this Government is exercised, differing from that of the
Church and State of England: yet in those Provinces which are granted by
particular Persons, the Government is much more conformable to that of England;
but as the Mattachusets or Bostoners were from the beginning the most Potent
and Predominant of all the rest of the Colonies, (insomuch, that Boston may
well be accounted the Metropolis of all New England,) so of late years they
have still usurped more and more Power and Authority over the rest; and
especially have not stuck to give Laws to the foresaid Provinces allotted to
particular Persons, and have gone about wholly to subjugate those places to
themselves, intrenching upon the rights of the true Proprietors; and that, even
contrary to the Kings express Commands by his Officers, there, and as it were
in open defiance of his Majesty and Government, as is evident from this
following Narration, of their behavior upon a business of this nature.

Proceedings of the Mattachusets against his Majesty's Commissioners.
IN the Year of our Lord 1665. his Majesty's Commissioners for the Affairs of
New England, being in the Province of Main, the People being much unsettled in
Point of Government, by reason the Mattachusets Colony, or Boston Government,
did usurp compulsively a Power over them contrary to their wills; and the right
of Sir Ferdinando Gorges Heir, who had his Commission then in the place, did
unanimously Petition to his Majesty's Commissioners to settle the Government;
upon which the said Commissioners examined the Bounds and Right of Mr. Gorges
Patent, with all the Allegations and Pretensions on both sides, and so
according to their Instruction from his Majesty, did settle a temporary
Government under his Majesty's immediate Authority, until such time as his
Majesty should give his final determination thereof; and for that end did
Institute Justices of the Peace to Govern the Province according to the true
Laws of England. Also his Majesty was pleased by his Mandamus in April 1666, to
the Governors of Boston, to signify that it was his will and pleasure, That
the Province of Main should stand good as his Commissioners had settled it,
until he had more leisure to determine it; yet notwithstanding, after three
years quiet possession, and exercising of Government by the Kings Justices,
according to their Commission granted by his Majesty's Commissioners, the
Bostoners, without any Conference with the said Justices, did in a hostile
manner oppose the King's Power, July 1668. which was as follows:

The General Court of Boston sent their Warrants to keep Court at York under
their Authority, and for that purpose Commissionated Magistrates by their own
Authority, namely Major General John Leveret, Mr. Edward Ting, Captain Richard
Walden, and Captain Robert Pike: Whereupon the King's Justices did oppose their
Warrants, and sent Post to New York, with an Address to General Nicholas, for
Advice what to do therein; who forthwith dispatched away to the Governors of
Boston, informing them of the danger of their Proceeding, it being an open
breach of Duty, to subvert the Government established by his Majesty's Power;
also sent the King's Mandamus, April 1666. that willed to the contrary.
Notwithstanding the Boston Magistrates in July 1668. in order to their Boston
Commission, came to York Town in the said Province, with several Armed Men,
Horse and Foot, to keep Court under their Authority; Opposition was made by the
King's Justices, and his Majesty's Power was urged, but little regard thereunto
shown; his Majesty's Mandamus was likewise much insisted upon, and produced by
the Justices, who asked the Bostoners what they thought of it? and how they
durst act so contrary to the King's Will and Pleasure? Major General Leveret
told them, That he believed it might be the King's Hand, but he had a
Commission from the general Court at Boston, which he would follow and observe
by the help of God. The same day in the Afternoon the said Major General
Leveret, with the rest of the Boston Magistrates, seized and imprisoned the
Province Marshal in doing his Office, and then forthwith went in warlike
posture to the Courthouse, where the King's Justices sat in Judicature, and
putting them from their Seats, sat down themselves in their Places, and
Executed their Boston Commission. The King's Justices drew a Protest against
their Proceedings, and so left the Decision to God's Providence, and his
Majesty's good Pleasure. Then they turned out all Officers, both Military and
Civil, and Swore others in their Places under their Authority; they forced the
whole Record of the Province out of the Recorders House contrary to his Will,
by virtue of a Special Warrant from that Court. They imprisoned the Mayor of
the said Province about three weeks, forcing him to give in five hundred Pound
Bonds, not to act according to his Commission; which with some Reservations he
was forced to deny for the security of his Estate.

These riotous Proceedings thus acted with such a precipitate fury, so incensed
his Majesty, that speedy care had been taken to reduce them to reason, had they
not upon mature consideration bethought themselves afterward to yield
Obedience to his Majesty's Orders.

Having treated at large of all that concerns New England in general, both in
reference to the Natives and the English Planters, we shall conclude with a
brief view of the Provinces of Laconia and Main, as they are truly Described
(among other ingenuous Collections and Observations of the Affairs of America,
and especially these Parts) by Ferdinando Gorges Esquire Heir to the
abovementioned Sir Ferdinando, and thereby sole Lord of the said Provinces,
only contracting what has been by him delivered more at large.

A brief Description of Laconia, a Province in New England.
Among diverse Plantations of the English happily Founded in New England, is a
Province to the Landward, named Laconia, so called by reason of the great Lakes
therein, but by the ancient Inhabitants thereof it is called The Country of
the Troquois: It lies between the Latitude of forty four and forty five
Degrees, having the Rivers of Sagadehock and Merrimeck on the Seacoast of New
England, Southerly from it; into each of which Rivers there is a short Passage,
frequented by the Salvages inhabiting near the Lakes. Also it has the great
Lakes which tend toward California in the South Sea on the West thereof: On
the North thereof is the great River of Canada, into which the said River
disgorgeth it self by a fair large River, well replenished with many fruitful
Islands: The Air thereof is pure and wholesome, the Country pleasant, having
some high Hills, full of goodly Forests, and fair Valleys and Plains, fruitful
in Corn, Vines, Chestnuts, Wallnuts, and infinite sorts of other Fruits, large
Rivers well stored with Fish, and environed with goodly Meadows full of
Timber Trees.

One of the great Lakes is called The Lake of Troquois, which together with a
River of the same Name, running into the River of Canada, is sixty or seventy
Leagues in length.

In the Lake are four fair Islands, which are low and full of goodly Woods and
Meadows, having store of Game for Hunting, as Stags, Fallow-Deer, Elks,
Roe-Bucks, Beavers, and other sorts of Beasts which come from the Main Land to
the said Islands.

The Rivers which fall into the Lakes have in them good store of Beavers; of
which Beasts, as also of the Elks, the Salvages make their chiefest Traffic.

The said Islands have been inhabited heretofore by the Salvages, but are now
abandoned by reason of their late Wars one with another: They contain twelve or
fifteen Leagues in length, and are seated commodiously for Habitation in the
midst of the Lake, which abounds with diverse kinds of wholesome Fish.

From this Lake run two Rivers Southward, which fall into the Eastern and
Southern Seacoast of New England.

Into this Lake there went many years since certain French of Quebeck, who
sided with the Algovinquins, with the help of their Canoos, which they carried
the space of five Miles over the Impossible Falls, to Fight a Battle in revenge
of some former Injuries done by the Troquois to the Algovinquins, who had the
Victory; for which cause the French have been so hated ever since by the Nation
of the Troquois, that none of them durst ever appear in any part of that Lake.
But their Trade, said to be sixteen thousand Beavers yearly, is partly sold to
the Dutch, who Trade with the Westend of the said Lake over Land by Horses,
from their Plantation upon Hudson's River: and another part is conceived to be
purchased by the Hiroons, who being Newters, are Friends both to the one and
the other; and these Hiroons bring down the greatest part of all by the River
of Canada.

The Way over Land to this great Lake, from the Plantation of Pascataway, has
been attempted by Captain Walter Neale, once Governor, at the Charges of Sir
Ferdinando Gorges, Captain Mason, and some Merchants of London, and the
Discovery wanted but one days Journey of finishing, because their Victuals was
spent, which, for want of Horses, they were enforced to carry with their Arms,
and their Clothes, upon their Backs: They intended to have made a settlement
for Trade by Pinnaces upon the said Lake, which they reckon to be about ninety
or a hundred Miles from the Plantation over Land.

The People of the Country are given to Hunting of wild Beasts, which is their
chiefest Food.

Their Arms are Bows and Arrows. Their Armor is made partly of Wood, and
partly of a kind of twisted Stuff like Cotton-Wool.

Their Meat is Flour of Indian Corn, of that Countries growth, sodden to Pap,
which they preserve for times of Necessity when they cannot Hunt.

This Province of Laconia, however known by a distinct Name, is included within
the Province of Main, which offers it self next to our consideration.

Of the Province of Main.
All that part of the Continent of New England, which was allotted by Patent to
Sir Ferdinando Gorges and to his Heirs, he thought fit to call by the Name of
The Province of Main. It takes it beginning at the entrance of Pascatoway
Harbor, and so passes up the same into the River of Newichwavoch; and through
the same unto the farthest Head thereof; and from thence North-Westwards for
the space of a hundred and twenty Miles; and from the Mouth of Pascatoway
Harbor aforesaid, North-Eastward along the Seacoast, to Sagadehock; and up the
River thereof to Kinibequy River, even as far as the Head thereof; and into the
Land North-Westwards, for the space of a hundred and twenty Miles.

To these Territories are also adjoined the North half of the Isles of Sholes,
together with the Isles of Capawick and Nautican, as also all the little
Islands lying within five Leagues of the Main, all along the Seacoast, between
the aforesaid Rivers of Pascatoway and Sagadehock.

He no sooner had this Province settled upon him, but he gave public notice,
That if any one would undertake by himself and his Associates, to Transport a
competent number of Inhabitants, to Plant in any part of his Limits, he would
assign unto him or them such a proportion of Land, as should in reason satisfy
them, reserving only to himself some small High-Rent, as 2 s. or 2 s. 6 d. for
a hundred Acres per Annum: and if they went about to build any Town or City, he
would Endow them with such Liberties and Immunities, as should make them
capable to Govern themselves within their own Limits, according to the
Liberties granted to any Town or Corporation within this Realm of England. And
as for others of the meaner sort who went as Tenants, that they should have
such quantities of Land assigned them as they were able to manage, at the Rate
of 4 d. or 6 d. an Acre, according to the nature or situation of the Place they
settle in.

And for the Division of the Province, and the Form of Government which he
intended to Establish, he first divided the Province into several Parts; and
those again he subdivided into distinct Regiments, as East, West, North, and
South; those again into several Hundreds, Parishes and Tythings, and these to
have their several Officers to Govern, according to such Laws as should be
agreed upon by public Assent of the Freeholders, with the approbation of
himself or Deputy, and the principal Officers of the public State.

The settled Government for the general State, to whom all Appeals were to be
made, and from whom all Instructions for the welfare of the Public were to
issue, were to consist of himself or his Deputy, who was to be chosen every
three year by himself, with the advice of his Council: Next a Chancellor for
the determination of all Causes; A Treasurer, to whom the care of the public
Revenue was to be committed; A Marshal, whose Office was to oversee the
Regiments, and to provide Men for public Service; An Admiral, to take care of
all Maritime Affairs, to whom a Judge of the Admiralty was to be joined to
determine all Maritime Causes; A Master of the Ordnance, to look to the public
Arms and Ammunition; A Secretary, to receive Intelligence, and to acquaint
himself or Deputy therewith. To these belong all their several Officers and
Ministers for the Execution of all Matters proper to their several Places.

The chief Town of this Province is called Gorgiana, which is Governed by a
Mayor, the rest are only inconsiderable Villages or scattered Houses; but
through Encouragement given to Adventurers and Planters, it may prove in time a
very flourishing Place, and be replenished with many fair Towns and Cities, it
being a Province both fruitful and pleasant.

SECT. II. New Netherland, now called New York.
THat Tract of Land formerly called The New Netherland, does contain all that
Land which lies in the North parts of America, betwixt New England and
Maryland; the length of which Northward into the Country, as it has not been
fully discovered, so it is not certainly known: The breadth of it is about two
hundred Miles. The principal Rivers within this Tract, are Hudson's-River,
Raritan-River, Delaware-Bay-River. The chief Islands are the Manhatans-Island,
Long Island, and Staten-Island.

The first which discovered this Country was Henry Hudson, who being hired by
the East India Company to seek a Passage in the Northern America to China, set
Sail Anno 1609. in the Half Moon Frigate; coming before Terre-neuff, he stood
about toward the South-West, where Sailing up a great River, he found two Men
Clad in in Ruffelo's Skins; and from thence arrived safe at Amsterdam.

New Netherland thus discovered, invited many Merchants to settle a firm
Plantation there; to which purpose they obtained Letters Patents in 1614.
granted them by the States in the Hague, That they might only Traffic to New
Netherland; whereupon they earnestly prosecuting the Design, sent out Adrian
Block and Godyn, who discovered several Coasts, Isles, Havens, and Rivers.

The Country, as they said, being then void, was therefore free for any body
that would take possession of it: Notwithstanding which pretense, they were
scarce warm in their Quarters, when Sir Samuel Argal, Governor of Virginia,
having first spoiled the French in Accadie, as we said, disputed the Possession
with these also. And although they pleaded Hudson's Right (who by Commission
from King James, and upon an English Account, had lately discovered those
Parts) and pretended they had not only bought all his Cards and Maps of the
Country, but all his Interest and Right also, and had fully contented him for
all his Pains and Charges in the Discovery; yet the said Hudson being an
Englishman, and acting all that he did by Commission from the King of England,
upon Debate it was concluded, That the Land could not be alienated after
Discovery without the King of England's consent, especially it being but a part
of the Province of Virginia, already possessed by the Subjects of England: So
that they were forced to wave that Title, and the Dutch Governor submitted his
Plantation to His Majesty of England, and to the Governor of Virginia, for and
under him: Upon which Terms for a good while they held it. Afterward, upon
confidence, it seems, of a new Governor sent from Amsterdam, they not only
failed to pay the promised Contribution and Tribute, but fell to fortify
themselves, and to entitle the Merchants of Amsterdam to an absolute Propriety
and Dominion of the Country, independent of any other; building Towns, as New
Amsterdam; raising Forts, as Orange Fort, near the Branch of the Nordt River,
which they call Hell-Gate. Complaint whereof being made to King Charles, and by
his Ambassador map of New England NOVI BEL^^ Quod nune NOVI JORCK vocatur,
NOVAE que ANGLIAE and Partis Virginiae Accuratissima et Novissima Delineatio.
bassador represented to the States, they disown the business, and declare by
Public Instrument, that it was only a private Undertaking, viz. of the
West India Company of Amsterdam. Whereupon a Commission was granted to Sir
George Calvert, made Lord Baltimore in Ireland, to Possess and Plant the
Southern parts thereof, lying toward Virginia, by the name of Maryland; and
to Sir Edmund Loyden, to Plant the Northern parts toward New England, by the
name of Nova-Albion: Which makes the Dutch the second time seem willing to
compound; and for the Sum of two thousand and five hundred Pounds, they offer
to be gone, and leave all they had there. But taking advantage of the troubles
in England, which then began to appear, and soon after followed, they not only
go back from their first Propositions, and make higher Demands, but also most
mischievously (as some report) furnish the Natives with Arms, and teach them
the use of them, as it may be thought, expecting to use their help upon
occasion, against the English.

After His Majesty's Restoration, His Majesty being truly informed of his just
Pretenses to all that Usurped Territory called New Netherland, (the same having
been formerly part of New England) and of how great prejudice to the Act of
Navigation, and how dangerous Intruders the Dutchmen are generally* upon other
Princes Dominions, what mischief might ensue to all our English Plantations in
time of War, if the Dutch were permitted to strengthen themselves in the very
heart of His Majesty's Dominions, being Masters of one of the most commodious
Ports and Rivers in America: His Majesty resolved to seize upon the same, as
his undoubted Right, and in May 1664. having designed four Commissioners to the
perfecting of Affairs in New England, Colonel Richard Nichols, Sir Robert
Carr, George Cartwnight, and Samuel Mawrick Esquires, with three Ships of War
to convey them to Boston: The matter was so ordered, that the same Ships served
for the reducing of the Town and Fort of New Amsterdam, upon conditions,
advantageous to His Majesty, and easy to the Dutch.

Now begins New Netherland to lose the Name, for His Majesty having conferred
by Patent upon his Royal Highness the Duke of York and Albany, all the
Acquisitions made upon Foraigners, together with Long Island, the West end
whereof was wholly settled and Peopled by Dutchmen; his Royal Highness
empowered, by Commission as his Deputy Governor, Colonel Nichols, Groom of his
Bedchamber, to take the Charge and Direction of Reducing and Governing all
those Territories; it was by him thought fit, to change some principal
denominations of Places, viz. New Netherland into Yorkshire; New Amsterdam
into New York; Fort-Amscel into Fort-James; Fort-Orange into Fort-Albany; and
withal, to change Burgomasters, Schepen, and Schout, into Mayor, Aldermen, and
Sheriff, with Justices of the Peace; so that all the Civil Policy is
conformable to the Methods and Practice of England, whereas New England retains
only the name of Constable in their whole Rolls of Civil Officers.

It is placed upon the neck of the Island Manhatans, looking toward the Sea;
encompassed with Hudson's River, which is six Miles broad; the Town is compact
and oval, with very fair Streets and several good Houses; the rest are built
much after the manner of Holland, to the number of about four hundred Houses,
which in those parts are held considerable: Upon one side of the Town is
James-Fort, capable to lodge three hundred Soldiers and Officers; it has four
Bastions, forty Pieces of Cannon mounted; the Walls of Stone, lined with a
thick Rampart of Earth; well accommodated with a Spring of fresh Water, always
furnished with Arms and Ammunition, against Accidents: Distant from the Sea
seven Leagues, it affords a safe Entrance, even to unskilful Pilots; under the
Town side, Ships of any Burden may Ride secure against any Storms, the Current
of the River being broken by the interposition of a small Island, which lies a
Mile distant from the Town.

About ten Miles from New York is a Place called Hell-Gate, which being a
narrow Passage, there runs a violent Stream both upon Flood and Ebb; and in
the middle lie some Rocky Islands, which the Current sets so violently upon,
that it threatens present Shipwreck; and upon the Flood is a large Whirlwind,
which continually sends forth a hideous roaring, enough to affright any
Stranger from passing farther, and to wait for some Charon to conduct him
through; yet to those that are well acquainted, little or no danger: It is a
place of great Defense against any Enemy coming in that way, which a small
Forticfiation would absolutely prevent, and necessitate them to come in at the
West end of Long Island by Sandy Hook, where Nutten Island forces them within
the Command of the Fort at New York, which is one of the best Pieces of Defense
in the North parts of America. It is built most of Brick and Stone, and covered
with red and black Tyle, and the Land being high, it gives at a distance a
pleasing prospect to the Spectators. The Inhabitants consist most of English
and Dutch, and have a considerable Trade with Indians for Beaver, Otter, and
Rackoon-Skins, with other Furrs; as also for Bear, Deer and Elke-Skins; and are
supplied with Venison and Fowl in the Winter, and Fish in the Summer by the
Indians, which they buy at an easy Rate; and having the Country round about
them, they are continually furnished with all such Provisions as is needful for
the Life of Man, not only by the English and Dutch within their own, but
likewise by the adjacent Colonies.

Manhattans River.
The Manhattans, or Great River, being the chiefest, having with two wide Mouths
washed the mighty Island Watouwaks, falls into the Ocean. The Southern Mouth is
called Port May, or Godyns Bay, In the middle thereof lies an Island called The
States Island; and a little higher the Manhattans, so called from the Natives,
which on the East side of the River dwell on the Main Continent. They are a
cruel People, and Enemies to the Hollanders, as also of the Sanhikans, which
reside on the Western Shore. Farther up are the Makwaes and Mahikans, which
continually War one against another. In like manner all the Inhabitants on the
West side of the River Manhattan are commonly at Enmity with those that possess
the Eastern Shore; who also used to be at variance with the Hollanders, when as
the other People Westward kept good Correspondency with them.

On a small Island near the Shore of the Makwaes, lay formerly a Fort, provided
with two Drakes and eleven Stone Guns, yet was at last deserted.

Wholesome Waters.
This Country has many removable Water-falls, descending from steep Rocks,
large Creeks and Harbors, fresh Lakes and Rivulets, pleasant Fountains and
Springs, some of which boil in the Winter, and are cold and delightful to drink
in Summer. The Inhabitants never receive any damage by Deluges; neither from
the Sea, because the Water rises not above a Foot; nor by the swelling Rivers,
which sometimes, for a few days covering the Plains, at their deserting them,
leave them fat and fruitful. The Seacoast is Hilly, and of a sandy and clayie
Soil, which produces abundance of Herbs and Trees.

The Oak grows there generally sixty or seventy Foot high, Trees.
and for the most part free from Knots, which makes it the better fit for
Shipping.

The Nut-trees afford good Fuel, and a strange Prospect when the Wood is set on
fire, either to hunt out a Deer, or to clear the Ground fit to be Tilled.

Some Plants brought hither, grow better than in Holland it self, as Apples,
Pears, Cherries, Peaches, Apricocks, Strawberries, and the like.



Their Vines grow wild in most places, and bear abundance of blue, white, Vines.
and Muskadine Grapes: Sometime since the Inhabitants made a considerable
advantage by the Wine of them, which is not inferior to either Rhenish or
French.

Water Lemmmons.
All manner of Plants known in Europe grow in their Gardens: The Water-Lemmons,
no less pleasing to the Palate than healthful when grown ripe; they are about
the bigness of an indifferent Cabbage: the English press a Juice out of them,
which if it did not turn sour in a short time, might well be compared with
Spanish Wine.

The Calabashes which grow there, made hollow, serve for Water-cups.

Pumpions are also there in great abundance.

Their Wheat though Set six Foot deep, grows very speedily: Wheat.
Kidney-Beans being planted amongst it, they will wind about the Stalks thereof.

Gray Pease grow here so fast, that they gather them twice a year. Pease.


In one Field Physical Herbs and Indigo grow wild in great abundance; and
Barley springs above a Man's height.

Moreover, there are diverse sorts of sweet smelling Flowers.

The Hills are most of a fat and clayie Soil, fit to make Pots, Tobacco-pipes,
Soil of the Mountains.
or any other sort of Earthen Ware.

In some places also is Store of Mountain Crystal, and that sort of Mineral
which we call Muscovia Glass: Others afford Marble, Serpentine Stone, and other
sorts of hard Stone. And though the Natives did not think it worth their while,
or were not in a capacity to dig for Minerals themselves, yet it remains
without contradiction, that the Mountains enclose both Gold and Silver. Gold
and Silver-Mines.


When Captain William Clieff, Anno 1645. used the Indian Interpreter Agheroense
(to decide the Differences which arose between the West India Company and the
wild People called Makwaes,) he observed him to paint his Face with a yellow
glittering color, which he judged to be of some rich Mineral: whereupon buying
some of the said Agheroense, he put it into a Crusible, and gained two small
pieces of Gold out of the same, valued at six Shillings; but keeping it
private, and purchasing a great quantity of the said Mineral from Agheroense
(who had showed him the Mountain which produced the same) extracted good store
of Gold out of it; which possessing Clieff with a belief of having found out a
business of great consequence, he sent Arent Corsen of New Haven with the
forementioned Mineral to Holland; but the Ship being never heard, of
afterward, and the Princess Pink, in which Captain Clieff was himself, with
store of the newfound Mineral, being cast away, the Business came to nothing.

Paint after a strange manner.
The Inhabitants, though divided into several Nations, yet agree in many things,
as in painting their Bodies, Shields, Clubs, and other Utensils in their
Houses. The! Colors wherewith they paint themselves they press out of Plants,
or make them of certain Stones grownd into very fine Powder. The chiefest Plant
is not unlike the Myrtle, only it has more Boughs, and bears red Berries; the
Juice of which being dried in the Sun, is afterward preserved in little Bags.
The Natives temper their Colors with Water, and paint their Bodies with the
same: It is as good a Purple as can be found. They also draw Ships, Trees, and
Beasts after a very rough manner: In stead of Feathers they wear pleited Hair,
which being colored red, has an excellent gloss, which never fades though it
Rain on the same.

The Horses bred in this Country, Horses.
being either brought thither from England or Utrecht, far exceed those of
English breed; but are both of them subject to a strange Disease, of which many
die in few hours. The same Distemper also seizes on Cattle if they go into
Forest Pasture: But the only thing to cure the same, is Hay from salt Marshy
Grounds.

The Oaken Woods have store of Hogs, Hogs.
which if taken and fatned with Turkish Wheat, are most delicious Meat.

The Sheep, Sheep.
though they breed well there, yet are very scarce, because the Planters not
being able to spare Men to watch them, they are often devoured by Wolves.

There are also abundance of Deer, all sorts of Fowls, Turkies, Geese, Ducks,
Pigeons, and the like.

The Lions, Lions.
whosc Skins the Indians bring to Market, are taken on a high Mountain fifteen
days Journey South-West from thence.

Black Bears.
There are likewise many black Bears, fearful of humane kind, but if Hunted,
they run direct on those that pursue them: they sleep all the Winter, lying six
Weeks Oh one side, and six on the other, and sucking their Feet all the time:
They generally lurk among Brambles, or in the Concavities of some hollow
Mountain.

Strange Beasts.
On the Borders of Canada there is seen sometimes a kind of Beast which has
some resemblance with a Horse, having cloven Feet, shaggy Mayn, one Horn just
on their Forehead, a Tail like that of a wild Hog, black Eyes, and a Deers
Neck: it feeds in the nearest Wildernesses: the Males never come amongst the
Females except at the time when they Couple, after which they grow so ravenous,
that they not only devour other Beasts, but also one another.

Toward the South of New York are many Buffles, Beasts which (according to
Erasmus Stella) are betwixt a Horse and a Stag: though they are of a strong
Constitution, yet they die of the smallest Wound, and are subject to the
Falling Sickness: they have broad branchy Horns like a Stag, short Tail, rough
Neck, Hair colored according to the several Seasons of the Year, broad and
long Ears, hanging Lips, little Teeth, and Skin so thick, as not easy to be
pierced: The Females differ from the Males, for they have no Horns; both may
easily be made tame: when Hunted, they vorm^^^^^ a sort of scalding Liquor on
the Dogs: they have great force in their Claws, for they can kill a Wolf with
the same at one blow: their Flesh, either fresh or salted, is a good Diet:
their Claws also cure the Falling Sickness.

But no Beasts are more plentiful here than Hearts and Stags, Hearts.
which feed up and down in great Herds: when they are Hunted by Wolves or Men,
they immediately take the next River, where they are caught several together,
by being crossed in their Swimming, and affrighted by the Echo which comes
from the Mountains, made by the Hunters hollowing on the other Shore, which
makes them fearful of Landing: whilst the Huntsmen joining several pieces of
Wood together get upon them, and Rowing toward these Deer, intercept them,
being tired and out of breath.

Musk-Cats.
Moreover, this Country breeds many Musk Cats, especially in Marshy Grounds.
These Beasts are beautiful to the Eye, having black speckled Skins, their
Mouths, full of sharp Teeth, and their Tails being long trail after them.

Many of the Learned maintain a Dispute concerning Civet, Whether it be the
Seed of the Civet-Cat? the Affirmative, which Cardanus maintained, is
contradicted by Julius Scaliger. Matthiolus, an Author of no little credit,
supposes that Civet is the Sweat of the Cat, because it is most chiefly taken
when these Beasts are exceedingly vexed and wearied: But since the Sweat runs
from all parts of the Body, which nevertheless do not all produce Civet, it is
impossible that Sweat should be Civet. Others account Civet to be the Dung of
the Cats; which last seems to come nearest to truth: for certainly it is
nothing else but an Excrement in the fleshy parts about their Pizzle, or near
the Fundament. The Cats being in pain to be discharged of this Civet, free
themselves from it by rubbing a Tree; and also fawn on those which take it from
them with a Spoon.

Besides all other wild Creatures, the Country according to Adrian Vander
Donk, produces yearly eighty thousand Beavers. Plin. lib. 32. cap. 3.
Pliny relates, that these Beasts bite off their Pizzles and throw them to the
Hunter, which are an exceeding good Medicine to help Abortion, stop the
Monthly Flowers, Giddiness in the Head, Gout, Lameness, Belly and Toot-ach,
Rhumes, Poison, and the Evil. But Pliny makes a great mistake herein, for the
Beavers have a small Pissel fastened to their Back bone, in such a manner, that
they cannot loose them but with hazard of their lives: They live in the Water,
and on the Shore, in great companies together, in Nests built of Wood, which
deserve no small admiration, being made after this manner: The Beavers first
gather all the loose Wood, which they find along the Banks of the Rivers, of
which, if there be not enough, they bite the Bark off from the Trees in the
neighboring Woods, then with their Tusks, of which two grow above, and two
below in their Mouths, they gnaw the main body of the Tree so long, till it
drops asunder: Their Nests very artificial, are six Stories high, covered on
the top with Clay to keep out Rain; in the middle is a passage which goes to
the River, into which they run so soon as they perceive a Man; to which purpose
one of them stands Sentinel, and in the Winter keeps open the Water from
freezing, by continual moving of his Tail, which is flat without Hair, and the
most delicious Meat that can be had. The Beavers go big sixteen Weeks, and once
a year bring forth four young, which suck and cry like young Children, for the
Dam of them rises on her hinder Feet, and gives her Teats, which grow between
the forelegs to two of her young, each of them one; the foremost legs of a
Beaver resemble those of a Dog, the hindermost those of a Goose; on each side
of the vent are two swellings within two thin Skins; out of their vent runs
generally an Oily moisture, with which they anoint all the parts of their body
which they can reach, to keep them from being wet; within they are like a
cut-up Hog; they live on the Leaves and Barks of Trees; they love their young
ones exceedingly; the long Hairs, which shining, stick out on the back, fall
off in Summer, and grow again against Harvest; they have short Necks, strong
Sinews and Legs, and move very swiftly in the Water, and on the Land; if
encompassed by Men or Dogs, they bite most severely; the right Castoreum, so
highly esteemed by Physicians, is a long Vesica, not unlike a Pear, within the
body of the female Beaver, the Indians mince the Cods of the Male Beavers
amongst their Tobacco, because they produce no Castoreum.

Fowls in New York.
This Country abounds also with Fowls; for besides Hawks, Kites, and other Birds
of Prey, there are abundance of Cranes, of several sorts, some gray, some
brown, others quite white; all of them have firm Bodies, and Bones without
Marrow, Claws of a finger long, strong and crooked Bills, their Brains dry,
their Eyes little and hollow, hard Features, the left Foot lesser than the
right, both deformed, their Blood thick, and the Excrements of a horrid smell;
they breed most in old Woods, whose ground is without Brambles, and also near
the Water, for they feed on Fish, and devour all sorts of Fowls, nay, snatch up
Hares, Rabbets, Tortels, and several other sorts of Animals, which they carry
away with them in the Air; nay, when hungry, they seize on one anorher; some of
them fly abroad for their prey about noon, others at Sunrising; they fall like
Lightning on what e're they pursue; they drink little, except the Blood of
those Creatures which they devour; they are very libidinous, coupling above
thirty times a day, not only with their like, but also with the Hens of Hawks,
and other Birds; they lay their biggest Eggs in thirty days, and the lesser in
twenty days; they generally bring forth three young; those of them that cannot
endure to look full against the Sun, are thrown out of their Nests; the young
ones when they begin to be fledged, are by the old carried into the Air, and
let fly, but supported by them; their sight is wonderful quick; for though
they fly as high as ever they are able to be discerned, yet they can see the
lead Fish that is in the Water, and a Hare lying in the Bushes: their Breath
stinks horribly, wherefore their Carcases suddenly rot; though they are
libidinous, yet they live long; most of them die of hunger, because their Bills
when they grow old, grow so crooked, that they cannot open the same, wherefore
they fly up into the Air against the Sun, and falling into the coldest Rivers,
loose their Feathers and die.

Besides the forementioned Birds of prey, there are abundance of Storks,
Ravens, Crows, Owls, Swallows, Gold-finches, Ice-birds, Kites, Quails,
Pheasants, and Winter- Kings, and which are most remarkable for their rich
Feathers, the Spechtes, they pick great holes in Trees, and make a noise as if
a Man were cutting down a Tree. The Pigeons fly in such flocks, Pigeons.
that the Indians remove with them to the place where they make their Nests,
where the young ones being taken by hundreds, serve them for a Months
Provision.

Moreover, New York breeds a strange Bird about a Thumb long, Pretty Birds.
full of glistering Feathers; it lives by sucking of Flowers like a Be, and is
so tender, that it immediately dies if water be spirted upon it; the Carcass
being dried, is kept for a Rarity.

Turkies.
But this Country abounds chiefly in Turkies, whose plenty deserves no less
admiration than their bulk, and the delicious taste of their Flesh, for they go
feeding forty or fifty in a flock, and weigh sometime forty or fifty pound
apiece; the Natives either shoot them, or take them with a Bait stuck on an
Angle: In March and Harvest the Waters swarm with Geese, Teal, Snites, Ducks,
and Pelicans, besides many strange sorts of Fowls not known in Europe.

The Rivers and Lakes produce Sturgeon, Salmon, Carps, Perch, Barbils, Fish.
all sorts of Eels, and many other Fish which are taken near Water-falls: The
Sea affords Crabs with and without Shells, Sea-cocks, and Horses, Cod, Whiting,
Ling, Herrings, Mackrel, Flounders, Tar-buts, Tortels, and Oysters, of which
some are a Foot long, and have Pearl, but are a little brownish.

Amongst the Poisonous Creatures which infest New York, the chiefest and most
dangerous, is the Rattle-Snake, Rattle-Snake.
whose description we have already had at large in New England.

Constitution of the Inhabitants.
The Inhabitants have their Hair black as Jet, harsh like Horse-hair; they are
broad Shouldered, small Wasted, brown Eyed, their Teeth exceeding white; with
Water they chiefly quench their Third: Their general Food is Flesh, Fish, Their
Diet.
and Indian Wheat, which stamped, is boiled to a Pap, by them called Sappaen:
They observe no set time to Eat, but when they have an Appetite their Meals
begin. Beavers Tails are amongst them accounted a great Dainty: When they go to
Hunt, they live several days on parched Corn, which they carry in little Bags
tied about their middle; a little of that said Corn thrown into Water swells
exceedingly.

Hudson's adventures remarkable.
Henry Hudson relates, That Sailing in the River Montains, in forty Degrees, he
saw the Indians make strange Gestures in their Dancing and Singing; he observed
farther, that they carried Darts pointed with sharp Stones, Sodder'd to the
Wood; that they slept under the Sky on Mats or Leaves; took much Tobacco, and
very strong; and that though courteous and friendly, they were very Thieves. He
Sailing thirty Leagues further, went in his Boat to an old Indian Commander of
forty Men and seventeen Women, who conducted him to the Shore, where they all
dwelt in one Housse, artificially built of the Barks of Oak-trees; round about
it lay above three Ships load of Corn, and Indian Beans to dry, besides the
Plants which grew in the Fields. No sooner had Hudson entered the House, but he
was received on two Mats spread on the ground; and two Men immediately were
sent out to shoot Venison or Fowls; and instantly returning, brought two
Pigeons; a fat Dog, whom they nimbly flayed with shells, was also laid down to
the fire: They also made other Preparations for Hudsons Entertainment, but not
willing to venture himself amongst them, that Night, tasted not of it,
notwithstanding the Indians breaking their Darts, threw them into the fire,
that thereby they might drive away all fears and jealousies from him.

New Netherlands. Apparel.
The Habits of the Natives, especially of the Men, are few; the Women go more
neat than the Men; and though the Winter pinches them with excessive, cold, yet
they go naked tiil their thirteenth year: Both Men and Women wear a Girdle of
Whale-fins and Sea-shells; the Men put a piece of Cloth, half an Ell long, and
three quarters broad, between their Legs, so that a square piece hangs behind
below his Back, and another before over his Belly. The Women wear a Coat which
comes half way down their Legs, so curiously wrought with Sea-shells, that one
Coat sometimes costs thirty Pounds. Moreover, their Bodies are covered with
Deerskins, the lappets or ends of which hang full of Points; a large Skin
buttoned on the right Shoulder, and tied about the middle, serves for an upper
Garment, and in the Night for a Blanket: Both Men and Women go for the most
part bareheaded; the Women tie their Hair behind in a tuft, over which they
wear a square Cap wrought with Sea-shells, with which they adorn their
Foreheads, and also wear the same about their Neck and Hands, and some also
about their middle. Before the Hollanders were Planted here, they wore Shoes
and Stockings of Buffelo's-skins; some likewise made Shoes of Wheaten-straw,
but of late they come nearer to our Fashions: The Men Paint their Faces with
several Colors; the Women only put here and there a black Spot; both of them
are very reserved.

Their houses.
Their Houses are most of them built of one fashion, only differing in length;
all of them agree in breadth of twenty Foot: They build after this manner, they
set Peeled Boughs of Nut-Trees in the ground, according to the bigness of the
place which they intend to build, then joining the tops of the Boughs together,
they cover the Walls and top with the Bark of Cypress, Ashen, and
Chest-nut-Trees, which are laid one upon another, the smallest side being
turned inwards: according to the bigness of the Houses, several Families, to
the number of fifteen dwell together, every one having his Apartment. Their
Fortifications are most of them built on steep Hills, near Rivers; the access
to them is only at one place, they are built after this manner: They set great
Poles in the Ground, with Oaken Pallisadoes on each side, cross-ways one
amongst another; between the crosses they set other Trees, to strengthen the
Work: Within this enclosed they generally build twenty or thirty Houses, of
which some are a hundred and eighty Foot long, and some less, all of them full
of People: In the Summer they pitch Tents along by the River side to Fish;
against Winter they remove into the Woods, Romove.
to be near their Game of Hunting, and also Fuel.

Many Wives.
To take many Women is not customary here, only amongst Military Officers, who
Marry three or four Wives, which so well agree, that there is never any
difference betwixt them; those that are not of Age, never Marry but with the
consent and advice of their Parents: Widows and unmarry'd Men follow their own
opinion and choice; only they take Cognizance of their Estates and Extraction:
The Bridegroom always presents the Bride; for the least offense, the Man after
having soundly beaten his Wife, turns her out of Doors, and Marries another,
insomuch, Marriages.
that some of them have every year a new Wife: On breach of Marriage, the
Children follow the Mother, from whom they account their Generation: They
account Adultery, if committed under the bare Canopy of Heaven, a great Sin:
Whoring is Licensed to single Women, if they receive Money for it, Whoring
permitted.
and no Man scruples to Marry them; nay, those that are Married, boast how many
they have enjoyed before their Marriage: She that is inclined to Marry, Strange
Marrying.
covers her whole body, and sets her self wrapped up in the middle of the way,
where a Bachelor passing by sees her, and makes up the Match blindfold: When
impregnated, they take great care that their Fruit receives no hindrance nor
prejudice: Childbearing Women's strange actions.
When the time of their Delivery approaches, (which they know exactly) they go
to a Melancholy place in the Woods, though in the coldest Weather, where they
raise up a Hut of Mats, and bring the Child into the World without any help or
Company, wash the Child in cold Water, and wrap it up in Mats; then a few days
after going home, they bring up the Infant with great care, none putting them
out to Nurse: So long as a Woman gives suck, or is quick with Child, she will
not admit of Copulation; one who has the Flowers, never comes abroad: In time
of sickness they faithfully assist one another: When any die, Funerals.
the nearest Relations shut their Eyes; and after having watched them some
days, they are Interred after this manner: The Corpse is placed sitting with a
Stone under its Head, near it they set a Pot, Kettle, Dish, Spoons, Money, and
Provisions to use in the other World; then they pile Wood round about it, and
cover it over with Planks, on which throwing Earth and Stones, they set
Pallisadoes, and make the Grave like a House, to which they show Veneration,
wherefore they account it a great piece of villainy to deface any thing of it:
The Men make no show of sorrow over the Dead, but the Women mourn exceedingly,
and carry themselves very strangely, beating their Breasts, scratching their
Faces, and calling night and day on the name of the Deceased: The Mothers make
great Lamentation at the Death of their Children, Mourning over the dead
remarkable.
especially Sons, for they shave off the Hair of their Heads, which at the
Funeral is burnt in the presence of all their Relations; which is also
performed by the Women when their Husbands die; besides, they black all their
Faces, and putting on a Hart-skin Shirt, mourn a whole year, notwithstanding
they lived very contentiously together.

On some occasions they go a Worshipping of the Devil, Conjurers.
to a certain place where the Sorcerers show strange Feats of Activity,
tumbling over and over, beating themselves, and hot without great noise leaping
in and about a great Fire: at last they make a great Cry all together; upon
which (as they say) the Devil appears to them in the shape either of a tame or
wild Beast: the first signifies bad, and the other good fortune; both inform
them of future Events, though darkly; and if the business fall out contrary,
they affirm that they have not rightly understood the Devil's meaning. Moreover
they bewitch some in such a manner, that they foam at the Mouth, throw
themselves into the Fire, and beat themselves severely; and so soon as they
whisper in the Ear of those whom they have bewitched, they immediately recover
their former health.

Language of the New Netherlanders.
The Language of this Country is very various, yet it is divided into only
four principal Tongues, as the Manhattans, Wappanoo, Siavanoo, and Minqua's,
which are very difficult for Strangers to learn, because they are spoken
without any Grounds or Rules.

Their Money is made of the innermost Shells of a certain Shellfish, Money.
cast up twice a year by the Sea: These Shells they grind smooth, and make a
Hole in the middle, cutting them of an exact bigness, and so put them on
Strings, which then serve in stead of Gold, Silver, and Copper Coin.

Vices and Virtues.
Now to say something of the Vices and Virtues of the Inhabitants. They are in
the first place very slovenly and nasty, stubborn, covetous, revengeful, and
much addicted to filching and stealing. Some appear reserved, using few words,
which they utter after serious consideration, and remember a long time. Their
Understandings being improved by the Hollanders, they are quick of
apprehension, to distinguish good from bad: they will not endure any
Oppression, but are very patient of Heat, Strange Stoves.
Cold, Hunger and Thirst. They have a strange way of using Stoves, which are
set in the Ground and covered with Earth, into which they go through a little
Door. A sick Person coming into the same, sets himself down, and places hot
Stones round about him; which done, and having sweat a considerable time, he
leaps into cold Water, by which he finds ease of all his Distempers.

Though these People know no great distinction between Man and Man, as other
Nations, yet they have noble and ignoble Families amongst them; superior and
inferior Offices, which they enjoy by Inheritance; but sometimes the Martial
Offices are bestowed according to the Valor of the Persons: Their Generals
seldom give their Enemies a Field-Battel, by drawing or dividing their Men into
Regiments or Companies, but make it their whole Design to defeat their Enemies
by sudden Sallies from Ambuscado's; for they never stand out a close Fight,
unless compelled to it, but if encompassed round, they fight to the last Man.
When any danger threatens, the Women and Children are conveyed to a secure
place. Their Arms formerly were Bows and Arrows, Arms.
and Battel-axes, but now they use Muskets, which they have learned to-handle
with great dexterity. Their square Shields cover all their Bodies and
Shoulders. About their Heads they tie a Snakes Skin, in the middle of which
sticks either a Fox's or Bear's Tail. They cannot be known by their Faces, they
are all over so besmeared with Paint of diverse colors. They seldom give
Quarter to their Enemies, Remarkable actions some Prisoners.
except Women and Children, which the Conquerors use as their own, that by that
means they may increase and strengthen themselves: and if any Prisoner is not
killed presently after the Battle, but falls into the Hands of one whose
Relations have formerly been slain by his Party, he is Roasted three days by
degrees before he gives up the Ghost. It desences no small admiration, that the
Sufferer during the whole time of his Torture, Sings till he breathes his last.
They have few or no Punishments for any Offense, committing few Crimes which
are by them accounted Capital. Laws.
If any one steal, and the Goods be found in his custody, the Governor of the
place where he resides commands him only to restore the same to the Owner. If
any one murder or kill the other, the Relations of the slain, if they can take
the Malefactor in twenty four hours, may without Examination or delay put him
to death also; but that time being once expired, the Revenger is liable to be
killed in the same time by his Relations whom he slew. All Obligations have
their power and virtue from certain Presents delivered upon the making of a
Contract, which is done thus: They dry as many Sticks as they have Articles,
which if they agree upon, every Man on the concluding of the Discourse lays a
Present before the others Feet. Sometimes they hang up the Presents, because
they are often three days in Consultation before they resolve; after which if
the Presents be taken down, it is a certain sign of their Agreement; but if
not, they proceed no farther, unless the Articles and Presents are altered. On
Businesses of consequence the Commonalty repair to their Governor's House,
Council-Assembly.
there to hear and enquire what the Nobility there assembled have concluded or
resolved on; at which the best Orator standing up, tells them their Intentions.
It happens sometimes that a turbulent Person making a Mutiny, and refusing to
hearken to reason, is immediately beheaded by one of the Nobility; in
contradiction of which none dare presume to speak the least word.

There are scarce any steps of Religion found amongst these People, Religion.
only they suppose the Moon to have great influence on Plants. The Sun, which
over-looks all things, is called to witness whene're they Swear. They bear
great respect, and stand much in fear of Satan, because they are often plagued
by him when they go a Hunting or Fishing: wherefore the first of what they take
is burnt in honor of him, that he to whom they ascribe all wickedness might not
hurt them. Diabolical Worship.
When they feel pain in any part of their Body, they say that the Devil sits in
the same. They acknowledge that there resides a God above the Stars, Their
ridiculous Opinion of God.
but troubles not himself with what the Devil does on Earth, because he
continually recreates himself with a most beautiful Goddess, whose original is
unknown: She on a certain time (say they) descended from Heaven into the Water,
As also of the Creation.
(for before the Creation all things were Water) into which she had instantly
sunk, had not the Earth arose under her Feet, which grew immediately to such a
bigness, that there appeared a World of Earth, which produced all sorts of
Herbs and Trees; whilst the Goddess taking to her self a Heart, Bear, and Wolf,
and Conceiving by them, she was not long after delver'd of several Beasts at
one time: and from thence proceeded not only the diversity of Beasts, but also
Men, of which some are black, white, or sallow; in nature fearful like a Heart,
or cruel and valiant like a Bear, or deceitful like Wolves: after this the
Mother of all things ascended up to Heaven again, and sported there with the
Supreme Lord, whom they say they know not, because they never saw him:
wherefore they shall have less to answer for than Christians, which pretend to
know him to be the Punisher of things both good and bad, which are daily
committed by them: and for this ridiculous Opinion they can hardly be brought
to embrace the Christian Faith.

Of the Immortality of The Soul.
Concerning the Souls of the Deceased, they believe, that those which have been
good in their lifetime, live Southward in a temperate Country, where they
enjoy all manner of pleasure and delight; when as the Wicked wander up and down
in a miserable Condition. The Echo which resounds from the Cries of wild
Beasts in the Night, they suppose to be the Spirits of Souls transmigrated into
wicked Bodies.

Their Cantica's, or Dancing.
At their Cantica's, or Dancing-Matches, where all Persons that come are freely
Entertained, it being a Festival time. Their Custom is when they Dance, for the
Spectators to have short Sticks in their Hands, and to knock the Ground and
Sing altogether, whilst they that Dance sometimes act Warlike postures, and
then they come in painted for War with their Faces black and red, or some all
black, some all red, with some streaks of white under their Eyes, and so jump
and leap up and down without any order, uttering many Expressions of their
intended Valor. For other Dances they only show what antic Tricks their
ignorance will lead them to, wringing of their Bodies and Faces after a strange
manner, sometimes jumping into the Fire, sometimes catching up a Firebrand, and
biting off a live Coal, with many such tricks, that will affright rather than
please an Englishman to look upon them, resembling rather a company of
infernal Furies than Men.

Their sitting in Council.
When their King or Sachem sits in Council, he has a Company of Armed Men to
guard his Person, great respect being shown him by the People, which is
principally manifested by their silence. After he has declared the cause of
their Convention, he demands their Opinion, ordering who shall begin: The
Person ordered to speak, after he has declared his mind, tells them he has
done: no Man ever interrupting any Person in his Speech, nor offering to speak,
though he make never so many long stops, till he says he has no more to say.
The Council having all declared their Opinions, the King after some pause gives
the definitive Sentence, which is commonly seconded with a shout from the
People, every one seeming to applaud and manifest their Assent to what is
determined.

If any Person be condemned to die, which is seldom, unless for Murder or In
cest, the King himself goes out in Person (for you must understand they have no
Prisons, and the guilty Person flies into the Woods) where they go in quest of
him, and-having found him, the King shoots first, though at never such a
distance, and then happy is the Man that can shoot him down; for he that has
the fortune to be Executioner, is for his pains made some Captain, or other
Military Officer.

They grease their Bodies and Hair very often, and paint their Faces with
several Colors, as black, white, red, yellow, blue, etc. which they take great
pride in, every one being painted in a several manner.

Within two Leagues of New York lies Staten-Island, it bears from New York
West something Southerly: It is about twenty Miles long, and four or five
broad, mosr of it very good Land, full of Timber, and producing all such
Commodities as Long Island does, besides Tin and store of Iron Oar; and the
Calamine Stone is said likewise to be found there: There is but one Town upon
it, consisting of English and French, but it is capable of entertaining more
Inhabitants.

Betwixt this and Long Island is a large Bay, which is the coming in for all
Ships and Vessels out of the Sea.

On the North-side of this Island After-skull River puts into the Main Land, on
the West Side whereof there are two or three Towns, but on the East Side but
one. There are very great Marshes or Meadows on both sides of it, excellent
good Land, and good convenience for the settling of several Towns. There grows
black Walnut and Locust, as there does in Virginia, with mighty, tall, straight
Timber, as good as any in the North of America: It produces any Commodity
which Long Island does.

Hudson's River runs by New York Northward into the Country, toward the Head
of which is seated New Albany, a Place of great Trade with the Indians, betwixt
which and New York, being above a hundred Miles, is as good Corn-Land as the
World affords, enough to entertain hundreds of Families, which in the time of
the Dutch Government of these Parts could not be settled by reason of the
Indians, excepting one Place, called The Sopers, which was kept by a Garrison,
but since the Reducement of these Parts under His Majesty's Obedience, and a
Patent granted to his Royal Highness the Duke of York, which is about six
years, by the care and diligence of the Honorable Colonel Nichols, sent
thither as Deputy to his Highness, such a League of Peace was made, and
Friendship concluded betwixt that Colony and the Indians, that they have not
resisted or disturbed any Christians there, in the settling or peaceable
possessing of any Lands within that Government, but every Man has sat under
his own Vine, and has peaceably reaped and enjoyed the Fruits of their own
Labors, which God continue.

Raritan-River.
Westward of After-skull River before mentioned, about eighteen or twenty Miles,
runs in Raritan River Northward into the Country some scores of Miles; both
sides of which River are adorned with spacious Meadows, enough to feed
thousands of Cattle: The Wood-Land is very good for Corn, and stored with wild
Beasts, as Deer, Elks, and an innumerable multitude of Fowl, as in other parts
of the Country. This River is thought very capable for the erecting of several
Towns and Villages on each side of it, no place in the North of America having
better convenience for the maintaining of all sorts of Cattle for Winter and
Summer Food.

Upon this River is no Town settled, only one at the Mouth of it; but next to
it, Westward, is a Place called Newasons; where are two or three Towns and
Villages settled upon the Seaside, but none betwixt that and Delaware-Bay,
which is about sixty Miles, all which is a rich Champain Country, free from
Stones, and indifferent level, having store of excellent good Timber, and very
well watered, having Brooks or Rivers ordinarily, one or more in every Miles
travel. This Country is peopled only with wild Beasts, as Deer, Elks, Bears,
and other Creatures, so that in a whole days Journey you shall meet with no
Inhabitants except a few Indians, It is also full of stately Oaks, whose
broad-branch'd tops serve for no other use, but to keep off the Suns heat from
the wild Beasts of the Wilderness, where is Grass as high as a Man's Middle,
which serves for no other end, except to maintain the Elks and Deer, who never
devour a hundredth part of it, than to be burnt every Spring to make way for
new. How many poor People in the World would think themselves happy, had they
an Acre or two of Land, whilst here is hundreds, nay thousands of Acres that
would invite Inhabitants.

Delaware Bay, the Mouth of the River, Delaware-Bay.
lies about the mid way betwixt New York and the Capes of Virginia.

The best Commodities for any to carry with them to this Country is Clothing,
the Country being full of all sorts of Cattle, which they may furnish
themselves withal at an easy Rate, for any sort of English Goods, as likewise
Instruments for Husbandry and Building, with Nails, Hinges, Glass, and the
like. They get a Livelihood principally by Corn and Cattle, which will there
fetch them any Commodities: Likewise they Sow store of Flax, which they make
every one Cloth of for their own wearing; as also Woollen Cloth, and
Linsey-woolsey; and had they more Tradesmen amongst them, they would in a
little time live without the help of any other Country for their Clothing; for
Tradesmen there are none but live happily there, as Carpenters, Blacksmiths,
Masons, Tailors, Weavers, Shoemakers, Tanners, Brickmakers, and so any other
Trade: Them that have no Trade betake themselves to Husbandry, get Land of
their own, and live exceeding well.

We shall conclude our Discourse of this Country with a notable Character
given thereof by a late Writer, as to the great advantage of happy living in
all respects, for whosoever shall be pleased to betake himself thither to live.

The Character of a happy Country.
IF there be any terrestrial happiness (says he) to be had by any People,
especially of an inferior rank, it must certainly be here. Here any one may
furnish himself with Land, and live Rent-free, yea, with such a quantity of
Land, that he may weary himself with walking over his Fields of Corn, and all
sorts of Grain, and let his Stock amount to some hundreds; he needs not fear
there want of Pasture in the Summer, or Fodder in the Winter, the Woods
affording sufficient supply, where you have Grass as high as a Man's Knees,
nay, as high as his Waste, interlac'd with Pea-Vines, and other Weeds that
Cattle much delight in, as much as a Man can pass through: And these Woods also
every Mile or half-Mile are furnished with fresh Ponds, Brooks, or Rivers,
where all sorts of Cattle, during the heat of the day, do quench their thirst,
and cool themselves. These Brooks and Rivers being environed of each side with
several sorts of Trees and Grape-Vines, Arbor-like interchanging places, and
croding these Rivers, do shade and shelter them from the scorching beams of the
Sun. Such as by their utmost Labors can scarcely get a Living, may here procure
Inheritances of Lands and Possessions, stock themselves with all sorts of
Cattle, enjoy the benefit of them whilst they live, and leave them to their
Children when they die. Here you need not trouble the Shambles for Meat, nor
Bakers and Brewers for Beer and Bread, nor run to a Linnen-Draper for a supply,
every one making their own Linen, and a great part of their woollen Cloth for
their ordinary wearing. And how prodigal (if I may so say) has Nature been to
furnish this Country with all sorts of wild Beasts and Fowl, which every one
has an interest in, and may Hunt at his pleasure; where, besides the pleasure
in Hunting, he may furnish his House with excellent fat Venison, Turkies,
Geese, Heath-hens, Cranes, Swans, Ducks, Pigeons, and the like; and wearied
with that, he may go a Fishing, where the Rivers are so furnished, that he may
supply himself with Fish before he can leave off the Recreation. Here one may
travel by Land upon the same Continent hundreds of Miles, and pass through
Towns and Villages, and never hear the least complaint for want, nor hear any
ask him for a Farthing. Here one may lodge in the Fields and Woods, travel from
one end of the Country to another, with as much security as if he were locked
within his own Chamber: And if one chance to meet with an Indian Town, they
shall give him the best Entertainment they have, and upon his desire direct him
on his Way. But that which adds happiness to all the rest, is the healthfulness
of the Place, where many People in twenty years time never know what Sickness
is; where they look upon it as a great Mortality, if two or three die out of a
Town in a years time. Besides the sweetness of the Air, the Country it self
sends forth such a fragrant smell, that it may be perceived at Sea before they
can make the Land: No evil Fog or Vapor does any sooner appear, but a
North-West or Westerly Wind immediately dissolves it, and drives it away.
Moreover, you shall scarce see a House, but the South Side is begirt with Hives
of Bees, which increase after an incredible manner: So that if there be any
terrestrial Canaan, it is surely here, where the Land flows with Milk and
Honey.

map of northern Virginia Noua TERRA-MARIAE tabula
This Northern part of Virginia (the limitts whereof extend farther
Southwards) is here inserted for the better description of the entrance into
the Bay of Chesapeack.



A NEW DESCRIPTION OF MARYLAND.
SECT. III.
BEfore We proceed to the Description of this Country, it will be first
requisite to relate the true occasion and means, whereby this part of America
came to be erected into a Province, and called Maryland.

In the Year of our Lord 1631. George Lord Baltimore obtained of King Charles
the First, of Great Britain, etc. a Grant of that part of America, (first
discovered by the English) which lies between the Degrees of thirty seven and
fifty Minutes, or thereabouts, and forty of Northerly Latitude, which is
bounded on the South by Virginia; on the North, by New England, and New Jersey,
The situation.
part of New York, lying on the East side of Delaware Bay; on the East, by the
Ocean; and on the West, by that part of the Continent which lies in the
Longitude of the first Fountains of the River called Patomeck.

In pursuance of this Grant to his said Lordship, a Bill was prepared, and
brought to His Majesty to Sign, who first asked his Lordship, what he should
call it, there being a Blank in the Bill designedly left for the Name, which
his Lordship intended should have been Crescentia; but his Lordship leaving it
to His Majesty to give it a Name, the King proposed to have it called
Terra-Mariae, in English, Maryland, in honor of his Queen, whose Name was
Mary; which was concluded on, and inserted into the Bill, which the King then
Signed; and thereby the said Tract of Land was erected into a Province by that
Name.

His Lordship somewhat delaying the speedy passing of it under the Great Seal
of England, died in the interim, before the said Patent was perfected;
whereupon a Patent of the said Province was shortly afterward passed to his
Son and Heir, (who was Christened by the Name of Coecil, but afterward
confirmed by the Name of Coecilius,) the now Lord Baltemore, under the Great
Seal of England, bearing Date June 20. 1632. in the eighth Year of His said
Majesty's Reign, with all Royal Jurisdictions and Prerogatives, both Military
and Civil in the said Province, as Power to Enact Laws, Power of pardoning all
manner of Offenses, Power to confer Honors, etc. to be held of His said
Majesty, His Heirs and Successors, Kings of England in common Soccage, as of
His Majesty's Honor of Windsor in the County of Berks in England; yielding and
paying yearly for the same to His Majesty and to His Heirs and Successors for
ever, two Indian Arrows of those parts, at the Castle of Windsor aforesaid, on
Tuesday in Easter Week, and the fifth part of all Gold and Silver Oar, which
shall happen to be found in the said Province.

The Bounds.
By the said Patent is Granted to his Lorship, his Heirs and Assigns, all that
part of a Peninsula, lying in the parts of America, between the Ocean on the
East, and the Bay of Chesapeack on the West; and divided from the other part
thereof by a right Line drawn from the Promontory, or Cape of Land called
Watkin's-Point, situate in the aforesaid Bay, near the River of Wigcho on the
West, unto the main Ocean on the East, and between that bound on the South,
unto that part of Delaware Bay on the North, which lies under the fortieth
Degree of Northerly Latitude from the Equinoctial, where New England ends; and
all that Tract of Land between the bounds aforesaid, that is to say, passing
from the aforesaid Bay called Delaware Bay, in a right Line by the Degree
aforesaid, unto the true Meridian of the first Fountains of the River of
Patomeck; and from thence stretching toward the South, unto the furthest Bank
of the said River, and following the West and South side thereof, unto a
certain place called Cinquack, near the Mouth of the said River, where it falls
into the Bay of Chesapeack, and from thence by a straight Line unto the
aforesaid Promontory, or place called Watkins-Point, which lies in thirty seven
Degrees and fifty Minutes, or thereabouts, of Northern Latitude.

By this Patent his Lordship and his Heirs and Assigns are Created the true and
absolute Lords and Proprietaries of the said Province, Title.
saving the Allegiance and Sovereign Dominion due to His Majesty, His Heirs,
and Successors; so that he has thereby a Sovereignty Granted to him and his
Heirs, dependant upon the Sovereignty of the Crown of England.

The first Seating.
His Lordship, in the Year 1633. sent his second Brother Mr. Leonard Calvert,
and his third Brother Mr. George Calvert, with diverse other Gentlemen of
Quality, and Servants to the number of two hundred Persons at least, to settle
a Plantation there; who set Sail from the Cowes in the Isle of Wight in
England, on November. 22. in the same Year; having made some stay by the way, at
the Barbados and St. Christophers in. America, they arrived at Point Comfort
in Virginia, on February 24. following; from whence shortly after they Sailed
up the Bay of Chesapeack, and Patomeck River: And having reviewed the Country,
and given Names to several places, they pitched upon a Town of the Indians for
their first Seat, called Yoacomaco, (now Saint Mary's) which the then Governor
Mr. Leonard Calvert, freely Purchased of the Natives there, for the Lord
Proprietaries use, with Commodities brought from England.

That which facilitated the Treaty and Purchase of the said place from the
Indians, was a resolution which those Indians had then before taken, to remove
higher into the Country where it was more Populous, for fear of the
Sansquehanocks, (another, and more Warlike People of the Indians, who were
their too near Neighbors, and inhabit between the Bays of Chesapeack and
Delaware) there being then actual Wars between them, insomuch, that many of
them were gone thither before the English arrived: And it has been the general
practice of his Lordship, and those who were employed by him in the Planting of
the said Province, rather to purchase the Natives Interest, (who will agree for
the same at easy rates) than to take from them by force, that which they seem
to call their Right and Inheritance, to the end all Disputes might be removed
touching the forcible Incroachment upon others, against the Laws of Nature or
Nations.

Thus this Province at the vast Charges, and by the unwearied Industry and
endeavor of the present Lord Baltemore, the now absolute Lord and Proprietary
of the same was at first Planted, and has since been supplied with People and
other Necessaries, so effectually, The number of Inhabitants.
that in this present Year 1671. the number of English there amounts to fifteen
or twenty thousand Inhabitants, for whose Encouragement there is a Fundamental
Law established there by his Lordship, whereby Liberty of Conscience is allowed
to all that Profess to believe in Jesus Christ; so that no Man who is a
Christian is in danger of being disturbed for his Religion; and all Persons
being satisfied touching his Lordships Right, as Granted by his Superior
Sovereign, the King of Great Britain, and possessed by the consent and
agreement of the first Indian Owners, every Person who repaireth thither,
intending to become an Inhabitant, finds himself secure, as well in the quiet
enjoyment of his Property, as of his Conscience.

Mr. Charles Calvert, his Lordships only Son and Heir, was in the Year 1661.
sent thither by his Lordship to Govern this Province and People, who has
hitherto continued that Charge of his Lordships Lieutenant there, to the
general satisfaction and encouragement of all Persons under his Government, or
otherwise concerned in the Province.

The precedent Discourse having given you a short Description of this Province
from its Infancy to this day, together with an account of his Lordships Patent
and Right, by which he holds the same; we will here speak something of the
Nature of the Country in general, and of the Commodities that are either
naturally afforded there, or may be procured by Industry.

The Climate is very healthful, and agreeable with English Constitutions; but
New-comers have most of them heretofore had the first year of their Planting
there in July and August, a Sickness, which is called there A Seasoning, but is
indeed no other than an Ague, with cold and hot Fits, whereof many heretofore
used to die for want of good Medicines, and accommodations of Diet and Lodging,
and by drinking too much Wine and Strong Water; though many, even in those
times, who were more temperate, and that were better accommodated, never had
any Seasonings at all; but of late years, since the Country has been more
opened by the cutting down of the Woods, and that there is more plenty of
English Diet, there are very few die of those Agues, and many have no
Seasonings at all, especially those that live in the higher parts of the
Country, and not near to the Marshes and Salt Water.

In Summer, the heats are equal to those of Spain, but qualified daily about
Noon, at that time of the Year, either with some gentle Breezes, or small
Showers of Rain: In Winter there is Frost and Snow, and sometimes it is
extremely cold, insomuch, that the Rivers and the Northerly part of the Bay of
Chesapeack are Frozen, but it seldom lasts long; and some Winters are so warm,
that People have gone in half Shirts and Drawers only at Christmas: But in the
Spring and Autumn, ( viz.) in March, April, and May, September, October, and
November, there is generally most pleasant temperate Weather: The Winds there
are variable, from the South comes Heat, Gusts, and Thunder; from the North or
North-West, cold Weather; and in Winter, Frost and Snow; from the East and
South-East, Rain.

The Soil is very fertile, and furnished with many pleasant and commodious
Rivers, Creeks, and Harbors.

The Country is generally plain and even, and yet distinguished with some
pretty small Hills and Risings, with variety of Springs and Rivulets: The Woods
are for the most part free from Underwood, so that a Man may Travel or Hunt for
his Recreation.

The ordinary entrance by Sea into this Country is between two Capes, distant
each from the other about seven or eight Leagues; the South Cape is called Cape
Henry; the North, Cape Charles; within the Capes you enter into a fair Bay,
Navigable for at least two hundred Miles, and is called Chesapeack Bay;
stretching it self Northerly through the heart of the Country, which adds much
to its Fame and Value: Into this Bay fall many stately Rivers, the chief
whereof is Patomeck, which is Navigable for at least a hundred and forty Miles:
The next Northward, is Patuxent, at its entrance distant from the other about
twenty Miles, a River yielding great Profit as well as Pleasure to the
Inhabitants; and by reason of the Islands and other places of advantage that
may Command it, both fit for Habitation and Defense: Passing hence to the Head
of the Bay, you meet with several pleasant and commodious Rivers, which for
brevity we here omit to give any particular account of: On the Eastern Shore
are several commodious Rivers, Harbors, Creeks, and Islands; to the Northward
whereof you enter into another fair Bay, called Delaware Bay; wide at its
entrance about eight Leagues, and into which falls a very fair Navigable River.

The natural Commodities of the Country.
This Country yields the Inhabitants many excellent things for Physic and
Chyrurgery; they have several Herbs and Roots which are great Preservatives
against Poison, as Snake-Root, which presently cures the bitings of the
Rattle-Snake, which are very Venomous, and are bred in the Country; others
that cure all manner of Wounds; they have Saxafras, Sarsaparilla, Gums and
Balsoms, which Experience (the Mother of Art) has taught them the perfect use
of.

An Indian seeing one of the English much troubled with the Toothache, setch'd
a Root out of a Tree, which applied to the Tooth, gave ease immediately to the
Party; other Roots they have fit for Dyers, wherewith the Indians Paint
themselves as Pacoone (a deep red,) etc.

The Timber of these parts is good and useful for Building of Houses and Ships,
the white Oak for Pipe-staves, the red for Wainscot; there is likewise black
Wall-Nut, Cedar, Pine, and Cypress, Chest-nut, Elm, Ash, and Popelar, all
which are for Building and Husbandry: Fruit Trees, as Mulberries, Persimons,
with several kind of Plumbs, and Vines in great abundance.

Of Strawberries there is plenty, which are ripe in April, Mulberries in May,
Rasberries in June, and the Maracok, which is something like a Lemon, is ripe
in August. In Spring time there are several sorts of Herbs, as Corn-sallet,
Violets, Sorrel, Purslane, and others which are of great use to the English
there.

In the upper parts of the Country are Buffeloes, Elks, Tigers, Bears, Wolves,
and great store of Deer; as also Beavers, Foxes, Otters, Flying-Squirils,
Racoons, and many other sorts of Beasts.

Of Birds, there is the Eagle, Goshawk, Falcon, Lanner, Sparrow-hawk, and
Marlin; also wild Turkies in great abundance, whereof many weigh fifty Pounds
in weight and upwards, and of Partridge great plenty: There are likewise sundry
sorts of singing Birds, whereof one is called a Mock Bird, because it imitates
all other Birds; some are red, which sing like Nightingales, but much louder;
others black and yellow, which last sort excels more in Beauty than tune, and
is by the English there called the Baltemore-Bird, because the Colors of his
Lordships Coat of Arms are black and yellow: Others there are that resemble
most of the Birds in England, but not of the same kind, for which we have no
names: In Winter there are great plenty of Swans, Cranes, Geese, Herons, Duck,
Teal, Widgeons, Brants, and Pigeons, with other sorts, whereof there are none
in England.

The Sea, the Bays of Chesapeack and Delaware, and generally all the Rivers, do
abound with Fish of several sorts; as Whales, Sturgeon, Thorn-back, Grampuses,
Porpuses, Mullets, Trouts, Souls, Plaice, Mackrel, Perch, Eels, Roach, Shadd,
Herrings, Crabs, Oysters, Cockles, Mussels, etc. but above all these, the Fish
whereof there are none in England, as Drums, Sheeps-head, Cat-fish, etc. are
best, except Sturgeon, which are there found in great abundance, not inferior
to any in Europe for largeness and goodness.

The Minerals may in time prove of very great consequence, though no rich Mines
are yet discovered there; but there is Oar of several sorts, viz. of Tin, Iron,
and Copper, whereof several trials have been made by curious Persons there with
good success.

The Soil is generally very rich, the Mould in many places black and rank,
insomuch, that it is necessary to Plant it first with Indian Corn, Tobacco, or
Hemp, before it is fit for English Grain; under that is found good Loam,
whereof has been made as good Brick as any in Europe: There are store of
Marsh-grounds for Meadows; great plenty of Marle, both blue and white;
excellent Clay for Pots and Tiles: To conclude, there is nothing that can be
reasonably expected, in a place lying in the same Latitude with this, but what
is either there found naturally, or may be procured by Industry, as Oranges,
Lemons, and Olives, etc.

Commodities which are, or may be procured by industry.
We need not here mention Indian Corn, (called Mayz) Pease and Beans of several
sorts, being the peculiar products Planted by the Indians of that part of
America.

All sorts of English Grain are now common there, and yield a great increase;
as Wheat, Rye, Barley, Oats, Pease, Beans, etc. good Beer of Wheat or Barley
Malt, after the English Mode, is made, even in the meanest Families there; Some
drink Beer of Indian Corn, others of the Stalks thereof, or of the Chipps of
the Pockykerry-Tree, all which make a fort of fresh and pleasant Drink; but the
general Diet of the Country is now English, as most agreeable to their
Constitutions.

There are few able Planters there at present, but what are plentifully
supplied with all sorts of Summer and Winter Fruits. as also of Roots and
Herbs, of all sorts out of their Gardens and Orchards, which they have Planted
for their Profit as well as Pleasure: They have Pears, Apples, Plumbs, Peaches,
etc. in great abundance, and as good as those of Italy; so are their Mellons,
Pumpions, Apricocks, Cherries, Figgs, Pomegranates, etc. In fine, there is
scarce any Fruit or Root that grows in England, France, Spain, or Italy, but
has been tried there, and prospers well.

You may have there also Hemp, Flax, Pitch, and Tar, with little labor; the
Soil is apt for Hops, Rape-seed, Annice-seed, Woad, Madder, Saffron, etc. there
may be had Silkworms, the Country being stored with Mulberry-trees, and the
superfluity of the Wood will produce Potashes.

There is a great quantity of Syder made there at present, and as good as in
any other Country; good Perry and Quince-drink is there likewise made in great
plenty: The Ground does naturally bring forth Vines in great quantities, the
quality whereof being something corrected by Industry, (as there have been
several trials thereof already made there) may no doubt produce good Wine, to
the great encouragement and advantage of the Undertakers.

Brave Ships may be built there with little charge, Clab-board, Wainscot,
Pipestaves, and Masts for Ships, the Woods will afford plentifully; some small
Vessels have been already built there: In fine, Beef, Furrs, Hides, Butter,
Cheese, Pork, and Bacon, to Transport to other Countries, are no small
Commodities, which by Industry, are, and may be had there in great plenty, the
English being already plentifully stocked with all sorts of Cattle and Horses;
and were there no other Staple-Commodities to be hoped for, but Silk and Linen
(the materials of which apparently will grow there) it were sufficient to
enrich the Inhabitants.

But the general Trade of Maryland at present depends chiefly upon Tobacco, it
being the Planters greatest concern and study to store himself betimes with
that Commodity, wherewith he buys and sells, and after which Standard all other
Commodities receive their Price there; they have of late vented such quantities
of that and other Commodities, that a hundred Sail of Ships from England,
Barbados, and other English Plantations, have been usually known to Trade
thither in one Year; insomuch, that by Custom and Excize paid in England for
Tobacco and other Commodities Imported from thence, Maryland alone at this
present, has by his Lordships vast Expense, Industry, and Hazard for many
years, without any charge to the Crown, improved His Majesty's, the King of
Englands Revenues, to the value of Forty thousand Pounds Sterling. per annum at
least.

The general way of Traffic and Commerce there is chiefly by Barter, or
Exchange of one Commodity for another; yet there wants not, besides English and
other foraign Coyns, some of his Lordships own Coin, as Groats, Sixpences, and
Shillings, which his Lordship at his own Charge caused to be Coined and
dispersed throughout that Province; it is equal in fineness of Silver to English
Sterling, being of the same Standard, but of somewhat less weight, and has on
the one side his Lordships Coat of Arms stamped, with this Motto circumscribed,
Crescite and Maltiplicamini, and on the other side his Lordships Effigies,
circumscribed thus, Caecilius Dominus Terrae-Mariae, etc.

The Government.
The Order of Government and settled Laws of this Province, is by the Prudence
and endeavor of the present Lord Proprietary, brought to great Perfection; and
as his Dominion there is absolute (as may appear by the Charter aforementioned)
so all Patents, Warrants, Writs, Licenses, Actions Criminal, etc. Issue forth
there in his Name: Wars, Peace, Courts, Offices, etc. all in his Name made,
held, and appointed.

Laws are there Enacted by him, with the advice and consent of the General
Assembly, which consists of two Estates, namely, the first is made up by the
Chancellor, Secretary, and others of his Lordships Privy Council, and such
Lords of Manors, and others as shall be called by particular Writs for that
purpose, to be Issued by his Lordship: The second Estate consists of the
Deputies and Delegates of the respective Counties of the said Province, elected
and chosen by the free voice and approbation of the Freemen of the said
respective Counties.

The Names of the Governor and Council in this present Year 1671. are as
follows, Mr. Charles Calvert, his Lordships Son and Heir, Governor; Mr.
Philip Calvert, his Lordships Brother, Chancellor; Sir William Talbot Baronet,
his Lordships Nephew, Secretary; Mr. William Calvert, his Lordships Nephew,
Muster-Master-General; Mr. Jerome White, Surveyor-General; Mr. Baker Brook,
his Lordships Nephew; Mr. Edward Lloyd, Mr, Henry Coursey, Mr. Thomas Trueman,
Major Edward Fits-Herbert, Samuel Chen Esquire.

His Lordship, or his Lieutenant there for the time being, upon due occasion,
Convenes, Prorogues, and Dissolves this Assembly; but whatsoever is by his
Lordships Lieutenant there, with the consent of both the said Estates Enacted,
is there of the same Force and Nature as an Act of Parliament is in England,
until his Lordship declares his dis-assent; but such Laws as his Lordship does
assent unto, are not afterward to be Altered or Repealed but by his Lordship,
with the consent of both the said Estates.

Their chief Court of Judicature is held at St. Mary's Quarterly every Year, to
which all Persons concerned resort for Justice, and is called The Provincial
Court, whereof the Governor and Councilare Judges: To the Court there does
belong several sworn Attorneys, who constantly are present there, and act both
as Barristers and Attorneys; there are likewise chief Clerks, Bailiffs, and
other Officers, which duly attend the Court in their respective places.

The Province is divided at present, so far as it is inhabited by English, into
Counties, whereof there be ten, viz. St. Mary's, Charles, Calvert, Anne
Arandel, and Baltemore Counties, which first five lie on the West side of the
Bay of Chesapeack; on the Eastern side whereof, commonly called The
Eastern-Shore, lies Sommerset, Dorchester, Talbot, Caecil, and Kent Counties,
which last is an Island lying near the Easternshore of the said Bay.

Besides the Provincial Court aforenam'd, there are other inferior Courts,
appointed to be held in every one of the Counties six times in the year, for
the dispatch of all Causes, not relating to Life or Member, and not exceeding
the value of three thousand weight of Tobacco; the decision of all other Causes
being reserved to the Provincial or higher Court beforementioned, and there
lies Appeals from the County-Courts, to the Provincial Court.

There are Sheriffs, Justices of the Peace, and other Officers appointed by the
Lord and Proprietary, or his Lordships Lieutenant for the time being, in the
said respective Counties; and without four Justices, of which one to be of the
Quorum, none of the said respective County-Courts can be held; any of his
Lordships Privy Council may sit as Judge, in any of the said County-Courts, by
virtue of his place.

These Courts are appointed to be held at convenient Houses in the said
Counties, which commonly are not far distant from some Inn, or other House of
Entertainment, for accommodation of Strangers; one of the said six County
Courts in each County is held for settling of Widows and Orphans Estates.

There are Foundations laid of Towns, more or less in each County, according to
his Lordships Proclamation, to that effect Issued forth in the year 1668. In
Calvert County, about the River of Patuxent, and the adjacent Cliffs, are the
Bounds of three Towns laid out, one over against Point Patience, called Harvy
Town, another in Battel-Creek, called Calverton, and a third upon the Cliffs,
called Herrington, and Houses already built in them, all uniform, and pleasant
with Streets, and Keys on the Water side. In the County of St. Mary's, on the
East side of St. Georges River, is the principal and original Seat of this
Province, where the general Assembly, and Provincial Courts are held, and is
called St. Mary's, being erected into a City by that Name, where diverse Houses
are already built: The Governor has a House there called St. John's; the
Chancellor Mr. Philip Calvert, his Lordships Brother, has another, and in this
place is built and kept the Secretaries Office, where all the Records are kept,
all Process, Grants, for Lands, Probates of Wills, Letters of Administration
are issued out: the Plat of a Fort and Prison is lately laid there, upon a
point of Land, termed Windmil-Point, from a Windmil which formerly stood there,
the situation is proper, for that it commands the breadth of the said River of
Saint Georges; so that when it is finished, all Shipping may safely Ride before
the Town, without the least fear of any sudden Assault, or Attempt of Pirates or
other Enemy whatsoever. This City has formerly been the usual place of abode
for his Lordships Lieutenants, and their Retinue; but of late years the present
Governor, Mr. Charles Calvert, has built himself a fair House of Brick and
Timber, with all Outhouses, and other Offices thereto belonging, at a place
called Mattapany, near the River of Patuxent beforementioned, where he and his
Family reside, being a pleasant, healthful, and commodious Seat, about eight
Miles by Land distant from St. Mary's.

Of the Indians in Maryland.
The Indians in Maryland ate a People generally of straight, able, and well
proportioned Bodies, something exceeding the ordinary pitch of the English,
their Complexion Swarthy, their Hair naturally long and black, without Curle,
which generally they cut after some strange Fantastical Mode; nay, sometimes
they Dye it with red and other preposterous Colors: They Liquor their Skins
with Bears Grease, and other Oils, which renders them more tawny, and less apt
to receive injury from the Weather: They are subtle from their Infancy, and
prone to learn any thing their Fancy inclines them to, in other things slothful.

There are as many distinct Nations among them as there are Indian Towns,
(which are like Countrey-Villages in England, but not so good Houses) dispersed
throughout the Province: Each Town has its King (by them termed Werowance) and
every forty or fifty Miles distance differs much from its Neighbors in Speech
and Disposition: The Sasquahanocks, though but few in number, yet much exceed
the rest in Valor, and Fidelity to the English; the rest being generally of a
more Treacherous Spirit, and not so stout, and the number of the English do
already exceed all the Indians in the Province.

The Werowance is assisted by Counselors, called Wisoes, who are commonly of
the same Family, and are chosen at the pleasure of the Werowance: They have
Captains in time of War which they term Cockorooses.

Most of their Governments are Monarchical, (except the Sasquabanocks, which is
a Re-publick) but for succession they have a peculiar Custom, that the Issue of
the Males never succeed, but the Issue-Male of the Female succeed in
Government, as the surer side: They all submit to, and are protected by the
Lord Proprietaries Government; and in case of any Assault or Murder, committed
on any English, the Party offending is tried by the Laws of the Province; and
in case of any new Election of King or Emperor among them, they present the
Person so Elected to the Governor for the time being, who as he sees cause,
either alters or confirms their Choice.

In the Year 1663. at the Indians Request, the present Governor Mr. Charles
Calvert, and some others of his Lordships Privy Council there, went to
Pascatoway, in this Province, to be present at the Election of a new Emperor
for that Nation: They presented a Youth named Nattawasso, and humbly Requested
to have him confirmed Emperor of Pascatoway, by the Name of Wahocasso; which
after some charge given them in general, to be good and faithful Subjects to
him, the Governor accordingly did, and received him into his Protection.

They pay great Respect and Obedience to their Kings and Superiors, whose
Commands they immediately Execute, though with an apparent hazard of their
Lives.

The Men's chief employment is Hunting, and the Wars, in both which they
commonly use Bows and Arrows; some of late have Guns and other Weapons, by a
private Trade with some English Neighboring Plantations: They are excellent
Marks-men, it being the only thing they breed their Youth to: The Women Plant
and look after the Corn, make their Bread, and dress what Provisions their
Husbands bring home. Their way of Marriage is by agreement with the Women's
Parents or Friends, who for a certain Sum of their Money, or other Goods,
deliver her to the Man at a day appointed, which is commonly spent in jollity.

Their Money.
There are two sorts of Indian Money, Wampompeage and Roanoack, these serve
among them as Gold and Silver do in Europe, both are made of Fish-shells, which
they string like Beads; Wampompeage is the largest Bead, sixty whereof
countervails an Arms length of Roanoack, which is valued at six Pence Sterling;
with this they purchase Commodities of the English, as Trading-Cloth, etc. of
which they make themselves Mantles, which is something shaggy, and is called
Dutch Duffels; this is their Winter Habit; in Summer they only wear a narrow
slip of the same to cover those parts, which natural modesty teaches them to
conceal; the better sort have Stockings made thereof, and pieces of Deer-Skin,
stitched together about their Feet in stead of Shoes: The Women's Apparel is
the same, but those of the best Quality among them bedeck themselves with
Wampompeage or Roanoack, or some other toy.

Manner of habitation.
Their Houses are raised about the height of a large Arbor, and covered with
Barks of Trees very tite, in the middle whereof is the Fireplace, they lie
generally upon Mats of their own making, placed round the Fire, a Woodden-bowl
or two, an Earthen Pot, and a Mortar and Pestle, is their chiefest
Household Stuff; he that has his Bow and Arrows, or Gun, a Hatchet, and a
Canoo, (a term they use for Boats) is in their minds rarely well provided for;
each House contains a distinct Family, each Family has its peculiar Field
about the Town, where they Plant their Corn, and other sorts of Grain
afore-mentioned.

Civility to the English.
They are courteous to the English, if they chance to see any of them coming
toward their Houses, they immediately meet him halfway, conduct him in, and
bid him welcome with the best Cates they have: The English giving them in like
manner civil Entertainment, according to their Quality.

The Werowance of Patuxent having been Treated for some days at St. Mary's, by
the then Governor, Mr. Leonard Calvert, his Lordships Brother, at his first
coming thither to settle that Colony, took his leave of him with this
Expression, I love the English so well, that if they should go about to kill
me, if I had so much breath as to speak, I would Command my People not to
revenge my death; for I know they would not do such a thing, except it were
through my own default.

In Affairs of concern, they are very considerate, and use few words in
declaring their intentions; for at Mr. Leonard Calverts first arrival there,
the Werowance of Pascatoway being asked by him, Whether he would be content,
that the English should fit down in his Country? returned this answer, That he
would not bid him go, neither would he bid him stay, but that he might use his
own discretion. These were their expressions to the Governor at his first
entrance into Maryland, whom then they were jealous of, whether he might prove
a Friend or a Neighbor, but by his discreet Demeanor toward them at first, and
friendly usage of them afterward, they are now become, not only civil, but
serviceable to the English there upon all occasions.

The Indians of the Eastern shore are most numerous, and were formerly very
refractory, whom Mr. Leonard Calvert some few years after his first settling
the Colony, was forced to reduce, and of late the Emperor of Nanticoke, and his
Men were deservedly defeated by the present Governor, Mr. Charles Calvert, who
reduced him about the year 1668. which has since tamed the ruder sort of the
neighboring Indians, who now by experience, find it better to submit and be
protected by the Lord Proprietaries Government, than to make any vain attempt
against his Power.

These People live under no Law, but that of Nature and Reason, which
notwithstanding leads them to the acknowledgement of a Deity, whom they own to
be the Giver of all good things, wherewith their Life is maintained, and to him
they Sacrifice the first Fruits of the Earth, and of that which they acquire by
Hunting and Fishing: The Sacrifice is performed by their Priests, who are
commonly ancient Men, and profess themselves Conjurers; they first make a
Speech to their God, then burn part, and eat and distribute the rest among them
that are present; until this Ceremony be ended, they will not touch one bit
thereof; they hold the Immortality of the Soul, and that there is a place of
Joy, and another of Torment after Death, prepared for every one according to
their Merits.

They bury their Dead with strange expressions of Sorrow (the better sort upon
a Scaffold, erected for that end) whom they leave covered with Mats, and return
when his flesh is consumed to Interr his Bones; the common sort are committed
to the Earth without that Ceremony; but they never omit to bury some part of
their Wealth, Arms, and Household Stuff with the Corpse.

SECT. IV. Virginia.
Situation of Virginia.
THe most Southerly part of Virginia (for all that Tract of Land, reaching from
Norumbega to Florida, and containing New England, New York, Maryland, and this
part we are now about to Treat of, was by Sir Walter Rawleigh termed Virginia,
in Honor of our Virgin-Queen Elizabeth) lies between Maryland, which it has on
the North, and Carolina, which it has on the South, from thirty six, to near
thirty eight Degrees of Northern Latitude; and with the rest of those Countries
which were comprehended under the same Denomination, was by the Encouragement,
and at the Expense of the said Sir Walter Rawleigh, first Discovered (as some
say) by Captain Francis Drake, for his many notable and bold Exploits,
afterward Knighted by the Queen: First Discovery.
But upon examination we find little reason to ascribe the first Discovery
thereof to Sir Francis Drake, whose chief performances, from the time he first
made himself Eminent at Sea, were against the Spaniards, and for the most part
in the Spanish-Indies; as his taking of Nombre de Dios, and Vinta Cruz, with an
infinite mass of Treasure; his taking of Santo Domingo in Hispaniola, and of
Carthagena in Castella Anna; and that which seems to have given occasion of
attributing to him the first Discovery of these parts, was his touching upon
the North part of the Isle of California, where being nobly Entertained by
Hioh, a King of that Country, and having a Surrendry thereof made to him, in
behalf of the Queen of England, he upon a Pillar erected, Inscribed the Arms of
England, with the Queens Name and his own, and called the place Nova Albion:
Certain indeed it is, that Sir Walter Rawleigh was the first Promoter of this
Discovery; for, after Mr. Martin Forbisher had been sent by Queen Elizabeth to
search for the North-West Passage, which was in the year 1576. and for which he
also was by the Queen advanced to Knighthood, and nobly rewarded; and Sir
Humphrey Gilbert obtaining the Queens Letters Patents, for attempting a
Plantation, had reached New Foundland (though perishing in his return) he upon
these Relations and Inducements undertook by others (for his employments would
not permit him to go in Person) to gain Discoveries to the Southward; and
accordingly in the year of our Lord 1584. obtained a Commission from the Queen,
to discover and Plant map of northern Virginia NOVA VIRGINIAE TABULA.
Notarum Explicatio Domus Regum Ordinariae Domus Incubrationes Anglos

Milliaria Germanica communia.

new Lands in America, not actually possessed by any Christians, who, with the
assistance of Sir Richard Greenvil and others, provided two small Barques,
under the Command of Captain Philip Amidas, and Captain Arthur Barlow, who
setting Sail the 27. of April, fell the 2d of July following with the Coast of
Florida, and made Discovery of the Isle of Wokokon, Roanoack, and the Continent
of Wingandacoa, which they left; and arriving in England about the midst of
September following, Her Majesty upon the relation of their Discoveries, was
pleased to call this Country Virginia.

April 9. 1585. Sir Richard Greenvil, with seven Sail, and several Gentlemen,
left Plymouth; and on May 26. Anchored at Wokokon, but made their first Seat at
Roanoack on August 17. following, which lies in thirty six Degrees of Northerly
Latitude, or thereabouts, where they continued till June 1586. during which
time they made several Discoveries in the Continent and adjacent Islands; and
being endangered by the treachery of the Salvages, returned for England, and
Landed at Portsmouth on July 27. following.

Sir Walter Rawleigh and his Associates, in the year 1586. sent a Ship to
relieve that Colony, which had deserted the Country some while before, and
were all returned for England as is beforementioned.

Some few days after they were gone, Sir Rirchard Greenvil, with three Ships,
arrived at the Plantation at Roanoack, which he found deserted, and leaving
fifty Men there to keep Possession of that Country, returned for England.

The year following, Mr. John White, with three Ships, came to search for the
fifty English at Roanoack, but found them not, they having been set upon by the
Natives, and dispersed so, as no News could be heard of them, and in their room
left a hundred and fifty more to continue that Plantation.

In August 1589. Mr. John White went thither again, to search for the last
Colony which he had left there; but not finding them, returned for England in
September. 6. 1590.

This ill Success made all further Discoveries to be laid aside, till Captain
Gosnol on March 26. 1602. set Sail from Dartmouth, and on May 11. following,
made Land at a place, where some Biscaners, as he guessed by the Natives
information, had formerly fished, being about the Latitude of forty eight
Degrees Northerly Latitude; from hence putting to Sea, he made Discovery of an
Island which he called Marthas Vineyard, and shortly after of Elizabeth's Isle,
and so returned for England, June 18. following.

In the Year 1603. the City of Bristol raised a Stock, and furnished out two
Barques for Discovery, under the Command of Captain Martin Pring, who about
June 7. fell with the North of Virginia in the three and fortieth Degree, found
plenty of good Fish, named a place Whitson-Bay, and so returned.

In the Year 1605. the Right Honorable Thomas Arundel the first, Baron of
Warder, and Count of the Roman Empire, set out Captain George Waymouth, with
twenty nine Seamen, and necessary Provisions, to make what Discoveries he
could; who by contrary Winds, fell Northward about one and forty Degrees and
twenty Minutes of Northerly Latitude, where they found plenty of good Fish; and
Sailing further, discovered an Island, where they named a Harbor,
Pentecost-Harbor; and on July 18. following, came back for England.

In the Year 1606. by the solicitation of Captain Gosnol, and several
Gentlemen, a Commission was granted by King James of Great Britain, etc. for
establishing a Council, to direct those new Discoveries; Captain Newport (a
well practiced Mariner) was entrusted with the Transportation of the
Adventurers in two Ships, and a Pinace, who on December. 19. 1606. set Sail from
Black-wall, and were by Storm, contrary to expectation, cast upon the first
Land, which they called Cape Henry, at the Mouth of the Bay of Chesapeack,
lying in thirty seven Degrees, or thereabouts, of Northerly Latitude: Here
their Orders were opened and read, and eight declared of the Council, and
empowered to chose a President for a year, who with the Council should Govern
that Colony: Till May 13. they sought a place to Plant in, Mr. Winkfield was
chose the first President, who caused a Fort to be raised at Powhatan, now
called James-Town: In June following, Captain Newport returned for England,
leaving a hundred Men behind him; since which time they have been sufficiently
supplied from England, and by the indefatigable Industry and Courage of Captain
John Smith, (one of the Council at that time, and afterward President of the
Colony) they made several Discoveries on the Eastern shore, and up to the Head
of the Bay of Chesapeack, and of the principal Rivers which fall into the said
Bay.

Virginia being thus Discovered and Planted, King James by his Letters Patent
bearing Date April 10. in the fourth year of his Reign, 1607. Granted License
to Sir Thomas Gates, Sir George Summers, and others, to divide themselves into
two several Colonies, for the more speedy Planting of that Country, then
called Virginia, between the Degrees of thirty four and forty five of North
Latitude, that is to say, taken in that large extent, mentioned in the
beginning: The first Colony to be undertaken by certain Knights, Gentlemen, and
Merchants, in, and about the City of London: The second to be undertaken, and
advanced by certain Knights, Gentlemen, and Merchants, and their Associates,
in, or about the City of Bristol, Exon, Plymouth, and other parts.

At the first Colonies Request, in the seventh year of the same King, a second
Patent was Granted to several Noblemen and Gentlemen, (including Sir Thomas
Gates, and some of his former Fellow-Patentees) bearing Date May 23. 1610.
whereby they were made a Corporation, and Body Politic, and styled, The
Treasurer, and Company of Adventurers and Planters of the City of London, for
the first Colony of Virginia: And by this Patent, there was Granted to them,
their Successors and Assigns, two hundred Miles to the Southward, from a Cape
of Land in Virginia, called Point Comfort; and two hundred Miles to the
Northward of the said Cape, along the Seashore, and into the Land from Sea to
Sea.

And on March 12. 1612. the said King, in the ninth year of his Reign, Grants
them a third Patent, of all Islands lying in the Sea, within two hundred Miles
of the Shore of that Tract of Land on the Continent, granted to them by the
said former Patent, Jac. 7.

In the Year 1615. Captain Smith procured by his Interest at Court, and the
King's Favor, a Recommendation from His Majesty, and diverse of the Nobility, to
all Cities and Corporations, to Adventure in a standing Lottery, which was
erected for the benefit of this Plantation, which was contrived in such a
manner, that of 100000. Pounds which was to be put in, 50000. only, or one
half was to return to the Adventurers, according as the Prizes fell out; and
the other half to be disposed of for the Promotion of the Affairs of Virginia,
in which, though it were three years before it was fully accomplished, he had
in the end no bad Success.

In the eighteenth Year of the said King's Reign, at the Request of the second
Colony, a Patent was Granted to several Noblemen and Gentlemen, of all that
Tract of Land lying in the parts of America, between the Degrees of forty and
forty eight of Northerly Latitude, and into the Land from Sea to Sea, which was
called by the Patent New England in America: For the better Government whereof,
one Body-Politick and Corporate was thereby appointed and ordained in Plymouth,
consisting of the said Noblemen, Gentlemen, and others, to the number of forty
Persons, by the Name of The Council established at Plymouth in the County of
Devon, for the Planting, Ruling, Ordering, and Governing of New England im
America.

The Patent of Virginia made void.
The Miscarriages and Misdemeanors of the aforesaid Corporation for the first
Colony of Virginia, were so many and so great, that His said Majesty was
forced, in or about October 1623. to direct a Quo Warranto, for the calling in
of that former Patent, which in Trinity Term following was legally Evinced,
Condemned, and made Void, by Judgment in the Court of the then King's Bench; as
also all other Patents, by which the said Corporation claimed any Interest in
Virginia. Thus this Corporation of the first Colony of Virginia was dissolved,
and that Plantation has been since Governed and Disposed of by Persons
Constituted and Empowered for that purpose from time to time, by immediate
Commissions from the Kings of England.

The Patent of Maryland granted to the Lord Baltem re.
In the Year of our Lord 1631. the Right Honorable George Lord Baltemore
obtained a Grant, of King Charles the First of Great Britain, etc. of part of
that Land to the Northward, which is now called Maryland; but this Patent of
Maryland was not perfected till 1632. as you may understand more fully by the
precedent Discourse of Maryland, which by express words in the said Patent is
separated from, and thereby declared not to be reputed for the future, any part
of Virginia.

The Patent Carolina granted to several Noble Persons.
And in the fifteenth Year of the Reign of King Charles the Second of Great
Britain, etc. on March 24. 1663. Edward Earl of Clarendon, then High-Chancellor
of England, George Duke of Albemarle, William, now Earl of Craven, John Lord
Berkley, Anthony Lord Ashley, Sir George Carterett Knight and Baronet, Sir
William Berkley Knight, and Sir John Colleton Knight and Baronet, obtained a
Patent from His Majesty, of the Province of Carolina, which lies to the
Southward of Virginia, in which is included some part of that Land which
formerly belonged to the said dissolved Company of Virginia. So that Virginia
at present extends it self only, and is situated between thirty six and
thirty seven Degrees and fifty Minutes, or thereabouts, of Northern Latitude,
and is bounded on the North, by Maryland; on the South, by Carolina; on the
East, by the Ocean; and on the West, by the South-Seas.

The Entrance by Sea into this Country is the same with that of Maryland,
between Cape Henry and Cape Charles, placed on each side of the Mouth of the
Bay of Chesapeak; Rivers of Virginia.
on the West side whereof you first meet with a pleasant and commodious River
called James-River, about three Miles wide at its Entrance, and Navigable a
hundred and fifty.

Fourteen Miles from this River Northward lies York-River, which is Navigable
sixty or seventy Miles, but with Ketches and small Barques thirty or forty
Miles farther.

Passing hence to the North you discover a third stately River, called
Rappahanock, which is Navigable about a hundred and thirty Miles -- from whence
following the Shore to the North you enter into Patomeck-River, which is
already described in the precedent Discourse of Maryland, to which Province
this River belongs, whose Southerly Bank gives Bounds to that part of Virginia
and Maryland.

To these Rivers many other Inland Branches and Rivulets are reduced, the chief
of which are hereafter specified.

Nature of the Country
The Country is generally even, the Soil fruitful, the Climate healthful, and
agreeable with English Constitutions, especially since the increase of
Inhabitants, and accommodation of good Diet and Lodging, which the first
Planters found great want of heretofore. For many years, till of late, most
New-comer^ had the first Year in July and August, a Disease which is called A
Seasoning, whereof many died, like to what is mentioned before in the
Description of Maryland, though more mortal and common than in Maryland,
because Virgina is a lower Country, and somewhat hotter, insomuch that
formerly diverse ill of that Distemper have come purposely from Virginia to
Maryland, to recover their Health; but now, since the Country is more open
and clear from Wood, few die of it, and many have no Seasonings at all.

This Country affords generally all such Roots, Herbs, Gums, and Balsoms, as
are expressed before in the Relation of Maryland.

All sorts of Trees for Building and Husbandry, Trees.
Fruit Trees; Vines, etc. are found in both Countries, equal in goodness and
quantity, only in such things as require more Sun, and that may be produced by
Industry) there may be some little difference, because Virginia is somewhat
more to the Southward of Maryland, as in Vines, Oranges, Lemmons, Olives,
Silk, etc.

There is a Plant grows naturally in this Country, Silk-Grass.
and in Maryland, called Silk-Grass, which will make a fine Stuff with a silky
Gloss, and better Cordage than Hemp or Flax, both for strength and durance.

The wild Beasts, Birds, and Fish, are much the same also in this Country as
are before described in the precedent Description of Maryland: Nevertheless we
shall think it proper not to omit some Fruits, Plants, Beasts, etc. mentioned
by the most authentic Describers of New England, Fruits peculiar to Virginia.
as peculiar to that Country. The Fruits are, their Putchamines, which are a
kind of Damsons; Messamines, a kind of Grapes; Chechinquamins, a sort of Fruit;
resembling a Chestnut; Rawcomens, a Fruit resembling a Gooser-berry; Macoquer, a
kind of Apple; Mettaquesunnauks, a sort of Fruit resembling Inkian Figs;
Morococks, resembling a Straw-berry, besides a Berry which they call
Ocoughtanamnis, somewhat like to Capers.

Their peculiar Roots are Tockawaugh, Roots.
good to eat; Wichsacan, of great virtue in healing of Wounds; Pocones, good to
assuage Swellings and Aches; Musquaspen, wherewith they Paint their Targets and
Mats. Also they have in great request a Pulse called Assentamen, and the Plant
Mattouna, of which they make Bread.

Their peculiar Beasts are, Beasts.
the Aroughena, resembling a Badger; the Assapanick or Flying-Squerril;
Opassum, a certain Beast having a Bag under her Belly, wherein she carries and
suckleth her Young; Mussascus, which smelling strong of Musk, resembles a
Water-Rat; Utchunquois, a kind of wild Cat.

Their peculiar Fish are Stingrais.

On the West side of the Bay of Chesapeak, between Cape Henry and the Southerly
Bank of the River of Patomeck, are three fair Navigable Rivers, as is before
mentioned, into which the other small Rivulets fall, Rivulets.
which here we will give some account of, as also of the Indian, or ancient
Names by which these three principal Rivers were formerly known. The first
whereof is Powhatan (now called James-River) according to the Name of a large
and considerable Territory that lies upon it. The Rivers that fall into this
Southward, are Apamatuck; Eastward, Quiyonycohanuc, Nansamund, and Chesopeak;
and Northward, Chickamahania.

The second Navigable River is Pamaunkee, by the English now termed York-River.
The Rivulet that falls into this is Poyankatanck.

The third (which is before described, and usually known by the Name of
Rappahanoc) was formerly termed Toppahanoc.

This we thought fit here to insert, to the end no color of mistake might
remain to after Ages concerning the derivation or original change of such
proper Names, especially being Places of great advantage to the Colony.

Several People of the ancient Natives of Virginia.
The chiefest of those Tribes or Divisions of People among the Indians, that
were by Name known to the English at their first arrival, were, upon the River
Pouhatan the Kecoughtans, the Paspaheghes, (on whose Land is seated James-Town)
the Weanocks, Arrohatocks, the Appametocks, the Nandsamunds, the Chesapeacks,
etc. On the River Pamaunkee, are the Younghtanunds, the Mattapaments, etc. On
the River Toppahanoc, the Manahoacks, the Moraughtacunds, and the
Cuttatawomens. On the River Patawomek, the Wighcocomocans, the Onawmanients,
and the Moyanances. On the River Pawtuxunt, the Acquintacsuacs, the Pawtuxunts,
and the Matapunients. On the River Bolus, the Sasquesabanoes: Southward from
the Bay, the Chawonocks; the Mangoacks, the Monacans, the Mannahocks, the
Masawomecks, the Atquanahucks, and the Kuscarawaocks, besides a number not
material to be named, as having had little of Transaction that we hear of with
the Planters.

Number of Inhabitants.
The number of English Inhabitants in this Country are in this present Year
1671. about thirty or forty thousand, who are plentifully stocked with all
sorts of tame Cattle, as Cows, Sheep, Horses, Swine, etc. and all sorts of
English Grain; great store of brave Orchards for Fruit, whereof they make great
quantities of Cider and Perry.

They have been much obliged by that worthy Gentleman Mr. Edward Digges, Son of
Sir Dudley Digges, who was Master of the Rolls, and a Privy Councellor to King
Charles the First, of Great Britain, etc. For the said Mr. Digges at his great
Charge and Industry, has very much advanced the making of Silk in this
Country, for which purpose he has sent for several Persons out of Armenia to
teach them that Art, and how to wind it off the Cods of the Silkworms; and
has made at his own Plantation in this Colony for some years last past,
considerable quantities of Silk, which is found to be as good Silk as any is in
the World, which has encouraged diverse others to prosecute that Work.

The Commodities of Virginia.
Though this Country be capable of producing many other good Commodities, yet
the Planters have hitherto employed themselves for the most part in Planting of
Tobacco, as they do in Maryland; whereof there are two sorts, one which is
called Sweet-scented, and the other called Oranoack, or Bright and Large, which
is much more in quantity, but of lesser Price than the former; and the
Plantations upon York River are esteemed to produce the best of that sort of
Sweet-scented: There is so much of this Commodity Planted in Virginia, and
Imported from thence into England, that the Custom and Excize paid in England
for it, yields the King about fifty or threescore thousand Pounds Sterling, per
annum: With this Commodity the Planter buys of the Ships that come thither for
it (which are above a hundred Sail yearly from England, and other English
Plantations) all Necessaries of Clothing, and other Utensils of Household Stuff,
etc. which they want, though they make some Shoes, and Linen and Woollen Cloth
in some parts of Virginia, of the growth and Manufacture of the Country; and
if they would Plant less Tobacco (as it is probable they will e're long find it
convenient for them to do, it being now grown a Drug of very low value, by
reason of the vast quantities Planted of it) they might in a little time
provide themselves of all Necessaries of Livelihood, and produce much richer
and more Staple-Commodities for their advantage.

Their usual way of Traffic in buying and selling is by exchange of one
Commodity for another; and Tobacco is the general Standard, by which all other
Commodities receive their value; but they have some English and foreign Coyns,
which serve them upon many occasions.

The Government is by a Governor and Council, Appointed and Authorized from
time to time by immediate Commission from the King of Great Britain: And Laws
are made by the Governor, with the consent of a General Assembly, which
consists of two Houses, an Upper and a Lower; the first consists of the
Council, and the latter of the Burgesses chosen by the Freemen of the Country;
and Laws so made are in Force there till His Majesty thinks fit to alter them.

The Chief Court of Judicature is called The Quarter-Court, because it is held
every quarter of a Year, where all Causes Criminal and Civil are heard and
determined, and the Judges of this Court are the Governor and Council: The
present Governor in this Year 1671. is Sir William Berkley, who was made
Governor by King Charles the First, of Great Britain, etc. in the Year 1640.
And those of the Council are Sir Henry Chichesly, who is one of the greatest
and most considerable Planters there, and Mr. Edward Diggs beforementioned,
Mr. Thomas Ludwel Secretary, Major General Robert Smith, and diverse other
worthy Gentlemen.

That part of the Country where the English are Planted, is divided into
nineteen Counties, viz. Northampton-County in Acomack, on the Eastern shore;
and on the Western shore, Corotuck, Lower-Norfolk, Nansemund, Isle of Wight,
Surry, Warwick, Henerico, James, Charles, York, New-Kent, Gloucester,
Middlesex, Lancaster, Northumberland, Westmoreland, Rappahanock, and
Harford-Counties.

In every one of these Counties there are inferior County-Courts kept every
Month; these take no Cognizance of Causes relating to Life or Member, or
exceeding a certain limited Value, such being referred to the Quarter-Courts
only, to which likewise there lie Appeals from their Inferior Courts.

There are Sheriffs, Justices of the Peace, and other Officers in every
respective County, appointed by the Governor, for the Administration of
Justice, who sit there according to his Order, and whereof these County-Courts
are chiefly composed.

There are few Towns as yet erected in this Colony; the Principal Seat of the
English there, is at a place called James-City, in Honor of King James of Great
Britain, etc. This is situated in a Peninsula, on the North side of
James-River, and has in it many fair Brick and other good Houses: In this place
are held the Quarter-Courts, General Assemblies, the Secretary's Office, and
all other Affairs and greatest Concerns of the Colony are here dispatched. On
the same side, nearer the Mouth of this River, stands Elizabeth-City,
containing also several good Houses of Brick and Timber.

Sir William Berkley, the present Governor resides at a place somewhat distant
from James-City, called Green-Spring, a fair Brick House, which he himself
caused to be built.

The other Towns of Note belonging to the English, only Henricopolis, or
Henry's-Town, (so named from Prince Henry then living, built in a very
convenient place, more within Land, about eighty Miles distant from James-City)
and Dale's-Gift, so named, and Planted at the Charges of Sir Thomas Dale,
Deputy Governor of the Country, about the Year 1610.

Of the Indians of Virginia.
The Indians of Virginia, in Stature, Complexion, and Disposition, differ very
little from those of Maryland: Their Laws and Customs; their way of Living and
Apparel; their Religion, Money, and manner of Burial, are the same in both
places; all which are more particularly expressed in the precedent Description
of that Province, to which we refer the Reader.

Yet these Indians far exceed those of Maryland, in Treachery and Cruelty to
the English there, as will appear by this following Relation of their
Proceedings toward them, since the first Seating of that Colony, wherein
nevertheless, the Civility of some particular Persons at their first Landing is
not to be omitted.

Transactions between the English and the Natives.
Upon the first arrival of Captain Amidas and Captain Barlow in Wingandacoa, now
Virginia, they were accosted by Granganimeo (the King's Brother of that
Country) who, attended with a Train of forty or fifty Men, came in a very
civil manner to Treat about a Commerce of Trade and Traffic, which immediately
began between them, and several Barters were made: Granganimeo, who was very
just of his Word, and always kept his promised Day of meeting, fancying most a
Pewter Dish, gave twenty Deer-skins for it, and boring a Hole therein, hung it
about his Neck for a Breast Plate; afterward he, with his whole Company, and
his Wife and Children, frequently and familiarly did eat and drink aboard the
English Ships, the King himself, called Wingina, lying sick at his chief Town,
six days Journey off, of a dangerous Wound which he had received from a
neighboring King his mortal Enemy. Some of the English going to Land upon the
Isle of Roanoack, were met by Granganimeo's Wife, who, her Husband being
absent, commanded her Servants some to draw their Boat ashore, some to carry
them on their Backs to Land, others to carry in their Oars into the House for
fear of stealing; and having caused a great Fire to be made, to warm them, and
to dry those that had been wet in their Voyage, she afterward Entertained them
with a very plentiful Feast or Banquet after that Country fashion; and when
they took alarm at the coming of two or three of her Men with Bows and Arrows,
she caused the Bows to be broken, and the Men to be beaten out of the House,
besides several other demonstrations of extraordinary civility; and when
notwithstanding all this they could not be persuaded to Lodge any where but in
their Boat, she used all means imaginable to make them quit their jealousy,
and accept of a Lodging in the House.

In the Year 1585. a Company that went over with Sir Richard Greenvill, burnt
the Town of Aquascogoc, by reason of a Silver Cup that was stolen by some of the
Indians, took Prisoner Menatonon, King of Chawonoc, who gave a large Relation
of another King about three days Journey off, who possessed an Island
wonderfully rich in Pearl, which was taken in great abundance in a deep Water
that environed it. Going toward the Country of the Mangoacks (among whom in
the Province of Chaunis Temoatan, they heard of a Mine of strange Copper called
Wassador, with Skiko, the King of Chowonock's Son, and Manteo, a faithful
Salvage, for their Guide) they were treacherously dealt with by Wingina, alias
Pemissapan (for so, his Brother Granganimeo being lately dead, he had altered
his Name) who endeavored to stir up a Confederacy of the Chawonocks, Moratocks,
and Mangoacks against them; yet by the urgent persuasions of Ensenore his
Father, the truest Friend the English had, after the death of Granganimeo, and
seeing them safe returned from their Journey, wherein he thought they had all
perished, and especially upon Menatonon's sending Messengers to them with
Pearl, and Okisco, King of Weopomeock, to yield himself Vassal to the Queen of
England, his Hatred was somewhat cooled; but Ensenore deceasing soon after, he
returned to his old treacherous Practices again, and in the end, while he was
contriving mischief against the Planters, he himself was shot, taken Prisoner,
and beheaded.

After the Company left upon Virginia by Sir Richard Greenwill, (for he himself
was returned) tired out with hunger, hardship, and the many extremities they
were at last reduced to, had deserted the Place, and obtained Passage for
England, through the civility of Sir Francis Drake, pitying their distress,
fifty Men more were Landed upon Roanoack-Isle by the same Person, who how they
were surprised and destroyed by the Natives, was discovered at large to the
Supply that was sent over in the Year 1587. by Mr. White.



A Party of those that went over with Captain Bartholomew Gosnol, Captain John
Smith, etc. were by the Indians set upon as they were raising a Fort near Cape
Henry, where they Landed, seventeen Men hurt, one slain, and all in danger to
have been utterly destroyed, had not a Shot happily made from the Ships by
chance frighted away the Salvages. Another small Party under Captain Smith,
going down the River to Keconghean, were very fiercely assaulted by sixty or
seventy Indians, but their Musket Shot did such Execution amongst them, that
they fled into the Woods and left behind them the Image of their God, which had
been carried before them as their Standard, and not long after sent one of
their Queiongcasocks to offer Peace, and to redeem their Okee; which Smith
granting, on condition six only of them would come unarmed and load his Boat
with Provisions; and promising moreover to become their Friend, and furnish
them with Beads, Copper, and Hatchets: They accepted the Condition, and brought
him Venison, Turkies, wild Fowl, Bread, and what else they had, Singing and
Dancing in sign of Friendship till they departed. In his Return he discovered
the Town and Country of Warraskayock, and the People of Chickahamania.

In his next Voyage for the discovery of the Head of Chickamahania River, he
was, through neglect of his Seamen who were sent to watch the Booty, taken
Prisoner; in which condition he was kept a whole Month: then being released,
he got Provisions for the People in James-Town; which had they not timely
received, they had all abandoned the Place, and returned to England.

While Affairs stood thus in a mean condition, Captain Newport arriving there
with a Ship and sixty Men to strengthen the Plantations, he went to
Weromocomoco, where King Powhatan kept his Court, King Powhatan.
and found him sitting on a Bed of Mats, and an Embroidered Leather Cushion,
Clothed in Deer-skins; at his Feet fat a young Maiden, and on each side of the
House twenty Concubines; his Head and Shoulders were painted red, and a Chain
of white Beads hung about his Neck. Newport, to oblige him, gave him an English
Youth; in requital whereof he received Powhatan's bosom Friend, Mamontak; with
whom returning, he found a sad Accident, for the Fire had not only burnt the
Houses of the new Planters, but also the Pallisado's about James-Town, made for
a Defense against the Enemies Assaults, James-Town burnt.
and most of their Store; which was so much the worse, because it happened in the
Winter, and indeed had proved very fatal, had not a Ship, which was supposed to
be lost, happily arrived there with a considerable quantity of Provisions.

Smith's Voyage.
Whilst the Town was rebuilding, Smith set Sail in an open Barque with fourteen
Men, and discovered two Isles before Point Charles, to which he gave his Name;
then ran into the Inlet Chesapeack, in the midst of which lay several Islands,
His remarkable Exploits.
by the Seamen called Russels. Before the River Wighcomoco they found a
disturbed Sea, and more Northerly a Bay with fresh and hot Water, and at last
he met with two Virginians, which conducted the English along a Creek to
Onawmoment, where some hundreds of them lay in Ambuscade, according to
Powhatan's appointment, to cut off Smith; who leaping forth on a Hidden
appeared like Devils, all painted but the Bullets flying about made them all
run away. Smith, whose Design was only to discover the Country, and the
Silver Mine of Patawomeck, ten Leagues up into the Country, found the Metal to
be of little value, so that he returned with little Success, being newly cured
of a poisonous Wound in the Arm, which was given him by a Fish not unlike a
Shark, whilst he lay aground near Toppahanock.

A while after being informed of Powhatan's Design to destroy the English,
(though he had been lately Presented by Newport with a Silver Basin, a rich
Chair, Bed, and Furniture belonging to it, with other things of value) he, to
prevent him, chose forty eight out of two hundred Men which were Garrisoned in
James-Town, then going to Werowocomoco, Landed with much trouble, the River
being frozen above half a Mile from the Shore.

A German Soldier amongst Smith's Company giving private notice to Powhatan of
the Design of the English, made his Escape by flight: But Smith going on to
Pamaunke, found King Opechancangough with seven hundred Men in Arms, threatening
a fierce Battle; but Smith making directly up to him, set his Pistol on his
Breast, and forced him to lay down his Arms. Powhatan by this time provided
with Swords and Muskets by two Dutchmen, also began to bestir himself afresh;
but his Intentions being too soon known, he was again quieted, and forced a
second time to send Smith a String of Pearl; after which a Peace was concluded
between all the Natives and the English.

Many other Quarrels and Encounters there were in the Infancy of the Plantation
between the Indians and the English, wherein it would be endless to recount all
the Treacheries and Ambuscades of the Salvages, some of which had proved very
pernicious to the Planters, had they not been betrayed to Captain Smith by
Pocahonta, King Powhatan's Daughter, who upon all occasions showed her self a
great Friend to the English, having saved the Captain's Life, when, being her
Father's Prisoner, he was just brought to Execution.

This Lady was afterward brought into England, Christened by the Name of
Rebekah, and Married to one Mr. Rolf, and died at Gravesend in an intended
Voyage back to her own Country.

Nor did their Cruelties and Treacheries end when the Plantation came to be
more settled, for on the two and twentieth of March about the Year 1621. in the
time of Sir Francis Wyat's Government, they generally combined to destroy all
the English there; and carried on this devilish Design with such dissimulation
and dexterity, that in one day they cut off seven hundred Men, Women, and
Children, there being at that time not above fifteen hundred in the Country.

Since which time, in the Year of our Lord 1643. there happened another bloody
Massacre, wherein near five hundred English were in one Night miserably
butchered by those barbarous and perfidious Salvages: whose Blood the present
Governor, Sir William Berkley, nobly and justly revenged the Year following,
utterly destroying most of them, and taking Prisoner their chief Emperor,
Opichancono, who died not long after in Prison.

Having given but a small hint, in its proper place, of the Story of Captain
Smith's Imprisonment by Powhatan, and his deliverance from Death by Pocahonta;
we have thought not improper to reserve the Story of it, being very remarkable
for a particular Relation, before we conclude our Description of Virginia,
since otherwise we should have interrupted the Series of our former Discourse.

The Relation of Captain Smith's being taken Prisoner by Powhatan, and of his
being delivered from Death by his Daughter Pocahonta.
THe Salvages having drawn from one George Cassen, whither Captain Smith was
gone, prosecuting that opportunity, they followed him with three hundred
Bowe-Men, conducted by the King of Pamaunkee, who in divisions, searching the
turnings of the River, found two of his Men by the fire side, whom they shot
full of Arrows, and slew. Then finding the Captain, who, as is said, used the
Salvage that was his Guide as his Shield, (three of them being slain, and
others sore galled) the rest would not come near him: Thinking thus to have
returned to his Boat, regarding them as he marched, more than his way, he
slipped up to the middle in an Osier-Creek, and his Salvage-with him, yet durst
they not come to him, till being near dead with cold, he threw away his Arms:
Then according to their composition, they drew him forth, and led him to the
Fire, where his Men were slain; diligently they chafed his benumbed Limbs, he
demanding for their Captain, they showed him Opechankanough, King of Pamaunkee,
to whom he gave a round Ivory double compass Dyal. Much they marvel'd at the
playing of the Fly and Needle, which they could see so plainly, and yet not
touch it, because of the Glass that covered them; but when he demonstrated by
that Globe-like Jewel, the roundness of the Earth, and Skies; the Sphere of the
Sun, Moon, and Stars, and how the Sun did chase the Night round about the World
continually; the greatness of the Land and Sea; the diversity of Nations,
variety of Complexions, and how we were to them Antipodes, and many other such
like matters, they all stood as amazed with admiration: Notwithstanding, within
an hour after they tied him to a Tree, and as many as could stand about him
prepared to shoot him; but the King holding up the Compass in his Hand, they
all laid down their Bows and Arrows, and in a triumphant manner led him to
Orapaks, where he was after their manner kindly Feasted, and well used.

Their order in conducting him was thus; Drawing themselves all in Fyle, the
King in the midst had all their Bows and Swords borne before him. Captain
Smith was led after him by three great Salvages, holding him fast by each Arm;
and on each side six went in Fyle with their Arrows nocked. But arriving at the
Town (which was but only thirty or forty Hunting Houses made of Mats, which
they remove as they please, as we our Tents) all the Women and Children staring
and gazing at him, the Soldiers first all in Fyle wheeled off to the Rear in
good Order; on each Flank were Officers, like Sergeants to see them keep their
Postures: A good time they continued this Exercise, and then cast themselves in
a Ring, Dancing in such several Postures, and singing and yelling out such
hellish Notes and Screeches; being strangely Painted, every one his Quiver of
Arrows, and at his Back a Club; on his Arm a Fox or an Otters-skin, or some
such matter for his vambrace; their Heads and Shoulders Painted red, with Oil
and Pocones mingled together, which Scarlet-like color, made an exceeding
handsome show; his Bow in his Hand, and the Skin of a Bird with her Wings
abroad dried, tied on his Head, a piece of Copper, a white Shell, a long
Feather, with a small Rattle growing at the Tails of their Snaks tied to it, or
some such like Toy. All this while Smith and the King stood in the midst,
guarded, as before is said, and after three Dances they all departed. Smith
they conducted to a long House, where thirty or forty tall Fellows did guard
him, and e're long, more Bread and Venison was brought him than would have
served twenty Men, I think his Stomach at that time was not very good; what he
left, they put in Baskets and tied over his Head. About midnight they set the
Meat again before him; all this time none of them would eat a bit with him,
till the next Morning they brought him as much more, and then did they eat all
the old, and reserved the new as they had done the other, which made him think
they would feed him for slaughter: Yet in this desperate estate to fend him
from the cold, one Maocassater brought him his Gown, in requital of some Beads
and Toys Smith had given him at his first arrival in Virginia.

Two days after a man would have slain him (but that the Guard prevented it)
for the death of his Son, to whom they conducted him to recover the poor man
then breathing his last. Smith told them, that at James-Town he had a Water
would do it, if they would let him fetch it, but they would not permit that;
but made all the preparations they could to assault James-Town, craving his
advice, and for recompense he should have Life, Liberty, Land, and Women. In
part of a Tablebook he writ his mind to them* at the Fort, what was intended,
how they should follow that direction to affright the messengers, and without
fail send him such things as he writ for, and an Inventory with them. The
difficulty and danger, he told the Salvages, of the Mines, great Guns, and
other Engines, exceedingly affrighted them, yet according to his Request they
went to James-Town, in as bitter weather as could be of Frost and Snow, and
within three days returned with an Answer.

But when they came to James-Town, seeing Men sally out as he had told them
they would, they fled; yet in the night they came again to the same place where
he had told them they should receive answer, and such things as he had promised
them, which they found accordingly, and with which they returned with no small
expedition, to the wonder of them all, supposing that he could either Divine,
or the Paper could speak: then they led him to the Youthtanunds, the
Mattapanients, the Payankatanks, the Nantaughtacunds, and Onawmanients upon the
Rivers of Rapahanock, and Patawomek, through intricate ways, and back again by
diverse other several Nations, to the Kings Habitation at Pamaunkee, where they
entertained him with most strange and fearful Conjurations. Not long after,
early in the Morning, a great fire was made in a long House, and a Mat spread
on each side thereof; on the one they caused him to sit, and all the Guard went
out of the House, and presently there came skipping in a great grim Fellow, all
Painted over with Coal, mingled with Oil; and many Snakes and Wesels skins
stuffed with Moss, and all their Tails tied together, so as they met on the
Crown of his Head in a Tassel; and round about the Tassel was a Coronet of
Feathers, the Skins hanging round about his Head, Back, and Shoulders, and in a
manner covered his Face; with a hellish voice, and a Rattle in his Hand. With
most strange gestures and passions he began his Invocation, and environed the
fire with a Circle of Meal; which done, three more such like Devils came
rushing in with the like antique Tricks, Painted half black, half red; but all
their Eyes were Painted white, and some red strokes like Mutchato's, along
their Cheeks: round about him those Fiends Danced a pretty while, and then came
in three more as ugly as the rest, with red Eyes, and white strokes over their
black Faces; at last they all sat down right against him, three of them on the
one hand of the chief Priest, and three on the other; then all with their
Rattles began a Song, which ended, the chief Priest laid down five Wheat Corns,
then stretching his Arms and Hands with such violence, that he sweat, and his
Veins swelled, he began a short Oration: at the conclusion, they all gave a
short groan, and then laid down three Grains more; after that, began their Song
again, and then another Oration, ever laying down so many Corns as before, till
they had twice incircled the Fire; that done, they took a bunch of little
Sticks, prepared for that purpose, continuing still their Devotion, and at the
end of every Song and Oration, they laid down a Stick between the Divisions of
Corn: rill night, neither he nor they did either eat or drink, and then they
feasted merrily, with the best Provisions they could make: Three days they used
this Ceremony, the meaning whereof they told him, was to know if he intended
them well, or no. The Circle of Meal signified their Country, the Circles of
Corn the bounds of the Sea, and the Sticks his Country. They imagined the
World to be flat and round, like a Trencher, and they in the midst. After this
they brought him a Bag of Gunpowder, which they carefully preserved till the
next Spring, to Plant as they did their Corn, because they would be acquainted
with the nature of that Seed; Opitchapam, the King's Brother, invited him to
his House, where, with as many Platters of Bread, Fowl, and wild Beasts, as did
environ him, he bid him welcome, but not any of them would eat a bit with him,
but put up all the remainder in Baskets. At his return to Opechancanoughs, all
the Kings Women, and their Children, flocked about him for their Parts, as a
due by Custom, to be merry with such Fragments.

At last, they brought him to Meronocomoco, where was Powhatan their Emperor.
Here more than two hundred of those grim Courtiers stood wondering at him, as
he had been a Monster; till Powhatan and his Train had put themselves in their
greatest Braveries. Before a Fire, upon a seat like a Bedsted, he sat covered
with a great Robe, made of Rarowcun-Skins, and all the Tails hanging by. On
either hand did sit a young Maid, of sixteen ox eighteen years of Age, and
along on each side the House, two rows of Men, and behind them as many Women,
with all their Heads and Shoulders Painted red; many of their Heads bedecked
with the white Down of Birds, but every one with something, and a great Chain
of white Beads about their Necks. At his entrance before the Emperor, all the
People gave a great shout. The Queen of Appamatuck was appointed to bring him
Water to wash his Hands, and another brought him a bunch of Feathers, in stead
of a Towel to dry them: Having Feasted him after their barbarous manner as well
as they could, a long consultation was held, but in conclusion, two great
Stones being brought before Powhatan, as many as could, laid Hands on him,
dragged him to them, and thereon laid his Head, when being ready with their
Clubs, to beat out his Brains, Pocahontas, the Emperors dearest Daughter,
seeing no entreaty could prevail, got his Head in her Arms, and laid her own
upon his to save him from death; whereat, the Emperor was contented he should
live to make him Hatchets, and her Bells, Beads, and Copper; for they thought
him a Man of all Occupations like themselves; for the King himself will make
his own Robes, Shoes, Bows, Arrows, Pots, Plant, Hunt, or do any thing as well
as the rest.

Two days after, Powhatan having disguised himself in the most fearful minner
he could, caused Captain Smith to be brought forth to a great House in the
Woods, and there upon a Mat by the Fire to be left alone. Not long after, from
behind a Mat that divided the House, was made the most doleful noise he ever
heard; then Powhatan, more like a Devil than a Man, with about two hundred more
as black as himself, came unto him, and told him, That now they were Friends,
and presently he should go to James-Town, to send him two great Guns and a
Grindstone, for which he would give him the Country of Capahowosick; and for
ever esteem him as his Son Nantaquoud. So to James-Town with twelve Guides
Powhatan sent him. That Night they Quartered in the Woods, he still expecting
(as he had done all this long time of his Imprisonment) every hour to be put to
one Death or other, for all their Feasting: but Almighty God (by his Divine
Providence) had mollifi'd the Hearts of those stern Barbarians with compassion.
The next Morning betimes they came to the Fort, where Smith having used the
Salvages with what kindness he could, he showed Rawhunt, Powhatan's trusty
Servant, two Demi-Culverins and a Millstone, to carry to Powhatan: they found
them somewhat too heavy; but when they saw him Discharge them, they being
loaded with Stones, amongst the Boughs of a great Tree loaded with Isickles,
the Ice and Branches came so tumbling down, that the poor Salvages ran away
half dead with Fear. But at last we regained some Conference with them, and
gave them some Toys, and sent to Powhatan's Women and Children such Presents,
as gave them in general, full content.

SECT. V. Carolina.
Situation and Description of Carolina.
CArolina is that part of Florida which lies between twenty nine and thirty six
Degrees and thirty Minutes of Northern Latitude: It is washed on the East and
South, with the Atlantic Ocean; on the West with Mare Pacificum, or the South
Sea; and on the North, bounds on Virginia. A Country wherein Nature shows how
bountiful she can be without the assistance of Art, the Inhabitants (excepting
a little Maiz which their old Men and Women Plant) depending merely on the
natural and spontaneous Growth of the Soil for their Provisions, the Woods
furnishing them with store of Fruit and Venison, and the Rivers with plenty of
several sorts of wholesome and savory Fish.

This Maintenance, which without forecast or toil they receive from the natural
fruitfulness of the Country, will, if we consider either the largeness of
their Growth, or the duration of their Lives, be thought neither scanty nor
unhealthy, their Stature being of a larger size than that of Englishmen, their
Make strong and well proportioned, a crooked or misshapen Person being not to
be found in the whole Country; and (where the chance of War, which they are
almost continually engaged in one against another in their little Governments,
spares any of them) they live to an incredible old age; so that when the
English came there, they found some of their Kings, who saw descend from them
the sixth Generation.

Production of the Soil.
The Soil is very rich and fertile, producing naturally Walnuts, Grapes (of
which the English who are there Planted have made very good Wine) Apricocks,
Bullys, with a multitude of others; besides the Woods also are full of very
good Peaches, and all the Season of the Year strewn all over with
Strawberries. Mulberry-Trees are the common growth of the Woods; and to assure
you they are the natural Offspring of the Place, and grow to an incredible
bigness, one whereof the English (who are new Planted at Albemarle Point on
Ashley River) made use to fasten the Gate of their Pallisado to, was so large,
that all who came from thence say, they never saw any Oak in England bigger,
which is but the ordinary size of the Mulberry-Trees of this Country, which is
so sure an Argument of the richness of the Soil, that the Inhabitants of
Virginia enquiring of the Seamen who came from thence, concerning the Quality
and Product of the Country, when they were informed of the large
Mulberry-Trees it produced, were so well satisfied with it, that they made no
farther Enquiry. There are also other Trees, as Ash, Poplar, and Bay, with
several sorts unknown to us of Europe; but those which make it almost all one
general Forest of large Timber Trees, are Oak, both red and white, and Cedar.
There are also here and there large Groves of Pine-Trees, some a hundred Foot
high, which afford a better sort of Mast than are to be had either in Maryland
or Norway. These larger Trees weaving their luxuriant Branches into a close
Shade, suffer no Under-wood to grow between them, either by their Droppings, or
else the Heads of Deer which loosening all the tender Shoots, quite destroy it;
so that a great part of the Country is as it were a vast Forest of fine
Walks, free from the heat of the Sun, or the encumbrance of Shrubs and Bushes,
and so clear and open, that a Man may easily ride a Hunting amongst the Trees,
yielding a Prospect very pleasant and surpassing. On the Skirts of these Woods
grow lesser Trees and Shrubs of several sorts; amongst them are sundry Dying
Materials, which how well the Inhabitants know how to make use of, appears in
the Deer-Skins that the chief of them wear, which are Painted, or rather Died,
with several lively Colors. But amongst their Shrubs, one of most note and use
is that whose Leaves make their Casini, a Drink they frequently use, and affirm
to be very advantageous for the preservation of Health; which, by the
description our English give of the size, color, and shape of the Leaf, the
sort of Tree it grows on, and the taste, color, and effects of the Drink,
which is nothing but the Decoction of the Leaf, seems to be the very same with
the East India TEE, and by those who have seen and tasted both, affirmed to be
no other, and may very probably be a spontaneous and native Plant of this
Place, since those who give us an account of it, tell us, that this so much
valued Leaf grows most plentifully in Nanking, a Province in China under the
very same Latitude, and very much agreeing in Soil and Situation with this of
Carolina.

What Herbs else the Country produces, the English Enquirers (who by minding
their Plantations and Settlement there, have been taken off from such
unprofitable Actions) give us but little account, only they say, that those
Plats of Ground which have been formerly cleared off by the Indians for the
Planting their Corn, they found thick covered with three-leav'd Grass and
Dazies, which the fertility of the Soil thrusts forth, whenever the Natives
remove their Tillage to some other place, and leave the Earth to its own
production; and in other parts they found plenty of Garden Herbs growing wild.
The low and Moorish Grounds are for the most part overgrown with Sedge and
Reeds, and such other Trash, which usually incumbers rich and uncultivated
Lands; those they call Swamsas, which with a little Husbandry would prove very
good Meadows. There are also some large and pleasant Savanas, or grassy Plains.

These are a part of the Trees and Plants best known to us, that Nature of her
self produces, in a Soil which contrives and nourishes any thing. The English
who are now Planted in the most Northern parts of it, at Albemarle, bordering
on Virginia, have Apples, Pears, Cherries, Apricocks, Plumbs, and Water-Melons,
equalling, and if you will believe the Inhabitants, both in largeness of size
and goodness of taste, exceeding any in Europe. And they who are Settled farther
South on Ashley River, have found that the Oranges, Lemmons, Pomegranates,
Limes, Pomecitrons, etc. which they Planted there, have thriven beyond
expectation; and there is nothing which they have put into the Earth, that
through any defect in the Soil, has failed to prosper.

Commodines of the Country.
Besides those things which do serve to satisfy Hunger, or provoke it, the Land
does with great return produce Indigo, Ginger, Tobacco, Cotton, and other
Commodities fit to send abroad and furnish foreign Markets; and when a little
time shall have brought those kind of Plants to maturity, and given the
Inhabitants leisure to furnish themselves with Conveniences for ordering those
things aright, the Trials that they have already made of the Soil and its
fitness for such Plantations, assure you, that besides Silk, enough to store
Europe, and a great many other considerable Commodities, they shall have as
great plenty of good Wine and Oil, as any part of the World.

The Mould is generally black, mellow, and upon handling feels soft, and (to
use their Expression who have been there) soapy, and is generally all over the
Country just like the fine Mould of our well ordered Gardens. Under this black
Earth, which is of a good thickness in most places that they have tried, there
lies a Bed of Marle, and in some parts Clay.

Fish and Waterfowl.
The Rivers are stored with plenty of excellent Fish of several sorts, which are
taken with great ease in abundance, and are one great part of the Natives
Provision, who are never like to want this Recruit, in a Country so abounding
in large Rivers, there being in that one small Tract between Port Rasal and
Cape Carteret, which are not one Degree distant, five or six great Navigable
Rivers, that empty themselves into the Sea. These Rivers are also covered with
Flocks of Ducks and Mallard, whereof millions are seen together, besides
Cranes, Herons, Geese, Curlews, and other Waterfowl, who are so easy to be
killed, that only rising at the discharge and noise of a Gun, they instantly
light again in the same place, and presently offer a fresh Mark to the Fowler.
At the Mouths of the Rivers, and along the Seacoast, are Beds of Oysters,
which are of a longer Make than those in Europe, but very well tasted, wherein
are often found good large Pearls, which though the unskilful Indians by
washing the Oysters do commonly discolor, and spoil their luster, yet it is not
to be doubted, but if rightly ordered, there will be found many of value, and
the Fishing for them turn to some account.

Besides the easy Provisions which the Rivers and Sea afford, their Woods are
well stocked with Deer, Rabbets, Hares, Turtle-Doves, Phesants, Partridges, and
an infinite number of Wood-Pigeons and wild Turkies, which are the ordinary
Dishes of the Indians, whose Housekeeping depends on their Fishing and
Hunting, and who have found it no ill way of Living in so fertile a Country,
to trust themselves without any labor or forecast, to the Supplies which are
there provided to their hands, without the continual trouble of Tillage and
Husbandry. Besides, these Woods are filled with innumerable variety of smaller
Birds, as different in their Notes as Kinds.

Temperatine of the Cl^mate.
The Temperature of this Province is agreeable to a Country, whose Position is
on the warmer side of the temperate Zone, but yet the Heat is not so sultry nor
offensive, as in Places under the same Latitude in the Old World; to which
moderation of Heat, as well as the healthiness of it, the vast Atlantic Ocean,
lying to the East and South of it, may perhaps not a little contribute, an
instance whereof some think China to be; to which deservedly admired Country
Carolina exactly answers in its Position and Latitude, the trending from
North-East to South-West of its Coast, and the lowness of its Shore, and wants
nothing but Inhabitants, to make it equal, if not excel, in all conveniences
of Life, as it does in richness of Soil, that flourishing Empire. The
healthiness of the Air is such, that it is not only benign and favorable to
the homebred Indians, and Constitutions accustomed to it, but the Englishmen
who first Planted on Ashley River, though for some other Conveniences they
Planted on the side, or almost middle of a Morass, and were encompassed with a
salt Marsh, where the Air, pent up with Woods that surrounded them, had not
that freedom it has in open and cultivated Countries, yet lost not in a whole
years time, of a considerable number, any one Person, of any Disease to be
imputed to the Country, those few that died in that time sinking under
lingering Distempers which they brought with them, and had almost worn them out
before they came thither. The Bermudians (who being accustomed to the pure Air
of their own Island, cannot without hazard of their Lives put themselves into
any other Place) assured of the healthiness of this Place, which is the next
Land to them, and under the same Latitude, venture hither. And generally all
the English Planting in the West Indies, are so taken with the Conveniences of
this Country, which, as some of the most considerable of the English in those
Parts say of it, promises all that the Heart of Man can wish, that they send
the overplus of their People hither; to which the Inhabitants of Barbados, a
skilful and wary sort of Planters, well knowing in all the parts of the
West Indies, have been found to remove the Hands they could spare. As the
Summer is not intolerably nor offensively hot, so the Winter is not troublesome
nor pinching, but enough to correct the Humors of Men's Bodies, the better to
strengthen them, and preserve their Healths; and so far to check the growth of
Plants, that by this stop they may put out more regularly, and the Corn and
other Fruits the better ripen together, and be ready seasonably at the Harvest,
the want whereof in some Countries hinders the beneficial Growth of several
valuable Commodities, the continual Spring all the year long making that their
Crops are never ready, their Trees being laden with green and ripe Fruit at the
same time, which is to be seen in the Vines growing between the Tropicks,
where, though they bear excellent Grapes, yet they cannot make any Wine,
whilst the mixture of ripe and sour Grapes upon the same Branch, renders them
unfit for the Press, which from Grapes so blended, though of a good kind, would
squeeze out a very crude and useless Liquor. This also is the reason why many
Parts where our Wheat will grow very well, do yet lose the benefit of it,
whilst the several Ears ripening unequally, never make the Crop fit for the
Sickle. But this Country has Winter enough to remove that Inconvenience, and
to put such a stop to the Rise of the Sap, and the Budding of Plants, as to
make the several kinds of Fruits Bud and Blossom in their distinct Seasons, and
keep even pace till they are fit to be gathered.

Nature, Constitutions, and Manners of the Inhabitants.
To this happy Climate the native Inhabitants are very well suited, a strong,
lusty, and well shaped People, who to their well knit and active Bodies, want
not stout and vigorous Minds; they are a People of a good Understanding, well
Humor'd, and generally so just and Honest, that they may seem to have no notice
of, as their Language has no word for, Dishonesty and Cheating; and the worst
Name they have for ill Men is, that they are not good. They are a stout and
valiant People, which appears in the constant Wars they are engaged in, not out
of covetousness, and a desire of usurping others Possessions, or to enrich
themselves by the Spoils of their Neighbors, but upon a pitch of Honor, and for
the glory of Victory, which is their greatest joy, there being no parts of
their Lives wherein they enjoy so much satisfaction, and give themselves so
wholly to Jollity, as in their Triumphs after Victory. Valor therefore is the
Virtue they most esteem and reward, and he which has behaved himself well in
the Wars, is suffered to wear the Badges of Honor, and is advanced beyond
others with some Marks of his Courage; which amongst some is blacking the Skin
below his Eyes, with black Lead, in fashion something of an Half Moon; which
Mark of Courage is, not suffered to be worn by any, but those who by some brave
Action, as killing the Enemy's Leader, etc. has signalized himself in their
Encounters. They are faithful to their Promises, fair and candid in their
Dealings, and so far from Dishonesty, that they want even the Seeds of it, viz.
Forecast and Covetousness; and he will be very little apt to deceive you to
Day, who troubles not himself much about to Morrow, and trusts for the
Provisions of the Day to the Day it self; which proceeds not in them for want
of Wit, but desire of Content and Quiet, or by the help of their natural Reason
they enjoy that Happiness which the Philosophers could not by their Study and
Reading attain to, whilst these Men cut off those Desires which Learning could
never help the other to Govern, and which if once permitted to run out beyond
the present, are capable of no rest nor Bounds. In their Conversation they are
courteous and civil, and in their Visits make Presents to one another; when
they meet, their way of Salutation is stroaking on the Shoulders, and sucking
in their Breath; and if he be a great Man whom they Salute, they stroke his
Thighs too; as civil an Address, as those Patterns of good Breeding, the
Hero's, used to their Princes, who in their greatest Courtships, we are told,
embraced their Knees: After their Salutation they sit down; and it is usual
with them to sit still almost a quarter of an hour before they speak, which is
not an effect of stupidity or sullenness, but the accustomed Gravity of their
Country; for they are in their Tempers a merry, frollick, gay People, and so
given to Jollity, that they will Dance whole Nights together, the Women sitting
by and Singing, whilst the Men Dance to their Ayrs, which though not like
ours, are not harsh or unpleasing, but are something like the Tunes of the
Irish: So that if we will not let our selves too fondly admire only the
Customs we have been bred up in, nor think Men are to be valued for making Legs
after our Mode, or the Clothes they wear, which, the finer and gayer they are,
always the more to be suspected of Luxury and Effeminateness; if we will allow
but these Men to follow the Garbs of their own Country, and think them fine
enough in a shape only to hide their Nakedness before, or a Deer-skin hanging
loosely on their Shoulders, and their Women not ill Dressed in Garments of
Moss, and Necklaces of Beads, whilst the Fashion of their Courts require no
other Ornaments; if, I say, a long and pleasant Life, without Distemper or
Care, be to be valued, without the encumbrance of unnecessary Trinkets; if Men
are to be esteemed for Valor, Honesty, Friendship, Humanity and good Nature,
though Strangers to the ceremonious Troubles we are accustomed to, the Natives
of Carolina will as little, or perhaps less, deserve the Name of Miserable, or
Salvage, as those that give it them. It Is true, the French and Spaniards who
have Planted amongst them, or with little Armies traveled their Country, have
been ill handled by them; but yet the Indians never did them any harm, or
treated them otherwise than Friends, till those Europeans by their breach of
Faith and several Outrages, had provoked their just Revenge; and they did
nothing but what most virtuous and generous sort of Men are apt to do, to
revenge those Affronts, which did not agree with their Tempers tamely to
endure. That this did not proceed from treachery and inconstancy in their
Natures, is apparent in the contrary Correspondence they have had with the
English Settled amongst them, to whom they have been all along very kind, as
they were at first very covetous of their Company; for after that some of their
King's Relation had been at Barbados, and had seen and admired the Temper,
Fashions, and Strength of the English there, and had been very civilly Treated
in that Island, they were so well satisfied with them, that at the coming of
the English to Settle there, the several little Kingdoms strove with all the
Arts and Arguments they could use, each of them to draw the English to Plant in
their Dominions, by commending the richness of their Soil, convenience of their
Rivers, the healthiness of their Country, the disparagement of their
Neighbors, and whatever else they judged might allure the English to their
Neighborhood. Nor was this only the first heat of Men fond of Novelties, and
as soon weary of them again, but ever since the English first Planted at
Albemarle Point, on Ashley River, they have continued to do them all manner of
friendly Offices, ready on all occasions to supply them with any thing they
have observed them to want, not making use of our Men's Necessities, as an
opportunity to enhance the Price of their Commodities, a sort of fair Dealing
we could scarce have promised them amongst civilized, well bred, and religious
Inhabitants of any part of Europe; and though they are much frighted with our
Guns, both small and great, yet like innocent and well-meaning People, they do
not at all distrust our Power, but freely, without suspicion, trust themselves,
both Men and Women, even their Kings themselves, in our Town, Lodging and
Dancing there frequently whole Nights together, upon no other Pledges but the
bare confidence of our mutual Friendship; nor do our Men use any greater
caution in Conversing with them, straggling up and down, and traveling singly
and unarmed through their Woods for many Miles about, and are so far from
receiving any injury or ill treatment from them, that on the contrary they are
kindly used and Entertained, and guided by them in their Way whenever they
desire it; and when any of our Men meet them in their Walks, the Indians all
stand still till they are gone by, civilly Saluting them as they pass. Nor does
this Assurance of theirs bound it self within their own Homes, they of their
own accords venturing themselves aboard our Ships, have gone voluntarily with
our Men to Virginia and Barbados. Nor have the English been wanting on their
parts in any thing that may preserve this Amity, being very cautious of doing
them any injury, bartering with them for those things they receive of them, and
buying of them even the waste Land they make no use of.

Besides the simplicity of the Indians Diet, it is very remarkable, that they
have a general aversion to those two things which are most acceptable to our
Palates, and without which few of us either eat or drink with any delight; for
in their Meats they cannot endure the least mixture or relish of Salt; and for
their Drink, they utterly abominate all manner of strong Liquor; to the latter
whereof, their large Growth and constant Health, is perhaps not a little owing.

Their manner of Government.
Every little Town is a distinct Principality, Governed by an Hereditary King,
who in some places is not Son, but Sisters Son to the precedent King, the
Succession of the Blood Royal being continued by the safer side. The great
Business of those Princes is to lead their Men out against their Enemies in
War, or against the Beasts in Hunting; for unless it be to appoint them where
to Hunt, or else to Consult about making some Attempt upon their Enemy, he has
but small trouble in the Government of his Subjects, who either through their
own Honesty, or the few occasions they have for Controversies in their
extempore way of Living, need few Laws, and little Severity to keep them in
order; but yet they Govern their People without Contract, and fail not of a
ready Obedience to their Commands; so that when some of them have bought things
of such of the English, who by the Orders made amongst our selves were not to
Traffic with the Indians, they have, upon Complaint made to their Casiques,
been restored again, though in strict Rules of Law they were neither bound by,
nor obliged to take notice of the Rules which were made only to Govern our own
People, and had at just Prices bought what they carried away; such is the
Honesty of Men, whose Principles not being corrupted with Learning and
Distinction, are contented to follow the Dictates of right Reason, which Nature
has sufficiently taught all Men for the well ordering of their Actions, and
enjoyment and preservation of humane Society, who do not give themselves up to
be amused and deceived by insignificant Terms, and minding what is just and
right, seek not Evasions in the Niceties and Fallacies of Words.

Carolina granted by Patent to several Noble Persons by His Majesty.
The same is to be said of the first discovery of this Country, as has been
formerly said of Virginia and Florida, of both which it partakes; but as to the
present Interest and Propriety, the English, besides all Virginia entirely,
have also so much of Florida as makes up this considerable Province of
Carolina, which soon after, the happy Restoration of His present Majesty King
Charles II. from whom it receives Denomination, was granted by Patent to Edward
Earl of Clarendon, L. Chancellor of England, George Duke of Albemarle, William
Earl of Craven, John Lord Berkley, Anthony Lord Ashley, Sir George Carteret,
Vice-Chamberlain of His Majesty's Household, Sir William Berkley, Knight and
Baronet, and Sir John Colleton, Knight and Baronet.

The Lords-Proprietors of this Country, for the better Settlement of it
according to their Patent granted unto them by His Majesty, and for the
enlargement of the King's Dominions in those parts of America, have been at
great Charge to secure this so rich and advantageous a Country to the Crown of
England, to whom of ancient Right, by the Discovery of Sir Sebastian Cabott in
the time of Henry the Seventh, it does belong, and for its Situation,
Fertility, Neighborhood to our other Plantations and several other
Conveniences, of too valuable consideration to be negligently lost: By the Care
therefore and Endeavors of those Great Men, Their care for Settling and
Improving of this Plantation.
it has now two considerable Colonies Planted in it, the one of Albemarle, on
the North side, bordering on Virginia, where are some hundreds of English
Families removed thither from New England, and some of our other Plantations in
the West Indies; and another toward the middle of the Country, at
Charlestown, or Ashley-River, a Settlement so hopeful, for the healthiness of
the Land, and convenience of access by a large deep Navigable River, and so
promising in its very Infancy, that many of the rich Inhabitants of Barbados
and Bermudas, who are now crowded up in those flourishing Islands, and many in
our other American Plantations, are turning their Eyes and Thoughts this way,
and have already removed part of their Stock and Servants thither. Nor is it to
be doubted, but that many, following the Example of those who went to
Albemarle, will be drawn to this better Plantation at Ashley-River, from
New England, where the heat of their Zeal, and the coldness of the Air, does
not agree with every Man's Constitution; and therefore it is to be thought,
that many well tempered Men, who are not much at ease under such Extremes, will
be forward to remove hither.

Fair Terms proposed to whomsoever shall remove thither.
The Lords-Proprietors, for the comfortable subsistence, and future enrichment
of all those who shall this Year 1671. Transport themselves and Servants
thither, allow every Man a hundred Acres per Head, for himself, his Wife,
Children and Servants, he carries thither, to him and his Heirs for ever,
paying only one Penny an Acre, as a Chief-Rent; which Penny an Acre is not to be
paid these nineteen years; and those Servants who go along thither with their
Masters, shall each also have a hundred Acres upon the same Terms, when he is
out of his Time. But though these Conditions are very advantageous, and the
Country promises to the Planter Health, Plenty and Riches at a cheap Rate, yet
there is one thing that makes this Plantation more valuable than all these, and
that is the secure possession of all these things with as great certainty as
the state of humane Affairs, and the transient things of this Life are capable
of, in a well continued Form of Government, wherein it is made every Man's
Interest to preserve the Rights of his Neighbor with his own; and those who
have the greatest Power, have it limited to the Service of the Country, the
Good and Welfare whereof whilst they preserve and promote, they cannot miss of
their own, the Lords. Proprietors having no other aim, than to be the greatest
Men in a Country where every one may be happy if it be not his own fault, it
being almost as uncomfortable, and much more unsafe, to be Lord over, than
Companion of a miserable, unhappy, and discontented Society of Men.

With this Design the Lords-Proprietors, who are at great Charge for carrying
on this Plantation, have put the framing of a Government into the Hands of one,
whose Parts and Experience in Affairs of State are universally agreed on, and
who is by all Men allowed to know what is convenient for the right ordering Men
in Society, and settling a Government upon such Foundations, as may be equal,
safe, and lasting; and to this has a Soul large enough to wish well to
Mankind, and to desire, that all the People where he has to do might be happy.
My Lord Ashley therefore, by the consent of his Brethren, the rest of the Lords
Proprietors, has drawn up, to their general satisfaction, some fundamental
Constitutions, which are since, by their joint approbation, confirmed to be the
Model and Form of Government in the Province of Carolina; the main Design and
Balance thereof (according to the best of my memory, having had a Copy
thereof) in short is as follows:

The Model drawn up by the Lord Ashley for the Government of Carolina.
1. EVery County is to consist of forty square Plots, each containing twelve
thousand Acres. Of these square Plots each of the Proprietors is to have one,
which is to be called a Signiory. Eight more of these square Plots are to be
divided amongst the three Noblemen of that County, viz. a Landgrave, who is to
have four of them; and two Casiques, who are to have each of them two apiece;
and these square Plots belonging to the Nobility, are to be called Baronies.
The other twenty four square Plots, called Colonies, are to be the Possession
of the People: And this Method is to be observed in the Planting and Setting
out of the whole Country; so that one Fifth of the Land is to be in the
Proprietors, one Fifth in the Nobility, and three Fifths in the People,

2. The Signories and Baronies, that is, the hereditary Lands belonging to the
Proprietors and Nobility, are all entirely to descend to their Heirs, with the
Dignity, without power of alienation, more than for three Lives, or one and
twenty years, or two Thirds of their Signiories and Baronies, and the rest to
be Demesne.

3. There will be also some Manors in the Colonies, but none less than three
thousand Acres in a Piece, which, like the rest of the Colony Lands, will be
alienable, only with this difference, that it cannot be parcell'd out, but if
fold, it must be altogether.

4. There is to be a Biennial Parliament, consisting of the eight Proprietors,
the Landgraves and Casiques, and one out of every Precinct, that is the six
neighboring Colonies, for the People, chosen by the Freeholders; these are to
sit and Vote altogether for the making of Laws, which shall be in force no
longer than sixty years after their Enacting, the great mischief of most
Governments, by which not only the People are mightily entangled by
multiplicity of Rules and Penalties, and thereby laid open to the Malice and
Designs of troublesome Men and cunning Projectors; but, which is far worse, the
whole frame of the Government in tract of time comes to be removed from its
original Foundation, and thereby becomes more weak and tottering.

5. There are eight supreme Courts for the dispatch of all public Affairs; the
first consists of the Palatine, who is the eldest of the Proprietors, and has
power to call Parliaments, and dispose of public Offices. The other seven
supreme Courts are, 1. The chief Justices for the determining of Controversies
of Meunt and Tuum, and judging of Criminals. 2. The Chancellors, for passing of
Charters, and managing the State Matters of the Province. 3. The
High-Constables, for Military Affairs. 4. The Admirals, for Maritime Affairs.
5. The High-Stewards, for Trade. 6. The Treasurers, for the public Stock; and
7. The Chamberlains, for Ceremonies, Fashions, Marriages, Burials, etc. These
are the seven supreme Courts, to whom lies the ultimate Appeal in all Causes
belonging to them. Each of these Courts consists of one Proprietor, and six
other Counselors, whereof two are chosen by the Nobility, and two by the
People. All the number of these eight Courts joined together make the Grand
Council, which are in the nature of a Council of State, and are entrusted with
the management of Affairs of greatest concernment. There is also in every
County a Court, and in every Precinct another; from the Precinct Court there
lies an Appeal to the County Court, and from the County Court to the
Proprietors Court, to which the Matter in question belongs, and there is the
last decision and determination thereof, without any farther Appeal. And to
keep the People from the Charges and vexation of long Suits, to the enriching
of Men cunning in Words, care is taken, that no Cause shall be Tried more than
once in any one Court, and that professed Pleaders for Money shall not be
allowed.

Liberty of Conscience is here also allowed in the greatest latitude, but yet
so, that neither Atheists, or Men of no Religion, are permitted; Atheism,
Irreligion, and vicious Lives being condemned, as disagreeable to humane
Nature, inconsistent with Government and Societies, and destructive to all that
is useful to, or becoming of Mankind; as on the other hand, rigorous Imposing
of, and hot Contentions about the Ceremonies and Circumstances of Religion, is
an occasion of perpetual Strife, Faction and Division, keeps Men from sedate
and temperate Enquiries after Truth, eats out the great Cement of humane
Conversation, Charity, and cannot be found in any one, who has but modesty
enough to think himself less than a Pope, and short of Infallibility.

There is also to be a Register of all Grants and Conveyances of Land, to
prevent even the occasions of Controversies and Lawsuits.

There are several other less considerable Particulars in this Government, all
contrived and designed for the good and welfare of the People; all which are so
well put together, and in such equal proportion balance each other, that some
judicious Men who have seen it, say, it is the best and fairest Frame, for the
well-being of those who shall live under it, of any they have seen or read of.

CHAP. III. Florida.
Situation and Bounds.
SOuth-West of Virginia lies the spacious Country of Florida, remarkable
hitherto rather by the great pains which the Spaniards have taken, and the ill
Successes they have met with in the discovery and search of this Province, than
by any thing else they have discovered in it answerable to their desires. On
the East it has the Atlantic Ocean, or Mare del Nordt; on the South, and
South-West, the Gulf of Mexico and Mare Virginium; and full West, part of New
Gallicia, and some other Countries, not yet perfectly known.

This Country is also one of those, said to have been first of all discovered
by Sir Sebastian Cabot, at the Charges of the King of England, about the Year
1497. but afterward more thoroughly searched into by John some de Leon, a
Spaniard, Ponce's Expedition.
who in the Year 1511. set Sail with three Ships out of the Haven St. German in
Porto Rico, North-West to the Isles Del Veio, Caycos, Yaguna, Amaguyao,
Manegua, and Guanahani, first discovered by Christopher Colonus, and called St.
Salvador: After that Steered North-West by a Coast, which (because of its
pleasant prospect) was called Florida, or (according to the more common
Opinion) because it was on Palm Sunday, which the Spaniards call Pascha de
Flores, or Pascha Florida) that he Landed here: And to find out a Haven he kept
sight of the Shore, which appeared South-West from him. Here the Ships met with
so strong a Tide, that notwithstanding they had a fresh Gale of Wind, yet could
they not stem it; one of the Ships was driven to Sea out of sight; the other
two casting Anchor, which raking, drove toward the Shore; whither, being
beckned by the Indians, they immediately went; when no sooner he Landed, but
they ran in great Companies to make themselves Masters of the Vessels, killed
one Spaniard, wounded two more: the Night approaching put an end to the Fight.
From hence Sailing to the River La Cruix for Wood and Water, they were resisted
by sixty Natives, which they put to flight with their Guns, and took one
Prisoner; after which they erected a Stone Cross. The Promontory, by which
glides the strong Current, lies in twenty Degrees North-Latitude, and called
Cabo de Corrientes, as the Row of Isles, before the Main Land Los Martyrs,
because the Cliffs at a distance appear like Men standing on Poles. Lastly,
after some small Encounters with the Floridans, Ponce returned home, Water to
make old People look young.
being only informed falsely by the Indians, that in Florida was a River, and
on the Isle Bimini a Fountain, whose Waters made old People young.

Vasquez's Expedition to Florida.
But after this Florida remained not unvisited; for eight years after the
forementioned Voyage, Lucas Vasquez de Aylom weighed Anchor with two Ships from
Hispaniola, to fetch Slaves from the adjacent Isles for the Gold-Mines, which
Labor the Natives were not able to perform: therefore steering his Course
Northwardly, he Sailed along the Coast of Chicoa and Gualdape, by them called
Cabo de St. Helena, and Rio Jordan, where the Natives looked upon the Ships as
Sea Monsters, and seeing Bearded Men in them, fled: the Spaniards pursuing
them, overtook one Man and a Woman; who being well Entertained, and Clad in
Spanish Habits, made the Strangers so acceptable to their Contrymen, that
their King sent fifty Men Aboard of them with Provisions, and to invite the
Seamen to his Dominions. The King sat with a great Cloth about him, Habit of a
Floridan King.
made fast on his Shoulders, covering his Belly, Breast and Back with the
Lappet thereof, and being long, was held up by one of his Servants; over one of
his Shoulders hung a String of Pearl that came three times about, and reached
down to his Thighs; on his Head he wore a Cap full of Ribbonds; his Arms and
Legs were also surrounded with a double Chain of Pearl; in his right Hand he
held a very rich Staff: But the Queen went almost naked, only a piece of a
wild Beasts Skin hung down before her from her left Shoulder to her mid-Leg,
and a double String of Pearl about her Neck hung down between her Breast, and
her Hair Combed behind reached down to the Calves of her Legs; about her Wrists
and Ancles hung also Strings of Pearl.

On the King's Command, the Spaniards were permitted to make inspection into
the Country, in which they were every where courteously Entertained, and not
without Gold and Silver Presents. Treachery of Vasquez.
Returning Aboard, Vasquez invited the. Indians to go with him, under pretense
of returning them thanks for the Favors which they had bestowed upon him; but
no sooner had he gotten a considerable number in his Ships, but he set Sail,
and losing one Ship, arrived with the other safe at Hispaniola with a few
Indians, Indians misused.
for most of them with grief and hunger died at Sea, and those that remained
alive, lived on dead Carrion.

Some few years after, Vasquez receiving Letters Patent from the Court of Spain
for the Government of Florida, fitted out a Ship thither in 1620. which brought
a good Return of Gold, Silver, and Pearls; whereupon he himself went not long
after, and coming into the River Jordan, lost one of his Ships, which proved
not the worst Accident; Vasquez defeated by the Floridans.
for Landing two hundred Men, they were all of them either slain or wounded by
the Inhabitants; so that Vasquez was forced to sound a Retreat: And after that
the Spaniards were less willingly drawn to that Coast, and the rather, because
the Inhabitants seemed poor, and had little Gold but what they procured from
the Otapales and Olugatono's, sixty Leagues Northward up in the Country.

Narvaez his Expedition.
Notwithstanding these unsuccessful Expeditions, Pamphilus Narvaez retained so
much Courage, that obtaining Letters Patents from the Emperor Charles the
Fifth, map of coast between Florida and Virginia VIRGINIAE partis australis et
FLORIDAE partis orientalis, inten^^^ ce^ti^^^que region NOVA^^ DESCR^^^
he fitted but four Sail and a Brigantine, weighed Anchor from Cuba with six
hundred Men and eighty Horse, in the Year 1528. On Florida he Landed three
hundred Foot and forty two Horse; they found many empty Huts, Strange Booty.
but in a great House a golden Bell hid amongst the Nets, Chests full of
Merchandise; and in each a dead Body covered with Beast Skins, and painted;
Pieces of Linen Cloth, and Wedges of Gold, which they had from the remote
Country Apalache. Narvaez, though against the Opinion of Nunnez Cabeca,
marched up into the Country, whilst the Fleet was to stand along the Shore,
and traveling fifteen days saw neither House nor Man, only here and there
some Palmito-Trees: Crossing a River on Floats, they were Encountered by two
hundred of the Natives; of which the Spaniards, having routed them, took six
Prisoners, who furnished them plentifully with Indian Wheat. After this they
marched fifteen days farther, without discerning the least foot-step of a Man;
but at last they met an Indian Lord with a considerable Train, before whom
marched several Pipers: being told by Narvaez that his Journey was for
Apalache, he conducted the Spaniards with a Canoo over a River, and Landing
again, walked with them to his Village, where he Entertained them with great
civility. Narv aez, after a long and troublesome Journey, came at last in sight
of Apalache, a Village which contained two hundred and forty Straw Houses,
built between the Mountains on a Moorish Soil, full of Nut, Pine, and
Savine-Trees, Oaks, Laurel, and short Palmito's, besides the Trees, which blown
down in several places by a strong Wind from between the Hills, and lying
cross, cumber the Highways: There are many deep Pools, and also Bears, Lions,
and other ravenous Creatures, which make the Ways very dangerous. Narvaez
falling suddenly on the Village, took the Casique Prisoner, as also store of
Wheat, Mortars to pound it, Hides, and Thredspun Cloaks. Here he rested twenty
five days, during which time some of his Men Journey'd farther into the
Country, yet found none but poor People, troublesome Ways, and an unfruitful
Soil: twice they were set upon by the Natives, who killed some of the Horses
and Men: They being a very strong People run stark naked, and as swift as a
Deer, Diving under Water from the Spaniards Bullets; which not a little amazing
Narvaez, he thought it convenient to set upon the Village Aute, lying on the
Shore: He is in great extremity,
Nine days he was in a miserable condition before he got any Wheat, Pease, or
other Provisions from this Village; the getting whereof cost him very dear, for
the Villagers behaved themselves so valiantly, that they killed many Spaniards,
and some of their Horses, which since they left the Haven of St. Cruce had
traveled two hundred and eighty Leagues; so that being tired and out of heart,
they could not carry the Sick and Wounded, who not able to go, fell down dead
in the Way: whereupon it was judged convenient to make five Barques, in which
they made their Shirts serve for Sails, the Horses Tails and Mayns for Ropes,
their Skins to hold fresh Water; with which putting out to Sea, they saw no
Land in seven days; and running through the Straights of St. Miguell, Steered
along the Coast of Rio del Palms; where they suffered great Drought, insomuch
that some drinking salt Water, died thereof: at last Landing, they were in the
Night set upon by a Casique, who having given Narvaez a great Wound in the
Face, fled, leaving behind him a Sable Cloak, scented with Amber; three days
they ranged again along the Seashore, when the Barque of Nunnez Cabeca being
behind, was by Storm driven on the Shore, where a hundred Indians waited to cut
them off, Cabeca it Stranded.
but were pacified with some Trifles: Thus being bereaved of Arms, Provision,
and all manner of Necessaries, they found themselves on an Isle, by the
Inhabitants called Malhado, where they were lodged and maintained so long as
they had any thing left; but Famine grew at last to such a height, His strange
Entertainment at Malhado.
that they devoured one another, and in a short time of eighty Men there
remained only four alive, viz. Nunnez Cabeca, Castillo, Orantes, and
Estevanico, who at last by Land reached to New Gallicia, and soon after to
Mexico, having escaped a thousand Dangers. Of Pamphilus Narvaez never any
tidings being heard, it is supposed he was drowned.

Sottus's Expedition very remarkable.
After this miserable Adventure, the Business of Florida lay dead for eleven
years, till Ferdinandus Sottus, chosen Governor of Cuba, obtained so much of
the Emperor Charles the Fifth, that he ventured one Expedition more for
Florida: Besides Seamen he carried five hundred Foot, and three hundred and
fity Horse; with which Landing in the Bay Del Espirito Santo, he marched
against the Casique Vitacucho, whom he took Prisoner, with a thousand of the
Natives, whom he either put to the Sword, or caused them to be torn in pieces
by Dogs; and staying all the Winter in Apalache, fortified that place, and
furnished himself with Provisions; he was informed, that thirteen days Journey
from thence lay the Kingdom of Cofachiqui, abounding with Gold, Silver, and
Pearls, which made every one of the Spaniards very desirous to go thither,
notwithstanding the Way was very dangerous; for the valiant Floridans lying in
Ambuscade in the Cornfieldsd, wounded and killed many of them by Shooting from
thence. Sottus, so soon as March approached, set forward on his Way. In the
poor Province of Achalaqui he found a few young People, and the old most of
them blind. Strange dealing of the Cofachiquians.
From Cofachiqui he was followed by four thousand Natives, who carried the
Spaniards Luggage, and served them as Guides through Woods and Wilderhesses.
The seventh day they stopped at a great River, whither Sottus sent four
Companies to seek out a Passage over, whereof three returned without any
effect, but the fourth, Commanded by Captain Annasio, and a Colonel of a
thousand Cofachiquians, came to a Village built along the River; in which they
made a a miserable Rout, killing all they lighted on, and hanging the Sculls of
the Dead by their sides: this done, they marched back. Sottus at last espying a
Village on the other side of the River, beckned to the Natives to come over to
him; whereupon six came immediately; who understanding that he desired their
friendly. Assistance and Trade, A Maid Governs the Country.
promised to acquaint their Governess, being a young Maiden: who soon after
came over to Sottus, and presented him with a String of Pearl: he complained to
her for Provisions, which she promised in part to store him with. Crossing the
River he found a brave Country, where were Pearls as big as gray Pease, Copper
of a golden color, Great Treasure of Pearls.
but no Gold. Out of the Tombs of their Princes the Spanish Officers, with the
leave of the forementioned Maid their Governess, got an incredible Treasure in
Pearls. In the Village Tolomeco they did the like. But here their Provisions
growing scarce, the Army was divided into two Bodies, Balthazar de Gallegos
leading one, and Sottus the other; yet the Design of them both was on the
Province of Chalaque; whither marching, they were surprised by such a violent
Storm, Great Tempest.
that few would have been left to relate their Adventures, had not the Trees
bore it off from them; for it not only Thundered and Lightened as if Heaven and
Earth would have met, but also Hailstones fell down as big as Eggs, which beat
down the Boughs of Trees. In the pleasant Valley Xualu, belonging to the
Kingdom of Cofachiqui, they rested fifteen days, and then marched through
Countries of Guaxale, Sottus's farther Journey very remarkable.
Acostes, and Coza, where above a thousand Indians, adorned with Plumes of
Feathers and rich Furr Cloaks, came to meet and welcome them, and to desire them
from the Casique to stay there all the Winter; but Sottus resolving to go to
the Haven Achusi, refused the same. After this he viewed Talisse, fortified
with wooden and earthen Bulwarks; where the Casique Tascalusa, a Man as big
again as an ordinary Spaniard, The City Mavilla.
received Sottus with great civility, and conducted him to Mavilla, lying in a
pleasant place. The City, surrounded with double Pallisado's, filled up with
Earth between, (where also at eighty Paces distant from one another, stands a
Tower to contain eighty Soldiers) has two Gates, eighty Houses, in every one
of which dwell a thousand Men, and a large Marketplace in the middle; where
whilst the Spaniards were in the midst of their Mirth, they on a sudden heard a
great cry of Arms; the first Assault was made by seven thousand, which still
increased by fresh Supplies; but the Spaniards at last setting the City on
fire, Cruel Fight.
broke through them, and left above eleven thousand slain, either by the Smoke
and Flame, or by their Bullets, Swords, Horses Heels and Dogs; the Spaniards
also lost eighty three Men and forty three Horses. Thence going to Chicora they
were stopped by the Natives before a deep River with high Banks, which at last
crossing, not without great trouble and bloodshedding, they Wintered in the
Village Chicora, where the Inhabitants let them rest very quietly for two
Months; at the end of which, joining together in the Night, they shot Fire
into the Straw Roofs, and maintained a Fight of two hours long, in which the
Spaniards lost forty Men, fifty Horses, and all their Hogs, which were burnt in
the Houses. From thence going to Chicacolla they were resisted in most places,
and in the Fort Alibamo Engaged by four thousand Floridans, who waited for
their coming; but those were so shrewdly handled, that half of them were slain,
and Sottus became Master of the Fort, as also of Chisca, which he Stormed and
took unawares. With no less trouble and danger did he get over the River El
Grande, where he discovered a Village that contained above four hundred Houses,
and many delightful Fruit Trees. The Casique Casquin, maintained the Spanish
Army six days in this place, and taking five thousand of his Subjects, marched
with them to Capaha, which has a deep and broad Moat on three sides thereof:
the fourth was fortified with strong Pallisado's, through which the Spaniards
breaking, made way for Casquin, who put all to the Sword, the Governor only
escaping in a Canoo to a neighboring Isle. The Entrance being thus taken by he
Spaniards, Casquin returned home. After which Sottus concluded a Peace with
Capahaes, the Governor, and took up his Quarters in the Village Vitangue, where
he received continual Sallies; but taking fifteen Casiques Prisoners, threatened
to burn them alive, unless they would procure them some Gold; yet not being
able to get any, they had only their Hands cut off and were sent away.
Moreover, Sottus helped the Guachacoya's, to ruin those of Anilco; which
Design proved successful, yet not according to Sottus's desire, for he found
not the Gold-Mines which he expected, but spent in this five years Progress the
great Treasure which he took out of Atibaliba's Palace; and the Pearls which he
got in Florida, for the Oysters being opened against the Fire, and the Pearls
drilled through with a hot Iron, lost much of their luster, neither would his
People consent to build a City in the Haven Achusi. Sottus dies.
In the midst of these Transactions Sottus died of the Bloody Flux, and his
Body was Interred in the River El Grande. After which his Successor Ludovicus
de Alvarado had worse success, for half of the Army being wasted by the
excessive heat, the rest resolved to desert Florida, utterly despairing to be
ever able to resist the valiant Natives. In the Province of Auche they procured
a Guide, whom, because he misled them in their Way, they caused to be torn in
pieces by their Dogs: after which they marched without a Guide through such bad
Ways, that they lost a hundred of their Men and eighty Horses, besides many
Floridans that carried their Luggage: At last coming to the River El Grande
they conquered two Villages; which fortifying, they took up their Winter
Quarters in them. But this being the fourteenth year, in which the River used
generally to overflow and drown all the adjacent Countries, on a sudden, to
their great amazement, the Wood which they had gathered for the building of
Barques to carry them home, was washed away, their Provisions spoiled, and
their Habitations drowned: and to this inconvenience was added another yet
greater; for the Governors round about raised all the Forces they could
possibly, to revenge themselves on the Spaniards for their great oppression.
But Alvarado being informed of this Design by the Casique Anilco, caused thirty
of the Abettors of the Plot to have their Hands cut off. Not long after this
the Spaniards set Sail, when a thousand Canoos that came to Engage them lay
sixteen days amongst them, Strange Fight.
killing and wounding several of the Seamen, and sunk a Barque with forty eight
Men, and also killed many Horses which were yet on the Shore; the Prisoners
they took were strappado'd to death, and the Horses shot: yet some of them got
safe from Panuco to Mexico.

Expedition of Ahumada and Samano.
These abovementioned Expeditions to Florida, notwithstanding they fell out
unfortunately, nevertheless by the permission of Philip the Second, King of
Spain, Peter Ahumada and Julius Samano, with five Dominican Monks, made another
Attempt, and Landed with several great Crosses, that thereby they might reduce
the Floridans, whose Language they understood not, to their Faith: But they
fearing treachery, resisted them, and killed the Monks with Clubs, flayed them,
and hung their Skins in their Temples.

The Expedition of Menendez.
Notwithstanding these and many worse Accidents that happened, yet the Spanish
King ventured once more, and sent Peter Menendez to Florida; whither he was
followed by three Jesuits from Rome, viz. Peter Martinius, Joan Roger, and
Francis Villaregius: The Master of the Ship in which they went being ignorant
where he was, judged it convenient to Land; whereupon nine Netherlanders and
four Spaniards, amongst which was Martinius, went ashore on Florida, whilst a
Storm arising drove the Ship to Cuba; by which means those that were Landed
were left in a miserable condition, having no Food but wild Herbs, on which
they fed twelve days: so that this Expedition also came to nothing.

Voyage of Ribald and Ladoniere.
At last the French following the footsteps of the Spaniards, John Ribald and
Ren^ Laudoniere having Sailed several times to Florida, discovered several
Coasts; but their Men were often set upon by the Spaniards, and cut off.

The Expedition of Dominicus Gurgius.
Anno 1567. Dominicus Gurgius set Sail thither with three Ships, which carried
two hundred Soldiers and eighty Seamen; with which entering the River
Tacatucouru he Landed, and found a Youth called Peter du Bre, who escaped when
the Spaniards cruelly massacred the French in the Garrison Carolina; after
which du Bre ranging up and down, at last served Saturiona, Governor of
Florida; whom deserting, and now meeting with the French his Contrymen, he
brought several Casiques to join with them against the Spaniards, Valiant
Exploit of Gurgius.
whom they drove out of three Forts, which were all by the Command of Gurgius
dismanteled.

Florida is called by the Natives, Irquasa. The Spaniards have built two Forts
on the same, the one erected on the Promontory Helena, is Consecrated to the
Apostle Matthew. City Angustine.
The City and the Fort Angustine lies near the River May. Both City and Fort
stand on a Hill, which is pleasant and well set with Trees. Between the
Foreland is a deep and wide Channel, which washes the City and Fort; it is
eight-square, at each corner there stands a round Tower, in which the Soldiers
keep Guard; the Country is watered by two Rivers, which gliding between the
Main and the Foreland, are great Safeguards to the Fort. The City is almost
square, only against the Fort it is much closer built than in any other place,
and divided into four Streets. The Church stands without of the City, and
before it the Augustine Cloister.

Constitution of the Floridans.
The Inhabitants of Florida are an Olive color, tall, and without any
deformity; their Skins generally painted, and their Bodies naked, only a
Deer's Skin about their middle, their Hair long and black, hanging down to
their Hams, but view PAGUS HISPANORUM in Florida
most of them tie it in a Knot on the top of their Heads; two small Boards
cover their Breasts, and six lesser hang on their Arms, two Bells at each Ear,
and a Cap on their Head, with a Feather: Their Quivers, which are always full
of Arrows, sharpened with Fish Bones, hang by their Sides; In their Left Hand
they hold a great Bow, with which they go to War, the King walking before with
a Club. They Consult daily about warlike Affairs in the King's Palace, Their
strange Consultation.
where he himself sits on a high Seat; the Grandees salute him first with their
Hands lifted over their Head, crying Ha, He, Ya, at which the rest cry Ha, Ha;
then every one sits down on a Stool round about the Room. If they have any
Business of Consequence to debate, then the King sends for the ancientest
Persons and Priests, called Jawas; this done, they give a Cup of Cassine (which
is a hot Drink made of Herbs) to the King; after which every one drinks in
order out of the same Cup. This Liquor occasions Sweat, quenches Thirst, and
satisfies the Appetite for twenty four hours. When they March against their
Enemies they live on Indian Wheat, Honey, Their Food in time of War.
smoked Fish, and diverse sorts of wild Roots, amongst which they mix Sand and
Cinders, to preserve them the longer. No sooner are the two Armies come within
sight one of another, but the Kings of both Parties roll their Eyes about in
their Heads, mutter something to themselves, and make strange Gestures and
Exclamations; which is answered by a general Cry of the whole Army: then each
King turning himself with great Reverence to the Sun, takes a wooden Platter
with Water, which he throws over his Army so far as he is able, and begs of the
Sun to grant him, that he may spill his Enemies Blood in like manner; then
throws another Dish-full into the Fire, wishing that his Soldiers may thus
Offer the Bodies of their Foes to the Flames; then step forth the Priests,
Their Priests are Sorcerers.
who are always skilled in the Art of Necromancy, and seating themselves on a
Shield in the midst of the Army, draw a Circle, in which they make many strange
Gestures, not without muttering to themselves, and seemingly say a Prayer of a
quarter of an hour long; during which they deport themselves so strangely,
Strange actions.
that they rather seem to be Devils themselves, than Charmers of the Devil:
They turn their Eyes quite round, and their Bodies as if without Joints; at
length being wearied they leap out of the Circle, and inform the King of the
numbe and condition of the Enemies Army. Those whom they take Prisoners they
flay alive, Cruelty on the conquered
and drying their Skins at the Fire, tie them to long Poles, and carry them
home as Trophies of their Victory, and afterward set them up in some Field or
spacious place, putting both Men and Women to watch them, then comes the Priest
with a wooden Image, and utters Execrations against the slain Enemies; at a
corner of the Fields kneel three Men, one of which striking with great force on
a Stone, gives as many Blows as the Priest pronounces Curses, whilst the other
two shake their Calabashes filled with Stones, and Sing many strange Songs: No
sooner is this ended, but the Women whose Husbands are slain in the Battle,
walking to the King, cover their Faces with their Hands, make many strange
Gestures, and desire liberty to take what revenge they can, and license also to
Marry at the limited time; all which the King permitting, they return thus
comforted home crying. Remarkable Mourning for the Dead.
Not long after they go to the place where their Husbands lie buried, where
they crop their Hair up to their Ears, and throw it on the Grave, as also the
Arms and Drinking-Cups which the Deceased used in their lifetime; after which
they may not Marry before their Hair be grown again to their Shoulders. The
same Custom is also observed when their King is buried; but then also all his
Subjects Fast and Howl three days together, stick his Grave full of Arrows, and
burn his House and all his Goods.

Floridans differ amongst themselves.
The Floridans differ amongst themselves very much, for those that inhabit the
Province Panuca, which borders upon New Spain, are valiant and cruel People,
Offering their Prisoners to their Idols, and eating them. The Men pluck up the
Hair of their Beards by the Root, make holes through their Nose and Ears, and
Marry not till their fortieth Year.

Next to these follow the Realms of Aranaris and Albardaosia, inhabited by a
People, which exceed all others in subtilty.

The Natives of Jaquazia run faster than a Deer, and tire not though they
travel a whole day.

The best Swimmers are found in Alpachia, Authia, and Someria, where the Women
Swim through deep and great Rivers with their Children in their Arms. Here also
are many Hermophrodites, Hermophrodites.
which carry all the Luggage when an Army is upon a March.

We find mentioned also two other Provinces of note, viz. Colas (which lies
near the Point called Cape Florida) and Tegista, or Florida properly so called,
being that long Peninsula, which pointing upon the Isle Cuba, by the Cape Los
Martyrs, stretches it self North and South about a hundred Leagues in length,
but not above thirty in breadth where it is largest. In this Province is the
Rio de lo Spirito Santo. The Soil, though it produces Indian Wheat twice a
year, yet it is never Dung'd, but when the Corn (which is planted in March and
June) is in, they burn the Weeds; the Ashes of which serves them in stead of
Soil. The King divides the Corn according to every Man's Family. In the Winter
they dwell four Months in the Woods, where they build small Huts of
Palm-boughs, feed on Venison, smoked Fish, and Crocodiles, which have pure
white Flesh, and are caught after this manner: Their manner of taking
Crocodiles.
On the Shore of the Rivers they build little Houses full of round Holes, in
which they place a Watch, who is to give notice to ten or twelve Associates,
covered all over with Boughs full of little sharp Prickles, which they thrust
into the Crocodiles Throat, who with open Mouth comes running at them, and so
throwing him on his Back, stick his Belly full of Arrows, and kill him with
Clubs. But with more subtilty and art they take their Deer, As also their Deer.
viz. They hide themselves unde a Stags Skin, so cunningly, that it seems as if
living, which they place near the Rivers where the Deer generally come to
drink, when on a sudden they shoot them.

Floridans, though libidinous, yet live long.
Their Priests serve in stead of Surgeons, wherefore they always carry a Bag
full of Herbs about with them, which are chiefly good against venereal
Distempers; for these People are exceeding libidinous; nay, Sodomy and defiling
of young Children is accounted no sin: Yet though they are much inclined to
Women, they attain to a great Age.

Rene Laudoniere Landing not far from the City Augustine, situate on the Banks
of the River May, met with the Floridan Governor Saturiona, who conducted him
to the French King's Court of Arms, erected two years before, which Saturiona,
as a testimony of his zeal to the French, had Crowned with Laurel and Flowers.
Saturiona had with him also his Son Atoreus, who had begotten diverse Children
on his Mother; whom his Father after that time no more acknowledging, resigned
her up wholly to him: At which time also his great Grandfather being then
living, was above a hundred and fifty years old, and saw his Childrens Children
to the fifth Generation.

The Religion in Florida is abominable, wicked, and cruel: Their horrid
Religion.
When they return Conquerors from a Battle, the old Women take off the dried
Hair from the forementioned Poles, hold it aloft, and thank the Sun for their
Victory. But the Offerings of their firstborn Sons are terrible, for they
knock out their Brains with a Club in the presence of the King. Their annual
worshipping of the Sun is also very ridiculous; for filling the Skin of a Stag
full of sweet smelling Herbs, they hang the Horns and Neck with Garlands, and
carry it with the noise of their kind of Vocal and Instrumental Music, to a
high Trunk or hollow Body of a Tree, on which they place the stuffed Stag, with
his Head toward the Sun; which done, they falling down, desire that he would
please to afford them plenty of all such Fruit as they Offer to him; after
which taking their leave, they let the forementioned Skin remain there till
the following Year.

The Spaniards since their Defeat in the Fort Carolina, and their Engagement
with Sir Francis Drake, Anno 1585. have had little disturbance on Florida.

Drake's Exploit on Florida.
Drake having burnt and plundered Domingo and Carthagena, steered along the
Coast of Florida, and discovered a Beacon on the same; whereupon he sent out
Spies, who sailed a League up a River, on whose Banks they saw a Fort, and
somewhat higher the Town Augustine, built full of wooden Houses; all which
being related to him, he steered thither, fired his Guns twice against the Fort
St. John; which the Spaniards answering only with one Volley, fled, with their
Commander Peter Menendez; when the English prepared to Storm, a Prisoner, being
a Frenchman, came in a Boat from them to Drake, and informed him that the
Spaniards had left the City Augustine and Fort St. John; to which Drake going,
found there Pallisado's of pleited Boughs, covered with Earth, and a Chest with
two thousand Pound, for the payment of the Soldiers, and fourteen Brass Guns,
with which he set Sail from thence.

The Mountains of this Country are only the Apalatei, supposed by the Natives
to have rich Mines of Gold in them, and which the Spaniards saw, but had not
time, nor other accommodation to stay and search them, by reason they were so
much wearied and wasted with a long March before they gat thither, and found
the People so stout and obstinate thereabouts, that in stead of entertaining
them with their Hens and Fowl, as other places had done, they were welcomed
with Blows, and made to return, leaving not a few of their best Soldiers behind.

Rivers there are many, and those very large and commodious, as 1^ Rio Secco,
or The Dry River, so called by the Spaniards (as some think) because they could
find no Gold in it. 2. Rio Grande, or The Great River. 3. Ligeris. 4. Garunna.
5. Sequana, etc. These last, so named by the French, who, after the Spaniards,
for some time had, but never held any long possession of the Country. There
are also Rio de Flores, Rio de Nieves, and Rio de Spirito Santo, lesser
Streams, yet all of them, with the rest, falling at several places into the
great Lake of Mexico; and some of them not a little haunted by the Caymans or
West-Indian Crocodiles, a Creature, as has been said before, dangerous both at
Sea and Land.

The Natives, who as yet hold Possession and Command of it for the most part,
are themselves generally sorted into certain Tribes or great Families; all
which are Governed severally by Chiefs of their own, whom they call Paracoussi,
and by reason thereof are almost continually in Feud and War one with another.

The Towns and Places most known in this Province, are 1. St. Helens, seated on
or near unto a Promontory of the same Name, where this Country bordereth on
Virginia. 2. Fort Charles, or Arx Carolina, built and so named by the French
King, but afterward ruined by the Spaniards. 3. Port Royal, a well frequented
Haven, at the Mouth of a River which bears the same Name. More within Land
there is, 1. Apalache, an old Town of the Natives, formerly a Place of great
resort, but now a poor thing of about forty or fifty Cottages; and yet as poor
as it is, Pamphilius Narvaez, as before related, when he searched the Country,
found the Natives not willing to part with it: for though he took it from them,
it was not without some resistance, and they quickly recovered it again: and at
the 2. named Aute, another old Town of theirs, nine days March from the other,
they overtook him, and fell so resolutely upon him, that he left not a few of
his best Soldiers dead upon the place, and was content himself to march quietly
away with the rest. 3. Ochalis, a Town consisting of about five or six hundred
Sheds and Cottages likewise of the Natives. 4 Vittacuche, a Borough of two
hundred Houses.

There is also on the the Eastern Shore of this Peninsula, St. Matthews, a
Place possessed and well fortified by the Spaniards; and St. Augustines on the
same Shore, but lying somewhat more Southerly than the other, at the Mouth of a
River of the same Name, taken and sacked by Sir Francis Drake in the Year 1585.

SECT. II. Jucatan.
JUcatan is a Peninsula, or half-Island, being encompassed with the Sea on all
sides, save only to the South-West, where it is joined to Guaxata, its farther
and more Easterly Point looking toward Cuba. The knowledge of, when, and by
whom this Province was discovered, is included in that of New Spain, of which
some will have it to be a part. The whole Province contains in compass nine
hundred Miles or more, and lies between eighteen and twenty two Degrees of
Northern Latitude, or thereabouts, the Air somewhat hot, and the Soil not
altogether so fertile as some other parts of New Spain are; but in recompense
thereof the People are so much the more industrious, living for the most part
by Handicraft Trades. Neither is it altogether unstor'd with Corn and diverse
sorts of Fruits, besides what it has of Fowl and Beasts, as Geese, Hens, Deer,
etc. particularly it yields plenty of Wax and Honey, by reason of its
frequent Swarms of Bees. They report some special things of this Province, as
namely, that the People of the Country used generally, and long before the
Spaniards came thither, a certain Ceremony map of Central America YUCATAN
Conventus Iuridici Hispaniae Novae Pars Occid^^talis, et GUATIMALA CONVENTUS
IURIDICUS
view St. FRANCISCO DE CAMPECHE
^emony of Religion, not much unlike to our Baptism, and which they called by a
Name that in their Language sighifi'd Regeneration, or A Second-Birth; that
they observed it so diligently, that few or none amongst them omitted to
initiate themselves by it, believing, that thereby the Seeds and Groundwork of
all Goodness was laid in them, and that they were fortified by it against the
assaults and temptations of ovil Spirits; that after they were three or four
years old, till they came to twelve, they usually thus Washed and Baptized
themselves; and that none were permitted amongst them to Marry, that were not
first initiated after this manner; that they chose likewise a solemn Day upon
which to do this; and that the Friends and Relations (especially the Father and
Mother) of the Parties to be initiated, as well as the Parties themselves,
always Fasted three days before the said Initiation; and that a great many of
the Natives had a Tradition, or general Report amongst them, that of ancient
time this Province of Jucatan was possessed and cultivated by a certain People
which came thither from the East, after a tedious long wanderring, and many
hardships endured at Sea, having escaped the Hands of their Enemies only
through the power of the Deity they worshipped; who helped them, and made them
to pass securely, even through the Waves of the Sea. All which, if true, seems
not a little to confirm the Report which goes for current in the Welsh
Chronicles, of one Madoc ap Owen, the Son of Guineth, a Prince of that
Country, who is said to have fallen upon a far Country this way in his
Travels; which he liked so well, that having secured to his Companions their
safe abode there during his absence, he returned himself into Wales for more
Men; and that he transported thither as many as he could carry in ten Barques
full fraught. This he is said to have done about the Year of our Lord 1170. but
neither he nor any of his Men were ever heard of since; and the success of the
Expedition, it seems, little inquired after by the Welsh, However, the Relation
seems not altogether incredible.

The chief Towns of the Province are, 1. Merida, in the Navel of the Country,
and the Seat of the Governor, twelve Leagues distant from the Sea on either
side. 2. Valladolidt, thirty Leagues distant from Nerida. 3. Campeche, a great
Town, consisting of about three thousand Houses or more, when first conquered
by the Spaniards; who found such Monuments of Art and Industry in it, as did
clearly argue, that the Place had been once possessed by some People that were
not barbarous. It is now called St. Francisco, and was surpised in the Year
1596. by Captain Parker, an Englishman, who took the Governor himself and some
other Persons of Quality with him, together with a Ship richly laden with Gold
and Silver, besides other Commodities of good value. 4. Tabasco, by the
Spaniard now called Villa de Nuestra Sennora de Victoria, and commonly Victoria
only, in memory, as it is thought, of the first great Victory which Cortez
otain'd over these People at the Battle of Potonchan, as has been said. 5.
Cintla. 6. Potonchan. 7. Salamanca.

All along the Coast of this Country there lie certain Islands, some within
the Bay or Gulf called Honduras, pertaining to the next Province, as 1. La
Zarza. 2. La Desconescida. 3. Vermeia. 4. Los Negrillos; and some without it,
as 1. Zaratan. 2. Pantoia. 3. De Mugeres, or The Island of Women; so named by
the Spaniards, who at their first Discovery of these Parts, for a long time
together could meet with none but Women. The chief of them is called Acusamil,
commonly Cozamul, and is fifteen Leagues in length, and about five in breadth,
and was as it were the Thoro-wfare, or Common Road of the Spaniards, when they
first discovered the Countries of New Spain: For first here Landed Ferdinando
de Corduba; after him John de Grialva, and others; and last of all the
fortunate Cortez. It is now called St. Crux.

CHAP. IV. Guatimala.
Its Situation and Bounds.
GUatimala stretches to the Isthmus, or Neck of Land, which, as we said,
joineth the Northern and Southern parts of the New World together.

This Country is bounded Northward with the Peninsula of Jucatan abovesaid,
and part of the Gulf or Bay of Honduras; on the South, with Mare del Zur; on
the East and South-East, it has Castella Aurea; and on the West, New Spain.
The length of it lies upon the Coast of Mare del Zur, and is said to be little
less than three hundred Leagues; but the breadth not half so much, and in some
places very narrow. It is generally a fertile and good Country in all
respects, but especially abounding in Cattle and good Pastures; it is
subdivided into seven inferior Provinces or Countries, which are 1. Chiapa. 2.
Verapaz 3. Honduras. 4. Nicaragua. 5. Veragua. 6. Costa Rica; and 7. Guatimala,
specially so called: all differing in Language and Customs one from another.

The Bishopric (as it is now called) of Chiapa is bordered on the West with
New Spain; on the East with Vera Paz; and on the South with Mare del Zur. It is
a Country much shaded with Woods, and those replenished with many fair and
goodly Trees, of diverse sorts, and of the largest size, as Oaks, Pines, Cedar,
Myrtle, and Cypress-Trees, besides others which yield them a good kind of
Rozen, precious Gums, etc. also several sorts of Balsom, as white, red, green,
and black, not only pleasant to the Scent, but an excellent Remedy for all
manner of green Wounds: the best of it drops out of the cut Bodies of the
Trees; and the worst is pressed out of the Wood and Leaves.

Trees and Plants.
There are also proper to this Country several other kinds of Trees and Plants,
as that whose Fruit tastes like Pepper and Cloves, being of a great height; a
Tree whose Leaves cure all ulcerated Sores, or the bitings of any poisonous
Beast.

There is a sort of Cabbage called Ilantas, which grows to the height of a
Tree, so that Birds make their Nests in them; they are eaten likewise like
other common Cabbages.

There is also an Herb with narrow Leaves, which is no sooner touched, but it
shrinks up to nothing; but at the going away of those which touch it, it
obtains its former vigor.

Here are likewise Quails, Birds.
Ducks, Geese, Pheasants, Parrots, Turtle-Doves, Pigeons, and the like, in
great abundance.

Amongst the several sorts of Falcons which breed in this Country, there is
one sort which has one Foot proper to its kind, the other like that of a
Goose; it feeds on Fish along the Rivers.

The Bird Toto-Queztall, which is somewhat smaller than a Pigeon, with green
Feathers and a long Tail, is taken only for its Tail, which when the Indians
have pulled out, they let the Bird fly again, there being a Law amongst them,
that whosoever kills one of them, is to suffer death.

The Cranes here are of a dark Gray; the biggest of them have a tuft of
Feathers like a Crown upon their Heads.



The Birds Guacamayes, which are red and blue, are like a Peruan Goose. Birds.


Moreover, the Country yields brave Horses, Goats, Sheep, Rabbets, and Foxes;
Beasts*
also wild Dogs, Leopards, Lions, and Tigers.

The wild Hogs which breed here have their Navels on their Backs, and have no
Tails, they smell exceeding strong, and feed together in great Companies.

The Taquatrin, a certain Beast proper to those Parts, has a Bag under its
Belly, in which it generally carries seven or more young ones, and has also a
bald Tail; it creeps into Houses in the Night to steal Hens.

Here is also a certain Beast (whose Name we find not) about the bigness of a
Rabbet, and like a Rat, and carries its young ones on its back whensoe're it
comes abroad.

The Serpents, which are very numerous here, trouble the Inhabitants
exceedingly, especially near the Village Ecatepeque, where there are such an
abundance on two little Hills, that none dares approach them; some of them are
very poisonous, for if touched with a Stick, the Poison runs up the same: and
whoever are anointed with the Blood of a dead Serpent, die a lingering Death.
John de Laet relates, that the Indians took one which carried thirty young
ones, which being a Finger long, crep up and down immediately; and the old one,
being above twenty Foot long, served the Natives for Venison.

Amongst other Beasts is also the Teuthlacokauhqui, or Fortress of the
Serpents; it has a Head like an Adder, thick Belly, glittering Scales, a black
Back, sprinkled with white Crosses; at its Tail there grows yearly a Bone, with
which it makes a noise when it stirs; its poisonous Teeth destroy those which
are bit therewith in twenty four Hours, unless the part which is wounded be
held in the Earth so long till the pain be over. Notwithstanding the noise,
terrible aspect, and gestures of this Animal, the Indian Hunters make nothing
to take the same by the Tail, and wrap it up in Linen, and carrying it home
make it tame. It is able to live a whole Year without either Meat or Drink; its
Head when cut off grows to the bigness of a Man's Thigh in ten days time.

No less resolute are the Indians in taking the Ibitobaca, which is an Ell
long, of a crimson Color, full of black and white Specks, the Bones whereof
they wear about their Necks in stead of Chains.

The Serpent Iquanna.
The Iquanna is a Serpent which does no manner of hurt, though terrible to look
upon to those which know it not, having a Bag under its Chin, a glittering Comb
on its Head, and on its Back sharp Bones, which stand like a Saw, and a long
Tail: It lays fifty Eggs at a time as big as Acorns, of a very good taste, and
fit to eat when boiled: It also lives both in the Water and on the Land.

Here are also many Baboons, Baboons.
which are big and heavy, with ugly Heads, short Legs like a Man, and Tails
standing upwards; they eat all sorts of Fruit, but chiefly covet after Wine and
Bread; and are so lascivious, that they often set upon Women: The Females
generally bring forth two, one Male, and the other Female. There is also
another sort, whose Skins, being red, are full of little Spots.

The ancient Inhabitants of Chiapa (divided into the Chiapaneca's, the Zeques,
the Zeltates, and the Quelenes) are very Civil and Witty, also skilful in
Painting, Singing, Breaking of Horses, and many other Trades.

Towns and Villages of Note.
The Places of more principal note in this Country, inhabited by the Spaniards,
are 1. Ciudad Real, pleasantly seated in the midst of a round Vale or Plain,
and almost encompassed with Hills representing the form of an Amphitheatre;
also at the Foot of one which stands in the midst of the rest, the City is
built. It is a City specially Priviledg'd by the King of Spain, having a Court
of Justice, Cathedral, and Dominican Cloister; of a pure and temperate Air, and
the Country round about plentifully abounding both in Corn and Fruit, only
somewhat too cold to produce Lemmons and Oranges; but for Pears, Apples,
Peaches, Quinces, Cherries, and the like, they grow here in great abundance.

2. Chiapa, which gives Name to the Valley aforesaid; It is a Bishop's See,
and famous, if but for one of its Prelates, viz. Bartholomeo de las Casas, of
the Order of Predicants, who was Bishop of this City, and his Memory justly
precious amongst the poor Americans at this day, for his Charity toward them,
and for the stout and zealous opposition which he made against the Spaniards
cruel and inhumane dealings with the Natives at the beginning of their
Conquests: by which at last, notwithstanding much difficulty and resistance
made by interested Persons of the other Side, he procured them liberty, and an
Edict from the Emperor in favor of them; whereby they were declared to be a
Free People, and not Slaves, and the Spaniards forbidden to use them any longer
as such, or to force them to any kind of Labor against their wills, or
otherwise than by agreement with them, which Liberty they enjoy to this day;
and though the Spaniards are said to give them very small Wages in some places,
and for their Work in their Sugar-Mills (which is no small Labor) not above
five Reyals, or Two shillings six pence a Week, for the Maintenance of
themselves, their Wives and Children, yet by reason it is with Consent, and in
a Country where all things are plentiful and cheap, their Condition is much
better than it was, and the favor which that good Bishop did them, never to be
forgotten. It is at present a great and populous City, and lies almost in the
midway betwixt the Cities of Mexico and Guatimala.

3. St. Bartholomews, in the Country of the Quelenes.

4. Tecpatlan, the chief of twenty five Villages, said to belong to the Zoques.
Here the Dominicans have another Cloister.

The Zeltates possess a fruitful Country, have thirteen Villages planted with
Trees that yield Cochenile, being under a Commonwealth Government.

The chief Place of the Quelenes is Copanavatzla, where there is good Cheese,
and store of brave Cattle: The River Chiepa gliding through the midst thereof,
loses it self in the Northern Ocean. In this part of the Country are Beasts
not unlike Apes, with long Tails, which they wind about the Legs of those whom
they find swimming and so pull them under Water; wherefore they that go to Swim
take Axes along with them, to cut off their Tails.

The Water of the River Blanco is clear and wholesome, running for the most part
through Rocky Grounds, which nevertheless are overspread with Trees.

In the highest Ground of Chiapa, a League and a half from the City Real,
spring clear Fountains, whose Water ebbs and flows every six hours.

Near the Village called Afixa is one which runs three years together, though
in the driest Season, and is dry three years, though it Rain never so much.

Not far from the Village Cinacatan is another Spring, whose Water cures
several Sicknesses, but kills all Birds and Beasts which drink of the same.

Here are likewise diverse Baths.

The Rivers which run out of the Valley Chiapa, fall into two great Pits.

Near the Village Bartholomew, in the Province Quelenes, is a strange Cavern,
out of which by the throwing of a stone into the same, are heard mighty noises
like claps of Thunder.

Not far from the Village Chicomucolo, appears a Cavern, in which is a great
Plain on one side, and a standing Lake, whose Water is like Sand, on the other.

The Spaniards, if they wanted not Slaves, might dig good store of Gold,
Silver, Copper, Lead, Tin, and Quicksilver, out of the Mines on the Mountain
Ecatepeck, which is in nine Leagues compass: The Wind blows so strong after
Sunrising, that no Man is able to travel for it, but in the Night.

SECT. II. Vera Paz.
VEra Paz, or The Country of True Peace, was so named by the Spaniards,
Situation and Bounds.
as they say, because it was never conquered by the Sword, but reduced to
Obedience only by the Preaching of the Dominican Friars. It is bounded on the
West and South-West with Chiapa; on the East with some part of Guatimala and
Honduras; and on the North with Jucatan. It contains about thirty Leagues in
length, and almost as much in breadth, being a woody and mountainous Country
for the most part, yet well distinguished with Valleys and lower Ground. It is
much subject to Rain, which it is said to have for nine Months of the Year
almost continually; by reason whereof the Country, being otherwise hot, is
much annoyed with a kind of Mosquit, or great sort of Gnats, which spoil the
Fruit very much, and are otherwise not a little trouble to the People.
Moreover, there happen oftentimes terrible Earthquakes and Storms, with Thunder
and Lightning.

Commodities of the Country.
The chief Commodities of this Country, are a kind of Amber, which some call
Liquid Amber, which drops from diverse of their Trees, and is said to be a
Commodity very precious, and of much use; Mastick, Sanguis Draconis, Gum Anime,
Sarsaparilla, China-Wood, and diverse other Medicinal Drugs, which it affords
in great plenty. The Woods afford a sweet smell, and the Trees in the same grow
a wonderful height.

The Canes which grow here, being a hundred Foot long, and proportionably
thick, serve for Timber.

There is also a hard Wood called Iron-Wood, either from its hardness or
color, or both, which never rots.

The abundance of Flowers which grow here afford nutriment to innumerable
swarms of Bees, which are about the bigness of small Flies. Their Honey, which
is somewhat tart, they hide in the Roots of Trees, or in the Earth. Another
sort, which is made by the Wasps, bereaves those that taste of their Senses.

The noted'st Beast in this Country is the Danta, Beasts.
which resembles a Mule, has no Horns, but Ash* colored long Hair, short
Neck, hanging Ears, thin Legs, with three Claws before and two behind, long
Head, narrow Forehead, little Eyes, a Nose hanging over its Mouth, little Tail,
sharp Teeth, and a Skin which is six Fingers thick, and scarce penetrable by
any Weapon. This Beast is taken in Traps, Holes, or else with Dogs, which he
often kills when hunted toward the Water. They say that this Beast taught Men
first to Let-blood; for if it be too full of Blood, it pricks it self against a
sharp Cane, and stops up the Orifice again very carefully. The Flesh thereof is
good Meat, as also that of the Ross-Lyons, which in the daytime sleep on a
high Tree, where they are shot by the Indians.

The Tigers are much more dangerous to be taken; yet the Indians Hunting them,
eat them in stead of Beef; and also through all New Spain.

The Bears, which make the Ways very dangerous to travel, have black frizled
Hair, broad Tails, Feet like Men's Hands: but since the Indians have made use of
Guns, which they learned from the Spaniards, they have much lessened the number
both of Bears and Tigers.

There are likewise many Leopards, Apes, and wild Goats (whose Skins serve the
Natives for Drums) Hogs, and Armadillo's.

Amongst their Fowls, are Eagles and Parrots.

The Country is so well stored with Water, that in three Leagues space are
above thirty Rivulets, and as many Fountains.

Medicinal Plants.
On the Mountains grow great quantities of Sarsaparilla, Mechoacan, and the
China-Root, which being yellowish has several Saffron-colour'd Knobs on the
top. The Sarsaparilla grows with many Stalks, creeping along over the Ground;
the Body thereof is tough and full of Prickles, the Leaves broad and sharp at
the ends, and are of a bluish color on one side, and green on the other, and
bear Clusters of Flowers, which close like Buds, and are first green, next
vermilion-red, and lastly blackish: within are two hard Stones, which enclose a
white Kernel, by the Indians called Juapecanga.

The Bay Golfo Dulce, which pours its muddy Water into the Sea, feeds the great
Fish Monati, and a great number of Crocodiles.

Several Rivers abounding with Fish fall also into the same, having their Banks
set all along with Trees, in whose Boughs, joined together on the top, those
sort of Birds make their Nests which prey on Fish.

The Women in this place are much shorter Lived than the Men, so that there are
often thirty Widowers to one Widow. Women with Child are Delivered by
themselves in the Highway; and from thence they go to the next River to wash
themselves and the Child.

Places of note.
As for any Towns or Places of much Traffic or Note, inhabited by the
Spaniards, we find not any named, save only St. Augustines; near unto which
there is said to be a Cave and Fountain within Ground, which converts the Water
that falls into it out of several lesser Springs, into a kind of Alabaster or
Stone, perfectly white, and fashions it likewise into Pillars, Statues, and
other artificial Forms of very curious Workmanship, as Laet reports.

SECT. III. Honduras.
Situation and Bounds.
HOnduras has on the South, Guatimala abovesaid; on the West, a certain Bay,
or Arm of the Sea, which they call Golfo Dulce, from the abundance of fresh
Waters which run into it from all Parts; on the North and North-East, the
Atlantic Ocean; and somewhat to the South-East, Nicaragua. It contains in
length, viz. from East to West, Coasting along upon the Sea, about a hundred
and fifty Leagues, and in breadth eighty. The Country is rich both in Corn and
Pasturage, being said to be very much advantaged that way by the constant
overflowings of the Rivers, which are very many, about Michaelmass-time, and
which the People order so well, that they water their Gardens, and exceedingly
fertilize the whole Champain, or lower part of the Grounds by them.

The fruitful Valleys of this Country were anciently very well inhabited, till
vast multitudes of the Natives were destroyed by the Spaniards Cruelties, of
which the Bishop Bartholomeo de las Casas, in his Letter to the Emperor Charles
the Fifth, gives this Relation:

Cruelties of the Spaniards.
The young Children (says he) they murdered, beating out their Brains against
the Stones; the Kings and Princes of the Country they either scorched to
death, or threw them to the Dogs to be torn in pieces; the poor People they
drove into their Houses, and then set them on fire; those that remained were
condemned to the greatest slavery imaginable, being used in stead of Mules and
Horses, and having greater Burdens laid upon them than they were able to carry,
insomuch that thousands of them fell down dead under them; some out of despair
running into the Woods were famished, after they had killed and eat their Wives
and Children for Hunger. In this one Province only they massacred above twenty
hundred thousand Men, and amongst others, Persons of Quality, which had civilly
Entertained them: nay, they tortured the poor innocent Natives all the ways
they could possibly invent, only to know of them where their Gold lay;
particularly Diego de Valasco spared none that ever fell into his hands;
insomuch that in a Months time above ten thousand were slain by him: He hanged
thirteen Noblemen, to twelve of whom he gave the Denomination of The twelve
Apostles; and the chiefest of them he called in a derision, Jesus Christ. Some
they suffered to starve to death, with their Heads compressed between the
cloven Barks of wild Vines; some also they buried alive, and leaving only
their Heads to appear above Ground, bowl'd Iron Bullets at them, and forced
them to eat one another; besides infinite other hellish Cruelties, too horrid
and dreadful to be recounted.

Commodities of the Countres.
This Country produces much Maiz, Wheat, Honey, and great Calabashes, from
whence the first Discoverers called that Sea Golfo de las Ybueras, because they
met with abundance of Calabashes, floating on the Water, which at Santo Domingo
bear the Name of Ybueras.

This Country is watered by three Rivers, the first Chamalucom, which glides
by the City San Pedro; the second Ulva, inhabited on both Shores; the third
Haguaro, the Grounds adjacent to which would prove very fruitful, were the
Inhabitants not too lazy. In stead of a Plough they use a long Pole, with two
crooked Staves at the end, one bent downwards and the oaths upwards, with which
they cut and turn the Earth. The Natives feed on several Roots, Flesh, and
Vermin.

At their Feast they make themselves Drunk with a Drink made of Honey,
Noblemen heretofore only drinking the Liquor of Cacao; but of late it is
common, and made by all People, though never so mean. They speak several
Languages, the chiefest whereof is that of the Chontales, a salvage People.
They divide their Year, called Joalar, that is, Passing, into eighteen Months,
and each Month into twenty Days. They formerly measured the Year by the
Nights, and began the Year forty days sooner than the Europeans.

New Valladolid.
The Towns in this Province are 1. New Vallodolid, by the Indians named
Comayagua, lying in a pleasant Valley under a temperate Climate. The Cattle
brought hither from Spain, increase exceedingly. The Silver-Mynes are also so
well stored, that they keep the Melting-house in the Town always employed.

The Governor of this Place has his Residence next to the Treasury-Chamber.

Anno 1588. the Bishop's See was translated hither from Truxillo: Nineteen
years before which Francisco de Monteio sent his Lieutenant Alphonso de Cacenes
thither, to build a Village half way between the Southern and Northern Ocean;
who accordingly erected the Town Santa Maria de Camoyagua, near a River
Navigable for Canoos, which disembogues in Puerto de Cavallos. The remaining
part of the Way to the Haven Fonseca being passable for Carrs (which was a
means to prevent many Inconveniences which used to happen to Travelers on the
Way between Panama and Nombre de Dios) the Spanish King was so much concerned
at the first proposal hereof, that he sent the famous Surveyor Baptista
Antonello thither, and the rather, because he received information, that the
new Way, along which they carried the Merchandise from Peru, Mexico, and other
Countries along the South Sea, lay very pleasantly, by reason of the brave
Vineyards, Cornfieldsd, Fruit Trees, Pastures, Streams abounding with Fish,
Herds of Deer, and Cony-Warrens; yet Antonello meeting with many troubles,
would not undertake the Business.

New Valladolid is adorned with a great Church, a Cloister, belonging to the
Monks De la Merced, and handsome Streets.

Gratias a Dios.
2. Thirty Leagues West ward from this City lies another called Gratias a Dios,
begun by Captain Gabriel de Royas, Anno 1530, that so he might be near the
Gold-Mines: But because the Natives kept the new Inhabitants in continual
alarm, and daily Stormed the unfinished Fortifications, Royas was necessitated
to leave off building any farther, the rather, because none came to his
assistance from the neighboring Garrison.

Six years after Gonzales de Alvarado undertook this Work, and built the City
on a Rocky Mountain; which, though otherwise barren, produced lusty Horses and
strong Mules.

3. San Pedro, St. Pedro.
though lying under a hot and unwholsom Climate, used formerly to be a brave
City of Trade; but it is gone much to decay since Golfo Dolce has been
discovered, because from that Bay the Commodities are carried in Barques up
into the Country.

Juan de Puerto de Cavallos.
4. The Village Juan de Puerto de Cavallos, inhabited by Factors and Moors: It
received that Denomination, because not far from it several Horses were forced
to be thrown overboard in a Storm. Though it be but ill fortified, yet it has
an exceeding large Haven. Captain Christopher Newport arriving here Anno 1591.
found two hundred Houses, and in them a considerable Booty left,
notwithstanding four Ships richly laden had lately set Sail from thence.

Six years after Newport, Capt. Ant. Sherly re-took the Place, and leaving the
Haven open for Pirates, Alphonsus Coriado judged it convenient to remove the
Trading Place to Amatique; he built the Village Thomas de Castilla, and
fortified the same against all manner of Assaults.

view TRU^^LLO.



Behind Cavallos lies the Valley Naco, which is exceeding fruitful, being
situate between high Mountains, where formerly was found plenty of Silver.

5. Eastward from Cavallos appears the famous City Truxillo, near a large Bay;
Truxillo.
secured from all Storms by two Cliffs, full of Trees; the Mouth of the Haven
called Joan Gil, is above two Leagues broad, and receives two Rivers, one from
each side of the City: The Stream Quaimarotte flows Eastward, and the River
Antonio Westward, both abounding in Fish. The Country round about produces
abundance of all sorts of Provisions, and chiefly abounds in Grapes, which are
gathered twice a year: Eight days after August they cut their Vines, which
afford them ripe Grapes again in October; they have two Harvests of Corn; also
Lemons and Oranges are very plentiful: The Cattle brought hither from Spain are
exceedingly increased to an incredible number.

Truxillo it self lying on a steep Mountain, is defended on that side which
respects the Sea, with a thick Wall of six Foot high; between which and the
Haven are many brambly Bushes, which prevent the access to the Wall, only a
narrow and steep way leading up to the City, which has a strong Gate, guarded
with two Brass Guns, and sufficiently Fortified to oppose an Enemy. The Eastern
Cliff, which bends before the Haven is called Punta la Rye, on which stands a
House with a high Beacon: Beyond the Wall Eastward, near the Haven, is a
Ship-yard, before which stands a large Wooden Cross: The Castle in which the
City Store is kept, joins to the Wall, near unto which, within the Town appears
St. Francis Church; but the Cathedral called Eglesia Major, is seen above all
other Buildings: The Houses covered with Palmito-Leaves, have Walls of Pleited
Bushes, Plastered over within and without: Behind the City, where it lies
open, are exceeding high Mountains.

Attempts upon this place by the English and Dutch.
Anno 1576. the English falling on this strong Place, carried a rich Booty from
thence; after which, Capt. Anth. Sherly and Capt. Will. Parker ventured once
more on the same, but being discovered by the Sentinel, were forced to Retreat,
not without a considerable loss: When not long after, Captain John Van Hoorn a
Hollander, attempting the same, had much better success; for he Weighing Anchor
for Pernambuc, with four Frigates, three Ketches, and a Sloop, set Sail to
Truxillo, where arriving, lay close before the City with his four Frigates,
which fired very fiercely on the Town; the Inhabitants of which not being idle,
killed three Men in one Ship, forced her to fall farther off from the Castle:
Whilst the Ketches and Sloop went about a Gun shot Westward beyond the City,
toward the River Antonio, where they Landed two hundred and fifty Soldiers,
which marched with all speed up the Hill, where the Castle lay which they
Scaled at Noonday; the Besieged being provided with seven Guns, shot, and
threw Stones continually amongst them, yet were forced to Retreat from the
Dutch Hand-granado's: During the storm, the Admiral himself Landed, but before
he came out of the Boat, the forementioned Soldiers had made themselves Masters
of the Fort, with the loss of only eight Men, and were busy Pillaging all
places they came at, and carrying their gotten Booty to a Watch-house near the
Castle on the Shore; when on a sudden a Fire happened in the East part of
Truxillo, which increased in such a manner, that in few hours two third parts
of the City lay in Ashes; every one then had enough to do to save themselves,
yet for all the haste they made, several Hollanders were killed at the blowing
up of the Magazine, and most of the Booty lost by the Fire; insomuch that they
carried but two hundred thirty nine Skins, six Bales of Indigo, eight hundred
and twenty Pounds of Sarsaparilla, seven Brass, and three Iron Guns, four
Clocks, and some few trifles with them; having before made an agreement for
twenty Pound of Silver, with the Governor Joan de Miranda, who informed them,
that they had not the least knowledge of the Hollanders Fleet, till the
Evening, when the Beacon on Punta La Rye was fired: Moreover, that the City was
inhabited by two hundred Spaniards, and as many more Mulatoes and Moors; and
that the Trade thereof was much gone to decay, because there had been no
Galleys there in two years before.

Twenty seven Leagues from this City lies the Village Jorgo de Olancho, where
four thousand Spaniards force Tribute from sixteen thousand Indians, who
possess much Gold.

SECT. IV. Nicaragua.
Situation and bounds.
NIcaragua is a County of this Province, bordered Northward with Honduras; on
the East, with the Atlantic Ocean, and part of Veragua; on the South, with
Mare del Zur; and on the West, with Guatimala, being called by Diego Lopez de
Salzado, The New Kingdom of Leon, and comprizing several little Territories, as
Nicoya, Nequecheri, Mabyth, Deria, Masaya, Mandigua, Cacoloaque, Cepeoco, Los
Micos, Madira, and the Contales. It has few Rivers in it, the want whereof is
supplied by the benefit of a great Lake, in the midst of the Country, called
by the Spaniards, Laguna de Nicaragua, containing, as is supposed, above one
hundred Leagues in compass. It empties it self by the Port of St. Juan into the
Atlantic or North-Sea, but reaches as far as the South or Mare del Zur, at
least within a very few Leagues; and from whence some Spanish Captains are said
to have made a passage, though with much difficulty, into the Lake, and from
thence to the North-Sea. It is abundantly well stored with good Fish, but
withal much haunted with Crocodiles; and the Country about it so plentiful in
all things, especially Cattle, Cotten-Wool, Sugars, and all kind of Fruits:
Amongst which, the chiefest is the Zeiba, which is of so great a thickness,
that fifteen Men holding Hand in Hand, can scarce encompass the same. The
Callabashes ripen here in fourteen days time: The Sea along the Coast, breeds
Whales and other Sea Monsters, which are often seen above Water.

Nature of the Inhabitants.
The Inhabitants of this Country, (except the Chontales, which live on the
Mountains, and maintain their old Salvage Customs) have for the most part
learnt the Spanish Tongue and Manners, and exercise themselves in all sorts of
Arts and Siences, especially in Working of Silver, making of Clothes, Wax-Work,
and the like: From the Mountains they gather Balsom, Liquid-Amber, Turpentine:
They also drive a great Trade in Cotton, Skins, and several sorts of
Provisions, to Panama, and Nombre de Dios.

The Lake Laguna de Nicaragua, which has a hundred and seventeen Leagues in
Circumference, and round about inhabited, is by three Leagues of Land separated
from the South Sea; and discharges its Waters into the River Desaguadero, which
falls into the Northern Ocean. Alphonsus Calera, and Diego Machuca de Zuaso,
were the first that Sailed out of the forementioned Lake into the Sea, not
without many dangers, by reason of the great Water-falls, called Rondales,
which fall into the River Desaguadero, and forced them often times to draw
their Barques over the Land.

The chief City is, Cities.
1. Leon, which is surrounded with Woods, and lies close by the Lake; has a
great Church, five Cloisters belonging to the Monks, de la Mercede, several
Houses for the King's Officers, and a hundred and twenty thousand Families of
Indians which pay Tribute. Three Leagues beyond Leon appears a high spiry
Mountain, from whose top, both Morning and Evening, rises a mighty smoke, and
sometimes casts out great sulphurous Stones over the neighboring Fields, and on
a sudden mighty Flames. A Dominican Monk, in hopes to get some melted Gold out
of its burning Mouth, went up the same with four of his Fraternity, and carried
an Iron Chain and a Kettle, which were no sooner let down into the hole, but
they were immediately melted; yet not so discouraged, they resolved to venture
a second time with stronger Materials, which nevertheless had the same, or
rather worse event; for the Fire flew out in such a manner, that the Dominicans
sadly scorched, had enough to do to escape with Life, since which none durst
presume to approach the same.

But besides the Episcopal City Leon, Erected by Franciscus Fernandez, 2.
Granada acknowledges the same Builder, and lying also on the shore of Laguna de
Nicaragua, is adorned with a Castle, Church, and several Sugar-Mills: Not far
from it lie the small Lakes Masaya and Lindiri; the first which is enclosed
between exceeding high Mountains, covers the Foot of the burning Mountain
Masaya; the other falls into Laguna de Nicaragua, near which is the smoky
Mountain Munbacho, surrounded with Fruit Trees.

3. and 4. The Towns Jean, and Neuva Segovia, which are not far from thence,
are of little consequence.

5. Realeio, this is, as it were, the Chattam of America, being a place on the
South Sea, where the King of Spain has all his Ships built that are made of
American Timber, and inhabited by few or none but Shipwrights, Mariners, and
Men of that kind of Profession.

6. and 7. Nicoya, Avarines.

8. Cartage, forty Leagues distant from Nicoya, and lying almost in the midst
of the Isthmus, or Straight of Darien, equally distant both from the North and
South Sea; on both which it is said likewise to have a convenient Port or Haven
for Shipping.

The Spaniards, when first they Landed here, called this Country Mahomets
Paradise, because of its exceeding Fruitfulness. The Cacao which they use here
in stead of Money, is not unlike the Stone of an Almond. The Inhabitants, in
stead of using a Steel and Flint to strike Fire withal, rub two pieces of Wood
together so long, till one of them is kindled; and burn the Boughs of
Pine-Trees in stead of Candles. Amongst the several Languages which they speak,
the Mexican is the chiefest: Amongst their Recreations, Dancing is principal,
Strange manner of Dancing.
which is performed after a very strange manner, for they meet sometimes two or
three thousand together, according to the bigness of the Province, in a
spacious Field, which is made clean before for that purpose: He that leads the
Dance goes backward, and with many strange Gestures, turns himself about, which
the rest, following four and four together in a row, imitate, whilst their
Tambores beat on hollow Instruments, and sing Songs, which are first answered
by the Ringleader of the Dance, and then seconded by the whole Company, each
of them waving a Fan or a Callabash, and being all adorned with Plumes of
Feathers on their Heads, and Strings with Shells about their Arms and Legs;
they also act several antic Tricks, the one, the blind Man, the other, the
Cripple, one feigns himself to be deaf, the other makes a wry Mouth, one cries,
and another laughs, whilst others drink healths in Chocolate, which continues
till-Midnight.

The Fish Manati.
A King of this Country in former times used to feed the Fish Manati with
Bread, in the Lake Guainabo, where it would appear at its being called Matto,
Matto, which signifies Noble-minded, and oftentimes carry eight or ten Boys on
its Back from one side of the Lake to the other; but being shot by a Spaniard
with an Arrow, never appeared again.

There is likewise a black Beast in this Country called Cascu, resembling in
some things a Hog; it has a hard Skin, little Eyes, open Ears, cloven Feet,
short Nose, and makes such a terrible noise, that it affrights those which hear
it.

No less strange and wonderful is the Fox-Ape, which has two Bellies one under
another; in the lowermost of which it carries its Young, which are never
brought into the World till they are able to shift for their own Food. It has
the Body of a Fox, Feet like a Man's Hands, and Ears like a Batt.

It will not be amiss before we conclude with this Province, to give you a
Relation of the Discourse which happened Anno 1527. between the Spanish Commander
Francisco de Monteio and the Nicaraguan Casique Alquinotex, who being a hundred
and ten years old, told him, That before the Spaniards arrival there, great
numbers of his Soldiers perished after a strange manner; for after having
vomited abundance of Worms, they fell down dead on a sudden: those that escaped
the Contagion differing amongst themselves, made two Parties, which twice
Engaging with one another, each of them lost above a hundred and fifty thousand
Men. Yet both these Plagues were no ways to be compared to the Slaughter which
the Spaniards had made amongst them.

About the same time an Italian, called Hieronymo Bonzo, Lodging with a
Nicaraguan Nobleman that understood the Spanish Tongue, was thus set upon by
him: What do not ( Oh Christ) the Christians do! they no sooner get their Foot
into an Indian 's Hut, but they commandingly call for Maiz, Honey,
Winter-Clothes, Gold, Silver, and a Woman to cool their lustful desires:
Certainly there is nothing more vicious on Earth. To which Bonzo gave him this
Answer: The wicked Spaniards commit oftentimes unseemly things. The Indian
again suddenly retorted, saying, Where are any such Men to be found as good
Spaniards? I have never known any but wicked Villains. To which Bonzo said, Why
have you made place for them on Nicaragua? Which was thus replied to by the
Nobleman: All People round about took Oath on the first News of the Christians
arrival, to hazard all, and fight to the last Man, before they would be under
the insupportable Yoke, with which they had heard other Countries were
oppressed with by them. To which purpose they made ready Bows, Arrows, Lances,
Stones, Clubs, and other Weapons of War: But when it came to the trial, the
Spanish Horse, of which they had never seen the like, struck such a terror into
the Indians, that they fled, and sent two Agents to Monteio to desire Peace;
but their Design was only to gain time, that they might gather new Forces, to
venture a second Encounter; which proved as fatal to them as the first. Then
desiring Peace once more, they gathered all that were able to bear Arms, and
swore one to another not to stir a Foot; and withal made a Law, That whosoever
did shrink should be killed immediately: But the Women being informed hereof,
begged that they might rather suffer under the Spanish Yoke, than be torn in
pieces by their Dogs, or killed by their Bullets and Swords, alleging, that
they were not able to resist the Spaniards; and entreated them, that if they
were resolved to go on with their first Design, they would first send their
Wives and Children to the other World, that so they might not fall into the
hands of the merciless and bloody Christians: Whereupon most Voices judged it
convenient to make use of the Opportunity, and to submit to Monteio. But his
cruel dealings made some to contradict that Determination, for which they paid
dearly; for not only they, but their little Infants, were put to the most
cruel Deaths imaginable; which made many of them also to lay violent hands on
themselves.

SECT. V. Costarica.
Bounds and Nature of the Country.
COstarica borders on the East with Veragua; on the South and East, with the
Sea; and on the North, with Nicaragua. The Country it self is barren and
mountainous; whose Inhabitants were valiant enough to Encounter with the
Spanish Forces, being unwilling to lose their former Privileges.

This Coast was discovered first by Christopher Columbus, who Anno 1502.
Sailing up the Rivers Belen and Veragua with Barques, took much Gold out of the
Mines Urira, but chiefly from between the Roots of Trees which were grown
together.

SECT. VI. Veragua.
Bounds and Nature of the Country.
VEragua is bounded on the West with Costarica; on the East it has the
District, or Country of Panama, being otherwise washed on all sides by the
Sea. It has its Name from a River of great note in this Tract, by which it was
first discovered. The Country is for the most part mountainous, and the Soil
outwardly barren, but recompencing all defects with the abundance of its more
inward Wealth, that is to say, in the richness of its Mines, of which it is
said to afford many, and so inexhaustibly rich and good, that the Spaniards
here know no end of their Wealth; although by the stoutness and untameableness
of the Natives, it was a long time, and they met with many difficulties, before
they could make themselves Masters of the Treasure.

Its chief Towns.
The chief Towns they have here are 1. La Conception, lying at the Mouth of a
River so named, and the Seat of the Governor.

2. La Trinidad, upon the Banks of the same River likewise, but down toward
Port Beleno, and about six Leagues Eastward of Conception.

3. St. Foy, twelve Leagues more to the South, where the Spaniards melt their
Gold, and cast it into Bars or Ingots.

4. Carlos, a Town they have upon the Coast of Mare del Zur.

5. Philippina, another on the West of Carlos; both of these seated upon a
large capacious Bay; before which there lie certain little Islands, to the
number of thirty or more, which the Spaniards are said to have wholly
dispeopled long since, by forcing the Natives over into the Continent to work
in the Mines, as usually they did before the Emperor's Prohibition: but now
they use Slaves or Negro's, which they buy for that purpose from Guinee and
other Parts.

SECT. VII. Guatimala, properly so called.
Bounds of the Country.
GUatimala, specially so called, has on the West the River Xicalapa, which
divides it from Vera Paz; on the East it is bounded with the Country of
Nicaragua; on the North, with Honduras; and on the South, with Mare del Zur.

This Country was conquered by Peter de Alvarado, Anno 1525. It is, by reason
of its neighborhood with Vera Paz, not altogether clear of Mountains, but
otherwise well watered with Rivers, and enriched with fair and fruitful
Valleys, which afford not only good Pasturage, and many great Herds of Cattle,
but likewise good store of Wheat, Maiz, and other Fruits of the Earth. Great
plenty of Cotton-Wool is generally both here and in the other Provinces, viz.
Vera Paz, Chiapa, etc. some Medicinal Woods likewise, and Liquors, and
absolutely the best Sulphur in America. The People are generally tractable and
well disposed, both in point of Religion and civil Government.

Towns of note.
The Towns of chief note are 1. Guatimala, now called St. Jago de Guatimala
since the re-building thereof; for about the Year 1586. it was almost buried in
Ashes, which one of the neighboring Mountains, for the space of six Months
together, continually belched out in such fearful quantities, that many People
were slain, the old City deserted, and a new one built in another place. The
day before this sad Accident happened, the neighboring Mountains were observed to
shiver, and a great noise was heard from under Ground; which amazing the
Indians, the news thereof was carried to the Bishop, Franciscus Moroquin, who
narrowly enquiring into the Causes of these Accidents, and what they might
portend, found that a sad Event would suddenly follow, as accordingly it did;
for about midnight on the eighth of August, Anno 1541. such a mighty store of
Rain fell, as if the Clouds had been all dissolved into Water, which came
rolling from the Rocky Mountains with such violence, that it washed down great
Stones, which carried on by the strength of the Water against the Houses, beat
them down; and none could have seen how they were ruined, had not the mighty
flashes of Lightning, followed by terrible claps of Thunder, lighted the Night.
Some instantly deserting this miserable place, fled up into the Country, and
there built a new Guatimala (as abovementioned) sur-nam'd St. Jago, three
Leagues farther toward the East, in a Valley through which flow two Rivers,
between two Vulcans, or smoking Mountains, which sometimes vomit forth
terrible Flames, mixed with dreadful Thunderclaps, Ashes, and great Stones,
insomuch that the Ground all about it, which is exceeding fruitful, seems to
move. There are many of these Vulcans in several parts of America, as namely at
Arequipa in the Kingdom of Peru, at Puebla de los Angelos, in the Province of
Tlascalla abovesaid, a Mountain of so great height, that they are fain to go
little less than thirty Leagues turning and wind-before they can reach the top
of it, and others in several other places. They are generally Mountains of
great height, and running sharp upwards, but at the top containing some
quantity of plain and level Ground; in the midst whereof is a Pit or Hole, out
of which abundance of Smoke and fiery Sparkles are vomited almost continually,
and so deep, that they are supposed for the most part to reach to the very
bottom of the Mountain. Some of these Vulcans cast forth neither Fire not
Smoke, yet are clearly seen to burn at the bottom with a quick Fire, and which
is so extremely hot, that it instantly melts Iron, or any other Metal that is
cast into it, as by experience has been found: for some conceiving that the
Matter which maintains these Fires within the Bowels of the Earth so long
together, can be nothing else but melted Gold, have endeavored several times to
extract and draw it forth in certain Vessels of Iron and Brass, which they have
caused to be let down into the bottom of the Vulcan or Pit, by long Iron Chains
made on purpose: but, as we said, the extreme heat and force of the Fire below
always melted them before they could be drawn up again, and by that means has
rendered all such Attempts frustrate. In this Town, now called St. Jago, reside
above six hundred Spanish Commanders, and more than twenty five thousand
Indians which pay Tribute. They have also a brave Church and two Cloisters, one
belonging to the Dominicans, and another to the Order La Merced, and likewise a
noble Hospital. Not far from thence is a place called Yzaleos, where there are
Orchards of Cacoa two Leagues in square, each of them producing yearly as much
as fifty thousand Men are able to carry. They reckon the Cacao by Contels,
which is the number of four hundred; by Xequipiles, of eight thousand; and by
Carga's, of twenty four thousand. In this County is a Mountain, whose top
smoking continually consumes by degrees, and oftentimes covers the neighboring
Country with Ashes. The Water which flows from the same differs very much, for
some of it is wholesome and fit to drink; some foul and stinking, and some turns
Wood, if laid in the same* to Stone. Here is also the Beast whose Head is
highly esteemed for the Bezoar-Stone, which it carries in the same. Here is
likewise a little Bear, which in stead of a Mouth, has a long Nose with a
round Hole in it, and a hollow Tongue, with which it sucks Honey, and disturbs
the Nests of Pismires. The Women in this Place make curious Earthen Ware,
colored either red or black with the Mud of two several Brooks. The Indians
called the boiling Fountains in this County Hell, because they bubble up a
Bowes-shot high, and make the River Caliente, which, notwithstanding it has
passed half a League through a wide Channel, retains its exceeding heat. Not
far from it lies a Stone, which having a Crack in the middle, sends forth a
thick Damp, and against bad Weather a thundering noise. On the Mountains grow
exceeding large Trees especially Oak. Here Pismires which are of an
extraordinary bigness, are brought to Market amongst other Provisions.

2. St. Salvador, forty Leagues distant from Guatimala Eastward, and seated
upon the River Guacapa, and having about it a small Territory, which by some is
accounted a distinct Country or Province.

3. Acaputla, a Town of the Natives, situated at the Mouth of the River, and
being as it were, the Port-Town to St. Salvador.

4. Trinidad, a Town of great resort, being the greatest Empory and Place of
Traffic for all sorts of Commodities, betwixt the People of New Spain and
those of Peru.

5. St. Michaels, two or three Leagues distant from the Bay Fonseca, upon the
South Sea.

6. Xeres de la Frontera, on the Confines of this Province, toward the Borders
of Nicaragua, besides several Villages which we shall have occasion to mention.

In the middle of a Lake within this Territory is an Island, on which the
Indians had a Tradition, That a Man no sooner set his Foot but he died
immediately: which Opinion of theirs was changed when the Spaniards went
thither in Boat-fulls and returned safe again, with Relation that they had seen
a large Stone Image, resembling a Woman; before which lay the Ashes and Bones
of slain People.

Round about the Village Guaymoco grow great Balsom-Trees, which afford Timber
of fifty five Foot long. From this Village leads a Way to the City Salvador,
near which the forementioned River Guachapa runs with so many windings, that
the Traveller is forced to cross the same several times before he can come to
the Foot of a Mountain which formerly cast out terrible Flames; but now the
combustible Matter being consumed, there appears only a great Hole on the top,
with Ashes in a large compass round about it. At the Foot of the same are two
Pits, one of which smoaks continually in such a manner, that it stifles all
those that approach it; yet the Mountain is well overspread with Cedars and
Pine-Trees.

Three Leagues farther lies the Village Nixapa; and not far from thence the
Hill Elmal Pais, which consists of great Stones and Ashes, wonderfully mixed
together: No less wonderful is a Brook which flows in the Night till Morning,
and then sinks into the Ground: And in the Country Choluteca is another, which
hides it self at Noon, and appears again toward Night. The Cavern which
formerly produced Fire and Smoke, now affords good Water to the Village
Curcatan, and City Salvador: Near the Village Yztepegve are five Springs, which
cast up Allom and Sulphur. The Natives Chontales which speak several Languages,
flock to the Village Mimilla, to make Offerings; not far from hence are two
Pits, one of which is full of boiling Water, and the other as cold as Ice:
Moreover, Cocori lies near a high Mountain, on the top of which is a very
turbulent Lake.

The chiefest Haven of this Country, Havens.
which lies along the South Sea, is Bahia de Fonseca, Discovered by Gonsalves
Davila, Anno 1522. and so named from Joan Rodrigas de Fonseca, Bishop of
Burgos; In the middle thereof appears the Island Petronella, with nine others,
of which four are inhabited by Indians.

The good convenience of the Haven Fonseca, induced some of the Spaniards to
make a new Passage from the side of the Southern Ocean, to the Northern, viz.
from Panama to Nombre de Dios, designing it to reach from the said Haven
Fonseca, unto Puerto de Carellos, which are distant one from the other forty
five Leagues; most of it good way, except some overgrown Mountains, which
might be made passable with little trouble; to which purpose they built the
Town Buena Esperanca, yet nevertheless the Work remained unprosecuted.

There are moreover reckoned as appertaining to Guatimala, the small Provinces
Soconusco, Suchitepec, and Chilulteca, the chief of them being Soconusco, to
which belongs the Town of Gevetlan, where the Spanish Governor has his
Residence; the rest seem to be only small Territories about Towns of the same
Name, in like manner as St. Salvador, and St. Miguel beforementioned.

CHAP. V. The Kingdom of Mexico, or New-Spain.
Bounds of New-Spain.
NEw Spain, the chiefest part of the Northern America, reckons in length from
the East-Point of Yucatan, to the place where Mechoacon juts against
Guadalajara three hundred and sixty Leagues; and in breadth from the Northern
parts of Panucos, to the Southern Ocean, a hundred and eighty Leagues; besides
a great part which lies to the Northward, behind inaccessable Mountains and
Wildernesses; inhabited by the Tepecuaenes, Guachucules, Cacatequas,
Tecaxquines, and others; and was, before the Spaniards Conquered and
Dismembered it, much larger than now it is; for as much as it comprehended the
whole Province of New-Gallicia, and reached from the furthest Point of the
Peninsula of Jucatan Southward as far as New-Biscay, and the Confines of
California Northward; containing in length seven hundred Leagues and more, and
about half as much in breadth: But since the Conquest by Hernando Cortez and
his Followers, the whole Country of New-Gallicia is taken from it, and made a
distinct Government or Audiencia, as the Spaniards call it, of it self.

map of Central America ^VA HISPANI ^OVA GALICIA GVATIMALA.



The Original.
The Natives of the Country are of the Race of the Chichimecae, a Salvage and
Wild sort of People, of the Province of New-Gallicia, especially in the Parts
of New-Biscay, living in Forests and in deep Caves under Ground; whose
Posterity do still at this day much trouble and annoy the Country thereabouts;
notwithstanding all the endeavors of the Spaniards, and the Garrisons which
they keep in those parts on purpose to destroy them. About five hundred years
ago, or more, according to the account of the Mexican Annals, diverse Hoards, as
they are called, of these Chichimecae, weary, it seems, of their Woods and
subterraneous dwellings, issued out into the more open Air, and fell down in
huge multitudes into these Southerly parts of America, which are now called
Mexico and New-Spain; not all at once, but at several times, and under several
names, viz. of the Suchimilci, Chalcae, Tepanecae, Tlascaltecae, and others,
who subduing or driving out the People they found in those parts, Seated
themselves in their room: And though at first every Nation or Company of them,
as they came, seized upon some Province apart by themselves, and held it, as it
were, in Sovereignty to themselves, without acknowledgement of any dependence
or subjection to their Neighbors, or those that were there before them; yet in
Tract of time, and by fortune of the Wars, which they made one upon another,
they fell under the Government of one King, viz. the King of Mexico, which was
the chief City of the Province.

The state of the Mexican Kingdom before the Spaniards arrival.
This Kingdom, at the time that the Spaniards first Discovered the Country, was
Governed by a Prince, named Motezuma; one, who by his Valor and good success in
the Wars, had in a few years of his Reign, before the Spaniards came thither,
subdued the better part of a hundred Cities and great Towns to his Dominion;
and held in actual submission to his Government, and Tributary to him, no less
than thirty several Casiques or petty Princes; every one of which paid him
Tribute, and were able upon occasion to bring into the Field an hundred
thousand Men: He is said to have been, for his Person, a wise and good Prince,
just, affable, and tender of his Subjects good: but by reason of some heavy
exactions, which his own power, and the Practice of his Ancestors before him,
gave him the confidence to Impose upon the Conquered People, a great part of
his Subjects lived but unwillingly under his Obedience, and rather by
constraint than otherwise: being also further exasperated against him by one
barbarous Custom, which the Mexicans frequently used, viz. the Sacrificing of
Men. Their manner was, whenever they had any solemn occasion of doing Honor
to their Devil-god Vitzilopuchtli, as they call him, to send out an Army of Men
from Mexico, into some of the subdued Provinces, (in case they had no Enemies
nearer Hand) and to fetch in as many Men as they thought good, to be
Sacrificed; whose flesh likewise afterward they did eat in a solemn Banquet.
This being a business of their Satanical Religion, and Motezuma a Prince
extremely Superstitious and Devoted to the Service of his gods, it is said,
that he Sacrificed commonly, one year with another, twenty thousand Men, and
some years, upon extraordinary occasions, not less than fifty thousand: So
great and grievous a Tyranny, by the just Judgment and Permission of Almighty
God, for their great and unnatural sins, did the Enemy of Mankind exercise upon
them. He was likewise much given to Women, but it was only to such as were
counted his Wives; of which he is said to have had no less than a hundred and
fifty with Child by him at one time.

The bounds of the Mexican Kingdom.
The Bounds of this Kingdom at present are thus; on the East it has a large Arm
of the Sea, which they call The Bay of New-Spain, or The Gulf of Mexico; On the
West, it has some parts of New-Gallicia, and Mare del Zur; on the North, the
rest of New-Gallicia, and part of Florida; and on the South, Mare del Zur
again, and part of Guatimala. It extends it self in length from Jucatan
South-East, to the Borders of New Gallicia Northward, above eight hundred
Italian Miles, and in breadth, from Panuco to the South Sea, about half so
much. It lies wholly under the Torrid Zone: nor is it a Country generally so
mountainous or high seated, as some others of America are, but for the most
part level or low; yet is it so fanned, (for three parts at least of four, by
the cooling Blasts of the Sea, and the Heats otherwise so moderated with
frequent Rains, which it has constantly three Months in the Year, viz. June,
July, and August) that the Air is rendered thereby exceeding temperate, and the
Climate not unhealthful, especially to temperate Bodies, and such as are never
so little used to it. Riches of Mexico.
A goodly Country it is, of inexhaustible Wealth and Riches, whether we regard
the Mines of Gold, Silver, Brass, Iron, etc. of all which it has many, and
very good; or the Fruits of the Earth, abundance of Cattle, plenty of Corn and
Grain, of which they have two Harvests; or any other Commodities and Endowments
of Nature, which serve for the enriching of the World. Amongst other things, it
affords Cassia, the Fruit whereof is a thing well known, and much commended by
the Apothecaries for its use in Physic, especially in Purgations, and removing
of all Obstructions of Phlegm, Choler, etc. Such store of Balm, Amber, all
sorts of Gums and precious Liquors, as no Country in the World is better
furnished with excellent Perfumes and Physic, than the Kingdom of New Spain.

Among the many other sorts of Trees which this Country produces, the most
remarkable is their Tunas, Tunas Tre^.
of which, there being five kinds, one is called Cumbeba, from whence proceeds
that admirable Tincture, commonly known by the Name of Cochinele, which is thus
made: On the top of this Tree is found a Worm, which has the bigness and shape
of a great Louse, which so increases, that in one years time a hundred Trees
shall be stocked from the seed of one of these Animals. The Worm it self being
white, after the Skin is carefully pulled off, put in cold Water or Ashes, and
so dried, becomes Cochinele. The best sort of it is to be had in Tlascala, and
that in so great a quantity, that no less than five or six hundred Arrobes of
Spanish Measure (each Arrobe is as much as five English Bushels) is yearly
Transported thence. The other sort, which grows on the Mountains, and that
which is not so carefully gathered, called Chichimecas, Dies not so well as the
right Cochinele. The Tunas also bears a Fruit long and whitish, with a smooth
Shell, and full of little Seeds like Figs: The red, which are inferior in taste
to the white, colors the Urine red.

Pine-Apples.
The Pine-Apples which grow here differ from the Spanish, for the Pulp is not
enclosed in a Shell: They have a pleasant smell, and a Pulp, which if eaten
much of, causes an Appetite, it being of a tartish taste; they keep good a long
time when Salted.

Fruit Cacao.
But much more beneficial is the Cacao, with which Fruit New Spain drives a
great Trade; nay, serves for Coined Money. When they deliver a Parcel of Cacao,
they tell them by five, thirty, and a hundred. Their Charity to the Poor never
exceeds above one Cacao-Nut. The chief reason for which this Fruit is so highly
esteemed, is for the Chocolate, which is made of the same, without which the
Inhabitants (being so used to it) are not able to live, notwithstanding it
causes Phlegm and Vomiting to those that are strangers thereto. When the
English Commander Thomas Candish coming into the Haven Guatulco, burnt two
hundred thousand Tun of Cacao, it proved no small loss to all New Spain, the
Provinces Guatimala and Nicaragua not producing so much in a whole year. The
Trees on which this Fruit grows are divided into four sorts, differing in
bigness and shape: all of them are very tender, for they will not only grow in
no place but on their usual Ground, but cannot endure the cold Nights Storms,
or excesses of Heat; wherefore the Cacao-Trees which grow out of the Fruit that
falls off, come to no perfection, except in shady and warm Valleys; which is
also the reason why the Planters of New Spain plant the great Leafy Tree
Cacaoquanthly (that is, The Mother of the Cacao's) near the Cacao-Tree, that it
may the better grow under the Shadow thereof; in which manner whole Woods are
planted: In the second year it bears Fruit, which is first ripe in January, and
again in the midst of Summer. Amongst the four sorts the chiefest is Quathuitl,
of an indiffent height, and full of sharp-pointed Leaves, which are fast to
the Boughs without Stalks, and bears a great Flower of a yellowish color,
which falling off, leaves long, tough, and hairy Threads behind them, out of
which grows the Cacavently, a Fruit which is oval, heavy like a Melon, of a
Saffron-colour, of a fat and thick Juice, a bitterish, yet pleasant taste, and
very cooling; being dried in the Sun it is thereby made fit to keep; it is
likewise highly esteemed, because the Chocolate is made of the same. Before the
Spaniards made themselves Masters of Mexico, no other Drink was esteemed but
that of the Cacao; none caring for Wine, notwithstanding the Soil produces
Vines every where in great abundance of it self. But besides the Quathuil, New
Spain has three other sorts of Cacao-Trees, viz. Mecanal, pleasant to behold
for its height, large Leaves and Fruit; the next is the Xochucaual, which is
less than the former; and lastly the least sort, which is called Halcacahual.
The Fruit of these four sorts of Trees, though differing in shape, yet is all
one in power and operation.

The Spaniards to make Chocolate mix Maiz (by the Mexicans called Tlaolli)
either whole or Ground, or boiled before with Chalk. Moreover, they put the red
Kernels also in the Drink, which grow in the Fruit of the Achiote-Tree. Of the
Kernels, which are dry and cooling, boiled in Water, and stirred till it comes
to a Pap, they make Cakes, which mixed with the Chocolate, gives it a cleansing
power, and takes away all tastes that cause vomiting.

The Pepper Mecaxochite, which grows creeping along the Earth, with long and
fragrant Leaves, round Stalks, hairy Roots, and three long Cods which shoot
upwards. This Pepper tempers the over-cooling property of the Chocolate.
Lastly, it consists also of Xochinacatlis, Tlilxochitle, and the Rozenish Gum,
Holli. The Xocinacatli is a Tree with small Leaves, and great Flowers hanging
on long Stalks that bend downwards, within of a purple, and without of a
dark-green color, of a sweet smell, and resembling an Ear; and this Flower
also gives a pleasant taste and wholesome operation to the Chocolate. The
Tlilxochitle runs up to the tops of Trees like Ivy; the Flowers, of a darkish
brown color, cleanse the Nerves, strengthen the Brain, and take away the
rawness of the Stomach. The Holli drops out of the Holquabuytle, a smooth barky
Tree full of Moisture, which at first appearance is white, then yellowish, and
lastly black, which kneaded into round Balls and Roasted, is a remedy against a
Looseness and soreness of the Bowels.

Nature of the People.
The Natives of the Country are very ingenious in diverse mechanical Arts,
especially in making of Feather-Pictures, a piece of Curiosity wherein they are
held to be incomparably, or rather inimitably excellent; and so industrious at
it, that although the Americans generally are not a People overmuch addicted
to any kind of Labor or Study, yet at this they will sit a whole day together,
without either Meat or Drink, only out of a natural affection they have to the
Work, and a desire to be excellent in it; The Country indeed affords them
great variety of Birds and other Fowl, of most rare and exquisite Colors,
which is a great advantage to their Skill, and helps much to the accomplishment
of their Work. They Paint likewise very curiously upon their Cottons; and are
held to be generally the best Goldsmiths in the World; of most perfect skill in
the purging and refining of all sorts of Metals, but especially of Gold and
Silver: And yet in other things so strangely stupid and ignorant, that when the
Spaniards first appeared amongst them, not a few of them (as it is reported)
took the Horse and Man both for one Creature; and when the Horse Neighed, they
would enquire very seriously what he said.

Lakes of New-Spain.
There are likewise many fair Lakes in this Province, but the principal are
those of Chapala and Mexico: the former of which is in the more Northern parts
of the Kingdom, toward the Borders of New Gallicia, and is chiefly famous for
the abundance of good Salt that is yearly made and Transported thence. The
other of Mexico is one of the largest and goodliest in the World, of circular
form (as some say) little less than nine hundred Miles in compass, environed
with the main Land, the Peninsula, or Cape of Florida, Jucatan, and the Island
Cuba, having two only Passages in and out, and both of them well fortified:
the one betwixt the Point of Jucatan and the Isle Cuba, where the Tide
violently enters; and the other betwixt the said Island and the Cape of
Florida, where it goes as violently out: upon which Gulf the King of Spain
has always some good Ships in readiness for all occasions; and by them, it is
supposed, he does more assure his Estates in those parts of America, than by
all the Garrisons besides.

The whole Kingdom of Mexico, or New-Spain, is subdivided into these Inferior
Provinces:

The several Provinces.
1. The Archbishopric of Mexico. 2. The Bishopric, Mechoacon. 3. Los Angelos,
or Tlascale. 4. Guaxaca. 5. The Lordship Panuco: And 6. the Province Tabasco.

Mexico, the chief Province of New-Spain, so denominated from Mexico the chief
City, not only of the Province, but of all America; lying between Tlascale and
Mechoacan, extends in length from North to South, a hundred and seventeen
Leagues; and in breadth along the Southern Ocean, seventeen, but up in the
Country, fifty view NOVA MEXICO
four Leagues: In which circumference lie to the North-East, Lateotlalpa,
Mextitlan, Xilotepeque, and Panuco; Westward, Matalzingo, and Cultepeque;
Eastward, Tuzcoco; South-East, Chalco; Southward, Suchmilco, Tlaluc, Coyxca,
and Acapulco.

Bound of Mixicana.
It is bounded on the East, with the East, with the Gulf of Mexico; on the West,
with Mechoacan; on the North, with Panuco, and some parts of New-Gallicia; and
on the South, with Tlascalla.

Nature of the Country.
This Country is both large and rich, containing not much less than one hundred
and thirty Leagues, both in length and breadth; and if it yields any thing to
Peru in the plenty of Gold and Silver, it is certain it much excels it in many
other Commodities; as namely, in all sorts of Fruits, abundance of Cattle,
plenty of Corn and Grain; in all which, the advantage this Country has, not
only of Peru, but of all the other Provinces of America beside, is well known:
Not to speak any thing of the great plenty and variety of good Fish, which both
the Rivers and Lakes of this Country afford, which is very great; insomuch,
that the very Tribute of the one Lake of Mexico is said to yield an Income of
above twenty thousand Crowns yearly, one with another.

The People of the Country are generally Industrious and Active, especially
since the Spaniards came among them; rich Merchants, if they apply themselves
to it; and they say likewise good Soldiers, when they are trained and employed
that way.

Chief Towns of Mexicana.
The chief Towns and places of the Province are, 1. Mexico, both anciently and
at present, the Metropolis and Capital City; being the Seat of an Archbishop,
and the ordinary Residence of the Viceroy, and chief Governors of New-Spain.

Description of the City Mexico.
This City, by the Indians was formerly called Tenustatan, lies in nineteen
Degrees and a half to the Northward of the Equinoctial-Line, raised out of a
brackish Lake, full of muddy Water; whose circumference along the Mountains is
seventy Leagues: This Lake swarms continually with Boats, which carry the
People to and again from one inhabited Island to another; four Stone-bridges,
no less costly than artificial, with Arches and Gates in several places, lead
from the City to the Main Continent.

The fresh Water which they have in the City Mexico, is led into the same
through Pipes that lie in the bottom of the Lake; but none are to enjoy the
benefit thereof, before they have paid a certain Sum of Money to the King's
Collectors.

Moreover, the City divided into Islands, contains above sixty thousand Houses,
which being built on several Isles, have large Bridges, which reach from one to
another; some that lie in the middle of the Lake, they approach in little
Boats; round about the Lake, especially where the way leads from the Continent
into the City, lie several Suburbs, all enclosed with Walls; between which
stand strong Towers, covered on the top: To keep off the force of the Water,
the Tenustatans have with great labor and charge, made a Bank through the Lake,
half way along the City: But the Lake Laguna, from whose bottom Mexico is
raised, is divided in two parts, the Sweet Lake, which is higher than the Salt,
falls in to the same through Sluices, with Bridges built on the Bank that leads
from the City to the main Land: The Salt-Lake, which has brackish and bitter
Water, ebbs and flows according as the Wind blows; no Fish is able to live in
the same, because the Water which in the sight of Mexico falls into the same
out of the Mountains, has a sulphury Ground: All along the shore, much Salt is
made, with which the Citizens drive a great Trade: There are continually above
a hundred thousand Boats (by the Indians called Acales, and by the Spaniards,
Canoos) going off and on from one shore to another: The fresh Water Lake, which
is bigger than the salt, and feeds small Fishes, has above fifty Suburbs about
the same, of which, some boast five thousand, and others ten thousand Houses:
Nay, the Suburb Tescuco, in former times was no way inferior to Mexico in
bigness; since the Spaniards have been Masters of this City, they stopped up many
Moats, to enlarge their narrow Streets.

Besides three public Markets, every open place affords all sorts of
Provisions daily; the Indians call the Markets Tianguystly, and the Spaniards,
Tianguez; the first and chiefest stands in Tatelulco, adorned with Galleries on
three sides; in the middle of this Square, which is accounted the biggest in
the World, stands next to the place of Execution, a stately Fountain; the Tents
which are every Week pitched up here for Trade, amount to above thirty
thousand. The second Market called St. John's, is in Mexico, and swarms
continually with People. The third is called Hipolito, from the Guardian-Saint
of the City, whither every Wednesday and Thursday comes such a multitude of
People, that this spacious Market is too little for them; for the sale of every
Commodity, a peculiar corner is allotted; but great Packs are left to be
disposed of in Boats, which lie near the shore.

At the four corners of the City, at present called St. John, St. Maria la
Rotonda, St. Pablo, and St. Sebastian, are above four thousand Spanish
Families, and thirty thousand Indians, besides what inhabit Tatelulco, now St.
Jago.

The Temperature of the Air.
The Air in this place is very strange; in the day time, the Sky is generally
Serene; the North Wind against the Evening brings Rain, of which the Mountain
Tepeaquilla lying a little League beyond the City, gives certain Testimonies;
for when a black Cloud appears on the top thereof, it is certain to be blown
from thence over Mexico with Rain: After a moist Evening follows a Starlight
Night, and a pleasant Morning: From September till May, it is generally dry
Weather here, but if it chances to Rain* the Rain is attended with a Storm,
which occasions a sulphurous Fogg, very unwholsom, and so dark, that one Man
cannot discern another, and causes a pain through all the Limbs, nay sometimes
Death it self; wherefore, when soever it approaches, every one keeps close in
his House, or goes into the Country.

Moreover, it is worthy of observation, how strangely this City is altered
since its being Conquered by the Spaniards, and especially when Anno 1629. it
was overflowed by a mighty Deluge; which alteration by Barnabe Cabo, in a
Letter to the Jesuit Hernande Leon, is thus set forth:

Baruabe Cabo his Description of Mexico.
Mexico, says he, lying in a Valley between high Mountains, has seventy
Leagues in circumference: The Valley being Oval, is for the most part
interspersed with Lakes, which the Indians, and after them the Spaniards have
dug, only the Lake which washes Mexico is natural; and to stop the
Water-falls, there are Banks and Sluices every where: The Flood before
Mexicalcingo flows a Fathom and a half higher than before Mexico. The four
other Lakes to the Northward have much more Water than the Mexicalcingo, of
which, some have scarce four, others but three Leagues in circumference; when
as Mexicalcingo's Lake reckons fifteen, and Mexico's sixteen. On the breaking
of the Banks, Mexico has often suffered great damage, wherefore the Viceroy
de Valesco took special care to make a vent for the Water through the lowest
Mountains; whereupon the Country being Surveyed, the Northern Coast near the
Village Gueguenoca, was found to be the most convenient. But about the manner
of letting the Water out, the Surveyors could no ways agree; most of them were
of opinion to dig Channels, into which the Lakes might discharge their Waters;
others, thought best to make a Gutter under Ground, which last Velasca put in
hand with unhappy success, because the Laborers who under-min'd the Ground,
were choked with the falling in of the Sand, or stifled with the sulphurous
Vapors rising out of the Earth: Nevertheless, they gave not over the Work,
though they began it quite another way, for a Frenchman, called Henry Martin,
advised to deepen the River Quaiotitlan, which falls into the Laguna, and by
that means make it a Bay, into which the Laguna might pour her over-charg'd
Waters: Which design, though contradicted by the Jesuit John Sanchez, was put
in practice; by which means the Water fell in a short time so much, that they
could walk dry to the Cliff El Ponnel, lying a League from the City; wherefore
they continually labored on this Work, till such time as Conde de Getues came
over for Viceroy, who judged the Charge to be unnecessary, nay Commanded the
Ditches to be broken down, which stopped the Water along the Silver Mines of
Pachuca, that he might see exactly how much it would overflow Mexico: Mexico
overflowed.
After which the Flood rose yearly higher and higher; till at last, Anno 1629.
a mighty Rain falling, swole the Laguna in such a manner, that it overwhelmed
all Mexico, washed down the Houses, all Merchandises which could not endure the
Water, were spoiled, and had not they had innumerable Boats to help them,
thousands of People might have perished in this Deluge: But at last, Henry
Martin restored again the forementioned Channel to its former Perfection, and
brought the Flood which fell down out of the Mountains within the Banks of the
River.

Quantitlan dug also a Channel of eight thousand Fathom long, and made an
Arched Sewer under Ground of the same length, which Sewer has at every two
hundred Fathoms distance, Vent-holes, and a hole of sixty Fathom deep, and by
this means, diverting abundance of Water, they dried Mexico in a short time:
When the Banks and Streets began no sooner to appear, but they fell to work to
raise the Ground, and to lay Bridges, and also to build more Boats. The
Citizens likewise found it convenient to make another deep Sewer for the
carrying away of more Water, notwithstanding it required twenty years labor.
The River, which in a manner runs through the middle of the City, is curbed by
a Wall; a crooked Bridge, with many Arches, and of a long extent, leads to the
City, Stately Palaces.
in which stand many brave Palaces, with pleasant Walks of Trees about them;
the Cloisters of several Orders of Friars, appear with high Spires and Turrets,
above all other Buildings.

And Monasteries.
The Franciscans have here four very sumptuous Buildings: The first, Consecrated
to St. Francis, stands in the uppermost part of Mexico, within a large square
Court, and on each a pleasant Walk of Trees: The Cloister it self is very high,
and trebble Walled, with Towers and Galleries about it: In the middle of the
City stands another Tower'd-Cloyster, called St. Jago. The third lies a little
distance from it, which being built long, has a stately Turret, and is called
Maria de Rodonda. The fourth, not far from the first, but much smaller, is
named San Diego; these belong to the Franciscans. The Augustine Monks are also
no way inferior to the Franciscans, for magnificent Structures, with spacious
Halls, high Towers, and rich Balconies: The first is denominated from St.
Augustine, just behind which appears San Pabla, less stately than the rest. St.
Sebastian, near the Laguna, is built in manner like a Church, whose Tower ends
like a Pyramid. The Cloister San Cruz, belonging also to the Augustines, built
square, stands near the Market, in the middle of which stands a stately
Fountain: The Court within environed with thick Walls, amazes the beholders by
the pleasantness of its situation.

Moreover, the Dominicans inhabit two brave Cloisters; the chiefest Dedicated
to St. Dominic, is eight square; to which is adjoining a pretty large Church,
with a Steeple: The second, which stands on one side of St. Jago, and consists
of three several Structures, is called Collegio de Porta Coeli, Opposite to St.
Jago, near the great Market the Jesuits have a stately College, or
High-School, where many are brought up in the Latin and Greek Tongues, whence
it is called, Casa Professa Les Estudios.

There is also another Habitation of Religious Men, called Illefonse Sanna
Noviciad, which for State, may vie with any Royal Palace.

Cloisters be^^ing to the Monkt of La Merced.
The Monks of La Merced dwell in two Cloisters, both Consecrated to the Virgin
Mary, yet Sirnam'd Montseratte, and Carmel: The first lying not far from the
River, is a mean Structure, in comparison to the last; the uppermost Tower of
whose Temple appears above all other Buildings, in the upper part of Mexico
near the Cloister of St. Francis.

Women's Cloisters.
The Women have also fourteen Cloisters here, the chiefest whereof is Dedicated
to Catharine of Siena; but much more splendid is that of Santa Teresa, built
like an Imperial Palace; famous for its stately Gardens, and round Fountain,
which continually spouts Water. The rest, which we shall only name, are La
Encarnacio, Santa Ines, Jesus-Maria, Laurenso, Las Des-calcas, Santa Clara,
Juan de la Penitentia, Regina Coeli, Santa Monica, las Rocogidas, Jeronymo, and
Conceptione; besides the Almshouses, Real de los Indios, and Nostra Senora del
Amor: There are likewise eight Hospitals, viz. de Dios, del Spiritu Santo, Juan
de Doys, de la Misericordia, de san Hippolito, and de san Lazaro. The three
chief Churches bear the Name of Catharine, Martin, and Vera Cruz; and the
Clergymen thereto belonging, enjoy many stately Palaces, amongst which are
Juan de Lateran, de Christo, and las Nivas.

The Viceroy's Palace and Archbishop's Seat.
The Residence of the Viceroy which lies near the Dominican Cloister, Porto
Coeli, is so sumptuous a Structure, that it may stand in competition with any
of those Edifices which were so much cried up by the Ancients; nevertheless, it
is not to be compared to the Archbishop's Seat, built round like a Theater,
whose Luster expresses the Quality of him that inhabits the same, he being
Governor of the Bishoprics of Fascala, Guaxaca, Mechaocan, New Galicia,
Chiapa, Yucatan, Guatimala, Verapaz, and the Philippinas. This mavelous
Structure was begun by Ferdinand Cortesius, but was finished by Sebastian
Ramires de Fuenleal; and not much inferior thereunto is the Casa de Cabildo
Alameda.

The gallantry of Mexico at this day.
At present, Mexico is thought to be one of the richest Cities of the World,
abounding (if reports be true) in all kind of voluptuous gallantry and bravery,
even to excess: It is supposed to contain about six or seven Miles in compass,
and to consist of above an hundred thousand Houses or Families, whereof not the
tenth part Spaniards, but those that are, all Gentlemen, at least as to their
garb and manner of living; for they live most splendidly in all respects, both
for Diet and Apparel.

For the first, we have spoken so much already of the general plenty of all
things in the Kingdom of New-Spain, that pertain to this part of pleasure, that
it is not to be doubted: And for the second this may be some instance, viz.
that it is no extraordinary matter to see an Hat-band or Role all of Diamonds,
in some ordinary Gentleman's Hat; and of Pearl among the common Citizens and
Tradesmen. The Coaches (which most Gentlemen keep) almost covered with Gold and
Silver, richly beset with Precious Stones, and within ordinarily lined with
Cloth of Gold, or the best China Silk that can be gotten; of which Coaches, in
time of year, at the Alameda, as they call it, which is, as it were, The
Hide-Park of Mexico, and a place made of purpose for recreation and delight, a
Man shall observe not seldom, above a thousand or two thousand Coaches, full of
Ladies and Gallants coming thither only to take the Air, and their Pleasure,
both the one and the other attended with a numerous Train of Servants and
Mulattoes of both Sexes. In la Plateria, which is but only one Street in
Mexico, nigh to the Viceroy's Palace, in less than half an hours space: with
the turn of an Eye, you may see Millions of Wealth in Gold, Silver, and
Precious Stones, in the Goldsmiths and Jewellers Shops thereabouts. In a word,
there is nothing hinders Mexico from being the most absolute City in the World
for delight and bravery, but only two Inconveniences to which it is subject:
The one is the danger of the Lake, with the Infalls whereof it may seem to be
almost continually threatened, and in the Year 1629. did actually suffer a very
great calamity, the Waters breaking through the Banks, and drowning a great
part of the City, with the destruction of much People, and the loss of all
their Goods entirely, through the avarice (as is supposed) of the Viceroy that
then was, and some other of the King's Officers, who diverted the Money that
should have been employed for the fortifying and repairing of the Banks, to
their own proper uses: The other is from the nature of the Soil and Ground it
self on which it stands; which is found to have a tincture of Sal Nitre in
it, somewhat strong; and the Winds partly from the Lake it self, and partly
from the Hills about it, raising the Dust of this Earth constantly every
Evening, for many Months of the Year together, so violently, that the Air is
even darkened therewith for some time: The Inhabitants are much annoyed by it,
and made subject to diverse Hypocondriacal Pains and Infirmities, and sometimes
killed with it, especially such as either cannot, or care not much to avoid it.

The City lies about sixty Leagues, or a hundred and fifty Miles distant from
the Atlantic or North Sea, from whence by the Port of St. John d' Ullua, or
Vera Crux, (which are the usual Landing-places) there is a fair and easy March
to Mexico, by the Cities of Xalabar, Perotta, Puebla de los Angelos, and
Tlascalla, all of them open and unfortifi'd Places, (as likewise Mexico it
self) arid the Country round about very rich and well accommodated with all
things.

City Chulula.
The next City of note in ancient times was Chulula, which being built in a
fruitful Plain, had above twenty thousand Dwelling-houses, and as many more
Banquetting-houses. The number of the Temples and Turrets were equal with that
of the days in the Year: The Government thereof belonged to a Mayor and six
Aldermen, and one chief Priest; for they never went upon the least Design
before they had been at their Devotion; in which the Priest's Office was only
to perfume the Idols four times in twenty four hours, viz. in the Morning, at
Noon, after Sunset, and at Midnight; at which times none durst be absent, but
they used also a cruel Exercise on themselves, and one much more cruel on
others, for on usual Feast-days they abstained from Meat, Drink, and Sleep,
scourged their Bodies with knotted Cords after a miserable manner, evacuated
their Seed, that so they might curb all fleshly Desires, and met every Night in
a spacious place, where sitting down they wounded themselves with Lances in
their Legs and Arms, so long till the Blood gushed out of the same; which
gathering in a Cup, they anointed their Temples therewith, and dipped the Lances
in the same, and then hung them up before the Temple in Bundles of Straw. Of
these were a great number, and the more, because they never used their Lances
but once. But on these Days, which were Consecrated to the Idol Tezcatlipuca,
every one besides the Priests wore a new Rope made of the Hemp Mangey, of a
Fathom long, and a thick Knot at the end, with which they beat themselves so
miserably on their Backs, as if they intended to have broken them: After which
the Priests stayed five days in the Temple, in which they used the like
cruelty, eating scarce once in twenty four hours.

Their Prisoners they used after a most horrid manner, viz. in their Temples
stood a round Stage of Stone; to the top of which they ascended by a Square
Scaffold, supported by twenty eight Pillars; behind which appeared thousands of
Men's Heads, and amongst them the Prisoners that were to be Offered sat stark
naked, and guarded by several Armed Men; three Foot from the Steps which led up
to the top of the Scaffold, stood a pyramidical Stone, (by the Indians called
Quauxicalli) and behind it two round Chapels, covered on the top like Mitres,
each had four Holes in a large Gate, in which sat a horrid Representation,
worshipped by six Priests called Chackalmua, whereof one called Papas, or
Topilzin, whose Office was to pluck out the Hearts of the Prisoners, being in
greatest esteem, wore a red Mantle about his Body, not unlike a long Coat, with
broad Fringe, which trail'd after him upon the Ground, and also a Crown of
green and yellow Plumes on his Head; his Ears and under Lip were likewise
adorned with Precious Stones: The other five appeared in like manner with their
Hands and Faces painted red, but having Leathern Fascia's about their Heads,
and white Coats stitched with Black on their Bodies, they might easily be
distinguished from the Topilzin; who on a sudden ran down the Stairs to the
Prisoners, and showed each of them an Image, (saying, This is your God) made of
Bledo Paste, Maiz and Honey, green Beads for Eyes, and Grains of Maiz for
Teeth: whereupon the Prisoners were led up, and laid with their Backs on the
sharp Stone Quauxicalli; then the five Priests took hold of their Legs, Arms
and Head, put wooden Collars about the Sufferer's Necks, whilst the Topilzin
showed Reverence to the Idol; which done, with a sharp Stone he cut open the
Breasts of the Prisoners, who in a deplorable condition lay on the pyramidical
Stone, and pulling their Hearts out of their Bodies, showed the same reeking to
the Sun, and at last threw them toward the Idol, and the dead Bodies down the
Stairs, where some appointed for that purpose carried the same away; but every
one taking his own Prisoner, and roasting and boiling him, served him up to his
Friends as a great Dainty.

This kind of Murdering was not only used amongst the Mexicans, but also by
all the other neighboring Indians, and especially in the City Chulula, which
(as we have said before) signifies The Sanctity of all the Gods: for in this
Town six thousand Children were yearly Offered.

The Citizens hereof used to drive a great Trade, especially in Cochinele.

Their Habits were several; for Persons of Note wore Cotton Coats, about the
Edges of which hung Feathers and pieces of Cony-skins: the meaner sort went in
Nequons, or a sort of Linen Coats made of the hairy Leaves of the Tree Maguey.

3. The City Tezuco, full of handsome Streets and fair Houses, is built near the
salt Mexican Lake, yet has no want of fresh Water, with which it is supplied
by Gutters from the Mountains under Ground, according to Anthony Herrera, it
twice exceeds in bigness the famous City Sivill in Spain.

4. Quitlavaca, by the Spaniards called Venezuela, (because it is, like Venice,
surrounded with Water, and divided into several Isles,) boasted formerly above
two thousand Families: From the Town a Cawsey of twenty Foot broad, and half a
League long, leads through the Lake to the Main Continent.

5. Yztacpalapa, a very populous Place, and lying part of it in the salt Lake,
and partly on the Main Land; where several fresh water Pools afford store of
Fish, two Leagues distant from Mexico, to which leads a broad Way; in the
middle of which stands a Fountain, surrounded with high Trees, which produces
excellent Water.

6. Mexicaltzingo, situate upon the Lake Laguna, a Town consisting of four
thousand stately Houses.

7. Cayocan, in a fruitful Plain, containing six thousand, being but a League
and a half from Yztacpalapa: to which the neighboring Village Houcilopucho was
not much inferior.

These three Places, before they were subdued by the Spaniards, boasted many
brave Temples and high Towers, whose luster appeared at a great distance, but
now being turned into Cloisters, they are inhabited by Monks and Nuns.

The Salt made here of Earth, though not white, and only fit to make Pickle
of, is Transported to many Places.

Towns and pleasant Villages about Mexico.
About Mexico there are also several Villages, the chiefest of which are 1.
Mastitlan, a Town pleasantly seated upon the top of an huge Mountain, in the
midst of most delicate Groves and shady Woods, and reckoned to contain no less
than thirty thousand Inhabitants in all, dwelling either in the City, or upon
the sides of the Mountain.

2. Antepecque; this is a Town belonging to the Marquess de Valle, who is of
the Posterity of Cortez, and said to be seated in the most delicious place of
all New Spain.

3. Acapulco, a Town seated upon the South Sea, or Mare del Zur, yet belonging
to this Province. It is a haven-Town, and one of the most frequented upon the
South Sea, situate upon a large and capacious Bay of about a League broad at
the Entrance, and affording many convenient Stations and Docks for Shipping. At
the bottom of the Bay Westward lies the Town, with a strong Castle very
opportunely built, both for the command and security of the Port, well walled
and fortified with Bulwarks, and having a constant Garrison of four hundred
Soldiers in it, or thereabouts. The reason whereof, I suppos^, may be chiefly
this, viz. that from this Port there is the greatest Traffic and Intercourse
held betwixt the East and West Indies, together with the Philippine Islands.

Silver Mines.
The Country has many rich Mines of Silver in it, and some of Gold; the chief
of which are by Herera reported to be these, viz. 1. Those of Puchuca, fourteen
Leagues distant from Mexico. 2. Of Tasco. 3. Talpuiana. 4. Cultepeque. 5.
Zacualpa. 6. Zupanguo, and diverse others.

The rest of the Villages are Guatitlan, Tenyauca, Escapusalco, Tacuba, and
Suchimilco.

Strange Fountain.
The neighboring Province Xilotepeck, which is exceeding fruitful, is alfo
famous for two Fountains, whereof one near the Village Queretaro produces
boiling Water, which when cooled, is a wholesome Drink for Cattle: The other for
four years is full of Water, and for four years after it is empty; in great
rainy Seasons it is quite dry, and in droughty Weather it overflows.

Between the Villages Queretaro and San Juan, is a Plain which extends it self
seven Leagues in breadth, and seven in length, besides two Leagues farther
beyond Quartero, where a hundred thousand Head of Cattle, and ten thousand
Horses, find plentiful Pasture.

The wonderful Mountain Nevada.
The Mountain Nevada, near the City De los Angelos, deserves no small
admiration; for it begins at thirty Leagues end to rise exceeding high, and
being flat on the top, has a wide gaping Mouth, whose bottom is fathomless;
from which at Sunrising and setting rises a Smoke up directly toward the
Sky, but immediately after spreading like a Plume of Feathers, it is dispersed
by the Wind, and no more seen till it appears in a dusky Cloud. With the Smoke
are also Ashes vomited up; yet the Mountain is very pleasantly planted with
lofty Cypress, Cedar, Oak, and Pine-Trees. The neighboring Fields abound
likewise with Wheat, Cotton, and Maiz. There seldom appears any Rain here.

At the Foot of this Mountain lies the Village Tepecco, famous for the Crystal
and Allom gotten there. The Village Ocotlan is also maintained by the same: But
Tuculala by Gold-Mines, and fruitful Lands, which are twice a year shaken by
Earthquakes; wherefore the Inhabitants live not in Stone Houses, but in little
Straw Huts.

South-Eastward from Nerada is excellent Sugar to be had, and on the Mountain
it self the famous Gum Anime, which drops out of a Tree called Jetaiba, which
is always green, with hard white Wood, a pale yellow speckled Bark, three long
soft Leaves hanging one over another on one Stalk, and the Fruit on the middle
of the Body. After the rainy Season is past in October, then they cut a Hole in
the Body of the Tree, out of which the Gum drops: it has a pleasant smell, and
is exceeding good against the Headache occasioned by Colds.

Not far from hence appears the Valleys Matalzingo and Atzompam, which have
excellent Pastures, in which Diego Nunnez de Camargo bred forty thousand Sheep
out of two in ten years time.

And these are the chiefest Towns, Villages, and Countries, which surround the
famous City Mexico.

The first Foundation of the City of Mexico.
Concerning the erecting of this City, the Indians relate thus: That the seventh
Family of the Navatlaca's, Extracted out of the Country Aztlan, ranged up and
down not without thousands of Inconveniences, from one Country to another,
according to the Information which their Sages had given their Spirit
Viztliputli, till at last some of the Priests straying from the Army, or rather
Multitude, got into a Wilderness, full of Brambles and Thorns, and came at
length to a Place where was a Spring of clear Water, in which the Fishes
glittered like Silver; where taking up their repose that Night, their Spirit
informed the oldest of them in a Dream, that they should find thereabouts a
Tunal Tree (whose Leaves grow out of one another) under which, on a Stone, lay
the Heart of the famous Sorcerer Copil: This Tunal Tree should be discovered by
a Crane on the top of it, which in one Foot should hold a Bird, and in the
other a Bough of the Tree, near which they were to build a City: The old Priest
waking, and relating his Dream, every one endeavored to find out the
forementioned Tree; at last they found it, by discovering on the top a Crane,
with spread-out Wings looking up toward the Sun, and holding in his Claws a
small Bird, invested with curious Feathers: Whereupon they with all speed built
a Chapel of Turf and Clods of Earth, and covered the same with Canes, to keep
their Idol from the Weather, resolving, so soon as they could, to build him a
better Temple.

The Lake on whose Isles they settled, abounded with Fish and Fowls, which they
exchanged with the neighboring People for Stone and Mortar for the building of
a Temple for Viztliputzli, and a new City; to which they made a Cawsey in the
Lake Laguna, and divided it into four great Wards or Divisions, and subdivided
them again into lesser; over which they placed peculiar Idols, and ordered a
Crane like that which they had seen on the Tunal Tree to be their City Arms.
The dividing of the Wards occasioned great dislike amongst the Grandees,
judging those to whose lot they fell, not to be worthy of them; wherefore
deserting the same, and traveling along the Lake Laguna, they settled
themselves at last in a sandy Soil, which they called Tlattellulco, and
entertained a bitter hatred against their Contrymen who kept the four Wards
of the new Tenustitan, doing them all the mischief they could; wherefore the
Assaulted were necessitated to choose a King, that they might be the better able
to oppose their Enemies: But that they might not raise a Discontent amongst
themselves about electing a Governor, they judged it fittest to take a
Foreigner; amongst whom they found none so capable of so great an Office as
Acamapixtli, Grandson to the King of Culhuacan, whereupon sending Ambassadors
thither, they obtained their desires.

The new King was no sooner Crowned, but he settled all things in order with
great Prudence, insomuch, that Mexico grew daily to be more famous and feared:
But this sudden growth raised a jealousy amongst the Neighbors, who dreaded
their growing Power and Valor.

Proceedings between the Tapuneca's and Mexicans.
The Tapunecans who were also a valiant People, being the nearest to them, and
having Azcapuzalco for their chief City, made it their main design, utterly to
root out the Mexicans, before they grew to be more Populous and Potent;
notwithstanding they had hitherto received Tribute from them, for delivering
the Lake Laguna to them, which was a quantity of Timber and Plants; yet they
demanded not only more Tribute than formerly, but also in such a manner, as was
thought impossible to have been performed, which was, that those Plants which
were formerly brought to them, as growing on the Land, should be set in the
Water, so as to come floating to them, as they grew, to Ascapuzalco, which if
they did not pay, they should expect to be all put to the Sword. The Mexicans
much amazed hereat, and not knowing how to produce the demanded Plants,
Viztliputzli informed the oldest Priest, that the demands might be satisfied,
and commanded him to throw Earth on the Water, and to Sow Seed on the same,
which at the usual time produced Maiz, Azi, Chias, Tomates, and the like, with
which the Tapunecans being satisfied, demand next a Goose, and a Hen which laid
Eggs, out of which the young ones should appear, when on the floating Clods of
Earth, the Nests came opposite to Azcapuzalco, which by the advice of
Viztliputzli, they performed fifty years one after another. Mean while,
Acamapixtli (who had enlarged Mexico with Streets, Palaces, Temples, and
Markets) dying, would not name any one to succeed him, but left the choice of
the Election to the Commonalty, who Crowned his Son Vitzilovitli, and Married
him to the King of Tapunecans Daughter, that by that means they might gain his
friendship, and be eased of their strange Annual Tribute: Whereupon
Ayauchigual, the King of Tapunecans Daughter being Married to Vitzilovitli, was
within twelve Months delivered of a Son, which the Grandfather called
Chimalpopoca, which signifies A Gun which gives Smoke, and afterward was
satisfied with two Geese, and some Fish yearly from the Mexicans, only as an
Acknowledgment that they inhabited his Country. Chimalpopoca loosing his
Parents, in his tenth year was Crowned King, with a Bow and Arrows in his left
Hand, and a Wooden Sword in the right: Soon after he obliged his Mothers
Father to be kind to the Mexicans, for they being in great want for fresh
Water, he had leave by Channels to bring the same out of the Mountain
Chapultepec, a League distant from Mexico; to which purpose they made a Pipe of
Planks, and hollow Trees joined together with Clay, quite through the Lake; but
this Pipe not being teight and durable, and the fresh Water by that means
mixing with the Salt, they sent Agents to Azcapuzalco, to request Stones,
Mortar, and Workmen to make a substantial Sewer: This message was ill resented
by the Council of Azcapuzalco; What, (said they) do the Mexicans think, shall a
rambling company of People, which on Charity live in another Country, Command
those that Govern them to be their Servants? This grudge went so far, that at
last they took a Resolution without the King's knowledge, (for he was
suspected, because of his Grand-chil'd Chimalpopoca) to forbid all manner of
Trade with the Mexicans; nay, to endeavor utterly to root them out; yet some
judged, that they ought to spare Chimalpopoca, while others on the contrary
said, That he ought to be destroyed, because his Father being a Mexican, he
would to the utmost of his Power defend his People; which last being approved
of, so troubled the King of the Tapunecans, that he died of grief; for the
Design being soon after put into execution, and the Tapuneca's breaking in the
Night into Chimalpopoca's Palace, Murdered him; which Murder made the Mexicans
thirst for revenge; whereupon, setting themselves wholly against the
Tapunecans, they entered into a League with Vezcuco, and Culhuacan, and chose
Izcoalt, for his great Valor, for their King; notwithstanding Acamapixtli had
begotten him on a Slave.

Izcoalts success against the Tapanecas.
Izcoalt was no sooner Crowned, but he made great preparation for a War, though
against every ones Opinion, because of the Populousness of the Tapunecans; yet
it was concluded on, that they should request Peace, and a place to inhabit on
the main Continent, that so they might remove from the Isles: This Request they
thought could not be denied them in Azcapuzalco, provided the Mexicans brought
their Gods thither, and wholly conformed themselves to the manners of the
Tapunecans, for otherwise they could expect nothing but utter Ruin: Yet though
every one else embraced the Proposal, Tlacaellel, the King's Nephew, stiffly
opposed it, alleging, that it did not agree with the Mexicans quality, to make
so mean and slavish a Proffer; and that they had best consider, first if there
were no other means to be found: and that he would willingly venture his Life
in going to Azcapuzalco, as a Spy, to pry into their whole Designs and
Intentions, which was performed accordingly; and soon after returning, he
brought information, that the Tapunecans were making great preparations for
War, and made no mention at all of Peace; which news struck a general fear into
all Peoples Hearts; many desiring that they might save themselves by flight;
but Izcoalt putting fresh courage into them, made an agreement with the People,
that if he was beaten by the Tapunecans, they should eat him up; but if he
proved Conqueror, they should all be at his Command; to which all consenting,
they boldly marched with their King to the City Azcapuzalco. The Front of the
Army consisting of the prime Nobility, was led by Tlacaellel, and the Rear
Izcoalt brought up, who was also to give the sign on a Drum, when they should
fall upon the Enemies; who having ten Men to the Mexicans one, suddenly Sallied
out of the Gates, where they were so briskly entertained by Tlacaellel, that in
a confused manner they soon ran back into the City, whither the Conqueror
pursuing them, got within the Gates, where he put all to the Sword which he
could meet with; some fled to a steep neighboring Mountain, whither being also
followed, they threw down their Arms, and begged Quarter, to serve the Mexicans
as Slaves, which was granted them, whilst Izcoalt found an unvaluable Mass of
Treasure in Azcapuzalco, and distributed the Conquered Country amongst those
who had behaved themselves best.

This Conquest made the neighboring People jealous of the Mexicans, whose
Success and growing Power they dreaded.

The Cuyoacans utterly subdued by Tlacaellel.
The Towns Tacuba and Cuyoacan, though they had Governors of their own, yet were
subject to the Tapunecans, whose General advising those of Azcapuzalco to try
another Encounter, they took up Arms again; but before it came to a Battle, the
Cuyoacans played a subtle trick with the Mexicans, for inviting them to an
Idolatrous Feast, after they had Eat, Drunk, and Danced, they forced them to
put on Women's Apparel, to their no small disgrace and ignomy; which remained
not unrevenged, for the Mexicans made a Poisonous Fume in the Gates of
Cuyoacan, which made Women with Child to Miscarry, and many to fall dangerously
sick; yet lastly, both Parties marched into the Fields, where whilst Izcoalt
was elsewhere engaged, Tlacaellel marching about, came upon the backs of the
Cuyoacans with such eagerness, that they fled to a strong Temple, which soon
after was set on fire by Tlacaellel, who pursued the Enemy ten Leagues.

portrait of Montezuma II MUTECZUMA Rex ultimus Mexicanorum


This Conquest stirred up the Suchimilcos, the first Family of the Navatlaca's,
to stop the proceedings of the Mexicans, that they might not, as they had
already done to others, fall upon them; to which purpose they thought to
surprise the Conquering Army; but Tlacaellel who led the Van, marched in good
Order to meet the Suchimilcos, fell resolutely upon their whole Army, and after
a short conflict, put them to flight, and took the City Suchimilco for Izcoalt,
who being Crowned King there, Commanded the Conquered to make a direct Road
betwixt Suchimilco and Mexico, of four Leagues long, both, that a Trade might
the easier be drove between these two Cities, and to keep them the better in
awe: Notwithstanding these examples, Cuytlavacan, a City built at the Lake
Laguna, trusting to the abundance of Boats, which the Citizens knew how to use
with great dexterity, daily molested Mexico with them by Water, whereupon
Izcoalt resolved to send his Victorious Army thither, but Tlacaellel opposing
the same, promised to subdue the Rebelling City w^^^ a considerable number of
Boys, which had skill in the managing of a Canoo, which being permitted him, he
accordingly made himself Master of Cuytlavacan, from whence the Boys brought a
great Booty, and diverse Prisoners, whom they sent as an Offering to
Vitzlipultzli.

Tezcuco submits to the Mexicans.
These unheard of Victories being spread far and near, moved Tezcuco after
several Skirmishes and Conflicts with Tlacaellel, to submit to the Mexican
King, who chose the Governor thereof for his Prime Councellor. Izcoalt
Deceasing, after having Reigned twelve years, his Son Muteczuma was chosen his
Successor; the Election and Coronation being performed after the following
manner.

Coronation of Muteczuma.
The new King mantled in Tigers Skins, was led into the chief Temple before a
Hearth, on which burnt Fire both Night and Day; not far from which stood the
Throne, where sitting down, he Offered Blood^ which was taken from his Cheeks;
Ears, and Legs; after which, an Orator: Congratulated him, in the name of the
Nobility; which done, they ended the Solemnity in a great Dinner, Fireworks,
and Dancing: At the same time it was established, that all Future Coronations
should be kept with an Offering of Provision, fetched by the King out of the
Enemies Country: wherefore Muteczuma going to the Country Chalco, took
several of the Natives, whose reaking Hearts he Offered to Viztlipuztli: Which
done, the Coronation followed, to which an innumerable company of People came
flocking from all the neighboring Provinces: Those which were Tributaries,
brought Presents with them, before which the Heralds carried the Coats of Arms
belonging to the Nobility of Mexico, in a good order.

Mutezuma's Brother taken Prisoner by those of Chalco.
Soon after the King's Coronation, he marched and fell upon Chalco, the
Inhabitants of which defended, themselves very Valiantly, took Muteczuma's
Brother, among several other Prisoners* to whom the Conquerors proffered the
Government; which at first he refused, but at last accepted of on this
condition, that a high Mast should be erected with a Scaffold on the top, which
made every one suppose, that Muteczuma's Brother did in that manner aim at a
high Election, but he at the appointed time, getting on the top of the Mast,
called with a loud voice, and spoke to the taken Mexicans which were there
present to this effect: Chalco seeks to set me on the Throne, the Heavens will
not permit it; learn by me rather to die, than to live and be guilty of Treason
to your Country: which he had no sooner said, but with some Flowers which he
held in his Hand, threw himself down from the Scaffold, which so enraged the
Chalcoans, that they immediately slew all the other Mexicans that were there
present; which not long after was revenged by Muteczuma, An example of great
Fidelity.
who not only subdued Chalco, but several other Provinces, leaving only
Tlascala unattempted, that the Mexicans might have a neighboring Enemy to fetch
Prisoners from for their Offerings, and also by Skirmishing with them, train up
their Youth in Martial Discipline.

Thus his Predecessors and he, having Conquered diverse Provinces, insomuch that
he was now become absolute Emperor over a vast Tract of Land, he resolved to
settle the same in good order; to which purpose he erected Courts of
Judicature, with good Laws; built a stately Palace and Temple; ordained several
Customs to be observed in Religion; which done, and having Reigned twenty eight
years, he Deceasing, left Ticocic for his Successor.

Description of the Temple Cu.
The forementioned Temple was called Cu, being built of Stone, in form like a
Serpent, of an exceeding bigness, in the middle thereof there was a spacious
open place, and round about it Habitations, two Stories high, the lowermost for
the Inferior Priests, and the uppermost for the High Priests; in this place
also above ten thousand People Danced in a Circle, on all high Feasts; four
great Gates faced the like number of broad Streets, each two Leagues long: On
the outmost Gate stood large Images, the Front of black Stones, Painted between
each Lay with red and yellow Colors, no less Beautiful than Artificial: On
each corner of the Temple were placed two Marble Statues of Indians, sitting
with their Arms stretched out, and holding a Candle, and on their Heads Plumes
of Feathers: Thirty high steps led up to a round place, set about with
Deaths-Heads, which was a Stage appointed for the slaughter of those, whose
Hearts were to be Offered to the Diabolical gods, and whose Heads, their Bodies
being eaten, were brought back to the Priests, who hung them under the Stage,
where every Head hanging till it dropped off, the vacant place was immediately
supplied with a fresh Head. At the end of the Stage stood two Chapels, covered
like a Cardinal's-Cap, in one of which sat the Image of Tiztlputzli, and in
the other Tlaloc, to which led a hundred and twenty Stone steps.

But besides this stately Temple Cu, Mexico boasted nine more, standing not far
asunder in a large Plain, all adorned with curious Imagery, and set out with
large Pillars, each being Dedicated to a peculiar Idol, and built with
magnificent Apartments, for the Priests to lodge in; the chiefest of them
Dedicated to an Idol called Tezeatlipuca, or Lord of the Humble. This Temple
was ascended to by eighty steps, and had before it a spacious Court; within a
low and broad Gate appeared a high Vail, which opened into a spacious square
Hall, hung with Tapestry, at the end whereof stood large Images, and beyond
which were several Rooms, in which Assemblies met, Scholars were taught, Judges
sat, and Priests Resided.

Tlacaellel resigns the Kingdoms to Ticocic.
But to return again to Muteczuma, his Funeral was no sooner finished, but the
four Prime Counselors were attended by the Commissioners of Tezcuco and
Tacuba, in order to the Election of a new King: Tlacaellel being the chief
amongst the Dukes, was by a general Vote Saluted King, as being most worthy
thereof, for his special Services shown in behalf of the Empire of Mexico: But
he humbly refusing the same, was desired to Nominate another, whereupon he
making choice of Ticocic, Muteczuma's eldest Son; the Council immediately bored
a hole through his Nose, and hung an Emrauld in the same. But before he
received the Crown, he was forced, according to the Custom, to fetch in some of
his Enemies for an Offering, which though he performed, yet he lost more
Mexicans than he took Prisoners, not without sufficient testimony of Cowardice;
which being ill resented by the People, he was Poisoned in the fourth year of
his Reign, and succeeded by his Brother Axayaca, by the appointment of
Tlacaellel; Axayacan chosen King.
who having attained to a great Age, and left the Charge of his Children to the
new King, departed this Life, to the great sorrow and grief of the whole
Empire; by the States whereof he was Buried with great Solemnity.

His Victory against the^ Teguantepecks.
In the mean time, Axayaca went with a considerable Army to the remote Province
Teguantepek, to fetch Prisoners to be Offered at his Coronation; and marching
before alone, Challenged his Antagonist, the King, to a single Combat, which he
refused, and chose rather to fall upon Axayaca with all his Forces; whereupon,
the Mexicans cunningly feigned flight, ambuscaded themselves till the Enemies
pursuing them, gave them their desired advantage, for rushing out of their
Ambuscade, they set upon the Teguantepecks, so disordered, that they easily put
them to flight, and had the pursuit of them as far as Guatulco, a noted Haven
upon the South Sea; from whence Axayaca returning Victor, received a Crown for
a Reward; yet notwithstanding these Proofs of his Valor, the Lord of
Tlatellulco Challenged him; whereupon he sent Agents thither, with proffers,
that since the Citizens of Tlatellulco were of one Blood with the Mexicans,
whom they deserted upon the dividing of the Wards and Towns, just before the
Election of the first King Acamapixtli, they should, if they pleased, be
received anew into fellowship and alliance with the Mexicans, acknowledging one
and the same King for their Supreme Head and Governor: But the Ambassadors
being scorned and laughed at for their proffers, returning, related the same to
Axayaca, who immediately marching thither to take revenge, sent part of his
Army to fall on the Enemy by Water; whilst himself falling upon them by Land,
put the Lord of Tlatellulco, with his whole Army, to flight, which was so
closely pursued, that they forced their way into the City with them, put the
Governor to Death, and laid the Town in Ashes; those which went by Water,
having had no less success.

Autzol succeeds him.
Axayaca, after eleven years Reign, Deceasing, bequeathed his Crown to Autzol,
who sought to promote his Election by engaging with the mighty Province
Quaxutatlan, whose Inhabitants, though but a little before, they had been so
bold as to demand Tribute of the Mexicans, yet terrified at the approach of
Autzol's Army, fled over an Arm of the Sea, where they had been secure, had not
Autzol invented a floating Isle of Planks, by which he got over his whole Army;
upon which the amazed Quaxututlans immediately submitted themselves to the
Mexicans, who pursuing their Victory, extended their Dominions to Guatimala,
over a Tract of three hundred Leagues.

Autzol's Generosity and Mrgnificence.
The new King having now subdued all his Enemies, and made himself glorious by
his Victories, was also ambitious to be as much extolled for his Generosity and
Magnificence; to which purpose he distributed all the Wealth which was brought
unto him from the neighboring Countries, amongst the Poor and the Nobility; to
the first he gave Clothes and Provisions; to the last, Plumes of Feathers and
Arms. Moreover he caused all mean Houses to be pulled down and new ones to be
built in their places. Lastly, he consulted how to bring fresh Water into
Mexico, which was placed in a brackish Soil: Upon this Design he was so bent,
that when one of his Sages dissuaded him from it, alleging, That the Water
would drown the City, he, in stead of following his Advice, banished him his
Presence, and upon his flying to Cuyaocun, caused him to be fetched from thence
and Executed. Then prosecuting his Design, he cut the Ditch before Cuyaocun, by
which means great store of fresh Water came flowing into the Lake Laguna, which
the Priests welcomed with strange Ceremonies; for some perfumed the Water,
others Offered Quails Blood, whilst others played on several Musical
Instruments, with many other Ceremonies, which are at large described in the
ancient Mexican Chronicles, kept in the Vatican Library at Rome. But the
Prophecy of the Executed Sorcerer was in a manner fulfilled; for the Water
overwhelmed a great part of Mexico, and divided the City into Isles: But to
prevent farther Mischief, Autzoll caused Banks to be raised, and Channels
dug; and not long after, in the eleventh Year of his Reign, he deceased:
After which the Mexican Kingdom tended toward its period, as the ensuing Story
will declare.

Amongst the Mexican Nobility, Mutexuma, a melancholy Man, yet very prudent,
who resided in a stately Apartment near the great Temple Cu, that there he
might the better converse with Viztlipuztli, was elected King; which he no
sooner heard, but fled from hence: but being found out, he was against his will
led to the Grand Assembly, and from thence to the holy Hearth, where for an
Offering he drew Blood out of his Cheeks, Ears, and Legs; and, according to an
ancient Custom, the Council of State boring a Hole in his Nose, hung an
Emerauld in the same; after which the Lord of Tescuco saluted him with a
Speech; which (since it is mentioned by Joseph d' Acosta, together with several
other Speeches of Congratulation to their Kings, which were taught to
Scholars, to make them expert in their Language) it will not be amiss to be
annexed here, that of many this one may serve for a pattern of the Mexicans
Eloquence, which is as follows:

The Lord of Tescuco his Speech to Muteczuma.
THe great happiness, most noble Muteczuma, which is befallen this Realm by
your Election, may easily be conjectured from the general joy, none besides
your self being able to undergo an Office, in the management whereof so much
Prudence is required: It is a most certain testimony that God loves Mexico,
that he has given its Inhabitants understanding to make such a Choice. Who can
doubt, but that you who have expatiated through the Heavens, and conversed with
Viztlipuztli, may easily Govern us Mortals on Earth? Who can despair, but that
the Virtue enclosed within your Breast, will extend to the Widows and Orphans?
Therefore rejoice, O Mexico; the Heavens have granted us a Prince without Vice;
Merciful, and not a Violator of the Laws; Affable, not despising common
Conversation. And you, O King, let not this great Preferment occasion any
alteration in your so long known Virtues: The Crown breeds care for the public
good; the troubles thereof must extend over the whole Realm, and every one in
the Realm.

Preparation^ for the Coronation of Muteczuma.
Muteczuma having heard out the Speech, would willingly have answered the same,
but could not utter a word for Tears, which gushed from his Eyes. Before he
went out to fetch Prisoners for Offerings at his Coronation, he first settled
his Household Affairs. And whereas till this time the Kings had been served in
their Palaces by ordinary Citizens, he took Knights, and the chiefest of the
Nobility, intending thereby to make a distinction between the Nobility and the
common People, and add more Majesty to the Royal Dignity. This done, Muteczuma
marching against a certain rebellious Province, fetched a considerable number
of People to be Offered to Viztupuztli. At his Return the Coronation. Day was
appointed, against which thousands of People came to Mexico; even their very
Enemies of Tlascala, Mechoacan, and Tepeaca, which were never conquered by the
Mexicans, flocked thither in great numbers. All those Countries which were
under Tribute bringing unvaluable Treasures, came in vast Multitudes, which so
thronged the City, that the very tops of the Houses were filled with
Spectators, no King in Mexico ever going to the Throne in such splendour; His
Grandeur.
nor was ever any King so much feared by his Subjects, none of the common
People daring to look in his Face; neither did he ever set Foot on the Ground,
but was always carried in a Chair on the Shoulders of his prime Nobility; he
never wore a Suit of Clothes but once, nor ever used a Cup or Dish after it was
once foul'd; he strictly maintained the Laws which he had made, and often went
himself in a Disguise, to make a strict enquiry after all Affairs whatsoever;
by which means the Mexican Power was now arrived to the highest top: but, as
other Realms, grown top-heavy with good Fortune, turn at last topsie-turvy,
just such a Misfortune befell Mexico; but not without several fore-running
signs of its destruction: The ruin of the Mexican Empire prognosticated.
for in the City Cholola their God Quezalcoalt informed them, that a strange
People were coming to take possession of the Mexican Dominions; and their
Soothsayers prognosticated the same, for which Muteczuma committed them all to
Prison, and doubtless had put them all to death, had not they escaped with the
help of the Master of their diabolical Art; and though they escaped themselves,
yet their Wives and Children were all put to death upon the King's Command:
Soon after which appeared a mighty Comet, or blazing Starfor a whole year
together; the great Temple Cu was set on Fire, and burnt to the Ground none
knew how; the Water which was thrown on the same to quench it, burnt like
Brimstone; in the Sky appeared three fiery Heads at noonday, and out of a
long Tail shot Sparks on the Earth; the Laguna, between Mexico and Texcuco,
began to swell into a Tide, which turned some Houses topsieturvy; a shrill
Voice was heard in the Night crying on the Water, Children, your ruin is at
hand; whither shall I carry you that you may not be lost?

A miraculous Story of a Bird.
No less strange is what d' Acosta relates of a Bird presented to Muteczuma, not
unlike a Crane, which the Fishermen had taken on the Laguna; on the shining
Forehead of which there appeared the resemblance of two Armies Engaged, and one
defeated by the other, and that whilst the Sages, called to interpret the
meaning hereof, sat in Consultation, the Bird vanished.

Another of a Countryman.
Moreover, there goes a Tradition, That a Countryman being at his Labor, was
taken up by an Eagle, and carried through the Air into a gloomy Cave, where a
Man lay fast asleep snoaring, when on a sudden he heard a Voice afar off,
saying, Do you know that Man? whereupon the Countryman taking special notice
of the dormant Man, knew him, by the Royal Apparel, to be Mutexuma; after which
the Voice was heard again, saying, How soundly does he sleep: the time is
coming which provides Punishments for many Crimes; burn the Snoarer with the
Torch which he holds in his Hands, he will feel no pain: Not long after he
being informed hereof, and looking on his Thigh, found the same burnt, to his
no small amazement.

News of the arrival of the the Spanish Fleet.
Having now possessed the Throne fourteen years, he received news of a Fleet,
and therewith a Draught of the Men and Vessels painted on Cloth. This startling
him, he immediately advised with his Council, who judged it convenient to
secure the Coast along the Southern Ocean with strong Watches; yet nevertheless
Ferdinand Cortesius Landed with five hundred Foot and sixty Horse, took the
City Potanchanum, marched through the Country Sicuchimalar to Tascalleca,
where they had a sharp Conflict, in which the Spaniards were in great danger;
and had not they had six Fieldpieces with them, which did as much affright as
hurt the Indians, they had without doubt been cut off there. In Chiurutecal
they were in as much danger; for certainly the Spanish Army had been set upon
in the Night, had not a Woman informed them of it.

Mean while Muteczuma consulted with his Sorcerers to destroy Cortesius by
Charms, who then was marching through Chalco, whereupon a considerable number
of Sorcerers went thither to the top of a high Mountain, where, as they were
beginning their Incantations and Charms, their Idol Tezcalipuca appeared to
them: and in an angry manner told them, That Monteczuma should lose his Crown
and Life; and to confirm his words, he showed them a dreadful spectacle; for
looking about, they saw the City in a light flame. This being told to
Muteczuma, he resolved to make himself as secure as he could, and went to meet
Cortesius with costly Presents, delivering him the Crown in the presence of all
his Council; to which purpose he took one Marina, experienced in the Castilian
Tongue, with him for his Interpreter; all things then seeming to end in
Friendship. But they continued not long in that state; for Cortesius, whose
whole Design was to bring Mexico under the Spaniards Subjection, not long after
accused Muteczuma, that Coalcopoca had on his Commands stormed the new Spanish
City Vera Crux, which he could no way excuse; and notwithstanding Muteczuma
delivered him Coalcopoca, Muteczuma committed to Prison by Cortesius.
with fifteen of his Nobles Prisoners, who were all burnt with green Wood; yet
he was committed Prisoner, to the great discontent of the Mexicans, who said,
That they were now come to a fine pass, to be thus fooled by a few Strangers,
who had imprisoned their King, trampled upon their ancient Images, endeavored
to murder them all, and in despite of them brought their mortal Enemies, the
Tascaltecans and Guazuzingans, into Mexico.

Cortesius marches against Velasquez's Party.
About this time there were certain Ships come to Vera Crux, which was a new
Port-Town of this Country, that the Spaniards had built since their coming
thither, and had Landed near upon a thousand Men; which was an Accident that
had like to have spoiled the Design of Cortesius and all his Company at Mexico,
these Men being sent by James Velasquez, Governor of Cuba, expressly against
Cortesius and his Men, upon pretense that they had acted not conformably to the
Commission which they had received from him, and gave him no account of their
proceedings; which in a great measure was true: for it must be confessed, that
Cortesius and his Men finding themselves to have fallen upon an Adventure that
was certainly rich and good, and having got such footing and interest in the
Country already, by their Success and Victories, and chiefly by their
Confederacy with so many of the Natives and People of the Country, revolted to
them, did almost at first, by a general consent, renounce their Commission, and
dependency upon Velasquez, and professed to act immediately from and for the
King of Spain. What pretenses they had for such a Resolution, seemingly at
least irregular, is not so well known. Whatever they were, they proceed in it,
and the whole Company (excepting only some few, who yet went along with the
rest) choose Cortesius anew for their Commander in chief, and appoint likewise
by common consent, all other Officers of Justice, both Civil and Military,
among themselves: and to give the better color at Court to their Proceedings,
they send Portocorrero and Monteio, two of their Principals, into Spain, with a
rich and noble Present to the Emperor, both to make report of the State of the
Country, and to procure immediate Commission from his Majesty, to proceed;
after which they advance toward Mexico, as has been said. Velasquez, being at
Cuba, and understanding their Proceedings, labored to intercept both their
Messengers and Present, but could not; and therefore sent Pamphilius Narvaez
with eleven Ships, and about nine hundred or a thousand Men to apprehend
Cortesius, and oppose his Proceedings. This happened about the time that the
Differences were but newly calmed betwixt the Spaniards and the People of
Mexico; and though it obliged Cortesius to leave the City in a wavering and
unsettled condition, yet he took such order, that Muteczuma still remained under
the Guard of the Spaniards as before, assisted with thousands of their Friends
of Tlascalla, and he himself taking the rest, and some few Spaniards along with
him, with undaunted courage and resolution marches against Narvaez: and such
was his good fortune, that not only Narvaez became his Prisoner without much
bloodshed, but likewise all his Men joined with him in his Design, through the
favor of the Chancery or supreme Court of St. Domingo, and by the procurement
of the Licentiat Vasquez de Ayllon, a Judge of it, who was sent with Narvaez to
accommodate the Differences. With this Recruit Cortesius marches back again to
Mexico; but at his coming finds things in a very bad condition; for the
Citizens, gathered together under the Command of one Quicuxtemoc, had recourse
to Arms, and for three days and three Nights vexed the Spaniards with continual
Stormings, notwithstanding whatever Commands they had to the contrary from
their imprisoned King, who at last, looking out of a Window, endeavoring to
appease them, was hurt with a Stone, of which he soon after died, as they say,
who would not have the Spaniards thought to have murdered him, as the Mexicans
say they did, with diverse other Noblemen, and some of his Children, the very
Night they fled. However it were, not long after his Death, out of extreme
necessity, and chiefly for want of Victuals, the Spaniards were forced to leave
the City in the nightime, and with the loss of four hundred and fifty of
their Men, who were either slain or taken Prisoners at the passing of a
Drawbridge, the rest making a heavy Retreat to their Friends at Tlascalla.
There is standing at this day in Mexico, upon the place where so many of them
were killed, a certain Hermitage, which they call Los Martyrs, or The
Hermitage of the Martyrs, though but improperly, if upon that occasion, as one
of their own Writers confesses, though he alleges no other reason.

This Retreat of the Spaniards out of Mexico happened to be upon the tenth of
July after midnight, in the Year 1520. which the Spaniards at Mexico call The
Doleful Night. Nevertheless the undaunted Cortesius being got, though with much
difficulty and trouble, by reason of the pursuit of the Mexicans for a good
part of the Way, to his sure Friends of Tlascalla, neither lost his Courage,
nor gave over his Resolution of yet gaining Mexico, especially the way being
now laid open, and sufficient occasion given by the Death of Muteczuma, and the
provocations of the Mexicans themselves, to make himself absolute and sole Lord
of the Place: wherefore having sent for, and procured a competent Supply of
fresh Soldiers from Santo Domingo, or Hispaniola, Almeria, Cuba, and other
places, being in all nine hundred Foot, eight hundred Horse, and seventeen
Pieces of Ordnance; he joins himself with the Auxiliary Forces of Tlascalla,
which were no less than a hundred thousand Men, Armed with Bows and Arrows:
and with this Army marches again toward Mexico, and Besieges it both by Land
and Water, viz. with the help of thirteen Brigantines or Galliots, which he had
built upon the Lake, and six thousand Canoos, or little Boats, which his
Friends and Confederates had procured him. By which means, and by his Army on
Land, in a short time he cut off all Provision from the City, and after a Siege
of full three Months or more, and a most stout and obstinate resistance made by
the People within, in which they are said to have lost above a hundred thousand
Men, beside those which perished by Famine, Sickness, or otherwise, Mexico
taken by the Spaniards.
he took it by Storm upon Tuesday the thirteenth of August 1521. Sacked it
first, and then burnt it to the Ground; yet afterward he caused it to be
Rebuilt again, far more Beautiful than at first it was; as in due place we
shall further see. They speak not of above fifty Spaniards slain during the
whole Siege, six Horses, and not many Tlascaltecans.

In this manner, and with so little Charges to the Conqueror, there fell to the
Crown of Spain the richest and goodliest Kingdom (one of them) of the whole
World, viz. the Kingdom of Mexico, which the Conquerors presently named New
Spain; and in reference to which name, the Catholic King has ever since
styled himself in the plural number Hispaniarum Rex, or King of both Spains;
and all by the Valor, Prudence, Cortez advanced to Honors.
admirable Resolution, and happy Conduct of Cortez; who was at first but a
private Adventurer in the American Plantations and Discoveries, though
otherwise a Gentleman of a good Family in Spain, born at Medellin in the
Country of Estramedura. The Emperor Charles the Fifth, who was also then King
of Spain, for his great Services, endowed him deservedly with many great and
rich Territories in the Provinces of Tlascalla, Mechoacan, and other parts
thereabouts, made him Marquess of the Valley, viz. of Guaxata, (which is his
chief Title) a rich and flourishing Province of that Country, Captain General,
or Commander in Chief, of all the Military Forces of New-Spain, and General
Discoverer of all the Maritime parts and Coasts of America toward the
South Sea, assigning him in propriety the twelfth part of whatsoever should be
discovered, to him and his Heirs for ever; but denied him the Government of
Mexico out of reason of State, though it is said, he much desired it.

Among the famous Havens which lie along the South Sea and Northern Ocean, the
chiefest is Acapulco beforementioned, The grand Haven Acapulco.
whither all Merchandise is sent to be transported to China, which is above two
thousand Leagues distant from thence; in which Voyage they generally spend
fourteen Months; four Sail, each of eight hundred Tun, appointed for this
Trade; generally two of them set Sail to China in March, and returning in
Summer, have no sooner dropped their Anchors, but the other two set out from
Acapulco, from whence the way by Land to Mexico, is seventy two Leagues over
steep Mountains, dangerous Rocks, and several Rivers; the chiefest whereof are,
first, Del Papagayo, or De las Balsas, which runs exceeding strong, which the
Indians cross on bundles of Canes tied upon Callabashes: Next San Francisco,
which though the biggest, yet has many shallow places to wade over. The
Mustichoes are no small Plagues to those that travel this way, for their
Poisonous Stings are the occasions of many Ulcerated Wounds, and oft-times
Death it self.

In this way lies also the Country del Valle, from which Ferdinand Cortesius
received the Title of Earl.

view of Acapulco PORTUS ACAPULCO


The Mouth of the Haven Acapulco gapes a full League North and South, and
within exceeding large, has a nook called Boca Grande, where the Ships Ride
safe at an Anchor: More Easterly appears a Land Inlet, (by the Spaniards called
Puerto del Marquis) secured against all Winds; near which is the City of San
Diego, to which belongs a Fort, with six Bulwarks, lying on a Promontory; the
main of the City is one large Street, consisting of fair and stately Houses,
and leading directly to the Haven; the Church which is of an oblong square,
has a high Steeple in the middle.

Spilbergen's Expedition.
A Dutch Admiral, one Joris Spilbergen, after he had done the Spaniards all the
mischief he could along the South Sea, ran with five Sail under the Fort
Acapulco, which fired ten Guns at him; whereupon, the Dutch Admiral Manning a
Boat, with a white Flag, they agreed upon a Cessation, and the Spaniards went
aboard of the Admiral, to whom Pedro Alvares, and Francisco Menendus, having
been a considerable time in Holland, and speaking the Language of that Country
very perfect, promised that all his Demands should be satisfied; yet Spilbergen
was suspicious that the Spaniards had a design upon him, wherefore he came and
lay close under the Castle with his five Sail, and made ready his Guns: But
this suspicion was soon cleared, when Alvares and Menendus proffered to stay as
Hostages, till the Governor of the Town sent the Admiral thirty Oxen, fifty
Sheep, some hundreds of Poultry, Coals, Oranges, Cittrons, and the like fresh
Provisions; as also Wood and Water; during which time, the Prisoners being set
at liberty, several Persons of Quality came to visit the Admiral, amongst whom
was Captain Castilio, one that had served twenty years in the Low Country
Wars; and Melchior Hernando, Nephew to the Viceroy of New-Spain, who desirous
to see the Ships that durst set twice upon Rodrigo de Mendose, Admiral of the
King of Spain's mighty Fleet, stood amazed that such little Frigates durst
Engage with so many great Spanish Ships; and carried the Admiral's Son to the
Governor of the City, called Georgius Perro, who civilly entertained him: Eight
days Spilbergen spent here at Acapulco, admiring the courteous Entertainment of
the Spaniards, and the more, because that having News but eight Months before
of the Dutch Fleet setting out, they had in that short time made all things
ready for resistance, the Fort having seventeen Brass Guns, and four hundred
Soldiers, besides many Noblemen and Reformades, whereas at other times there
used not to be above forty Men, and four Guns in the same.

SECT. II. Mechoacan.
Bounds and Description of Mechoacan
THe next Province of New Spain is the Bishopric of Mechoacan, which has on
the North-East, Panuco; on the East, Mexicana, properly so called; on the South
part, Tlascalla; on the West, the Main Ocean, or Mare del Zur; and last of all,
more directly Northward, Xalisco, which is a Province of New Gallicia: The Name
signifies in the American Language, as much as A Fish Country; and so it is,
having many fair Lakes and Rivers in it, abundantly well stored with Fish. The
Country so exceedingly pleasant and healthful, that it is usual for sick
Persons of other Provinces to come hither to recover their health, only by the
benefit of a good Air. The Soil so abundantly fertile of all sorts of Grain,
that of four measures of Seed, it has been often observed, they have reaped
the next Harvest, more than so many hundred measures of the same Grain. Very
well Wooded; and by reason of its many Rivers and fresh Springs, equally rich
in good Pasture: and besides great plenty of Medicinal Herbs and Plants, it
affords good store of Amber nigh the Sea Coasts, Mulberry-trees, and
consequently Silks; much Honey, Wax, and diverse other Commodities, both for
necessity and pleasure. The People of the Country are generally tall, of a
strong active Body, and a good Wit, especially in comparison of other Natives;
not unskilful in diverse curious Manufactures, the most excellent
Feather-Pictures, afore-mentioned, being said to be found in this Province.
They seem more generally inclined to the Humors and Customs of the Spaniards,
than any other Americans; and received the Preaching of Christian Religion,
when time was, with much willingness; so that the Country is now entirely
Christian, and divided into several Parishes.

Languages belonging to the Mechoacans.
The Languages which are spoken in Mechoacan are several, as the Otomian,
Chihcimian, and the Mexicans, which is common through all New Spain, and the
Tarascan, a neat and brief Language, which properly belongs to this Country.

The Lions and Wild Dogs of this Country devour great numbers of Cattle
yearly, Tigers.
yet the greatest mischiefs happen from the Tigers, which often fetch People
out of their Houses, notwithstanding the Doors are locked, for they break in
through the Walls and Roofs, with much eagerness and strength: Of the greatness
whereof, Jacob Bontius tells us this story, That the Governor Peter Carpentier
set a Trap without the Walls of Batavia, of great Timber, Pleited with Iron,
Baiting it with a Goat; which taking effect, the Tiger that was caught therein,
impatient of such close Imprisonment, rent the Timber, and getting out, left
the Goat untouched.

Hugo Linschot relates, That the Tigers in the West Indies hurt no Spaniards,
exercising their cruelty only on Indians; and that finding a Black and a White
Man sleeping together, they devour the Black and not the White: How far these
assertions deserve to be credited, may appear by an evident contradiction of
the first, for it is well known, many Spaniards in the West Indies have been
eaten by the Tigers.

General Fedreman marching in this Country at the Head of his Army, was
assaulted by a Tiger, which in despite of them all killing a Spaniard, and
three Indians, escaped from them; no Trees serve for a refuge against their
fury, for they climb up to the top thereof, and fetch down their Prey; their
Claws are so exceeding Venomous, that whoever is scratched with the same, is
never to be cured; there is no Beast but they will venture upon, wherefore they
lie in the Bushes, from whence they rush out upon them; but this disadvantage
they have, that most other Beasts are too nimble. Footed for them, for they are
a very heavy Creature, whatever has been delivered by the Ancients concerning
the Tigers swiftness.

As to the difference which they make in Humane Flesh, it is thus far true:
That they find more sweetness in Women's Breasts than other parts, and chose a
Black Man before a White: Concerning the first, France gives a sufficient
testimony, when two Tigers, in the time of King Lewis the Twelfth, breaking
loose, left a great number of Women lying Breastless in the Road. The second is
confirmed by John Johnston's Relation of a strange accident that happened in
Bengale, viz. A Moor dreaming that a Tiger fetched him out of the Ship, hid
himself the next Night between Decks, of which the Master asking the reason,
was informed concerning his Dream, which proved prophetic, for about Midnight
a Tiger leapt into the Ship, and devouring the Moor, went away without touching
any one of the Hollanders, of which there were thirty: But a Seaman walking on
the shore escaped more wonderfully, for a Tiger setting upon him behind, and a
Crocrodile before, he leaping from betwixt them, discovered to the Tiger the
Crocodile, to whom the Tiger directly running, and engaging with the Crocodile,
spared the Sea-mans life: Notwithstanding the cruelty and mischief of these
Tigers, the Indians are led by their sottish Superstition to worship them;
because, as they say, the Devil often appears to them in that shape.

Besides the Tigers, Squerrils.
the Inhabitants of Mechaocan are exceedingly molested with Squerrils, which
not only carry much Fruit into their Holes, but also under-mine the Houses, so
that they often sink or fall on one side, the mischief being the worse, because
they increase daily. Most of them bear four young at a time, which on the third
day run about for Prey, and can scarce be taken, because of their exceeding
swiftness, leaping a great distance from one Tree to another; their Tails serve
them on diverse occasions; for leaping they use it like a Wing, and at their
crossing over a River, for a Sail; in tempestuous Weather, they stop their
holes therewith, to keep out the Wind.

Several kinds of them.
There are six several sorts of these Squerrils; the first called Tlilic, cover
themselves with their Tails; the second Quapatchli, is as big again, and can
never be made tame; the third Techallotl, with a bald Tail and great Eyes; the
fourth Talmototly, has a thick Head, and a Tail full of black and white
streaks; the fifth Quimitchpatlan, has a little Head and long Legs, and
leaping from one Tree to another, seems to fly; the last sort called
Yztactechalotl, is whitish.

The Foxes do also great mischief here, their Urine smells so horribly, Foxes.
that forty days after, none are able to abide near the place where they have
urin'd, and on whatsoever Stuff or Cloth a drop thereof chances to light, the
stink can never be washed away.

The Bird Auras.
Here breeds also a sort of Birds, called Auras, which are not unlike
Moore-Hens; they fly exceeding high in the Air, feed on naught but stinking
Carrion, which they scent at a great distance; they have a hairy Head and Neck,
and ugly Face: Some of the Fowls of this Country stay here all the year long,
others go away, and return at certain times.

Ingenuity of the Natives.
The Natives, since the Spaniards coming thither, have gotten their Habits and
Language, learned all sorts of Trades; their Tables, Chests, and Cupboards made
of Brasile-Wood, are no way inferior to the best that are made in Europe.
Painting is also in great esteem amongst them: They make handsome Clothes,
Shoes, and strange Copper Locks. They have a peculiar Art in Tilling their
Ground: They teach the Spanish Dogs several tricks, but not feeding them well,
they cause them to run from them, and turn wild, whence they are called
Cimarrones, because they do much hurt to the Cattle.

The Inhabitants, when a Fever or Ague is upon them at the highest, leap into
cold Water: against other Sicknesses they use Herbs, whose sovereign Power
Experience has long since taught them.

Since the Spaniards made Mechoacan a Bishopric, they have built ninety four
Schools, fifty Churches, several Hospitals and Cloisters, inhabited by
Franciscan and Augustine Monks.

There are said to be in this Bishopric a hundred and fifty Towns or Buroughs
(besides many scattered Villages) most of which have Free-Schools erected in
them, for the Training up of Youth in the Christian Religion, good Literature
and Arts; and few of them without an Hospital for the Sick: of which Towns the
principal are as follows:

Principal Towns.
1. Zinzoutza, the Seat of the ancient Kings of Mechoacan. 2. Pascuar, a City
forty seven Leagues distant from Mexico, once a Bishop's See. 3. Valladolid,
the Metropolis or chief City of the Province, since the Episcopal Chair was
removed from Pascuar thither. It lies upon a great Lake, equal amost for
bigness to that of Mexico, and is about seven Leagues distant from Pascuar,
toward the East. 4. St. Michaels, a good Town, forty Leagues Westward of
Mexico, and in the Way to the Zacatecas, but lying in a Road that is somewhat
dangerous, being not a little infested with Salvages on both sides of it. 5.
St. Philips. 6. La Conception de Salaya, seventeen Leagues distant from
Valladolid, and a convenient Stage for Travelers, being indeed, with the two
last mentioned, built chiefly for the defense and securing of the Country
against the Salvages. 7. Guaxanata, a Town on the Borders of Panuco, where
there are very rich Mines of Silver. 8. Leon, another Town likewise of very
rich Mines, twenty four Leagues distant from Valladolid, and threescore from
Mexico. 9. Zamorra. 10. Villa de los Lagos, and others.

Toward the Sea there is 1. Acatlan, but two Miles distant from the Seacoast,
and a small Town, yet by reason of a safe and very good Harbor which it has
for Shipping, a Place of no little Trading. 2. Natividad, another well known
and convenient Haven upon Mare del Zur, pertaining to this Province, and from
whence they usually set Sail for the Philippine Islands. 3. St. Jago de buena
Speranza, so called by the Spaniards, perhaps from the abundance of good Pearls
they found upon this Coast. 4. Colyma. 5. Zacatula, and some others.

This Province, as we said, was at first a distinct Kingdom of it self, yet
subordinate and Tributary to that of Mexico; the King whereof named Tamgaiva,
or Bimbicha, (as Laet reports) at the first coming of the Spaniards thither,
after the Conquest of Mexico, voluntarily submitted himself to them, and was
Baptized. Nevertheless afterward, upon a pretense of I know not what Treason
intended by him against them, and which the Spanish Writers themselves
professedly think to have been feigned, by command of Nunnez de Gusman,
President of the Chancery of Mexico, he was most inhumanely burnt alive, and
his Kingdom seized upon by the Spaniards.

SECT. III. Tlascalla.
Situation and Descriptian of Tlascalla.
THe Bishopric of Tlascalla, formerly called Tlascalteca, Tlaxcala, and
Tlascalan, is a Province of New Spain, which extends it self entirely from
one Sea to another, from the Atlantic to Mare del Zur, with which it is
bounded on the East and West Parts, lying otherwise, and for the most part
betwixt the Provinces of Mexicana, last spoken of, and that of Guaxata, which
follows, containing in length from one Sea to the other, not much less than
an hundred Leagues, and in some places fourscore in breadth; but toward the
South Sea growing much narrower. It is a Country exceedingly plentiful both in
Corn and Cattle, full of rich Pasturage, and so plentifully stored with Maiz,
Wheat, and other Grain, that it is accounted as it were the Granary of America;
besides Deer, all manner of Venison, and great store of Fowl. There is likewise
Copperess, Allom, Silver-Mynes, Manna, Anime, and Liquid Amber, with a sweet
smelling Gum which drops out of a Tree. The Rivers feed no Fish, because they
fall with exceeding force from the Mountains; only near Topoyanco, is a deep
Lake of fresh Water, inhabited round about by Indians, enjoying the pleasure
and profit of the many Cumbeba-Trees, which yield Cochinele, producing yearly
above two hundred thousand Dupkets worth of that Commodity. In this Lake swim
black Hedgehogs, whose Flesh is good and wholesome to eat.

The ancient State of the Tlascallans.
The People of this Country, when the Spaniards came first amongst them, lived
in the form of a Commonwealth, or Free State, refusing to be subject to the
King of Mexico, with whom they had almost continual War; and upon that account,
as has been said, assisted Cortesius in the Conquest of the Kingdom, without
whose help it is most certain he had never been able to do any thing. They enjoy
therefore many special Privileges and Immunities more than other Americans do.
They pay no Tribute, but only a handful of Wheat yearly for every Person, by
way of acknowledgment, otherwise living, under the Protection of the Spaniards,
wholly in the Form of their ancient Government. In former times they were great
Maneaters, and not only eat the Flesh of their Enemies, but also of one
anotther, insomuch that Man's-flesh hung in public to be sold.

River Zahuatl.
The River Zahuatl, which rushes out of the Mountain Xicoleucalt, oftentimes
overflows all the Country near it, and washes away diverse Houses. Zahuatl
signifies Scabby Water, because all those, especially Children, that wash in
the same, are sure to be Scabby. On its Banks the Spaniards have built many
Houses, the fashion whereof is now also imitated by the Indians of this
Province, who formerly built quite after another manner; for they made low
Houses of Earth, Wood and Stone, with large and strange Chambers; some a
Stones-cast one from another, others close together, had narrow crooked Streets
that ran betwixt them.

Tlascallans Language.
In this Province are two sorts of Languages spoken, viz. the Mexican, and that
of the Ottomons, who formerly deserting Mexico, chose the Tlascallans for their
Protectors: They are a toilsom and painful People.

To the Northward of Tlascalla are Mountains, which all the year long, except
three Months, are covered with Mist; and the Woods on the tops of them are a
great shelter to Lions, Tigers, Wolves, and wild Dogs, called Adives, and other
wild Beasts, which do much hurt to the small Cattle. Here are also many
Serpents and Adders.

The whole Province is said to contain two hundred good Towns and Buroughs,
and more than one thousand Villages, all of them exceedingly populous, and
supposed to contain in the whole above a Million and half of Natives, besides
Spaniards, who have some few Colonies in the Country for securing of it.

Towns and Villages.
The chief Towns of the Province are 1. Tlascalla it self, which denominates the
whole Country as the Metropolis, and where the Bishop's See was at first, till
in the Year 1550. it was removed to Puebla de los Angelos. It is a fair Town,
and commodiously seated in the midst of a large and fertile Champain of
threescore Miles in compass. It consists of four large and beautiful Streets
or Quarters, and in the midst of them where they all meet, has a Piazza, or
Marketplace, equal to that of Mexico, and able to receive twenty or thirty
thousand Persons conveniently, to Buy and Sell in it; and whose Shambles seldom
show less than fifteen thousand Sheep, four thousand Oxen, and two thousand
Hogs.

2. Puebla de los Angelos, or The City of Angels, a Town built by Sebastian
Ramirez, a Churchman, and he that was the first President, or chief Governor
of Mexico, under the Crown of Castile. It was built in the Year 1531. almost in
the Road-way from Vera Crux to Mexico, and seated in a very delicate and
fertile Country, and of a good Air. It is a Bishop's See, and valued at twenty
thousand Ducats of yearly Rent, the City it self supposed to contain about
fifteen hundred Families; where there is abundance of excellent Cloth made, and
for fineness not yielding to the best of Spain. Its chief Edifices are, the
Cathedral and four stately Cloisters, belonging to the Dominicans, Franciscans,
Augustines, and Capuchins; as also a Free School for five hundred Indian
Children, endowed by Ramirez with a yearly Revenue.

3. Zempoallan, seated upon a River of the same Name.

4. Napalaca, in the Valley Ocumba, ows its original to an Indian called Juan,
who at first had only one House, and a Herd of Hogs there, till upon his
invitation, all the neighboring People came from the tops of the Hills;
insomuch, that in a short time, the place was Peopled by thousands of Families.

5. Guaxacingo, all hitherto great and ancient Towns of the Natives.

6. Segura de la Frontera, a Spanish Town, built by Cortez presently upon the
Conquest of Mexico, for the securing of the Confines, as the Name imports.

7. Vera Crux, a Town built by Cortez and his Companions, at their first
Landing, and where afterward, by a Stratagem, and out of a resolution either
to Conquer or Die in the Country, he caused all his Ships to be burnt, that
his Soldiers might not so much as think of returning back from whence they
came. The Town was at first built five or six Leagues up within Land; but the
place being found not to be so healthful, the Inhabitants in a short time
deserted it, and seated themselves upon a Bay of the Sea, right over against
St. John D' Ullua.

8. Medellin, another Spanish Town, built likewise by Cortez, in memory of his
own Birthplace, which was Medellin, a small Town of Estramadura, a Province of
Spain, but was afterward destroyed by some Spanish Commanders, out of malice
to Cortez.

Lastly, St. John D' Ullua, a noted, and the most usual Port to all this
Province, and likewise to the City of Mexico it self, from the North Sea: but
of difficult entrance, especially to such as are not well acquainted with the
Passage, or want Guides, by reason of certain Rocks and Quicksands, wherewith
the Mouth of the Haven is said to be barred; but within, the station is more
safe. It has likewise two strong Bulwarks or Forts raised, on either side of
the Entrance one, to defend the Passage; besides a strong Castle, built since
Captain John Hawkins surprised twelve Ships richly Laden within the Haven, and
thirteen others that arrived with a new Viceroy from Spain, valued at near
sixty Tun of Gold, of which he might easily have made Prize, had he not trusted
to the Viceroys Promise, to give him all satisfaction he should require, by
which being deceived, he lost all his Fleet but two Ships.

Between Tlascala and Los Angelos are the Fountains, out of which the River
has its Original, which gliding by Machaocan and Zacatula, falls into the
South Sea: This River is so exceeding full of Crocodiles, Great increase of
Grocodiles.
that they have made several places which formerly were Inhabited on its Banks,
utterly desolate; for the Females laying generally Eggs as big as those of a
Goose, increase prodigiously; and were it not that the Indian Mice, called
Ichneumones, destroyed them, they would grow still to greater numbers: But this
Animal creeping in at the Crocodiles Mouth, eats his way out of the Belly
again; Water-Serpents, Hawks, Buffeloes, and especially Tigers, are also their
mortal Enemies, for they throwing the Crocodiles on their Backs, rend open
their Bellies: They are more desirous of Man's flesh here than in any other
place, because the River of Tlascala has but small store of Fish; in the day
time they lie covered in the Mud, from whence they rush forth, and set upon
those that happen to pass by them; they pursue the Canoos in the Water, and
strike down the Rowers with their Tails.

Burning Mountain Popatepeck.
Eight Leagues beyond Tlascala, appears the Mountain Popatepeck, which for ten
years ceased smoking, till Anno 1540. it broke forth in such a manner, that
the Country all about was terrified therewith; for it vomited not only a
black Smoke, but also horrible Flames, which sometimes being blowed downward,
burnt the Corn in the Fields, and the Ashes thereof flying as far as Guaxocingo
and Chulula, burnt a great deal of the Town to the Ground; every one endeavored
by flight to secure themselves, with intention never to return thither again;
but the Flame and Smoke abating, Captain Diego de Ordas went up to view the
place; whence the Fire was cast forth; which curiosity and presumption of his,
had like to have cost him his Life, for the sulphury Smoke breaking forth on a
sudden, had almost stifled him.

Rivers of Mexicana.
Moreover, the Bishopric of Tlascala, is on the North Coast washed by the River
Papoloava, since called Alvarado, from a Spanish Commander, who first Steered
his Course thither: The next Stream named Banderas, is so called, because the
Natives held white Clothes on Poles, to invite the Spaniards ashore. The third
is Almeria, on which, Cortesius, a year after the taking of Mexico, built the
Town Medellin, as aforementioned.

Along the Tlascallan shore, washed by the Northern Ocean, lie the Isles
Blanca, Verde, and Sacrificios: The first received its denomination from White
Land, the other from Green Trees; and the third, because Joan de Greyalve, who
first Discovered New Spain, Landing on this Island, found a Bloody Altar there,
with Sacrificed People with opened Breasts, chopped off Arms and Legs.

The River Almeria falling into the Ocean opposite to the Sacrificios, the
Spanish Ships came often to an Anchor there; but in these latter times, they
have forsaken the same, because the Northern Winds used to blow very hard
against the shore, and spoiled many Vessels: But Henry Hawks gives this reason,
That a dreadful apparition of Spirits frighted the Spaniards from thence.

The Province Tepeaca.
In the Bishopric Tlascala, is also comprised the Province Tepeaca, whose
Metropolis was built by Cortez, when with great Loss he was sent from Almeria.
The Soil thereabouts is barren and stony; the Water which they have in the
City, is brought in Pipes from a River which flows out of the Mountains into
the Market place. The plain Country has many good Pastures. The Inhabitants
thereof speak four sorts of Languages; of which, the commonest is the Mexican;
others use the Popolucan or Otoman Tongues.

The Village Alyoxucan appears afar off on a high Mountain, Alyonan.
on whose top is a Lake of a hundred and fifty Fathom in circumference; the
Water whereof is very cold, and of a bluish Color, and neither Ebbs nor Flows,
to which the Villagers climb along a narrow Path.

Not far from thence, in the Plain, are two other very deep Lakes: The first
called Tlacae, is a League in circumference, and breeds delicate white Fish,
not above a Fingers length: The second named Alchichican, about the same
bigness, which in stormy Weather is very turbulent.

Strange sort of Bird.
Amongst the Fowls of this Country, the most noted is a little Summer Bird,
with a long crooked Tail, speckled Feathers; feeds on nothing but Flowers and
the Dew; about Harvest time, when the Rain ceases, it hangs fast with its Bill
on a Tree, and as soon as the first Rain falls, it revives again.

In this Country Tepeaca are five Villages, in each of which is a Franciscan
Cloister and convenient Hospital.

In this Country they gather the Water in the time of the Rainy Months, in a
dug Pool, which every Morning produces little Toads with long Tails, which
in few days fall off; but these little ones growing to be great, make a most
dreadful noise in the Night: From October till March, not one drop of Rain
falls in this Country; during which time, the Northern Winds make a dry and
wholesome Air, yet oftentimes a tempestuous Sea, to the loss of many Ships.

Farther up into the Country, between Vera Crux and Los Angelos, lies the
Village Rinconanda; and also Xalapa and Perota built of Straw Houses in the
middle of a Wood of Cedar and Pirte-Trees, inhabited by the Spaniards, for the
accommodating of Travelers: To which purpose there are likewise Inns built
near the Spring Fuente de Otzumba, which gushes out of a high Rock.

Not far from hence is the Populous Village Chetula, where a small number of
Spaniards dwell amongst thousands of Indians, who chiefly make use of Mules to
carry their Loads.

SECT IV. Guaxata.
Situation and Description of Guaxata.
BEtween Los Angelos and Guatemala, lies the Bishopric of Antiquera or Guaxata
largely taken; it has on the North, the Bay of Mexico; on the South, Mare del
Zur; on the East, Jucatan and Chiapa which is one of the Provinces of
Guatimala; on the West, Tlascalla.

The Country extends it self upon the South Sea about an hundred Leagues in
length, but from the Sea to the Borders of Tlascalla, one hundred and twenty;
Eastward not above half so much; having a good Air, and a Soil no less
fruitful, especially in Mulberry-Trees, and abundance of Silks, which the
Country affords, more than any other Province of America besides; nor is it
less rich in Mines of Gold and Silver, there being scarce a River in the whole
Country, but the Sands of it are said to be Tinctured more or less with that
yellow Metal; also Crystal and Copperess. It yields likewise great plenty of
Cassia and Cochinele, two rich Commodities; and the People generally, if they
would take pains, might be the wealthiest, it is thought, of any other in
America: But whether it be through any voluntary contempt of Riches, or through
any natural sloathfulness, as yet they seem to Pine in the midst of plenty,
living, for the most part of them, little better than from Hand to Mouth;
nevertheless, exceeding liberal of what they have, especially to such as bear
the Habit of Religion, and attend the service of their Souls; maintaining in a
plentiful and good manner, as it is said, no less than one hundred and twenty
Convents of Religious Men, of several Orders, in this only Province; besides
Hospitals, Schools for the training up of Youth, and other places of public
Charity; it is said also to have three hundred and fifty Villages, and near as
many brave Country Houses. Division.
It is sub-divided into many particular Provinces; which, because they are many
and but small, in comparison of some other, we may call Wapentakes, or
Hundreds, rather than Provinces: The principal whereof are these that follow,
viz. Misteca. 2. Tutepecque. 3. Zapoteca. 4. Guazacoalco. 5. Gueztaxatla: and
6. the Valley of Guaxata, from whence Cortez, after the Conquest of Mexico, had
his Title given him by the Emperor, Marquess of the Valley. It is the richest
and most pleasant part of the whole Province, extended in a continued Tract
together, full sixteen Leagues or more, lying about fourscore Southward of
Mexico, and wanting neither Mines of Gold and Silver, nor any other of the
prime and best Commodities of the New-World.

In this Country they speak thirteen sorts of Languages, Languages.
of which the Mexican is most used.

Poisonous Herb.
Amongst the Plants which grow here, is an exceeding Poisonous Herb, which kills
those whosoever pluck it, though a long time after, that is to say, if it be of
a Years growth, it kills not before the Years end; if a Month old, at the
Months end; if a Day, on the same.

This Country formerly suffered also many inconveniences by Earthquakes, but
of late they are somewhat abated, which the Spaniards ascribe to Martialis,
Protector of the Cathedral at Antequera.

Misteca is divided into Alta and Baxa, both of which have Rivers and Brooks
that afford Gold, whither the Indian Women taking Provisions, go for several
days, and gather Gold in Troughs, which they exchange at the Spanish Markets
for Provisions.

Strange Cave
Not far from the Village Cuertlavaca, lies a high Mountain, remarkable for a
strange Cave, whose Entrance is very narrow, at the end whereof appears a
square Place of fifty Foot; upon one side whereof stand Pits with Steps; near
which begins a crooked Way of a League long; at the end of which is a spacious
Place with a Fountain of good Water; from the Foot of which flows a small
Brook: But because none have made any farther discovery of this Cave, the other
parts of it remain yet unknown.

On the top of St. Antonio, the Indians live with their Families in Caves
between the Rocks.

Not far from hence appear two Mountains, whose tops, though they lie at a
great distance from one another, at the bottom they are so near, that a Man may
step from one to the other.

The six Rocks Pennoles, formerly Garrisoned by the Kings of Mexico, have Gold,
Lead-Mynes, and a Root which is used in stead of Soap.

In the Village Totomachiapo, is a Cave of half a Mile long, at the end whereof
the Water prevents a farther discovery.

The Rocky Country Zapotecas formerly bred very salvage Inhabitants, Mantled
in Furrs, but now Civilized, clad after the common manner.

Americans, whether Extracted from the ten Tribes of Israel.
The People spread over Guaxacualco, Yluta, and Cueztxatla, observe
Circumcision, according to an ancient Custom; from whence some have in vain
sought for a testimony, that these Americans should be originally extracted
from the scattered Tribes of Israel; but the Tartars more immediately, who at
last crossing the Straits of Anian, furnished the desolate Country of America
with Inhabitants: But this Opinion is without any probability of truth; for it
will never follow from their Circumcision, that the Tartars, the greatest
People on Earth, must owe their original to a few Israelites, Prisoners, since
that Ceremony was never thought on by them till they embraced the Mahumetan
Religion. And though they had been Circumcised before Mahomet's time, this
would be no testimony that they were extracted from the Israelites: for how
many People embraced Circumcision, which were never extracted from Abraham's
Seed? It is affirmed by Diodorus Siculus, that the Cholchians; by Philo
Judaeus, the Egyptians; by Herodotus, the Moors; by Strabo, the Troglodytes; by
Cyprian, the Phoenicians and Arabians Circumcised themselves from all
Antiquity, which is to this day observed by some of them. It also plainly
appears by the Prophet Jeremiah, that the Egyptians, Edomites, Ammonites,
Moabites, and Ishmaelites, had the same Custom anciently amongst them.

Towns and chief Villages of Guaxaca.
The Towns of principal note inhabited by the Spaniards in this Province, are 1.
Antequera, in the Valley aforesaid, a stately City, and beautified with a fair
Cathedral Church, built with Pillars of the finest Marble, of great height and
bigness. The River which glides by the Walls, springing out of the Ground, runs
to the Mountain Coatlan. Not far from thence lies the Village Herrera, which
boasts four hundred Spanish Families, though some say that the greatest part of
them are Indians, who pay the Spaniards Cotton Cloaks and Nuts for Tribute.

2. Illephonso de los Zapotecas, lies on a Mountain belonging to the Mixes,
anciently a salvage, strong, and long-bearded People, who speak a gross
Language, and in former times went naked, only a white Deer-skin, Tanned in
Man's Brains, about their Middle. They maintained continual War against the
Zapoteca's, and could never have been subdued by the Spaniards, had it not been
for their Dogs, which kept them in such awe, that thirty Spanish Soldiers
ventured to live in Illephonso amongst thirty thousand Mixes, who now drive a
Trade in Cotton, Maize, and Gold.

3. San Jago de Nexapa appears at a great distance on a high Mountain, where
also twenty Soldiers with their Dogs were wont to awe the cruel Natives.

4. The last Place, built by Gonzales de Sandovall, Anno 1522. is Villa del
Espiritu Santo, Commands fifty Indian Villages, which with great difficulty
were brought to submit to the Spaniards.

The River Aquivicolco affords a convenient Harbor, the Mouth thereof being a
hundred and ninety Paces broad.

Upon the Southern Ocean is the Haven Guatulco, where the Ships that Sail to
Honduras and Peru take in their Lading. The Custom-house belonging to this
Place was first plundered by Sir Francis Drake, and nine years after burnt by
Candish.

The River Ometipu, which springing out of the Mountain Cacatepec, falls into
Tepoanteque, abounds with diverse sorts of good Fish, especially Cra-Fish. There
are also reckoned of the Natives of this Province, no less than fifteen
thousand Persons that pay Tribute to the Spaniards, besides Women and Children,
and also a great number of Spaniards.

Sect. V. Panuco.
Bounds and Description of Panuco.
PAnuco is the most Northerly Province of Hew Spain, by some called Guasteca,
bounded on the East with the Gulf of Mexico; on the West with Uxitipa, a
Country of New Gallicia; on the North with some undiscovered Countries of
Florida, from which it is divided by the River of Palms; on the South with
Mechoacan and Mexicana. It is called Panuco, from a River of that Name, which
turning from the Mountains Tepecsuan in New Gallicia, and dividing New Biscay
from the Province of Zacatecas, passes through the midst of this Country
also, and at last empties it self into the Gulf.

This Country is reckoned to be about fifty Leagues in length, and not much
less in breadth; of a fruitful Soil, having some Mines of Gold in it, and once
very populous till the Spaniards, about the Year 1522. dispeopled it by their
insatiable cruelty.

Conquest of it difficult.
Before Ferdinand Cortesius, Francis de Garay attempted to Conquer this
Province, but after much pains to no purpose, he returned with but a small
remnant of those he carried with him; and though Cortesius subdued the
Countries Ayotetextetlatan and Chila, yet it was not without many considerable
Losses; for the Inhabitants being valiant and cruel, not fearing the Spanish
Bullets, ran in amongst them, and made great slaughter, and (according to an
old Custom in New Spain) drank their Blood.

Barbarous Customs of the People.
These People, on their Festival Days called Raeaxipo Veliztli, which signifies
A Flaying of Slaves, used to pull off the Skins of a certain number of Slaves,
with which they walked about begging Alms from Hut to Hut, and whosoever denied
them, was sure of a Blow in the Face with the bloody Skin; of which so long as
there was but one Lappet remaining, they went a Begging; and whatsoever they
got, was employed in Uses and Necessaries belonging to their Idolatry. On the
forementioned Days they also used other barbarous Customs, amongst which this
was one: The Priest challenging the Slave which was to be Offered, to Fight for
his Life, he had one of his Feet tied to a great round Stone, and having a
Sword to offend, and a Shield to defend himself, Encountered with the Priest,
who was Armed after the same manner, whom if he conquered, he not only
preserved his Life, but gained the Name of a valiant Man.

Strange usage of Prisoners.
They also dealt strangely with Persons that were yearly to be Offered to their
Idols: for after having washed them, they put on them the Clothes of the Idol,
and gave them the same Name, every one honoring them as a God; were permitted*
to walk up and down, but guarded by twelve Men, that they might not escape; for
then the chiefest of the Guard was to supply the others place: Moreover, they
resided in the chiefest Apartments of the Temple, eat of the best, were served
like Princes, and attended through the Towns by Persons of the greatest
Quality, who led them through the Streets; where they no sooner played on a
little Pipe, but all People came running to them, fell at their Feet and
worshipped them: In the Night they locked them up in a Cage, secured with Iron
Bars, and at the appointed time flayed them alive.

Towns and Villages.
The chief Towns now remaining, and inhabited by the Spaniards, are 1. St. Lewis
de Tampice, a Colony of Spaniards situate on the Northern Bank of the River
Panuco, at the very Mouth of it; where it has a very large Haven, but so
barred with Sands, that no Ship of any great Burden can enter or abide in it
with safety; and yet the River otherwise so deep, that Vessels of five hundred
Tun, might Sail up threescore Leagues at least within Land, and thereby visit
the rich Mines of Zatatecas on the one side of it, and of New Biscay on the
other, at pleasure, and without fear of much opposition.

2. St. Stevan del Puerto, on the South side of the same River, eight Leagues
distant from the Sea, or Gulf of Mexico, at present the Metropolis or chief
Town of the Province, built by Cortesius in the place where stood old Panuco,
which was likewise the Metropolis, or Head Town of the Natives, before the
Spaniards burnt and destroyed it.

3. St. Jago de las Valles, which is a Fronteer Place, and enjoys certain
special Immunities, and some fair Possessions also for defense of the Country
against the Salvages. It is twenty five Leagues distant from St. Stevan del
Puerto, lying in an open or Champain Country, and is fenced about with a Wall
of Earth.

Miles Philips his Voyage.
Miles Philips, an Englishman, put ashore by Captain John Hawkins, in the Bay
of New Spain, Anno 1568. suffered great hardship before he came to Panuco, from
whence returning, he made mention of a City lying along a River of the same
denomination, (which is there not above two Bow shoots-broad,) in a pleasant
Country, containing two hundred Spanish Families, beside the ancient
Inhabitants and Negro's, which all drive a great Trade in Salt, which is made
in Pans Westward from the River: Philips traveling from Panuco to Mexico, saw
by the way the Villages Nohete, by the Spaniards called Santa Maria, and a
Cloister of white Monks: Next he viewed Mestitlan, where some gray Monks had a
House, and the Town Puchuen.

Chilton's Journal.
Another account of this Province is taken from a Journal kept by John Chilton,
four years after Philips's Voyage; he having a Spaniard for his Convoy, left
Mexico to find out Panuco; in three days time they reached the City Mestitlan,
where he observed, that twelve Spanish Families lived amongst thirty thousand
Indians. The City built on a high Mountain, full of Woods, is surrounded with
Villages, through which run many brave Springs; and the Air about them is no
less wholesome than the Ground fruitful; the Highways are shaded with all sorts
of Fruit Trees.

The Village Clanchinoltepec, four times more Populous than Mestitlan, belongs
to a Spanish Nobleman, who built a Cloister there for nine Augustine Monks, of
which Order there also reside twelve in the City Guaxutla.

Moreover, they traveled over the plain Country Guastecan, to the Village
Tancuylabo, inhabited by a tall People, with blue Painted Bodies, and Pleited
Hair, hanging down to their Knees, going stark naked, but never without a Bow
and Arrow. They esteem nothing more than Salt, as being the only Cure against
certain Worms that grow between their Lips. From hence they traveled to
Tampice, in which Journey they spent nine days; and coming thither, were
informed, that of forty Christians which dwelt in the same, the Indians had
slain twelve, whilst they were gathering of Salt. From hence they came to
Panuco, then in a manner deserted, because of the Indians oppressing the
Spaniards, of which, at that time, there were but ten, and one Priest. Chilton
falling sick here, resolved nevertheless to change that unwholsom Air and
barren place for a better; to which purpose, getting a Horse, he took an Indian
behind him for his Guide, but loosing his way in a thick Wood, happened amongst
a Company of wild People, which dwelt in Straw Huts, twenty of them immediately
surrounding him, brought him some clear sweet Water to drink, out of a Gilt
Venice Glass, which having drunk, two naked Men led him into the highway;
which ended at the Gate of the Walled City Santo Jago de las Valles, inhabited
by twenty five Spanish Families, who informed Chilton of the great danger which
he had been in, for the People which gave him the Water were Man-eaters, who
not long since, had burnt an Augustine Cloister, built on a Mountain, had taken
away, and eat the People, of which they had in all likelihood gotten the Venice
Glass; and had they not observed Chilton to be sickly, he had without doubt
been eaten by them, and his Skin, with some of his Hair, (that being a great
Ornament amongst them) been hung about their middle.

During Chilton's stay in St. Jago, Frans de Page came thither with forty
Soldiers from the Viceroy Henry Manriques, and took five hundred Indians, good
Bow Men out of the Neighboring Villages, Tanehipa and Tameclipa, with which he
designed to go to the Silver Mines at Zacatecas: Chilton joining with this
Company, came to the great Rives De las Palmas, which separates New Spain from
Florida, where they spent three days in vain, seeking to find a passage over;
wherefore they at last took pieces of Timber, which joining together, and
standing upon, they were Towed over by Swimming Indians; being gotten on the
other side, they Marched over steep Mountains, and thick Wildernesses, and came
at last to Zacatecas, on whose Silver Mines, the richest in all America, worked
above three hundred Spaniards daily.

SECT. VI. Tabasco.
Bounds and Description of Tabasco.
THe last Country belonging to New Spain is Tabasco, bounded on the North by
the Northern Ocean, and on the East with Jucatan; and however some account it a
distinct Province, yet others make no mention of it, letting it pass for that
part of Jucatan which lies about the City Tabasco, from which it seems to be
denominated: The Ground level and without Mountains, has many great Woods of
Cedar-Trees, Brasile, and others. Here are also many good Indian Fruits, as the
Manmeyes, Zapotes, Aguacates, and Guajabos. For three Months they have
continually dry Weather, the rest of the year being for the most part rainy;
which vicissitude of Moisture and Heat makes the Country exceeding fruitful,
insomuch that they have three or four Harvests of Maiz in a year.

Vines, Figs, Lemmons, Oranges, Rice, Barley, and all sorts of Garden-Herbs
grow here also in great plenty.

The Pools, Brooks and Lakes, abound likewise with all manner of Fish: and for
Seafish, besides the Tortugas, and Yguanras, the Manae, or Sea-Cow, is of
principal note.

The Fish Manate.
This Fish is terrible to behold, having a Head like an Ox, little Eyes, two
Feet near the Head in stead of Fins, two round Holes in stead of Ears, round
bones like Balls in its Brains, a short Tail, and bristly Skin: The Females
have two Dugs, with which they suckle their Young.

Peacocks, Pheasants, Parrots, Quales, Hens, Pigeons, Birds.
with several sorts of Birds altogether unknown to the Europeans, are here in
great abundance.

The Woods also abound with Tigers and Lions, Beasts.
which do no little hurt to the Inhabitants, Wild Hogs, Deer, and Rabbets, are
likewise here in great plenty; and Turtles of an exceeding bigness: Likewise
Apes, Polecats, and Squerrils, which do very much hurt to the Fruit Trees,
especially the Cacao. The Musticho's are a great annoyance to the People, and
disturb their rest at Night.

Languages of the Natives.
Since the Spaniards have conquered Tabasco, they have forced the Inhabitants to
observe their Laws and Customs. They speak three sorts of Languages, amongst
which that most used, called Chontal, is copious of Words. The second, Zoques,
is spoken on the Mountains which divide Chiapa and Tabasco. The Mexican Tongue
was first brought thither by the Garrisons which Muteczuma placed there in the
Forts Zimatlan and Xicalango, and is the most spoken, in regard it has not
only its Accents, but is also of great use, partly because it is understood in
most places of America, and partly because the Priests have made Songs in that
Tongue, with which the Tabascans are much delighted.

The chief City Nostra Sennora de la Vittoria, already mentioned in Jucatan,
was so called by Ferdinand Cortesius, from the great Victory which he obtained
over the Indians when he marched first toward Mexico.

Thus far of the Description of the several Parts and Divisions of New Spain,
differing in Customs and Languages, though most of them have some affinity with
the Mexicans, who by force of Arms had made a way to the supreme Empire. All of
them acknowledge a, Creator, but have no Name to express the Word God. But
besides the Creator of the World they have made to themselves Gods of many
other Creatures; amongst which are the Sun, Moon, Stars, and the Manes of the
Deceased, the care of whose Burial they committed to the Priests, which was
sometimes in the Fields, sometimes in their Houses; others carried their dead
Bodies to the Mountains, some buried them in Temples; and as they either burnt
or buried the Body, so they buried or burnt their Clothes and Riches with them,
especially of Persons of Quality, whilst those that accompanied the Corpse sung
a mournful Song; after which they Feasted. The Heirs of Noblemen that had been
at the Funeral put themselves all into Mourning. A Person, after he is dead, is
stretched out upon the Floor, where he lies till all his Friends come to
Present and Complement him, as if living: But at the death of an eminent Person
they not only bring him Presents, but proffer him his Slaves, Steward,
Butlers, Dwarfs, and Household Priest, (all which a Lord must keep) that they
may serve him in the other World. The priests which performed the Funeral
Ceremonies, walked before the Corpse with the Image of the Idol which the
Deceased had appropriated to himself, (for every Lord, according to the
greatness of his Quality, bore the Name and Apparel of some Idol or another;)
other Priests beat on Drums, played on Pipes and singing Dirges, perfumed the
Way with Myrrh, whilst the Servants and Relations made a doleful cry; a
Herald also carried the Coat, of Arms and Trophies of the Deceased,
artificially painted on Cloth; at last they pyl'd sweet Wood about the Corpse,
which being lighted, and the Body burnt to Ashes, a Priest in a frightful
Dress, Vizarded with a gaping Mouth, long Teeth, and fiery Eyes, came on a
sudden, and with a long Stick stirred the Ashes about, and gathering it in an
Urn, buried the same with the forementioned things.

The Idols in New Spain are represented in terrible Figures, to which they
Offer humane Sacrifices.

The Priests, divided into higher or lower Orders, acknowledge a supreme Head,
which they call Papas. Each Idol had a peculiar sort of Priests: Those that
served Viztlipuzli, obtained their Places by Inheritance; but others were chose
by the Commonalty, unless they had been bred Priests from their In^ancy.

Cloisters dedicated to the ancient Mexican Religion.
The Mexican Cloisters in the time of Heathenism were generally built in the
chiefest Temples, in a great Piazza, or square Court, where for the most part
two Monastical Houses stood one against another, the one inhabited by a
Fraternity of Recluses, and the other by a Sisterhood; which last being Maids
of twelve or thirteen years of age, called The Penitential Daughters, swept the
Temple, prepared Meat for the Idols and Priests, which was plentifully supplied
from the Alms and Offerings that were daily brought in to the Priests,
consisting of little Cakes made like Hands and Feet, besides other strange
Meats, which being set before the Idols, was soon, after taken away again, and
eaten up by the were under a Governess, who employed them in making
Embroideries to adorn the Temple; and sometimes rose up with the Priests at
Midnight, and played on Pipes, perfumed the Temple, and scourged themselves
till the Blood ran down their Backs, besmearing their Faces therewith, and
leaving it on a whole year; then going into a large Chamber, where a Cistern
stood for that purpose, they washed it off again; after which, if they
committed the least uncleanness, they were put to a most miserable Death; which
was judged upon seeing a Rat run through the Nuns Chamber, or a Batt flying by
it, or finding any piece of Cloth gnaw'n by a Mouse or Rat; for they suppose
that the forementioned Creatures dare not come into a hallowed place, unless
defiled. In this recluse manner they were only confined to live a year, which
being expired, they had free leave to Marry.

The House opposite to the Nuns in the same square place of the Temple, was
inhabited by Youths of eighteen and twenty years of age, whose Heads were
shaven like Monks, and pleited Tufts hung from the Crown down to their Backs;
they lived also mean and chaste, kept the Priests Clothes and
Perfuming-Vessels, carried Wood for Offerings, and kept always burning Lamps
before Viztlipuztli's Altar. Amongst them were also Boys of a less Age, whose
Office was to gather Flowers and Herbs to strew the Temple with, to sharpen the
Priests Lances, which they Let themselves Blood with every Night in the Legs,
and carry them Water. These Youths, Clothed in Nets, fell on their Faces on the
Ground when they met with a Woman, and went four and four, or six and six
together to beg Alms, and by turns watched the forementioned Fire; in the
Morning they drew Blood out of their Thighs, with which they anointed their
Temples down to their Ears, and when the Blood looked black, washed it off
again in a consecrated Bath, which their strict and severe Life endured a whole
Year.

Mexican Religion abhorred by the neighboring People,
The particular Religion of the Mexicans, composed of cruel slaughters and
butcheries of Men, reigned a long time against the minds of the other Indians
that were under their Dominion, every one beginning more to abhor the cruel
flaying of living People, and tearing out the Hearts of Men for Offerings; and
the rather, because they were forced to fetch them out of their Enemies
Country with the hazard of their own Lives, insomuch that they were ready long
before to have embraced another Doctrine, if any other Teacher had but appeared
amongst them; which was the chief reason why they so easily received the Roman
Religion: for when Cortesius had conquered the City Mexico, the Mechoacan
Agents entreated him to send them Teachers to prescribe them Laws, according to
which they might live, because their Idolatry, which had long oppressed them,
was not to be suffered any longer, because of the Cruelties which were required
of them in the performance thereof.

Their Processions.
Their Processions were stately, and after this manner: The chiefest Nuns
raising a Paste of Bledoi-Seed and parched Maiz, kneaded it with Honey, of
which they made an Idol resembling their Deity Viztipuztli, across whose Nose
and Forehead they drew a blue Stroke; his Head they adorned with a Plume of
Feathers, and in the left Hand placed a round Box, in the right a crooked Staff
like a Serpent, and Wings behind on his Shoulders; at the appointed Feast Day
the Nuns meet before Sunrising, in new white Apparel, with Garlands of Maiz
about their Heads and Necks, which hung down below the left Shoulder, their
Faces painted with several colors, about their Arms hung Parrots Feathers from
their Elbows down to their Hands: Thus adorned, they carried the kneaded Idol
to a Court, where the Youths that inhabited a Cloister in the same Temple,
fetching the Idols blue Throne, with great Reverence set it down at the lower
Step of the Temple, at which the People threw Dust on their Heads; which was no
sooner done, but the Boys ran with all speed to the Mountain Chapultepec, a
League from Mexico, whither the Multitude flowing them in manner of Procession,
made all short Prayers and Offerings there; from thence hastening into the
Champain Fields Atlacuavaya, they performed the like Service as before; which
done, they went to the Village Cuyoacan, a League farther; from whence they
came back in all haste with their Idol into Mexico: Wherefore this
Processioning for its expedition was called Ipaina Viztliputli. The Idol being
brought into the Temple, was by four Cords made fast to his Throne, hoised up
to the Cieling with the noise of Drums and Trumpets, whilst the forementioned
Youths strow'd the Temple both within and without full of Roses; after which
the Nuns gave the Boys the resemblances of Bones made of the same Dough with
the Idol, with which they were to cover the Floor of the Chapel; then appeared
the Temple-Priests, with Scarfs about their Bodies, Garlands on their Heads,
and Strings with Flowers about their Necks, each going in order according to
his quality to the place where the Bones lay; which being Consecrated with
Songs and Dances, were religiously worshipped for Bones of the Idol; after
which six of the Priests went down to the Stone Quauxicalli, on which the
Prisoners lying upon their Backs, had their Hearts pulled out; which being
finished, the Maids and Boys beforementioned went to meet one another, Dancing
to the sound of Pipes, Drums and Songs; which their nearest Relations
answering, Danced round about them, whither the whole City and Country People
all about came flocking in great numbers.

During this high Feast none, upon great Penalties, durst eat any other Food
but the Cakes made of the same Dough of which the Idol was made; neither were
they permitted, though Children, to drink till the Afternoon.

Lastly, the Priest climbed up to a Chapel strow'd with Roses, in which the
Idol sitting, they disrobed him, broke his holy Arms and Legs into little
pieces, which they distributed amongst the common People, who received them
with great Reverence, and with tears in their Eyes, imagining they eat the Body
of their God; for which honor every one paid a tenth part of the Charge which
had been spent in this high Feast. Then a Priest admonished them how they
should lead their Lives, since they were united with their God; which ended,
they all went to their several Habitations in a wonderful good order from the
Temple.

Ancient Attire of the Mexicans.
Concerning the Mexicans Apparel, it is a sufficient testimony, that they are no
way of the same original with the several barbarous Nations, that run up and
down naked in New Spain: for the Inhabitants of Mexico went anciently Clothed
in Cotton: On their Heads they wore a high Plume of red Feathers; about their
Necks, over their Shoulders, Breast and Back, a kind of large Thorax of
Feathers curiously pleited; each Arm adorned with Armlets, and their Middles
girt with broad white Girdles full of red Streaks; in stead of Garters they
wore Laces of Feathers, as also a little above their Ancles. Their Priests
besmeared all their Bodies, especially the Head, with an Ointment, whose
special virtue was to make their Hair grow exceeding long, which they braided
with broad Cotton Strings; they also smutch'd themselves with a kind of
blacking Stuff; when they went to make Offerings to their Idol in Caves, Woods,
or on high Mountains, they bedawb'd themselves with an Ointment made of
Spiders, Salamanders, Adders, Scorpions and Toads, which the Temple-Boys caught
for them in great abundance. This Ointment they made with many Circumstances;
for having roasted the forementioned Vermin on the Hearth of the perpetual
Fire before Viztlipuztli's Altar, and stamped the same in a Mortar with
Tobacco, living Scorpions, the Seed Ololuchqui, (to which they ascribed a power
of representing Visions) hairy Worms, and Soot, they kneaded all together, put
the Ointment in Pots, and placed it before the Idol, thenceforth reputing it a
sanctified Medicine, that would prove good against all manner of Diseases;
wherefore the Priests being always sent for to the Sick in stead of Doctors,
perfumed the Patient, shaved his Hair, hung Snakes Bones about his Neck, and
ordered him at a certain Hour to bathe himself, and in the Night to watch
before a Fire-hearth, and to eat no Bread but what had been Offered to their
Idol. Moreover, the said Ointment is thought to have another power, viz. to
make those that anointed themselves with the same, valiant and strong; which
the common People believed, because the Priests would go through Woods and
Wildernesses that abounded with ravenous Beasts.

These Heathens also seemed to have something of Circumcision and Baptism; for
they not only cut off a piece of the Infant's Ears and privy Members, which
they Offered to their Idols, but also washed them as soon as they came into the
World, putting into their Hands such Tools as were of use in their Fathers
Profession. Their Nuptial Solemnities.


Their Marriages also were celebrated with great solemnity: The Priest having
asked the Bride and Bridegroom, If they would join together in Matrimony? if
they both consented, he tied the Brides Scarf, and Bridegrooms Coat together,
and so accompanying them home, led them nine times about the Fire-hearth: If
the Bride had no Impediments, then the Bridegroom made Presents to her Father
and Mother, Offerings to the Gods, and a brave Dinner to the nearest Relations;
after which an Inventory was drawn of what each of them had brought, that upon
their being Divorced, (which was very common amongst the Mexicans) each might
have his share; and if they had Children, the Man was to keep the Sons, and the
Woman the Daughters; nor were they permitted, on pain of death, being once
parted, to join together again.

The Feast Texcoals.
On the ninteenth of May they kept the Feast Texcoalt, Consecrated to the Idol
Tezcatlipuca, before whom they Offered a Slave, which was done after this
manner: Toward the Evening the Multitude coming into the Temple, the Priests
pulling off the Idols old, put on new Apparel, hung him full of Precious Stones
and Armlets, set Plumes of Feathers on his Head; which done, the Curtains
behind which he stood, were drawn, and a Priest Clothed exactly like the Idol
coming forth, turned himself round, blowed a kind of Trumpet toward the four
Winds, and ate Earth, which all the People imitated: whereof those which had
committed any heinous Offense, Offered Incense to the Idol, and weeping, begged
forgiveness of their Sins. Those that were Soldiers besought him to grant them
store of Prisoners, and strength to conquer their Enemies; for which they would
return him thanks with Offered Prisoners.

This Feast of Texcoalt lasting ten days, ended on the twenty ninth of May with
peculiar Ceremonies; for in the Morning a company of Priests, black all over,
carried on their Shoulders a large Chair of State richly adorned; in which sat
their Idol Tezcatlipuca, and Priests with long pleited Hair, and Clad in the
same Apparel with the Idol, which they set down at the Foot of a pair of Stairs
which led up to a Chapel; whither the attendant Youths and Virgins came and
spread Carpets before it, and green Boughs of Manghey; after which two Priests
carried the Idol into a spacious Court in the Temple, several others walking
before, each with a perfuming Vessel; when they threw their Perfumes on the
Consecrated Hearth, they held their Hands toward the Idol, desiring him that
he would send their Prayers to Heaven: Next followed the Multitude, who
scourged themselves till the Blood ran down from their Backs. So soon as the
Procession was ended, the represented Tezcatlipuca was hoised up to the
Cieling, and abundance of Flowers strow'd before the Altar; which done, every
one went home to Dinner, whilst the Youths and Virgins adorned the Idol, and
placed Meat before him: Lastly, the Votaresses came two and two with Baskets of
Bread, and Dishes of Meat: their Governess in a white Sur-Coat over a red Vest,
with Wings on her Shoulders, and broad Girts, at which hung Calabashes filled
with holy Relics and Flowers: Moreover, she conducted the Votaresses to the
Steps of the Altar on which the Idol sat; where having eaten Bread they came
back, and the Temple-Servants went in their places, and carried the Meat which
stood on the Altar to the Priests Cells, who by that time were to have Fasted
five days: this done, the People came all to the Temple again, to be present at
the end of the Feast: then a Slave, who had represented the Idol a whole year,
appeared, to whom every one having showed Reverence, the chief Priest cutting
open his Breast, tore the Slave's Heart reaking out of his Body, and showed it
to the Sun; then the Consecrated Youths and Maids made a great noise with
Drumming, Singing and Dancing about the Body till Sunset; after which the
Virgins going up to the upper Chapel, placed Bread and Fruit, made up like
dead Men's Bones and Heads, before the Idol, where, after it had stood a little
while, the Servants went up and fetched it down, whilst the Youths and Maids
went to their several Cloisters.

Much after the same manner, and with such like brutish Ceremonies, not worth
mentioning, was also celebrated the Feast of Quetzatcoalt.

In the inner part of the Temple stood a Stage, on which upon Festival Days the
People Acted Drolls; in which they sometimes feigned themselves deaf, blind,
lame, and the like, and begged to be cured of their Idols; sometimes were
dressed like Serpents, Adders, Crocodiles, or other ravenous Beasts, in which
postures they fought one with another.

Computation of Time amongst the Mexicans.
Those Feasts were all kept on certain times, according to the Mexican Almanac,
in which the Year was divided into eight Months, and each Month into forty
five Days, which together made three hundred and sixty: The five remaining
Days, to complete the Year, they kept apart, on which all Affairs whatsoever
were laid aside, as Selling, Buying, Offerings, etc. nothing else being thought
on but Feasting one another for the passing away of the time. The first Day of
their Year was on the twenty sixth of February. Each Month had a peculiar Name
and Sign. Moreover, they divided the Year into four parts by as many
Representations, viz. a House, a Rabbet, a Cane, and a Flint to strike Fire
with; and Figured it out by a Wheel with four Spikes jutting out round about
it, colored green, red, blue, and yellow, and in the middle thereof a Sun;
each Spike signified thirteen years, wherefore it had thirteen Divisions,
distinguished by the four forementioned Representations: At each Division of
the Wheel they set down what remarkable things should happen that year by
certain Characters; as, a Man in red Apparel typifi'd that Year when Ferdinand
Cortesius, clad in Red, conquered Mexico. When the Wheel was filled with fifty
two years Prognostication, then on the last Night they broke all their Pots and
Vessels in pieces, and blew out their Candles, because they believed, that at
the end of the said fifty two years the World would be at an end, and therefore
they had no need of Housholdstuff, or ought else: But so soon as the Day
appeared again, they played on Pipes, Trumpets, and Drums, rejoicing that God
had deferred the destruction of the World fifty two years longer; then they
bought new Utensils and Candles, and made solemn Processions.

Art of Writing.
Concerning the Art of Writing amongst the Inhabitants of New Spain, Joseph
Acosta tells us, That some old Books, containing ancient Passages, the Course
of the Heavens, nature of Beasts and Plants, were found in Jucatan, according
to the Relation of a Learned Indian, but were all burnt by Command of a Spanish
Bishop, because he supposed them to be full of Matter touching the Black Art.
Their Histories they described with the Representations of the Things.
Rhetoric and Poetry the Children were taught by Rote in the Schools, so that
they never forgot what they had once learnt; But at present they use Spanish
Letters or Characters.

Ancient Government.
Moreover, the Government of Mexico has ever been kept in a good Order, the
King's Power being exactly limited, that nothing might be lost of the common
Privileges. The fourth King Icoath made Earls, who next to the Lords of
Tezcuco and Tacuba, had right to the Crown; which was like a Mitre turned up
behind, and rising before with a Point. According as they increased in Power,
so they advanced in Royal Dignity; in which Muteczuma the Second exceeded all
others: And to manifest his splendour, his House for all sorts of Creatures, and
many other things, might serve for a sufficient testimony: for in it he kept
Seafish in salt Water, River-Fish in fresh Water, and all manner of Beasts in
peculiar places: The Birds were kept in great Aviaries, surrounded with golden
Rails. Next to the Kings followed four Earls called Atlacohecalcatl, which
signifies Princes of the Throne Lances, a Weapon much used amongst the
Mexicans. The next in Degree were the Tlacatecatl, or Man-cleavers;
Esauahuacatl, or Blood-shedders; Tsallancalqui, or Lords of Blackness, without
all which the King durst not take any Business in hand. High and lesser Courts
of Judicatory, where Matters of Life and Death were tried, were in most Cities;
and other Courts also for petty Quarrels, Controversies, and the like. The
Collectors brought their Revenues to the Court every Month. The chief thing
which preferred both Rich and Poor to Places of Honor, consisted in Valor and
heroic Exploits. Their Arms were chiefly sharp pieces of Flint made fast to a
Stick, with which they could at one Blow chop off a Horses Head. They also used
Pikes, Clubs, and Lances, and sometimes Slings: For defensive Armor, they had
Helmets and Shields, made of Tigers, Leopards, and Lions Skins. They always
fell upon their Enemies unawares, their Design being generally to take
Prisoners rather than to kill them; for they reserved them for Offerings to
their Idols. Muteczuma made several Commanders over his Armies, giving them a
Power one above the other, which were to be distinguished by several Marks; for
the chiefest tied the Hair on the top of their Heads with a red String, betwixt
which stuck a brave Plume of Feathers; at the end whereof hung as many Tassels
as they had done noble Exploits. To this Order belonged also the King, who wore
one of the same Marks, with which King Muteczuma and his Son stand Carved on a
Rock. The Ayulas, or The Order of the Eagle, consisted of valiant Men. The Gray
Knights were of less Quality, and wore Collars which reached up to their Ears,
the lower part of their Body being naked. Persons of greater Dignity, when
going to the War, were Armed from Head to Foot: Which Order was also permitted
to wear Cotton-Clothes, and Shoes richly embroidered with Gold and Silver; they
used painted Vessels, and had Lodgings provided for them at Court.

Their Education of Youth.
Moreover, it is worthy of obesrvation, what great care the Mexicans took in the
bringing up of their Children; to which purpose they had Schools near to their
Temples, in which Youth was taught to Sing, Dance, Morality, Obedience, and
also Martial Discipline. Children of noble Extract had Learned Men for their
Tutors. Their Punishments for Transgressions were very severe, the Masters
forcing their Scholars to Fast and Watch, carry great Burdens of Provisions to
the Army, and be in the midst of Engagements. Others, whose Fancy led them to a
holy Life, willingly embraced the Services of the Temple.

Their manner of Dancing.
Their manner of Dancing in New Spain was very strange and differing; they used
pretty Instruments, and Songs which contained antique Passages, according to
the Times; they in their Motions imitated Shepherds, Fishermen, Plowmen,
Hunters, and the like: Sometimes they Danced in Mascarades, with a Man on their
Shoulders, making the same Motion with his Hands in the Air, as the other with
his Feet on the Ground. They had also Tumblers and Dancers on the Ropes, which
showed strange Tricks on an erected Pole. But above all Dances, the Mitotes was
the chief, which was generally Danced in the King's Palace, or inner Court of
the Temple; in the middle of which they placed a great Drum and a hollow Tub on
a large Image; round about which the most eminent Persons made a Ring, Sang
sweetly, and Danced leisurely, when on a sudden two that are more nimble, with
diverse Motions came into the midst of them, and Danced exactly after the sound
of the Drum and hollow Tub, which was seconded with the noise of Flutes and
Pipes.

CHAP. VI. New Gallicia.
Bounds and Extent of New Gallicia.
NEw Gallicia, by some called Guadalajara, from the chief City. This whole
Province is the most Northern Country of all America, that is inhabited to any
purpose by the Spaniards. Here, it is true, they are scattered up and down in
all the parts of it, but it is at a huge distance, and for the most part only
where the Mines are. It is bounded on the East and to the South, with the
Kingdom of Mexico or New Spain; on the West, with the Gulf or Bay of
California; Northward, for so much as is yet discovered, with Quivira and
Cibola, lying between eighteen and twenty eight Degrees of Northern Latitude,
that is, from La Natividad, a Port so named by the Spaniards, in the Confines
of New Spain, to the most Northerly Borders of Cinoloa, a part of this
Province, containing, as is supposed, not much less than three hundred Leagues
in length, and in breadth much more; and whereof not a tenth part is either
used or frequented by the Spaniards.

Temperature and Nature of the Country.
The Air is generally here very temperate, inclining rather to Heat than Cold,
and subject now and then to sudden Storms of Rain, and great Claps of Thunder,
which yet do not hinder, but that the Country is held to be reasonably
healthful, and the People observed to live generally to a good old Age. The
Soil, by reason of the Climate, would be a little inclining to Drought, but
that, besides the frequent Rains which it has, it is constantly moistened with
fresh Morning Dews, which make it for the most part wonderfully fruitful,
almost beyond belief, yielding for every Pushel of Wheat that is sown,
threescore; and of Maiz, two hundred for one; besides great plenty of
Sugarcanes and Cochinele; both which nevertheless the Spaniards are said to
neglect in some sort, employing themselves wholly about richer Commodities: for
the Country affords them good store of Mines of Silver and Brass, but of Gold
or Iron, not many as yet have been found. The Rivers abound plentifully with
Fish, and the Woods with Wenison, and some other wild Beasts. The Country is
generally more mountainous than plain, frequently shaded with Woods, and whole
Forests of the stateliest Pine-Trees and Oaks that are to be seen; amongst
which breed abundance of Wolves, which do great mischief to the People, as also
Scorpions and Mustiecho's. The Hurts received from Scorpions, are healed with
the Juice of the Fruit called Queon; those from the Mustiecho's, by Vinegar and
the Juice of Lemmon. Here is likewise a green Stone, accounted a sovereign
Medicine against the Gravel.

Several sorts of Tunas-Trees.
The Trees peculiar to this Country, are, the tunas, already spoken of in
Guatimala, and thought to be the same we vulgarly call Indian Fig Trees, and
are distinguished into six sorts.

The first, by the Portuguese called Cardon, has sharp Prickles, thick Leaves,
full of slimy Juice, an odoriferous Flower, oval Fruit, covered with an
Orange-colour'd Rind, and small Roots: The Fruit within consists of a white
juicy, and well tasted Pulp, full of black Seed.

The second has a round Body full of Boughs, with Star-like Prickles hanging
downwards, the Flower white, and the Fruit very like that of the Cardon, only
smaller.



The third is the Caxabra, which shoots up to a great Tree full of prickly
Cods; at the utmost end grows a large white Flower; the Fruit, which is as big
again as an Egg, is pleasant and cooling.

The fourth sort has a straight Body full of Prickles, runs lesser and lesser
to the top; at the end of the small Boughs, each thick Leaf produces another;
the Wood, if kindled, burns like a Candle.

The fifth, named Cumbeba, grows out of small Roots, with three or four
cornered thick Leaves, full of Prickles, the Flower somewhat less than the
former, the Fruit oval, hard and red, having a white and juicy Pulp: The
Prickles of this Cumbeba-Tree are so sharp, and stick in so deep, that they can
scarce be pulled out. This is that sort of Tunas that produces Cochinele, which
is a Worm that grows under the Leaves, and is covered with a Skin, which being
neatly taken off and dried in the Sun, as formerly mentioned, becomes a rich
Commodity. Joseph de Acosta tells us, that the Spanish Fleet, Anno 1578.
carried so much Cochinele to Spain, as amounted to two hundred eighty three
thousand seven hundred and fifty Ryals.

But the last sort of the Tunas is the Unirumbeba, which has a straight Body
full of Prickles, on the top whereof grow diverse prickly Leaves, not unlike
those of the Palm Tree: It is only found in barren places, remote from the Sea.

Moreover, all kind of Fruits transplanted hither from Spain thrive very well,
as Apples, Pears, Granats, Figs, Peaches, Apricocks, Muskmelons, etc.

The Root Castanuela.
The Root Castanuela affords a much better Feeding for Swine than Acorns. But
amongst many other Roots which are found here, as the Xiquimas, Yaca, Cochuco,
Cari, Totora and Mani, The Batata.
the chief is the Batata, which is fat, sweet, and windy; it runs over the
Ground with a tough green Sprig, the new Fibers taking Root dispersedly up and
down, being yellow without, and within full of milky Juice; the Leaf resembling
a Heart, is of a pale yellow color on the top, and donuy underneath; roasted
in Ashes, it eats better than a Turnip: It is divided into three sorts.

The first, called Omenapo-yeima, when boiled, shows like red Betel, but Dies
of a Skye-colour; the innermost Skin, which is of a dark Red, yields an
Ink-like Juice.

The second sort, called Parro, differs little from the first, only the Body,
Root, and Veins of the Leaves, are of a Purple color.

The third sort Jetiope, being white, has a very good relish, and cures the
Ague.

The Pepper, which is here called Axi, grows in the warmest Valleys, and the
more by being often watered: there are of it diverse kinds, differing in color,
smell, and taste one from the other; for one sort is green, yellow, or red;
another sort yields a strong musky scent; and one sort is sharper, another
milder: the Veins and Kernels thereof are eaten with Salt.

The Herb Cevadilla cures all manner of Sores.

This Country also breeds an innumerable company of Deer, Hogs, Goats, Beasts.
Sheep, Oxen, and Horses; and of hurtful Creatures, Pismires, which do great
mischief to the Plants, and Locusts, which fall in huge swarms on the Corn, and
cannot be frighted from the same by any means whatsoever. The want of Water is
also no small prejudice to the Fields.

The biggest River, called Guadalajara, with many windings runs North-westward
into the Southern Ocean; and four Leagues from the City of the same, falling
down from a steep Rock, it makes such a horrible noise, that it deafens those
which approach the same.

The Lake Mechoacan opens here also with a wide Mouth.

Two sorts of Hedge-hogs.
The River before mentioned, produces all manner of Fish in great abundance; and
also a sort of Hedge-hogs, called Iguana, which live both in the Water, and on
the Land, and are of two sorts: The first, called Senembi, is four Foot long,
of a deep green color, with black and white Spots, has a scaly Skin, white
Spots on each side of the Head, a row of sharp Prickles from the Head to the
Tail, wide Nostrils, great black Eyes, and little Teeth. The second sort,
called Tejaguacu, differs from the first, in having white Spots on a brown
Skin, a longer Tail, and a red Tongue, which is slit. Both sorts are reported
to fast eight Months together; and though often terribly wounded, and dead to
all imagination, yet live a great while after; and though they swim up and down
in Rivers, yet they Lay their Eggs in the Sand: their Flesh boiled is both
wholesome, and of a good relish.

The manner of the Spaniards living.
The Spaniards which inhabit New Gallicia, drive a considerable Trade in
Merchandising, Husbandry, breeding of Cattle, and working in the Mines: They
use Wayns and Carrs, drawn by Oxen, Mules, and Horses, to carry their Loads, as
also Spanish Weights and Measures. They are little troubled with any other
Mischiefs but what may happen from the treacherous Natives, who take all
opportunities to run into the Woods, that there they may exercise their Pagan
Religion in freedom; in which having spent some time, they gather a
considerable number together, and oftentimes fall unawares on the Spaniards,
who use Leather Shields and Helmets, and furred Cotton Clothes, to secure them
from the Arrows which the Indians, lying in Ambuscades, shoot at them out of
the Bushes.

The Nature, Habits, and Customs of the Natives.
The Natives, though subtle, are lazy, and will not work, unless for great
Rewards. They wear Cotton Shirts, square Cloaks of the same Stuff, made fast
with two Buttons on their Breasts; Drawers, and soal'd Shoes: Flag-Matts serve
them for Beds, on which they lie under Cotton Clothes: About their Necks, Arms,
and Legs, they wear green Stones, and Snale Shells for an Ornament. Their
greatest Recreation is Dancing, their Music being nothing else but the noise
or sound of a piece of hollow Wood. Horseflesh, and Bread made of Maiz, is by
them accounted a great Dainty. The Drink Cacao is also highly esteemed amongst
them; but much more the Wine that they make of Maquey, which is the wonderful
Tree that affords many necessary things, viz. Syrrup, Honey, Oil, Vinegar,
Yarn, Needles, Water, and Wine; every Man making it his Business to plant and
preserve the same with great care near his House, notwithstanding they grow in
several places of the Fields; they have broad thick Leaves with sharp ends, out
of which is drawn a Thorn, which serves them for a Needle or Pin. These Leaves
have a hairy Filament about them, which serves in stead of Thread: the young
Sprout being cut, produces a sweet Juice, which boiled, makes good Wine; when
grown sour, serves for Vinegar; but being twice boiled, becomes a Syrrup; and
being hung over the Fire a third time, a perfect Honey: Also the Wood being
spungie, keeps Fire as well as Match. Moreover, the Inhabitants when they
travel, carry Leather Bags with them full of Cacao, Maiz, and Pepper, mixed
together.

Over each Village in this Country the Spaniards have placed an Indian
Casique, Alcalde, and Alguazil, where all sorts of Provisions are sold at a
Set-price.

The Casiques are succeeded by their Heirs, who resent nothing worse than
Affronts, and take pride in nothing more than their Valor.

The Moors or Negro's which are brought hither from Guinee, do all manner of
hard Labor.

The Guachichiles and Guamares are a valiant People, and have each their
peculiar Language, utterly different from the Mexican.

Division of Nova Gallicia.
This Country comprehends these inferior Provinces: 1. Guadalajara; 2. Xalisco;
3. Chiametta; 4. Couliacan; 5. Cino-loa; all of them on the Western Shore; 6.
Zacatecas, to which some add Nova Biscaia and Nova Mexico, though others treat
of them as distinct Countries apart from the rest.

SECT. II. Guadalajara.
Bounds of Guadalajara.
GUadalajara is bounded on the West, with Xalisco; on the South and South-West,
with New Spain; and on the North, with Zacatecas. It is a Country exceeding
pleasant, and rich in all kind of Commodities, but especially in its Mines of
Silver. It is well watered with the River Barania, which runs through the
midst of it, and with diverse other Streams: yielding abundantly both Wheat,
Maiz, and some other Grain. In a word, there is nothing said of the properties
of New Gallicia in general, either for Soil, Climate, or People, but is
peculiarly verified of this Province.

Towns and Cities.
The chief Towns are 1. Guadalajara, which gives Name to the whole Province. It
is seated on the Banks of the River Barania, in a most delectable and sweet
Air, and a rich Soil, by advantage whereof it is become the Metropolis of New
Gallicia, honored with an Episcopal See, which was translated thither from
Compostella in the Year 1570. with the Courts of Judicature, and the Residence
of the King's Treasurers for that Province. This City was built on the Plain
Molino, by Nunnez de Guzman, in the Year 1531. The neighboring Mountains afford
store of Timber. All manner of Spanish Plants grow here likewise in great
plenty. In the City is a Cathedral, several Cloisters, inhabited by Augustine
and Franciscan Monks. The Bishop of this City belongs to the Archbishop of
Mexico. The Air very temperate, neither molesting the Inhabitants with too
great Cold, nor excess of Heat.

2. St. Maria de los Lagos, a Town thirty Leagues Eastward of Guadalajara,
being a Fronteer Place, and built on purpose to secure the Country against the
Chichemecae, which are a barbarous and unreduc'd People of the North-East parts
of this Country, who harboring themselves in Caves under Ground in the
thickest of huge Woods and Forests, do oftentimes issue out, and make foul
spoil in the Country where they come, having first intoxicated themselves with
a Liquor made of certain Roots, and would do much more harm, if it were not for
this Garrison.

3. Del Spiritu Santo, built by the Founder of the other two, viz. Nunnez de
Gusman aforesaid, in a part of the Country which they call Tepecque.

SECT. III. Xalisco.
Bounds and Description of Xalisco.
Xalisco, or Galesco, as some call it, is bounded on the North, with Couliacan;
on the South, with some parts of New Spain; on the East, with the Province of
Guadalajara; and on the West, with the Gulf or Bay of California. The Country
is chiefly fertile in Maiz and Mines of Silver, not altogether so apt for
Herbage and Pasture as some other Countries about it. The People were Cannibals
before the Spaniards came amongst them, eating Man's-flesh; were much given to
quarrelling and Contentions amongst themselves, but by this time, it is supposed
they are reasonably well reclaimed both from the one and the other.

Towns of chief note.
In this Country, besides many other goodly Streams, is the great and famous
River Barania, on the Banks whereof are seated most of their principal Towns,
as 1. Xalisco, which gives Name to the whole Province, and to a large
Promontory or Foreland on the Western Coasts, which shoots it self out into the
Bay of California, right over against certain Islands, which the Spaniards call
The Three Mary's. This was an ancient City or Town of the Natives, but sacked
and taken by Nunnez de Gusman, in the Year 1530.

2. Compostella, built by the aforesaid Gusman, and so named from the City in
Spain, so famous for the Grave of James the Apostle, who (according to the
Roman Writers) was buried there, lies near the South Sea on a barren Soil,
within the Torrid Zone; yet the Ground breeds many sorts of Vermin, besides
other noxious Creatures; amongst which the Capybara roots up whole Trees and
other Plants in the Night. This Beast, resembling an indifferent large Hog,
has short Legs and Claws, thick Head, with a Beard, wide Ears, and on each
Jaw Bone twenty four Teeth, besides two Tusks, but no Tail; it goes slow, but
swims exceeding fast, and dives under Water for aconsiderable time together:
they often feed together in great Herds, and make a terrible noise.

3. La Purification, a small Town on the Sea side, toward the Confines of New
Spain.

SECT. IV. Chiametla.
Situation of Chiametla.
AGainst Xalisco juts Chiametla, along the South Sea, where the Inhabitants wear
short Cloaks, and Deer-skin Shoes; and in the Wars use Shields made of strong
Twigs twisted together. The Women, which are indifferent handsome, are clad down
to their Feet.

Towns of principal note.
The chief Town of this Province is Sant Sebastian, so called from the River
upon which it stands; it was built by Captain Franciscus de Yvarra, Anno 1554.
who discovering many Silver Mines, has made several Melting-houses, in which
the Silver being melted swims upon the Lead.

SECT. V. Couliacan.
Bounds of Couliacan.
NExt to Chiametla, Westward and Southward of Cinoloa, lies Couliacan, Coasting
all along the Bay of California, which it has on the West; on the East it has
New Biscay; and on the South, Xalisco. The Country is not defective in any
kind of necessary Provision, but more especially it abounds with Fruits of
all sorts. But the Spaniards look only at the Mines, of which they have some
few in this Country. The People were generally Clothed with Cotton-Wooll when
the Spaniards came first amongst them, but yet never a whit the more modest,
being exceedingly given to Venery, and that in a more shameless and beastly
manner than many other Americans who went naked.

The Spanish Towns are these, Towns.
1. Hiustula, seated on the Banks of a fair River, distant about a days Journey
from the Sea. 2. Quinola. 3. Quatrobarrios, an old Town of the Natives, but new
named by the Spaniards. 4. El Leon, an old Borough. 5. Couliacan, the chief
Town of the Province. 6. St. Michael, in the Valley of Arroba, two Leagues
distant from the Sea, in a rich and plentiful Country, both for Corn and
Fruit, whither it was removed from the Banks of the River Orala, where it first
stood; it was built by Nunnez de Gusman in the Year 1531. after he had burnt
the Towns, and destroyed a great number of the Natives, Inhabitants of the
Country.

Nunnez de Gusman first Discoverer (...) of this Country.
This Country was first discovered by the aforesaid Nunnez de Gusman (after he
had built Guadalajara) after this manner: Marching from Chiametla to Piatzala,
he ruined this Province with Fire and Sword: he likewise conquered the
Countries of Zapuatun and Piaztla; the first being a Plain, lay enclosed within
high Mountains, where the Spaniards met none but Women, till they came to a
great River called De la Sall, whose Banks on each side were well inhabited;
the second juts against the Ocean, and is watered by a River of the same
Denomination. Here, within the Houses, (which are built after a strange manner)
lay thousands of Serpents mingled together, with their Heads sticking out on
the top and at the sides, and hissing with open Mouth at those which approached
them. The Inhabitants showed great Revence to these Serpents, because (as they
said) the Devil often appeared to them in that form. And this seems to be a
Custom amongst them from the Tradition of Eves being tempted by the Devil in
the shape of a Serpent: Serpents worshipped by the Natives.
Nor was this Superstition peculiar only to these Indians, forasmuch as diverse
Nations of the ancient Heathens of other parts of the World, worshipped the
Likeness of a Serpent. And even amongst the Greeks, according to Plutarch,
Hesychius, Clemens Alexandrinus, and others, it was no unusual thing in their
religious Worship to call on Eva, and at the same time to show a Serpent.
Plutarchus and Aelianus say, That the Egyptians honored a Serpent for their
God. The same says Erasmus Stella of the old Prussians; Sigismund Baro, of the
Liflanders; and Alexander Guaginus, of the Sarmatians and Samogethes. Moreover,
some write, that in the Province of Calecut are Serpents with exceeding great
Heads, and weighing as much as a great Hog, to which the King shows great
Reverence; so that it seems the Devil takes delight to be worshipped in that
shape wherein he worked the Fall of Mankind.

Gusman leaving Piaztla marched to Bayla, where he found the great River De
Mugeres, and the Country full of Woods and Pastures: thence traveling upwards
along Mugueres, they ascended to the top of a Mountain, where they were
assaulted by the Inhabitants of the aforesaid Village Quinola, whom
nevertheless they soon put to flight; but not long after received a shrewd
Repulse at the Entrance into a Wood built full of Houses; yet nevertheless
being at length Conquerors, though not without sufficient loss, they marched
farther in amongst the Mountains, till their Provisions beginning to grow
scarce, and they seeing no likelihood of getting to an end of this troublesome
Journey, at last their Necessities forced them to retire.

The Fish Guarapucu.
The Flood which comes out of the Sea up to the City St. Michael, through the
River Cignatlan, abounds with Fish, and especially the Guarapucu, which is
seven Foot long when it comes to its full growth; it has no Scales, but a
smooth Skin of a Silver color mixed with Green: from the Head to the Tail runs
a crooked Line of thin Scales on each side; it swims exceeding swift, feeds on
lesser Fishes, and spawns in the Sea: the Flesh being wholesome and good to eat,
is salted up against Winter. At the same Place is also the Piracarba, which
shines exceedingly, The Piracarba.
having Silver-colour'd Scales, a broad slit Tail, a long white Beard, four
great Fins, and a little Head. Farther into the Sea are a sort of flying Fish,
called Pirabebes, which rise by thousands up out of the Water, Flying Fisher.
so escaping the Dolphins and other Fish which prey on them; yet sometimes they
are snatched up by the Birds, or else by the Fishes, when they dive down into
the Water to wet their own Wings, which consist of a thin Skin, distinguished
in length by tough Fins. These flying Fish also differ much one from another,
for most of them are like Herrings; others have a thick Head, roud before like
the Dolphins.

Moreover, the Country about St. Michael was always well inhabited. The
Houses, being artificially built, were adorned on the top with many obscene
Images, and venereal Representations: But since the Spaniards have conquered
this Country they have destroyed them, and built other Houses in their stead,
and also bestowed much cost and labor on the Silver Mines De las Virgins.

SECT. VI. Cinoloa.
Bounds of Cineloa.
CInoloa is the most Northern part of New Gallicia, bounded on the West, with
some part of the Gulf or Bay of California; on the East, with a long Ridge of
Mountains, which they call Tepecsuan; on the North, with Cibola; and with
Couliacan on the South. This Country, besides the general fertility of the
whole Province of New Gallicia, yields great store of Cotton-Wool, by reason
whereof both Men and Women here are better Apparelled, for the most part, than
elsewhere the Americans are; is exceedingly well watered with Rivers, which
descend from those Mountains Tepecsuan, not above thirty or forty Leagues
distant from the Sea; and which, with the variety of their Streams and
Meandrous glidings, do divide the Country into many and good Pastures, which
are likewise stored with abundance of Kine, Oxen, and other Cattle.

The chief Towns possessed by the Spaniards are 1. St. Philip and Jacob, Towns.
seated toward the Sea side, on the Banks of a fair River, about thirty or
forty Leagues distant from the Town of Couliacan.

2. St. John de Cinoloa, an ancient Colony of Spaniards, settled there by
Francisco de Yvarra, in the Year 1554, which is all they have in this Country,
except some few old Forts of the Natives, which they found, after their manner,
poorly furnished; but have since repaired them for Defense against the Natives
of those Parts, which as yet remain unreduc'd.

Nunnez de Gusman 's Travels.
This Province was also discovered by Nunnez de Gusman, who having rested some
Weeks in St. Michael, proceeding on his Way, he Ferried over the River
Petatlan, which received that Denomination because the Houses were covered with
Mats, by the Indians called Petat.

The People hereabouts were generally Man-eaters.

Eighteen Leagues farther runs the River Tamochala, which has many Villages on
both sides thereof.

Between Petatlan and Tamochala lie several desolate Wildernesses, and Woods of
the Brasile-Tree.

But Gusman traveling up twenty seven Leagues along the forementioned River
Tamochala, came to Province Cinoloa, where they stayed six Weeks, by reason of
the abundance of Rains; during which time the Villagers provided them
Turtle-Doves, Hares, Rabbets, and all sorts of Fowls; but at last deserted
their Habitations in the Night: after which the Spaniards crossing Tamochala
went along a barren Desert, where (had they not found Water in certain Wells,
and likewise store of Juice out of the Tunas-Trees) they had without doubt
perished; at last getting over the River Yaguinu, they found a deserted
Village, out of which a broad Path led along the Stream; whither Gusman
marching, he came into a Plain, where he spied several Indians, which after
some resistance were routed by the Spanish Horse.

The Villages built on the Banks of the River Yaguinu, as also the Language of
the Inhabitants differ little from the former.

Not far from hence a Ridge of Hills runs into the Sea, and also extend
themselves a hundred Leagues toward Xalisco.

SECT. VII. Zacatecas.
Bounds and Description of Zacatecas.
THe Zacatecas, as they call them, are bounded on the South, with Guadalalajara;
on the North, with New Biscay; on the West, which Couliacan and some part of
Xalisco; and on the East, with New Spain. The Country, especially the more
Western part of it, is very rich in Silver Mines, no Province of this part of
America richer; but not so apt either for Wheat or Maiz. But the Eastern parts
of it are abundantly stored with all sorts of Fruits, the Woods every where
replenished with Deer, the Fields no less with Corn, and every Tree almost
giving Entertainment to some Bird or other.

Towns and Villages.
The Towns are 1. Las Zacatecas, forty Leagues distant from Guadalajara, and
fourscore from Mexico, but neighbor'd with most rich Mines, and therefore both
Garrisoned and well peopled by the Spaniards; for it is supposed there are no
less than five hundred Families of them in the Town, and about the Mines.

2. St. Martins, twenty seven Leagues distant from Zacatecas, and as rich a
Place, having a Colony of four hundred Spaniards at least.

3. St. Lucas de Avinno. 4. Erena, lesser Towns, but both of them rich, and
seated in the midst of excellent Mines.

5. Nombre de Dios, in the most Northerly part of this Country, sixty eight
Leagues distant from Guadalajara, and founded by the aforesaid Francisco de
Yvarra; who having subdued and quieted the Natives, and thereby gained to
himself the Government of these Countries, granted the propriety of some Silver
Mines both to the Spaniards and to the Natives, and by that means drew so many
of them thither, that in a short time it became the chiefest and best peopled
town of the whole Province.

6. Durango, in the Valley of Guadiana, eight Leagues distant from Nombre de
Dios, and built by Yvarra.

7. Xeres de Frontera, a Place built on purpose for the repressing of the
Chichemecae aforesaid, and other Salvages that infested the Borders of
Guadalajara, in the Regency of the Marquess of Villa Manrique.

8. Last, St. Lewis, built by Alonso Pacheco, in that part of the Country
which is called Uxitipa, and people by him with a Colony of Spaniards, being
distant about twenty Leagues from Panuco in New Spain, to which the whole
Country of Uxitipa once belonged.

Several Mines discovered by the Spaniards.
The aforesaid Franciscus de Yvarra, Anno 1554. discovered the Mine called Sant
Martin, and since also Lucas Avinno, the Mine Del Sombrereto, lying near the
City Del Erena: but the Mines De los Ranchos, Chalchuites, De las Nieves, and
Del Frisuillo, would produce much more Silver, if the Mine-works were stored
with Quicksilver. The Viceroy of New Spain, named Lodowick de Velasco,
ordered a certain number of Soldiers, Slaves, Horses and Mules, for every Mine,
to defend the Workmen from the Assaults of the Natives, which oftentimes
Sallied out upon them. Moreover, Velasco sent Priests through all the Country
to Preach the Gospel: But Yvarra having the care of the Priests, guarded them
with a company of Soldiers, and in his Way discovered the Valley San Juan, and
the River De las Nacos, where he conquered the rebelling Natives.

Near the Silver Mine Sant Martins the Monks built a Cloister; after which
Yvarra gave free leave to all that would, to dig in the Mine at Avinno, which
he had bought, on condition they should pay the real fifth part of what they
got, to the Spanish King: which Privilege stirred up many, insomuch that
Avinno in a short time grew very populous. Yvarra, though having brought his
Business to this pass, could not rest, but sent Antonius Pacheco to a Valley in
Guadiana, to build the forementioned City Durango, where several Rivers make a
convenient and delightful place for Habitation, whither Yvarra followed three
Months after, and finished the new Town. But the chiefest Silver Mines, which
borrow their Denominations from the Province Zacatecas, are continually guarded
by five hundred Spaniards, and as many Slaves.

CHAP. VII. New Biscay.
Bovnds of New Biscay.
NEw Biscay, by some accounted a Province of New Gallicia, has on the South,
Zacatecas; on the West, the Country of Cinoloa; Northward it is bounded with
New Mexico; the Eastern Borders of it looking toward Florida, not yet well
discovered: so called by the Spaniards, only from its neighborthood to New
Gallicia. It is, as the other Provinces, exceeding rich in Silver Mines, and
has some also of Lead; which serve principally, as some say, for the refining
or purging of the other Metal. The People generally are of a stout and resolute
Disposition, and with much difficulty submitting to the Yoke; yea, the
Spaniards themselves confess, that there remain yet to this day four great
Towns unreduc'd, though they lie, as it were, in the midway, betwixt the
Zacatecas aforesaid, and the Mines and Town of St. Barbara of this Province:
The Spaniards call them Las Quatro Ceinegas, or The Four Quagmires, as lying,
perhaps, in the Marshes, or in some Fenny and lower parts of the Country.

Towns and Cities.
The Towns which themselves hold, are, 1. St. Barbara, famous for the rich Mines
about it.

2. St. John's, equal to the other, and not above three or four Leagues distant
from it.

3. End, the most Northerly Town which the Spaniards have in this Country,
distant about twenty Leagues from the other.

These be all Colonies of the Spaniards, and built on purpose for securing the
Mines; which when they were first discovered by Yvarra, he ordered Roderigo del
Rio to guard the same, and took up his Winter Quarters at St. Juan in a strong
House, stored with all manner of Provisions, and erected there by him, as a
place of defense against the Chichimecae, who (though the Spaniards kept the
place with strong Guards) killed above four hundred of their Horses and Mules;
which loss no way daunted him, so as to change his Resolution of going Topia:
whither traveling, he found many snowy Mountains, and suffered extreme Cold,
which killed most of their Horses, being seen fifteen days after to stand so
stiffly frozen, as if still alive: at last getting within the Borders of Topia,
after he had suffered many inconveniences, he was opposed by the Inhabitants,
till he pacified them with Presents.

SECT. II.
Convenient Havens of New Gallicia.
THis Country has many convenient Havens, viz. San Jago, Navidad, Malacca,
Chacalla, below the Promontory Corientes, the Bay Xalisco, the Road Massatlan,
and Chiametla, so called from a Town about eleven Leagues from the Ocean.

Here, and in several places of New Gallicia, grow Lillies, Roses, Violets,
Jessamins, and many other Flowers; amongst which the Floripondium deserves
peculiar observation, because it flourishes the whole Year; and its white
Blossoms, which are bigger than Lillies, opening in the Morning, yield an
exceeding sweet smell.

The Flower Granadilla.
In no less esteem is the Murucuia, by the Spaniards called Granadilla, which
will not grow, it bereaved of any of its Leaves: it bears a Flower from the
resemblance of our Savior's Suffering, called The Passion-Flower, which
exceeds the biggest Rose in circumference; the uppermost Leaves green, those
underneath of a purple color; on the top hangs a round Bush of a thousand
interwoven threads of diverse colors, distinguished by white and red Specks; the
pale Stalk which sticks in the middle of the Flower, is divided into five
others, that bend downwards with a yellow Button-like Knob; on the middlemost
Stalk stands a pale yellow Flower, which appear three hours after Sunrising,
and closes again a little before Sunset; the Fruit, which is very round,
smooth, and a pale Green, has white Specks, a thick Rind Saffron-colour'd
Pulp, which is wholesome, of a good relish, and has abundance of black Seeds
enclosed in little Husks.

CHAP. VIII. New Mexico.
Bounds of New Mexico.
NEw Mexico (as it is called for distinction's sake) is bounded on the
South-West, with New Biscay; more directly Westward, with some parts of
Quivira; the Countries Northward of it not yet discovered; Eastward it extends
it self as far as Florida.

This Province doubtless for largeness may compare with New Gallicia, having
been searched and discovered by the Spaniards above a hundred, some say two
hundred Leagues directly Eastward, and to the North-East: and they report
Wonders of it, if we may believe them, at least in respect of what was
generally found in these Northern parts of America at their first Discovery; as
namely, That they have Towns fairly and well built of Lime and Stone, Houses of
four Stories high, and most of them provided with Stoves for the Winter Season,
as well as any in Europe; the Streets fair and broad, and the People as curious
and expert in diverse Arts and Manufactures as any of theirs. More particularly
they tell us of a Town called Chia, of the Province of Cuames, so big, that it
is said to contain eight several Marketplaces. Another called Acoma, a great
Town, but seated on the top of an high Rock, without any ordinary way of access
to it, but by a pair of Stairs hewn out of the hard Stone, or else by certain
Ladders, which the Inhabitants let down and take up as they please. And
likewise of a third, which they call Conibas, containing, as they say, no less
than seven Leagues in length, and about half so much in breadth, seated upon a
Lake, but scatteringly built, and much of the space taken up with Mountains and
many fair Gardens, in the midst of which the Town stands; of all which more
hereafter. This certain, that the Country to which they give the Name of New
Mexico, is of a vast extent, reaching from the Mines of St. Barbara in New
Biscay Eastward, and to the North-East, above two hundred Leagues already
discorver'd, but doubtless taking up no small part of those Countries which are
sometimes assigned to Florida, if not of the Confines of Virginia also.

Travels of Ruyz Espejus and others.
This Country was first, Anno 1581. discovered by a Franciscan Monk, named
Augustine Ruyz, who with two other Monks of his Order, got eight Soldiers of
Conde de Coruna, Viceroy of New Spain, for his Companions; with whom he
traveled from the Valley Sant Bartholomew, to the Province De los Tiguas,
where one of the two Monks was killed by the Natives, which occasioned such a
fear amongst the Soldiers, who judged themselves too weak to make any
resistance, that they resolved to return, notwithstanding all the arguments
which Ruyz used to dissuade them from it; yet nevertheless he and his Brother
Franciscus Lopez, and four Indians, went onward of their Journey; which news
the Soldiers carried back to the Franciscans in Sant Bartholomew; who fearing
their Brethren would be destroyed, sent several Soldiers and a Monk, called
Bernardyn Beltran, after them, who were also accompanied by Antony Espejus, who
spent a great part of his Estate in raising of Men, providing Arms and
Provisions, loading therewith a hundred and fifty Horses and Mules; with which
he traveled direct North from the forementioned Valley, and after two days
Journey found a People called Conchi, who went naked, and lived in Huts built
together like a Village: They were Governed by Casiques, fed on Hares, Deer,
Rabbets, Maiz, Calabashes, and Melons. Several adjacent Rivers afford them
plenty of Fish. They were amazed at the Crosses which the Spaniards there
erected, till they were informed of a Crucified Savior. Espejus being every
where kindly Entertained amongst them, and conducted twenty two Leagues father,
came amongst the Indians called Passaguates, of the like Constitution with the
Conchi's; who had skill in Minerals, and judged that there were many Silver
Mines in that Country. From whence the Passaguates traveled with the
Spaniards to the Borders of the Los Tobosos, who no sooner saw them, but they
fled, because a few years before they had been miserably dealt with by the
Spaniards; but being informed by the Interpreters, that they needed not be
afraid of any thing, they all appeared, and conducted Espejus to the Borders of
the Patarabueyes; which People possess a large Country, Stone Houses and
Villages built in good order. Great Rivers with come out of the North, and
others that disembogu'd into the North Sea, afforded them all sorts of Fish; as
also the Woods plenty of Venison, Fowls, and wholesome Plants. In some Pools also
the salt Water afforded Salt.

The Valor of the Inhabitants may sufficiently appear by the rough
Entertainment which the Spaniards met withal the first Night; for the
Patarabueyes fell so fiercely upon them, that had not the Watch given notice
thereof in time, none had escaped with Life; nevertheless five Horses were
killed, and a considerable number of Men wounded: after which retreating, they
went upon a neighboring Hill, whither Espejus sent his Interpreter, and an
Indian the same Country, to inform them, That the Spaniards came not to molest
them, and if they pleased to come to them, they should meet with none but
Friends; which was the more easily credited, because the Casiques received some
Presents; after which being reconcild, they conducted the Spaniards twelve days
Journey up a long River, whose Banks were inhabited in several places. from
thence they reached to a Place, inhabited by a People richly Clothed, who also
seemed to have some knowledge of God; for in their Discourse they pointed up to
Heaven, called the Creator and Preserver of all things Apalito, and signified
that they had received that Knowledge formerly from those that were left of
Pamphilius Narvaez's Army, who having ranged through Florida were driven hither.

These People also Presented Espejus many tanned Skins, with which he went to a
great Village, the Inhabitants whereof were very courteous, and bartered them
for brave Plumes of Feathers and Cotton Cloaks, streaked with blue and white:
but Espejus having no Interpreters whom they could understand, could not learn
by what Name they were known; yet by signs they expressed what time of the year
they had Precious Stones brought to them; and also what their Country
produced; and also that abundance of those Riches was to be found in a Province
about five days Journey Westward from thence, whither they freely offered to
conduct the Spaniards, which accordingly they did, bearing them company one and
twenty Leagues to the next Province, inhabited by a People whose Name also they
could not be informed of, yet staying three days amongst them, they were
Entertained with Presents and Dances both Night and Day. The Country afforded
them also store of Venison and Fruits: Those that understood Minerals, judged
that there were likewise several Gold Mines.

Leaving this Province, they entered into a great Wilderness of Pine-Trees, in
which they traveled twelve Leagues in fifteen days, without seeing either Man
or House; but at the end of the Wood they spied a Village of Straw Huts, where
there were great quantities of white Salt, and Deer Skins neatly dressed. The
People of the Place courteously Entertained the Spaniards, and conducted them
along the River Del Norte, to New Mexico: The Banks of the River on each side
was planted with Nut-Trees and Vines, which spread themselves out above three
Leagues; through which they had scarce passed three days together, when they
saw ten Populous Villages pleasantly seated on the the said River, from whence
came many thousands of the Natives to meet Espejus, who was not so much amazed
at the great number of People, as at their extraordinary Civility and decent
Habits; for they Entertained him with well dressed Meat, roasted Poultrey, and
pleasant Fruits: Their Garments were Cotton Cloaks, Deer-skin Breeches, Shoes
and Boots of good Leather. The Women wore their Hair neatly Combed and Pleited.
Their Houses were almost four Stories high, handsomely built, and divided into
fair Chambers, had Stoves or Cells under Ground against the Cold in the Winter.
Every Village was Governed by a Casique, whose Commands were published by the
Alguaziles. Each House had a peculiar place in which their Idol stood, before
whom they set Meat twice a day. Near the Highways stood Temples very curiously
painted, wherein their Deity, as they say, diverted himself in his Progress
from one Village to another. At certain Distances near their Plough'd Lands,
stood Portico's, supported on four Columns, under which the Husbandman used to
eat, and take his Noon-sleep. Besides their Swords, which were strong enough to
cut a Man through the Middle, they used Bows and Arrows: Their Shields were
made of Deer Skins.

Espejus having stayed here four days, went to the Province De las Tiguas,
which had sixteen Villages; in the chiefest whereof, called Poala, Augustine
Ruyz and his Brother Monk Franciscus de Lopez had been slain, besides four
others; wherefore the People being conscious of this Crime, and fearing that
Revenge would follow, fled to the Mountains, from whence they could not be
enticed, whilst the Spaniards found their Houses full of Provisions and some
Minerals.

Now those being dead whom they sought for, some though it convenient to
return; but Espejus and Beltran persuaded the contrary, alleging, That farther
up, according to the Indians information, lay several Provinces which were
worth the discovery, and advised that the chiefest part of their Forces might
stay there, whilst they and some few resolute Men went farther upon the
Discovery, which accordingly was performed. Espejus having traveled two days,
came into a fruitful Province, jutting against Cibola, in which he found eleven
Villages, inhabited by above fourteen thousand People, who were clad in Skins
and Cotton, worshipped many Idols, and received the Spaniards with great
Civility.

The like Entertainment they met withal in the Country Los Quires, washed by
the River Del Norte; near which stood five Villages, inhabited by about fifteen
thousand People.

Thirteen Leagues farther they found De los Cunames, having also five Villages,
the chiefest of which being Cia, boasted (as above mentioned) eight
Marketplaces: The Houses, made of Lime, were neatly Painted, and comprised in
all above twenty thousand Persons, and civil People, who presented Espejus and
his Company with handsome Cloaks, set good boiled Meat before them, and showed
them rich Minerals, and the Mountains out of which they got the same.

Of the like Constitution were the Inhabitants De los Amires, which being
thirty thousand in number, resided in seven well built Villages, lying
North-West from Cunames.

After this they marched Westward, and found the eminent Village Acoma,
mentioned before, built on an exceeding high Rock, to which led only a narrow
Path up a pair of Stairs cut in the Rock; as also many Wells to receive Rain,
besides what they have out of a River, led by moats round about their Plough'd
Lands. The Spaniards staying here three days, were Entertained with all sorts
of good Meat, Dances and Drolls.

From hence traveling twenty four Leagues more Westerly, they entered the
Province of Zuny; where the erected Crosses which had remained there till that
time, were sufficient testimonies of Cornaro's having been there, after he was
deserted by Andreas de Cuyocan. Casper de Mexico, and Antonius de Guadalajara,
being settled on Zuny, (otherwise called Cibola) and speaking the Indian Tongue
better than their Native Language, informed Espejus, that sixty days Journey
farther lay a great Lake, whose Shores were crowned with many brave Villages,
inhabited by a People which wore Golden Armlets and Earrings; whither
Franciscus Vasquez had gone a second time, had not Death prevented him. This
Information so encouraged Espejus, that notwithstanding it was so great a
Journey, yet he resolved to venture thither, though the Monk Beltran and most
of his Company persuaded him to the contrary; whereupon Beltran returned: After
which Espejus went on to the said Lake; wither he was accompanied with a
hundred and fifty Indians. Having gone twenty six Leagues, he found a populous
Province, whose Borders he no sooner approached, but he was told, That if he
was willing to lose his Life, he and his Party might enter into a forbidden
Dominion; yet notwithstanding this threatnign Message, he wrought so much upon
the Casique by the Presents which he sent him, that he was permitted to come in
freely; nay, the Inhabitants of Zaguato strow'd Meal on the Earth for the
Spaniards to go over, and presented Espejus at his departure with forty
thousand Cotton Cloaks, and a considerable quantity of Plate, which he sent
with five of his Soldiers, and all the Cibolan Indians, back to Cibola, keeping
only four Companions and one Guide, with whom he traveled forty one Leagues
Westward; where he found a Mountain, to the top whereof led a broad Path; which
ascending, he took up Silver Oar with his own Hand. The several sorts of People
that inhabited here were all civil and courteous, living in good fashion, in
pretty large Houses, built on the Banks of a pleasant River, shaded with Vines
and Nut-Trees, and thick planted with Flax: They informed Espejus, that near a
River which runs eight Miles toward the North Sea, were such stately Places,
as could not be beheld without great admiration. But Espejus going back a plain
Road to Cibola, found not only those whom he had sent from Zaguato, but also
Beltran, with the other Soldiers, who having been detained where by the
Civilities and kind Entertainments of the Indians, were now upon returning
home; so that Espejus was left alone with eight Soldiers, who resolved to
venture their Lives and Fortunes with him. They traveled along the River Del
Norte, through the Provinces De los Guires and Habutas, whose Mountains,
overspread with Pine-Trees and Cedars, have many rich Mines. The Natives wore
painted Cotton Cloaks, and dwelt in stately Houses five Stories high. At the
Borders of the Realm Los Tamos they were stopped, and not permitted to come on
farther; wherefore being but few in number, and several of them sick, they
judged it convenient to cross the River De las Vaccas (so called from the
abundance of Cows that were thereabouts) to the River Conchos and the Village
Bartholomew, where Espejus was informed, that Beltran was long before his
arrival gone to Guadiana.

And now that we may have the better Account of New Mexico (which Ruyz Espejus,
and Beltran endeavored to discover) it will be necessary to begin with the
first original thereof, according as several ancient. Histories make mention.

First original of the New Mexicans.
The most ancient Possessors of that part of Northern America called New Spain,
were for their fierce and salvage Nature called Chichimecae, who dwelling in
Caves, fed on Moles, Rabbets, Hedghogs, Serpents, Roots and Herbs. Whilst the
Women accompanied their Husbands in their Travels, the Children were put into
Baskets, and hanged in a Tree. No manner of Government was to be found amongst
them. They never Tilled their Ground till the Navatlacans came from New Mexico
(which was anciently divided into two Countries, Aztlan and Teuculhuacan) to
New Spain; after which they Sowed their Lands.

The Navatlacans (who used to dwell in Houses, worship Images, plough their
Lands, and obey their Governors) were divided into six Tribes, each Tribe
possessing their limited Bounds: and there goes a Tradition, That out of six
Pits that are to be seen in New Mexico, the Navatlacans had their original. The
time when they deserted New Mexico, as their most authentic Histories or
Records declare, was (according to our computation) Anno 940. and they farther
affirm, that they spent forty years in a Journey, which might have been
traveled in a Month: The reason of which tediousness was, because they rested
in all places where they found a fruitful Country; but as they had advice from
their diabolical Spirits, which (as they say) appeared visibly to them, they
still went on farther and farther, yet left behind those that were aged, sick,
and decrepid, building convenient Houses for them, and appointing Overseers to
look after them. The Ruins of the Houses are yet to be seen on the Way along
which they passed.

The six Tribes divided themselves after this manner: Four of them settled round
about the great Lake of Mexico. The Sichumilans taking the South part, built,
besides two other Towns, a Metropolis of their own Name, as the Chalcans on the
North. The Tapunecans built Azcapuzalco in the West, which signifies A Pismires
Hole, because of the abundance of Inhabitants. The Eastern part was taken up by
the Chalhuans. And all these Names have a peculiar signification; the first
signifies People of Flowery Fields; the second, People of Mouths; the third,
People of Bridges; and the fourth, Crooked People. Not long after, the
Tatluicans, a strong People, went over the Mountains on the other side of the
Mexican Lake, where they built several Towns on a hot, yet fruitful Soil, the
chiefest whereof they called Quahunachua, that is, A Place where an Eagles
Voice is heard. The Tlascaltecans went near the Snowy Mountains, one, of which,
being between Mexico and De los Angelos, vomits horrid Flames and Smoke up into
the Sky. Here scattering up and down, they built several Villages, besides the
City Tlascalla; the Inhabitants whereof assisted the Spaniards, as has been
related in the taking of Mexico, for which good Service they live free, without
paying any Tribute.

When these six Tribes came first from Mexico thither, the Chichimecans made
little or no resistance against them, but hid themselves amongst the Rocks: yet
some of them not long after taking courage, flew to Arms, and had without doubt
destroyed the Tlascallans, had not a subtle Plot saved them: for under a show
of Friendship they falling on the unarmed Chichimecans, killed every Man of
them.

Joseph de Acosta tells us, that Anno 1586. he saw a Grave in Mexico, wherein a
Chichimecan of a Gygantick size lay buried.

After this Conquest gotten by the Tlascallans, the forementioned six Tribes
lived in Peace and Quiet, and strengthened themselves the more by Marrying into
one another Families.

The Chichimecae keeping on the Mountains left the new People in quiet
possession of their Lands, nay, learnt some of their Customs, insomuch that
they began to build Huts, choose Governors, and live according to their Laws.

The first March of the Mexicans into New Spain
The Tlascallans having possessed New Spain three hundred and two years, a
seventh Tribe (a valiant and civilized People) came thither, upon their Demon
Viztlipuztli's promise of having the supreme Government: wherefore he was
carried in an Ark by four chief Priests, whom he informed whither and when they
should travel or rest, for where ever they stopped, they built a Tent in the
middle of their Army for their Idol, whom they set on an Altar; which done,
they Sowed the Ground about them: yet if their Demon commanded them to march
before Harvest, then they left the Product to the ancient and sick People. But
at last Mexi, from whence the Name of Mexico is derived, conducted the Army
into Mechaocan, where the pleasant Soil among the Lakes enticed many to take up
their Habitation. But Mexi proceeded on his Journey, yet not without great
Crosses, in regard Viztlipuztli's Sister (some Inchantress probably so called)
did much hurt to the whole Army by her Sorceries, because they would not honor
her as a Goddess, till Viztlipuztli informed one of them that carried the Ark,
that the Army should march on, and banish the Witch from them: whereupon she
accordingly being driven away, built the Village Malinalco, as a Habitation for
Conjurers. Mean while, the Army grew weaker and weaker by their leaving so many
People behind them in most places; therefore they judged it convenient to rest
a while in Tula, where a great River watered the Country; which, according to
Viztlipuztli's Commands, being dried up, made a large Lake about the Mountain
Coatepeck, whose Banks being planted with Willow and Poplar-Trees, were
exceeding pleasant, and the more, because of the variety of Birds that made
their Nests in the same; which so delighted many of the People, that being
tired with traveling, they resolved to settle there; which Resolution was so
ill resented by Viztlipuztli, that he commanded the Bank to be broken, that the
Water might have liberty to flow its former Course, and threatened them with
heavy punishments: after which in the Night a terrible Cry of Murder was heard
in one part of the Army; which being inquired after the next Morning, they
found diverse People lying on the Ground with their Breasts cut open, and their
Hearts pulled out: whereupon those that remained went on to Chapultepec, where
they fortified themselves in the Mountains against the adjacent depiction of
Huitzilopochtli, Aztec god of war Viztlipuztli idolum Mexicanorum
People, which Copil, Son to the Malinalcon Witch, had raised up against them;
and soon after the Tapunecans and Chalcans went against their new Neighbors,
with whom they began a bloody Fight, when Vitzilovitli, at that time General of
the Mexican Army, pressing in amongst them, broke their Ranks, and made way for
all his Army (though with his own Death) to march Conquerors to Culhuacan: The
Prince of which Province gave them a Place to settle on, near the white Water
Ticaapan, whose Shores swarmed with Adders and Serpents, upon Design that the
Strangers might be destroyed by them; but it proved quite otherwise: for they
without regret eat the poisonous Animals; and Dunging the unfruitful Soil,
received a plentiful Harvest: They would willingly have settled here, after
their so long ranging up and down, if Viztlipuztli would have approved thereof;
but he told them, that they must possess themselves by Arms, and make a
Culhuacan Maid their Goddess: whereupon they desired the Casique's Daughter of
Culhuacan, who was sent them in rich Ornaments, and with a stately Retinue: But
she was no sooner entered on the Ticaapan Shore, but they flayed her alive, and
her Skin being stuffed, and named Tocci, was religiously worshipped. But not
satisfied with this cruelty, they sent for her Father to visit his Daughter in
her Dignity; who accordingly coming with great Attendance, was led into a dark
Chapel, where by the burning Tapers he knew the Goddess to be no other than
his Daughters Skin stuffed full of Cotton; whereat burning with rage, he
afterward fell upon these Murderers with all his Forces, and drove them to the
Place where they afterward built Mexico,

We have often made mention heretofore of the Governor of this Journey,
Viztlipuztli, it will therefore be necessary to give an exacter Description of
him, as follows:

Description of the Image Viztlipuztli.
He was a wooden Image like a Man, sitting on a blue Seat in a triumphant
Chair; at each end of which was placed a Staff with a Serpents Head upon it,
from whose Forehead, which was Painted blue, ran a Streak of the same color,
cross his Nose to both his Ears; upon his Head stood a Plume of Feathers, the
ends whereof were tipp'd with a golden Varnish; his left Hand held a white
Shield, on which stuck five Feathers, and on the top a Laurel Bough; next the
Shield lay four Arrows, pretended to be sent from Heaven; in his right Hand a
Truncheon, full of blue crooked Streaks like Serpents; behind on his Shoulders
appeared Wings, not unlike those of a Bat, his Eyes large and round, and his
Mouth reaching from Ear to Ear, made him terrible to behold, also gaping, and
full of Teeth, which stuck out of his Belly; in his Breast also were two fiery
Eyes, and under them a shrivelled Nose; his Feet ended in Claws, hung round
about with Precious Jems, golden Boxes and Shields set out with diverse colored
Feathers. The Curtain behind which this Idol sat, was not drawn open except on
a Feast Day.

Next Viztlipuztli stood generally a lesser Image, called Tlaboc, and also the
Goddess Tocci, Daughter to the Prince of Culhuacan, who (as before mentioned)
was flayed by their Daemon's Command. Since which time they supposed, that they
were never more acceptable to their Gods, than when they appeared Clothed in
another Man's Skin; and accounted no Offering better, than a Heart taken out of
their Enemies Breast, since their Spirit destroyed so many after that manner in
the Army at Tula.

But Tocci, they say, had also a Son much inclined to Hunting, Yocci's Festival.
whose Image they carry, attended by a thousand People, with the sound of Horns
and Trumpets, to an Arbor on a high Mountain; which being made of green Leaves
pleited, had in the middle an Altar, on which they set the Idol, whilst the
Multitude surrounded the Foot of the Mountain, and set all the Bushes about the
same on Fire; which done, they shouted and hollowed, and played on several
Instruments; which frighting the wild Beasts that lay sheltered in the Woods,
made them run to the top of the Mountain, where they were more and more
enclosed by the People, insomuch that many of them were slain for an Offering
before Tocci's Son's Altar; which done, they carried the Idol back to his
Temple, and the People made Merry with the slain Venison.

Description of Tezcatlipuca's Image.
As great Reverence they showed to Tezcatlipuca, because (as they said) he
pardoned their Sins. This Idol was made of a black shining Stone, richly
Apparelled, having Golden Earrings; in his undermost Lip a Silver Sheath, in
which stuck sometimes a green, and sometimes a blue Plume of Feathers; his Hair
was tied with an embroidered String, at the end of which hung a Golden Ear,
whereon Smoke was Painted, signifying the Prayers of oppressed Sinners;
moreover, the String hung full of Pearls, and about the Neck in a String hung a
Jewel; on his Breast, as also on his Navel, a green Stone; in his left Hand he
held a Fan made of a Gold Plate, in which stuck many colored Feathers: this
Plate glittering like Glass, was in stead of a Mirror for Tezcatlipuca, to
observe all worldly Transactions in the same: and to punish Criminals, he held
four Darts in his right Hand. His Feast they kept once in four years.

This Idol also had the Command of Hunger, Drought, Famine, and pestilential
Distempers; wherefore he had quite another shape, sat on a Stool behind a red
Curtain embroidered with dead Men's Bones and Sculls; his Body Coal black, his
Head stuck full of Quails Feathers, a Quiver with four Arrows in his left, and
a Rod in his right Hand, which made the Image seem very terrible.

The Idol Quetzalcoalt, being their Guardian over the Merchants, was placed in
a high Temple, being shaped like a Man, his Face only excepted; for that
resembled a Bird's Head, with a red Bill full of Teeth, a Comb, and a long
Tongue; on the hind-part of his Head stood a Mitre, and about his Legs Silk
Garters beset with Pearls.

CHAP. IX. Cibola, Tontonteac, and Nova Granada.
THough the Province of Zuny abovementioned in the Chapter of New Mexico, in
the Voyage of Espejus, be there otherwise called, and appear to be the same
with Cibola, yet we find it not treated of by any as part of New Mexico, but by
some as a distinct Province, by others as a part of California largely taken;
for besides that California, properly so called, has formerly been taken
rather for a Peninsula than an Island, and still affords to some an Argument of
question, whether it be one or the other. The whole extent of the Province
generally so termed, has been reputed to comprehend the supposed Peninsula it
self, Cibola, Quivira, and Nova Albion; but since, according to the best Maps
and Discoveries, there seems little doubt to be made, that California, strictly
taken, is a perfect Island: and since upon that Consideration we have reserved
it to be described amongst the Islands of Northern America, we also
consequently judge it most requisite to consider those Countries apart that
were included in the extended California.

Situation, Temperature, and Productions of Cibola.
Cibola lies Southward of Quivira, betwixt it and New Gallicia, to the North
and East: on the West it has Mar Vermiglio, or the Bay of California. The Air
of the Province is indifferently temperate, especially if compared to the sharp
Frosts and Colds of Quivira. The Country is for the most part level and plain,
as Quivira is, having but few Trees in it, except here and there some Woods of
Cedars, which yet do abundantly supply the Natives both with Timber and Fuel.
The Ground affords plenty of Maiz, and some small white Pease, of both which
they usually make Bread. There is great store of Venison, and a kind of Sheep
(as they say, and as it should seem by their Fleece) as big as some little
Horses or Oxen, some of their Horns weighing forty or fifty Pound: But perhaps
by some mistake of Authors, this Beast may be no other than Taurus Mexicans,
elsewhere described, whose Hair is extremely thick and shaggy, and of which
they make Cloth as of Wool, as has been said. There are also Lions, Bears, and
Tigers in this Province, in such numbers, that the People of the Country are
not a little troubled with them, and would gladly destroy them if they knew
how. The People are generally well Limbed, tall of Stature, and seem to be a
little more Ingenious than their Neighbors of Quivira; yet they go naked many
of them, only covered with Mantles made of Skins, which are many times
painted, and that with such Curiosity and Art, as do sufficiently argue, that
neither themselves nor their Neighbors of Quivira, from whom they have them in
Traffic, do make them, but that they are the Merchandise and Commodity of some
other Nations, perhaps of Cathay or China, who, by the North-West Seas, do
Trade with the Maritime Parts, and People of Quivira.

This part of the Country has been reasonably well searched by the Spaniards,
but as yet nothing discovered so considerable, as to persuade them to stay in
it.

That which seems most observable, is the great Lake Tonteac, situate almost in
the midst of the Province; upon which, or near unto it, they found seven or
eight old Towns of the Natives, some whereof contained four or five hundred of
their Cottages or little Houses, and were fortified also with Ramparts, and
other Works of Defense, so as the Spaniards could not become Masters of them,
but by Force and Storming: In the attempt whereof Vasquez Coronado, their
Commander in chief, was twice beaten down with Stones by the Natives; yet at
last carrying the Place, he found in it good plenty of Maiz indeed, which was
some refreshment to his Army, but nothing else: whereupon having named the
Place Granada, in memory of the Viceroy of New Spain, who sent him upon that
Expedition, he departed. In his return homeward he fell upon a certain
Country, which he named Tucayan, of which his Companions report great matters;
as first, of a certain River called Huex, on the Banks whereof, in the space of
twenty Leagues, or thereabouts, there stand no less than fifteen good
Buroughs, well built, and furnished likewise with Stoves or Hot-houses,
against the Cold, as in other Countries of Europe; as also of a very fruitful
and pleasant Valley, which they therefore called Aroba de Corazones; of another
great Town and Territory, called Chichilticala; and lastly, of the Valley of
Nuestra Sennora, or Our Ladies Dale, in the South parts of the said Territory,
all of them described for such rich and delicious Places, that some take them
for the Campi Elisii of America, especially seeing the Spaniards were never
known to visit them a second time, the Discoveries that have been made since
being only of the North-West Parts of the Country, along the Coasts of Mar
Vermiglio, and this no farther than only to give Name to certain Capes or
Promontories which they met with, as namely 1. Porto de St. Clara, near to the
Mouth of the River which they call Rio del Nordt. 2. Las Playas. 3. St.
Michael. 4. Lago del Oro, which bordereth on Quivira; and lastly, El Rey
Coronado, Eastward of that.

TOntonteac is mentioned by so few, Tontonteac
and by those few so obscurely, that it cannot well be determined to be any
other than that Country which lies about the great Lake Tonteac, above spoken
of in Cibola, and which being made Habitable by six or seven Towns not
inconsiderable for Habitations of native Indians, might happily pass for a
distinct Province. And perhaps the reason why this Province has been so
obscure, and little taken notice of, might be from the ruin of these Towns by
War, or some other Accident: and to this purpose are the words of a late
Writer, The Province of Tontonteac (says he) has five Houses only left,
which stand on the Shore of a salt Lake.

Nova Granada a Province of Northern America
NOva Granada, besides that it is a generally known and described Province of
Southern America, is also named amongst the Provinces of Northern America,
particularly by Bertius, Cluverius, and Golnitzius, and in some late Maps of
America so conspicuously specified, that it might appear to be all that Tract
of Land which contains both New Mexico and the several Provinces adjoining to
it; but since we find it not described by any at large, it will with most
verisimility pass for that part of New Mexico where stands the City of St. Foy;
and this is most plainly expressed by Monsieur Martini, though there are who
confound Cibola with New Granada. Waving which Decision, we shall only insert
a short Description of the Place, according to Cornato, who seems to have been
one of the first Discoverers of these Parts, and whose Credit is preferred
before that of Marcus de Niza.

Nova Granada (says he) consists of seven Villages, Its Description.
built in the circumference of four Leagues, the chiefest whereof boasts two
hundred Houses, which for the most part are four or five Stories high, and
built of Stone; the Cellars thereto belonging, being neatly Paved, serve for
Stoves against the Cold: they ascend to their upper Rooms by Ladders. The
Inhabitants go naked, only some Covering about their Middle, and over their
Shoulders Cotton Cloaks, painted with diverse Colors. They live on Maiz, white
Pease, Hares, Rabbets, and Venison: their Salt wherewith they season the same,
they fetch from a neighboring Lake. The Turkies, which they have in great
numbers, are killed only for their Feathers, notwithstanding their Flesh is
exceeding good Meat. The Soil is for the most part plain, yet has some high
Mountains; and the Pastures flourish with Grass. The Woods abound with Bears,
Tigers, Lions, wild Hogs, Rhinocerots, and the like ravenous Beasts, which make
the Ways dangerous for Travelers. Besides large Deer, there are also Sheep,
which in bigness may compare with Horses, having exceeding great Horns, and
little Tails.

Concerning the abundance of Turkoises, of which Niza makes mention, Cornato
could give no certain account, because a little before his Arrival the
Granadians had conveyed their Children, which were under fifteen, and the aged
People, who were above sixty years of age, with their chiefest Goods, into
remote places. However, it is not unknown, that this Country affords
Turkoises; for Cornato in his Journey to Quivira, Besieged a City in these
Parts near a great River; the Inhabitants whereof, when they were not able to
defend themselves any longer, throwing their Cloaks, Turkoises, and other
Riches into the Fire, Sallied out upon the Spaniards, and died not altogether
unrevenged, as shall be specified more at large in the Description of Tignes,
which being named among the Towns of Quivira, will upon the comparing of
Circumstances, be apparently found to be the same with this.

Lastly, New Granada has no Fruit Trees, but little Cedars fit for Building.

CHAP. X. Quivira.
QUivira is the next Region accounted of California, largely taken; yet
appearing by some Charts to lie so vastly remote, that all New Mexico,
Gallicia, and other Provinces already mentioned, lie between that and the
Island. And whereas New Granada is by several made a part of New Mexico; yet
most certain it it is, that by some it is confounded with this Country, or at
least accounted a part thereof, as hereafter shall more plainly appear,
according to the Account of those that have most fully and particularly
described it.

Situation of Quivira, and Description of the Inhabitants.
Quivira takes up the most Northern and unknown part of America toward the
West, reaching as far as the supposed Straight of Anian aforesaid (if there be
any such) or else joining to the Continent of Tartary. It is likewise the least
fruitful part of all the West Indies, especially for Corn. Cattle it has good
store, and Pasturage indifferent good, the Country being for the most plain
and level, and nothing else but Pasturage. The Natives are few and salvage,
living in Hoards or great Companies together, after the manner of the Tartars,
to whom they are Neighbors, and (as it is not improbably thought) of their
Race. The Men Clothe themselves most commonly in that kind of Oxes Hide,
elsewhere spoken of under the Name of Taurus Mexicanus. The Women wear little
else but their Hair, notwithstanding the Country, especially for one half of
the year, is excessive cold. Their Cattle, though they are much less than the
ordinary Kine of Europe, are the chief Sustenance and Employment of the
Natives; by Pasturing huge Herds whereof from place to place, the People live,
and maintain a Traffic with other Parts. Yet some of them inhabit Towns, the
chief whereof, as yet discovered, seem to be these which follow:

Towns of chief note.
1. Acus, or Acuco, a small Town, but seated in a strong defensible place, and
being a great Staple for Cotton, the Territory about it has been taken for a
distinct Province, and by some called The Kingdom of Acuco.

2. Tignes, a Town seated upon the Banks of a River bearing the same Name, and
inhabited, it seems, by a stout and resolute People, and whom the Spaniards,
coming amongst them in the Year 1540. had much ado to master: for they endured
a Siege for the space of six Weeks; and at last finding themselves so strongly
begirt by their Enemies, that there was no means to escape but by Death, or
yielding up themselves, rather than they would fall alive into their hands,
they first buried and spoiled all such Treasure as they had (which were chiefly
Saphires, and a few other Gems, that the Country afforded) and after that
setting on fire their Household Stuff, they took their Wives and Children with
them, and made a desperate Sally out upon the Spaniards; wherein although they
were most of them slain, and trod under the Horses Feet, or drowned in passing
the River, yet was it not without some loss to the Spaniards themselves: nor
would those few that were left behind deliver up the Town, till it was fired
about their Ears, and that they could no longer abide in it. This Town, by all
Circumstances, must needs be the same with that before mentioned in Nova
Granada, which makes good what we have said above, viz. That New Granada is by
some confounded with, or at least taken for a part of this Region.

3. Cicuic, another small Town, four days Journey from Tignes. The Country
about this place, although generally it be all good Pasturage, and maintains
abundance of Cattle, yet is it so open and plain, that for almost a hundred
Miles together, the Spaniards, in their March hither from New Spain, found
neither Stone nor Tree, nor any thing else that could serve them for a
Landmark; so that they were forced, as they marched along, to raise up Heaps
of Cow Dung, to serve them for direction in their coming back, which was not
long after: for not finding the Commodities they sought for, and fearing to be
surprised by Winter in those cold Countries, where they had no kind, of
accommodation, they made somewhat a hasty Retreat, leaving behind them only
some few Religious Men, of the Order of St. Francis, whose Endeavors to do the
People good by Converting them to the true Knowledge and Worship of Almighty
God, procured them not long after, the Crown of Martyrdom, being murdered all
of them, except one, by the Natives, and he not without much difficulty
escaping their Hands.

NOva Albion was so denominated by Sir Francis Drake, Nova Albion.
when he was there Entertained by the King of that Country; but whether it
were in Quivira that he was thus Entertained, and left that Denomination, or in
the Island of California, appears not either from the Relation, or from the
common Consent of Cosmographers, since some there are, who will have Quivira
and Nova Albion to be one and the same Province; others reckon it to be the
utmost North-West part of California; others make it distinct from Quivira, yet
determine it not to the Island California, seeming rather to make it an
adjoining Country to Quivira: wherefore finding little else that concerns the
Description of the Place, except the said Voyage of Drake, we shall here set it
down, and leave the farther Disquisition concerning the Situation of the Place,
till we come to describe the Island of California it self.

Sir Francis Drake's Arrival there.
Captain Francis Drake set Sail from Plymouth Anno 1577. and after much hardship
getting through the Straights of Magellan, arrived in the Haven Guatulco,
having before his coming thither taken as many rich Spanish Ships in the
Southern Ocean as he could possibly have wished for, so that his only care now
needed to have been how to get safe home; yet he put on a Resolution, not to
come short of Ferdinandus Magellanus, who Saild about the World. Which brave
Resolution of Drake's was approved of by all his Seamen; whereupon he set Sail
along the North of California the fifth of June; being gotten into forty two
Degrees, which was the farthest that Cabrillo went, he came on a sudden out of
a warm Air into so frigid a Climate, that the Seamen were almost killed with
Cold, and the farther they went, the colder it grew; wherefore falling down
three Degrees more Southerly, they got into a convenient Haven, where the
Natives who lived along the Shore brought them Presents; which Drake left not
unrequited, by returning them others, that were to them more novel, and not
unuseful.

Nature and Habit of the People.
These People are exceeding hardy; for, notwithstanding the extraordinary
coldness of the Climate, the Men go naked; but the Women wear Garments of
pleited Flags or Rushes, which being put about their Middle, hang down to their
Ancles; on their Stomachs hang the ends of a hairy Skin tied together, which
hanging also over their Shoulders, cover their hinder Parts. They show great
Respect and Obedience to their Husbands. Each House is surrounded with an
Earthen Wall, and all the Corners thereof being close stopped, and Fires made
in the midst of them, they are very warm. Rushes and Flags strow'd thick on the
Ground near the Walls, serve them in stead of Beds.

The Indians coming a second time to Visit the English, brought them Plumes of
Feathers, Neckbands of Network, and store of Tobacco: Drake pleased with this
their kindness, built Tents on the Brow of a Hill, on the top of which the
Indians stood that brought the Presents, whilst one of them with a loud voice
maintained a long Discourse; which he had no sooner ended, but everyone laid
down his Bow and Arrows, and walked unarmed down to the Tents to proffer their
Gifts: their Wives staying behind on the top, pinched their Cheeks, and made
sad lamentation; which Drake supposed was because they made Offerings there:
whereupon he also caused all his Men to kneel down and say their Prayers, which
made the Indians to look very earnestly upon them, and to return him the
Presents which the day before they had received of him.

Drake's Entertainment by the King of the Country.
The rumor of these Strangers arrival spreading all over the Country, made the
Inhabitants far and near desirous to see them; the King himself sending
Ambassadors to Drake, to inform him that he was on the Way coming to see him;
all which the Agents related at large, and desired some Presents, as a
testimony that their King should be welcome; which he being assured of, came
with a Retinue of above twelve thousand Men, before whom walked one of a
Gygantick size, carrying a costly Scepter, on which, by three long Chains made
of Bones, hung a great and a small Crown made of Feathers; next followed the
King himself in a Suit of Cony-Skins; then came a great confused company of
People, each of them carrying a Present: whereupon Drake putting his Men into
good order, marched to meet the King; at which the Mace-bearer made a long
Preamble, and when he had done, Danced to the Tune of a Song, which he Sung
himself; then the King and his whole Retinue also fell a Singing and Dancing so
long, till being weary the King went to Drake, and humbly desired of him, that
he would accept of the Realm, assuring him, that all the People should be under
his Obedience; which said, he put the forementioned Crown on his Head, and
hanging three double Chains about his Neck, called him Hioh: whereupon Drake
took possession of the Country in Queen Elizabeth's Name. The King staying
alone with Drake, his Retinue went amongst the English, every one looking very
earnestly upon them, and to those whom they liked best, being the youngest,
they falling down and crying, proffered Offerings, as to Gods, and held their
Cheeks to draw Blood out of them; which the English refusing, they desisted;
but showed them great Wounds, and desired some Plasters of them; which they
supplied them with.

The English going up into the Country found the same well grown with Woods,
which abounded with Coneys, whose Heads differed little from the European, but
having Feet like Moles, long Tails like Rats, and in their Sides a Bag, wherein
when they had filled their Bellies they put the remainder. They also saw
numerous Herds of Deer, with whose Flesh having been courteously Entertained in
several Villages, they returned to the Fleet. Drake, just before he weighed
Anchor, caused a Pillar to be set in the Ground with a Silver Plate on the
same, A Monument erected by Drake before his departure
with an Inscription, mentioning the Day of his Arrival, Name and Arms of Queen
Elizabeth, and free delivering of that Realm to him by the Indians: he also
nailed a Sixpence with the Queens Effigies on the Plate, under which he caused
his own Name to be Engraven.

THE ISLANDS OF Northern America.
CHAP. XI. Terra Nova, or Newfound Land, with the Island of Assumption.
HAving treated at large of all the several Regions and Provinces of the North
part of the Continent of America, we come now to those Islands that lie within
the same Degrees of Northern Latitude with that part of the Continent: The
first is Terre Neuve, or Newfound Land, discovered together with several other
Parts upon the Continent before mentioned by Sir Sebastian Cabott, by the
Countenance and Charge of King Henry the Seventh of England; whereupon a
rightful Claim thereunto, and Interest therein, has been owned by the
succeeding Kings of England, as hereafter shall be more particularly related.

Situation and Bound of Newfound Land.
Newfound Land is situated betwixt the Degrees of forty six and fifty three of
Northern Latitude, and is divided from the Continent of America by an Arm of
the Sea, in like distance as England is from France. The Island is as large as
England in length, greater in breadth, and lies near the Course that Ships
usually hold in their Return from the West Indies, and is near the midway
between Ireland and Virginia.

map of the Caribbean INSULAE AMERICANAE IN OCEANO SEPTENTRIONALI, cum Terris
adiacentibus.


We shall not much need to commend the wholesome temperature of this Country,
Temperature
seeing the greatest part thereof lies above three Degrees nearer to the
South, than any part of England does, so that even in the Winter it is pleasant
and healthful as England is.

Nature of the Inhabitants.
The natural Inhabitants of the Country, as they are but few in number, so are
they something a rude and salvage People, having neither knowledge of God, nor
living under any kind of Civil Government. In their Habits, Customs, and
Manners, they resemble the Indians of the Continent, from whence it is to be
supposed they come; they live altogether in the North and West part of the
Country, which is seldom frequented by the English; but the French and
Biscainers (who resort thither yearly for the Whale-fishing, and also for the
Cod-fish) report them to be an ingenuous and tractable People (being well used)
and very ready to assist them with great labor and patience, in the killing,
cutting, and boiling of Whales, and making the Trayn-Oyl, without expectation
of other Reward than a little Bread, or some such small Hire.

It has the most commodious Harbors in the World, Commodious Harbors.
and the most safe Seas to Sail to it, there being not any Islands, Rocks or
Sands between the Lands-End in England and Newfound Land, and for the most
part it is not above three or four Weeks Sail thither, and less coming back;
and is the most commodiously situated for the discovering of the North-West
Passage, and other Inlets into the South Sea; whereby the ordinary Voyages to
China, Japan, and the East Indies, are much eased in the expense of Time and
Charge; and the most open to Trade to all Parts, of any Island of the
West Indies.

On the East side of the Land, are the Bays of Trinity and Conception, which
stretch themselves toward the South-West.

Tor-Bay and Capelin-Bay lying also on the East, stretch themselves toward the
West.

The Bays of Trespassey, St. Mary, Borrel, and Plaisance, on the South part of
the Land, extend their Arms toward the North.

The great Bay of St. Peter's lying on the South-West side of the Land, and
Southerly from the great River of Canada, being about twenty Leagues distant,
the same stretches toward the East.

Trinity Harbor lies in near forty nine Degrees of North Latitude, being very
commodiously seated to receive Shipping in seasonable Weather, both to Anchor
in, and from thence to Sail toward either the East, West, or South. It has
three Arms or Rivers, long and large enough for many hundred Sail of Ships to
moare fast at Anchor near a Mile from the Harbors Mouth. Close adjoining to
the Rivers side, and within the Harbor, is much open Land, well stored with
Grass sufficient, Winter and Summer, to maintain great store of ordinary
Cattle, besides Hogs and Goats, if such Beasts were carried thither; and it
stands North most of any Harbor in the Land, where our Nation practices
Fishing: It is near unto a great Bay lying on the North side of it, called The
Bay of Flowers; to which Place no Ships repair to Fish, in regard of sundry
Rocks and Ledges lying even with the Water, and full of danger.

The bottom of the Bay of Trinity lies within four Leagues through the Land
South-West, Southerly from Trinity, as by experience is found; and it comes
near unto the Bay of Trespassey, and the bottom of some other Bays.

Trespassey in like manner is as commodious a Harbor, lying in a more
temperate Climate, almost in forty six Degrees of North Latitude, and is both
fair and pleasant, and a wholesome Coast free from Rocks and Shelves; so that of
all other Harbors it lies the most South of any in the Land, and most
conveniently to receive our Shipping, passing to and from Virginia and the
Bermuda Islands; and also any other Shipping that shall pass to and from the
River of Canada, and the Coast thereof, because they usually pass, and so
return in the sight of the Land of Trespassey, and also for some other
purposes, as shall be partly declared in the following Discourse.

The Soil of this Country in the Valleys and sides of the Mountains is so
fruitful, Fruitful Soil.
as that in diverse places the Summer naturally produces without Tillage, great
plenty of green Pease, and Fitches, fair, round, full, and as wholesome as ours
in England.

Berries and Fruits.
Of Berries and Fruits, there grows Strawberries, red and white, and as fair
Raspice-berries and Goose-berries as there be in England; as also Bilberries,
which are called by some Whortes, and many other delicate Berries peculiar to
the Country, in great abundance. Likewise small Pears, Cherries, Filberds, etc.

Herbs and Flowers.
There are also Herbs for Sallets and Broth, as Parsley, Alexander, Sorrel, etc.
and also Flowers, as the red and white Damask Rose, with other kinds, which are
most beautiful and delightful, both to the sight and smell. And questionless,
the Country is stored with many Physical Herbs, though their Virtues are not
known.

When Corn was first Sow'n here, it was observed to grow very fair, the
increase was great, and the Grain very good; and several sorts of Kitchen
Plants that have been Set here, have proved very well.

In diverse parts of the Country there is great store of Deer, Beasts.
and some Hares, many Foxes, Squerrils, Beavers, Martins and Otters, yielding
excellent Furrs, Wolves and Bears, with other sorts of Beasts, serving as well
for Necessity, as for Profit and Delight.

Variety both of Land and Waterfowl is in this Country infinite: Birds.
The chief Land-Fowl, besides a great number of small Birds, that live by
scraping their Food from the Earth in the hardest Winter, are Hawks, great and
small Partridges, Thrush, and Thrussels abundance, very fat; as also Filladies,
Nightingales, and such like, which sing most pleasantly. There are also Birds
that live by prey, as Ravens, Gripes, Crows, etc. For Waterfowl, there is
certainly so good, and as much variety, as in any part of the World, as Geese,
Ducks, Pigeons, Gulls, Penguins, and many other sorts. These Penguins are as
big as Geese, but do not fly, for they have but a little short Wing; and they
multiply so infinitely upon a certain flat Island, that men drive them from
thence upon a Board into their Boats by hundreds at a time, as if God had made
the innocence of so poor a Creature to become such an admirable Instrument for
the sustentation of Man: And also Godwits, Curlews, and such like; which Fowl
do not only serve those that Trade thither for Food, but also they are a great
furthering to diverse Ships Voyages, because the abundance of them is such, that
the Fishermen do bait their Hooks with the quarters of Sea-Fowl on them; and
therewith some Ships do yearly take a great part of their Fishing Voyages with
such Bait, before they can get others.

The fresh Waters and Springs of that Country are many in number, Springs.
and withal so very pleasant, delightful and wholesome, that no Country in the
World has better: And Fuel for Fireing, no where more plentiful.

In like manner there is great abundance of Trees fit to be employed in other
serviceable uses: Trees.
There are Fir and Spruce-Trees, sound, good, and fit to Mast Ships with, and
as commodious for Boards and Buildings as those of Norway; and out of these
come abundance of Turpentine. Moreover the Pine and Birch-Trees here are scarce
to be compared for height and greatness.

The Rivers also and Harbors are generally stored with delicate Fish, as
Salmons, Peals, Eels, Herrings, Mackrel, Flounders, Lance, Capelin, Cod, and
Trouts, the fairest, fattest and sweetest, that ever were seen in these Parts.
The like for Lobsters, Cra-fish, Mussles, and other variety of Shellfish.

The Seas likewise all along the Coast, do plentifully abound in other sorts of
Fish, as Whales, Spanish Mackrel, Dorrel, Pales, Herrings, Hogs, Porposes,
Seals, and such like Royal Fish, etc.

But the chief Commodity of New found Land yet known, and which is grown to be
a settled Trade, and that it may be much bettered by an ordinary Plantation
there, (if the Traders thither will take some better course than formerly they
have done, as shall be declared) is the Cod-fishing upon that Coast, by which
our Nation and many other Countries are enriched.

Almost incredible is the benefit of the Fish, which the French, Biscainers,
and Portuguese fetch yearly from this Coast of Newfound Land, and the Bank,
which lies within twenty five Leagues from the South Cape of that Country,
where the French use to Fish Winter and Summer, usually making two Voyages
every year thither. To which Places, and to the Coast of Canada, which lies
near unto it, are yearly sent from those Countries, more than four hundred Sail
of Ships.

This Island of Terra Nova belongs properly and justly to the Crown of England,
having been under the sole Jurisdiction of the English from the first Discovery
thereof, which was by Sir Sebastian Cabot, Employed by King Henry the Seventh,
to find out some other part of America, than what had been discovered by
Columbus, as has been above declared in several places.

Afterward King Henry the Eighth continued the English Interest there, and
Employed one Rutt into that Island, in order to the Plantation thereof.

Queen Elizabeth no less careful to preserve that Plantation, sent Sir Humphrey
Gilbert, a Devonshire Knight, to plant a Colony there, the better to secure the
same, and to increase Trading there; and accordingly the said Sir Humphrey with
two good Ships and a Pinnace in her Name, took possession of that Country, in
the Harbor of St. John's. He Sailed from thence toward Virginia, and by reason
of some unhappy direction in his Course, the greatest Ship he had struck upon
Shelves on the Coast of Canada, and was there lost, with most part of the
Company in her; and he himself, being then in a small Pinnace of twenty Tun, in
the company of his Vice Admiral (Captain Hays) returning toward England, in a
great Storm, was overwhelmed in the Sea, and so perished.

In the Year 1608. it was undertaken anew by John Guy, a Merchant of Bristol,
and with so good success, that the Colony in a short time were well furnished
with Wheat, Rye, Barley, and other Grain of their own Sowing, with Turnips,
Coleworts, and abundance of other necessary things, not without some probable
hopes of Metals, a certain and plentiful Trade of Sables, Musk, and other rich
Commodities.

The Province of Avalon in Newfound Lands.
In the Year 1620. Sir George Calvert Knight, then principal Secretary of State,
and a Privy Councellor to King James the First of England, etc. purchased a
part of Newfound Land, which was afterward in the Year 1623. granted to him
and his Heirs by Patent from the said King, under the Great Seal of England,
bearing Date the seventh of April, in the One and twentieth Year of his Reign:
by which means the said Tract of Land was erected into a Province, and at the
Instance of the said Sir George Calvert, called Avalon, from Avalon in
Sommerset-shire, where Christianity was first Planted in England.

This Province lies in the forty seventh Degree of Northern Latitude, and is
thus bounded: It begins Southerly from the middle part of a certain Neck of
Land or Promontory, situate between the two Harbors, Fermose and Aquafort; and
from thence following the Shore toward the North unto the middle part, or half
way over a little Harbor, called in that regard Petit Port, or Petit Harbor,
which boundeth upon the South part of the Plantation of St. John's, including
the one half of a certain fresh River, that falls into the said Port of Petit
Harbor; and so tending along the South Border of the said Colony of St. John's,
extends it self to a certain little Bay, commonly called Salmon Cove, lying
on the South side of the Bay of Conception, including the one half of the River
that falls into the said Cove, as also one half of the Cove it self; from
whence passing along the Shore of the said Bay toward the South, and reaching
unto the bottom thereof, where it meets with the Lands of the forementioned
John Guy, named Sea Forest, is bounded with a certain River or Brook, which
there falls into the Sea, and from the Mouth of the said Brook ascends unto
the farthest Spring or Head thereof; from thence passing toward the South for
six Miles together along the Borders of the said John Guy's Plantation, and
there crossing over Westward in a right Line, reaches unto the Bay of
Placentia, and the space of one League within the said Bay from the Shore
thereof; whence turning again toward the South, passes along the Harbor of
Placentia, with the like distance from the Shore, and descending unto New
Falkland toward the North and West part thereof, stretches it self in a right
Line Eastward, continuing the whole Southerly length upon the Bounds of the
said New Falkland, unto the middle part or Point of the Promontory, or Neck of
Land before mentioned, between the Ports Fermose and Aquafort; at which place
is described and finished the Perambulation of the whole Precinct, whose Extent
may be thus computed, commencing from the Promontory between the Ports Fermose
and Aquafort, which is fifty or sixty Miles from South to North distant from
Petit Harbor; from whence crossing Westward to the Bay of Placentia, is judged
to be sixty Miles more or upwards, from East to West.

And thereby was also granted to the said Sir George Calvert and his Heirs, all
Islands and Islets, within ten Leagues of the Eastern Shore of the said Region
toward the East, together with the Fishing of all sorts of Fish, saving unto
the English free liberty of Fishing, as well in the Seas as in the Ports and
Creeks of the Province aforesaid, and the Privileges of salting and drying
their Fish upon the Shores of the said Province, as heretofore they reasonably
used and enjoyed the same, so as they do no injury or notable loss or detriment
unto the Lord Proprietary, his Heirs and Assigns, or to the Inhabitants of the
said Province, in the Ports, Creeks, and Shores aforesaid, and especially in
the Woods growing within the said Province.

And by the said Patent all Royal Jurisdictions and Prerogatives, both Military
and Civil, within the said Province and Islands thereunto belonging, were
farther granted to the said Sir George Calvert and his Heirs, and he and they
thereby created the true and absolute Lords and Proprietaries of the said
Province, saving the Allegiance due to His Majesty, His Heirs and Successors,
to be held of them in Capite, yielding and paying unto them therefore a white
Horse, when, and as often as any of them shall come into the said Province, and
the fifth part of all Gold and Silver Oar which should be found there.

Sir George Calvert, before the obtaining of this Patent, had caused a fair
House and Fort to be built in the said Province, at a place called Ferryland,
and in the Year 1624. having obtained a Dismission from his Employment of
Secretary of State, and being then created Lord Baltemore of Baltemore in
Ireland, he did in the Year 1627. Transport himself to Avalon, to inspect his
Concerns there in Person; from whence returning the same year, he Embarked
himself again, together with his Lady and all his Family, except his eldest
Son, for Avalon the year following; at which time (there being then War between
England and France) he redeemed above twenty Sail of English Ships, which had
been taken there that year by French Men of War, whereof one Monsieur De la
Rade had the chief Command, and shortly after took six French Fishing Ships
upon that Coast, and sent them the same year, with a great many Frenchmen
Prisoners, into England. Coming thence, he left a Deputy there, and continued
the Plantation till his Death, which was in April 1632. After whose Decease it
descended of right to his Son and Heir Cecil, now Lord Baltemore; who thereupon
sent one Captain William Hill as his Deputy thither, to take possession
thereof, and to manage his Interest there for him. Captain Hill, according to
his Commission, shortly after repaired thither, and lived some years at the
Lord Baltemore's House at Ferryland above mentioned.

In the thirteenth Year of King Charles the First, of England, etc. about the
Year of our Lord 1638. Marquess Hamilton, Earl of Pembroke, Sir David Kirk, and
others, under pretense that the Lord Baltemore had deserted that Plantation,
obtained a Patent of all Newfound Land, wherein Avalon was included, and
shortly after dispossessed the Lord Baltemore of his Mansion House in
Ferryland, and other Rights there, and during the late Rebellion in England
kept possession; but His now Majesty King Charles the Second, immediately after
his most happy Restoration in the Year 1660, upon the now Lord Baltemore's
Petition, thought fit to refer the whole Matter to be Examined by Sir Orlando
Bridgeman, then Lord-Chief Justice, now Lord Keeper of the Great Seal of
England, and others, to report the true state thereof to His Majesty, together
with their Opinions thereupon: The Referrees accordingly, upon full hearing of
Council on both sides, certifi'd; That they conceived the said Patent to Sir
George Calvert, to be a good Patent, in force, and not avoided by the later to
Sir David Kirk and others; and that the Title and Interest to the said Province
did therefore belong to the Lord Baltemore. Whereupon His Majesty, on the
twentieth of March in the same Year, Ordered the Possession thereof to be
re-deliver'd to his Lordship, which was accordingly executed: Since which time
his Lordship has peaceably enjoyed the possession thereof, and continues the
Plantation to this day, by deputing Lieutenants there from time to time, for
the better Government of that Province, the rest of New found Land remaining
still to the aforesaid Proprietors, claiming by the Patent of 13 Car. 1.

The Commodities that are either by Art or Nature produced there, are the same
with those of the remainder of Newfound Land. The Winter there is extreme
cold, the Summer very hot, but withal pleasant; and during that Season there is
great plenty of Pasture for Cattle.

The Coast of this Province is very safe, and as well furnished with variety of
bold and pleasant Harbors, as any other part of Newfound Land; where the
English likewise Fish for Cod, the lesser sort whereof is called Poor-John,
which is there caught in great abundance, especially at Ferryland, and in the
Bay of Bulls. Besides these two there are diverse other excellent Harbors on the
Eastern Shore of Avalon, as Capling Bay, Cape Broyle, Brittus, Isle of Spears,
Barrom Cove, Whitburns Bay, and Petit Harbor above mentioned. On the West are
the Bay of Placentia, and several other good Harbors.

There are no Indians in Avalon, and but few English, by reason of the
excessive Cold in Winter, though Sir David Kirk and his Lady, and also his
Family, lived in the Lord Baltemore's House at Ferryland for the space of ten
years and upwards.

The Soil seems to promise great store of Mines, which probably may in time be
disover'd. The late Lord Baltemore took accidentally a piece of Oar up that lay
there upon the surface of the Earth, and brought it with him into England,
which was found upon trial to yield a greater proportion of Silver, than the
Oar of Potosi in the West Indies, but hitherto no Mine of it has been
discovered there.

The Trade of Fishing being of so great concernment to the Nation of England,
the same (if it be well managed in this Island of Terra Nova) will employ every
year above two hundred Sail of English Ships, and ten thousand Mariners,
besides the great benefit which may accrue unto the Nation by Imposition upon
Strangers there, which would amount to several thousands of Pounds per Annum;
with which those Coasts may be Guarded, and Ships Trading thither secured:
besides the great Customs by the Ships called The Sacks (being commonly in
great numbers every year) who carry Fish from Newfound Land into the
Straights, France, Portugal, and Spain, and who bring their Returns into
England, as Bullion, and all other native Commodities of those Countries.

If the Island were well fortified, we might Command all those of other Nations
that come to Fish in Newfound Land, to pay Contribution in Fish or otherwise,
for their Privilege to Fish there, the said Island being first Planted by
English, and pertaining to the Kingdom of England; or if occasion should
require, they might be utterly debarred of Fishing there.

The Trade of Fishing is of so great concernment to France, Spain, Portugal,
the Straights, and other Parts, that they cannot well be without that yearly
Supply in Fish which comes from that Island: Neither can the Hollanders,
Spaniards, or Portuguese, well set any Ships to the West Indies, without
Newfound Land Fish, there being none that will endure to pass the Line sound
and untainted, but the Fish of that Country, salted and dried there. And so
long as the Act continues still in force, That no Fish be Transported from the
said Island, but in English Bottoms, it will contribute very much to our
increase of Shipping there, and by consequence, of the employment of Mariners;
and the Fishing of that part of the Island will be solely appropriated to the
English Nation, to whom of right it belongs, which will prove the greatest
Balance of Trade in that part of the World; and that whereas above two hundred
Sail do Trade thither yearly to Fish, if a thousand Sail come, if there be but
Fishermen enough, they may all have Fraughtage there.

The French, if once the Island be fortified, will be deprived of their Nursery
of Mariners, this being the only place, besides Canada, and one or two
adjacent Coasts, where they come for supply of Fish, with which that Nation
cannot be furnished so well from other Parts.

By well Planting and Fortifying Newfound Land, the Trading to Virginia, New
England, and those Parts, would be much encouraged, New England having had of
late great Traffic with Newfound Land, where they vend the Growth of their
Plantation. Besides, Newfound Land is a Key to the Gulf of Canada, which if
the English had again in their possession, as they had in the Years 1628. and
1632. they might give a Law to all foreign Kings and People interested in any
of the parts of America, and a Protection to all the English Plantations upon
that Continent, whereby great security, comfort and profit would arise to the
Nation and People of it: whereas on the contrary, if the French, Spanish, or
Dutch, should possess themselves of the said Plantation, they would not only
deprive this Nation of all the Advantages aforesaid, but would also derive to
themselves so great a Power to prejudice all the Plantations of the Coasts of
America belonging to this Nation, that the Inconveniences thereof are scarce to
be imagined or expressed.

map of Bermuda ^^ppa AESTIVARVM Insularum ^^^s BARMVDAS dictarum, ad Ostia
Mexi^^i astuarij jacentium in latitudine Graduum 32 Minutorum 25. Ab Anglia,
Londino Scilicet versus Libonotum 3300 Miliaribus Anglicanis, et a Roanoack
(qui locus est in Virginia) versus Euronotum 500 Mill. accurate descripta.

Nomina, fortunae bona submittentium in quaestus Virginiani alea A. j622, quam
fieri potuit accuratissims, expressa numeris, little portiones quam proxime in
agrorum divisione referentibus, quae portiones illic Separatim distinguntur in
regione ipsa. quemadmodum hic lineis ob oculos ponuntur.
Hammilton alias Har: rington Tribe. 1 To Lord Marq. Hammilton -- Shares 6 1
Si. Edward Harwood -- Shares 4 2 M. John Delbridge -- Shares 3 3 M. John Dike
-- Shares 3 4 M. El. Robert -- Shares 2 5 M Rob. Phipps -- Shares 2 6 M Ralph
King -- Shares 2 7 M Quicks heirs or assigns -- Shares 2 8 M ^illiam Canning
-- Shares 4 8 M. Will. Canning -- Shares 1 8 M. Will. Webb^ -- Shares ^ 9 M.
John Barnard -- Shares 2 10 Si. Tho. Huggia -- Shares 2 11 M. John Gearing --
Shares 2 12 M. Cleoph. Smith -- Shares 2 13 Robert, Earl of Warwick -- Shares
4 14 M. Tho. Cowell -- Shares 3 15 M. Greenwels heirs, or assig. -- Shares 1
16 M. Cley -- Shares 1 17 M. Poulson -- Shares 2 18 M. John Dike -- Shares 1 19
Common ground -- Shares 13 acres 20 M John Dike -- Shares 1 21 M. Geo. Thorpe.
Esquire -- Shares 1
Smiths Tribe. 1 Si. Dudley Dig, Since M. Geo. Sandys. or his assig. --
Shares 2 2 M. Rich. Edwards -- Shares 2 3 M. Will. Pain -- Shares 4 4 M. Rob.
Smith -- Shares 2 5 M. Geo. Berkleys assigns -- Shares 5 6 Si. Sam. Sandys --
Shares 7 7 M. Autho. Pennistone -- Shares 4 8 Si. Edwin Sandys -- Shares 1 9 Si
Tho. Smith -- Shares 5 10 M. Rich. Morer -- Shares 4 11 M. Henry Timberly --
Shares 4 12 Rob Johnson, Alderman -- Shares 5 13 M. John Wroth -- Shares 3 14
M. George Smith -- Shares 4
Devonshire Tribe. 1 M. Antho. Pennystone -- Shares 2 2 M. John Dike -- Shares
1 3 M. John Dike -- Shares 1 4 M. John Barnard -- Shares 2 5 Robert Earl of
Warwick -- Shares 2 6 M. Francis West -- Shares 2 7 Will. Lord Cavendish --
Shares 3 8 The said W. Lord Cavandish -- Shares 2 8 Will. Earl of Devonshire
-- Shares 5 9 M. Edw. Lukin -- Shares 5 9 M. Edward Ditchfield -- Shares 1 10
M. Edw. Ditchfield -- Shares 4 11 M. Will. Nichols -- Shares 2 12 M. Edw.
Ditchfield -- Shares 1 13 M. John Fletcher -- Shares 2 14 M. Gideon Dolawne --
Shares 2 15 M. Anthon. Pennistone -- Shares 3 16 M. Best -- Shares 2 17 M. Edw.
Lukin -- Shares 2 18 M. Rich. Rogers -- Shares 2 19 M. Will. -- Shares 4
Pembroke Tribe. 1 M. George Smith -- Shares 4 2 Gleabland -- Shares 2 3 M.
Nicholas Hide, Esquire -- Shares 1 4 Si. Laurence Hide -- Shares 2 5 M. Thomas
Ladwin -- Shares 2 6 William, Earl of Pembroke -- Shares 10 7 M. Richard
Edwards -- Shares 1 8 M. Harding -- Shares 1 9 M. Richard Edwards -- Shares 1
10 M. Ward -- Shares 1 11 M. Richard Edwards -- Shares 2 12 M. Iacobson or his
assign -- Shares 1 13 M. John Farrar -- Shares 1 14 M. John Farrar -- Shares 1
15 M. Nichol. Farrar -- Shares 1 16 M. William Canning -- Shares 2 17 M.
Richard Martine. Esquire -- Shares 2 18 M. Morris Abbot -- Shares 2 19 M. Rich.
Caswell -- Shares 1 20 M. Rich. Caswell -- Shares 2 21 M. Rich. Caswell --
Shares 1 22 M. Rich. Edwards -- Shares 2 23 M. Rich. Edwards -- Shares 2 24 M.
Rich. Caswell -- Shares 2 25 M. Rich. Edwards -- Shares 2 26 M. Geo. Sandys, or
his Assig. -- Shares 2 27 M. William Pain -- Shares 2
Pagets Tribe. 1 M. John Chamberlain, Esquire -- Shares 5 2 M. Thomas Airs and --
Shares 4 2 M. Rich. Wiseman -- Shares 4 3 Rich. Wiseman -- Shares 1 4 William,
Lord Paget -- Shares 10 5 M. William Palmar -- Shares 4 6 M. Bagwell -- Shares
5 7 John Ball -- Shares 1 8 M. Thomas Wheatley -- Shares 1 9 M. Christopher
Barron -- Shares 4 10 M. John Woodall -- Shares 1 11 M. John Woodall -- Shares
1 12 M. Jews -- Shares 2 13 M. Geo. Etheridg -- Shares 4 14 Incognira --
Shares 2 15 Si. William Wade -- Shares 1 16 M. John Bernard -- Shares 1
Warwick Tribe. 1 Captains Daniel Tucker -- Shares 1 2.3.4.5.6 M. Joseph Man --
Shares 5 7 M. Step. Sparrow -- Shares 1 8 M. Francis Meuerell -- Shares 1 9.10
M. Sam. Tickier -- Shares 2 11.12.13 M. George Smith -- Shares 5 14.15 M.
George Smith -- Shares 5 16.17.18 Robert, Earl of Warwick -- Shares 5 19.20
Robert, Earl of Warwick -- Shares 5 21 M. William Felgate -- Shares 1 22.23
Capt. Daniel Tucker -- Shares 2 24.25 M. Rich. Wheatly -- Shares 2 26 Capt.
Daniel Tucker -- Shares 2 27 John Faucet -- Shares 1 28 Doct. Anth. Hun. ton.
or his Assign. -- Shares 2 29 Doct. Anth. Hun. ton. or his Assign. -- Shares 2
30 M. Francis Meuerell -- Shares 1 31 M. Rich. Poulson -- Shares 1 32 M. Matthew
Shepherd -- Shares 1 to. 42 M. Geo Tucker -- Shares 10 43 M. Christ. Cletheros
-- Shares 1 44 M. George Swinhow -- Shares 2 45 M. George Swinhow -- Shares 2
46 M. Richard Tomlins Esquire -- Shares 1 47 M. Francis Meuerell -- Shares 1 48.49
Sir John Walter -- Shares 2 50 M. Martin Bond -- Shares 1
Southampton Tribe. 1 Capt. Tucker -- Shares 1 2 Capt. Tucker -- Shares 1 3
Capt. Tucker -- Shares 2 4 M. John Britton -- Shares 1 5 M. Rich. Chamberlain
-- Shares 3 6 M. Leo. Harwood, or his assig. -- Shares 1 7 M. John Banks --
Shares 1 8 Sir Nathaniell Rich. -- Shares 12 9 Robert, Earl of Warwich --
Shares 3 10 M. Rich. Morer -- Shares 6 11 M. George Scot -- Shares 6 11 M.
Edmund Scot -- Shares 6 11 M. Antho. Abdy -- Shares 6 12 Heary. Earl of
Southamton -- Shares 4 12 M. Arch. Bromefield -- Shares 2 13 M. Henry Timberly
-- Shares 2 14 S. Thomas Hewet -- Shares -- Shares 2 15 M. Peirces -- Shares 1
16 S. Ralgh. Winwood -- Shares 2
Refiduum. Quid hoc Refiduum sit. et cor hic apposition apparet libro Geodesae.
Societati exhibito. 1 Captain Tucker Parts 3 2 Gleabe-land Parts 2 1 Sandys
Tribe Parts 2
Sandys Tribe. 3 M. Geor Barkley or his heirs -- Shares 5 4 S. Edwards Sandys
-- Shares 5 5 M. Ierom Heydon -- Shares 10 6 M. Tho. Melling et M. John Cusse
-- Shares 2 7 M. Rich. Chamberlain -- Shares 2 8 M. Abraham Chamberlain --
Shares 2 9 M. George Smith -- Shares 2 10 M. Robert Gore -- Shares 3 11 S.
Edwards Sackvile -- Shares 1 11 S. John Davers -- Shares 1 12 M. Robert Gore --
Shares 2 13 M. John Delbridge -- Shares 1 14 M. John Wroth Esquire -- Shares 1 15
M. Rich. Chamberl. Esquire -- Shares 10



Ad Communem agram in singu lis Tribubus quol attinet, in quot portiones
dividatur et ibi inceat quemadmodum partim in Mappa Choragraphica exprimitur.
Ita eti am claribus liquet ex Libre Geo desiae Virginianae Societati tradito.



After the granting of the Patent aforesaid of 13 Car. 1. Sir David Kirk's
great Pains there, and constant Endeavors, were beyond expectation blessed
with a continuance and preservation of Trade in that Place; in the carrying on
of which, he had always a special regard to the real Advantage of this Kingdom,
and the particular Service of His Majesty.

The wonderful Bank of Terra Nova.
Before this Island, right over against Cape Ray, at the distance of twenty four
Leagues or more, there lies an huge Bank or Ridge of Land, extending it self
in length out of the Sea, above a hundred Leagues, but in breadth not above
four or five and twenty, when it is broadest, and in other parts much less,
sharpning toward each end into a Conus, or narrow Point. It is accounted one
of the Wonders of the Sea, which round about, at some distance, is very deep,
and hardly to be sounded, especially betwixt the Bank (for so they commonly
call it) and Cape Ray, but drawing nearer, it grows by degrees more and more
shallow, insomuch that nigh the Land there is not much more Water than is
necessary for the Ships to Ride in. It runs out in length, as was said, from
North to South, from forty one Degrees of Latitude to fifty two; and round
about it there lie scattered a multitude of lesser Islands, which Sir Sebastian
Cabot, when he first discovered the Place, called by one common Name Los
Baccaloos, or The Islands of Cod-fish, The Baccaloos
from the great quantity of that sort of Fish he there found; which was such,
that they hindered the passage of his Ships, and lay in such multitudes upon the
Coasts, that the very Bears would come and catch them in their Claws, and draw
them to Land.

The Isle of Assumption.
IN the Gulf of St. Laurence, toward the Mouth of the River Canada, is another
less considerable Island, said to have been first discovered by Quartier, and
by him called The Island of Assumption; by John Alphonso, The Island of
Ascension; by the Natives, Natistcotec: It extends it self from the forty
eighth to the fiftieth Degree, between the South-East and North-West.

Quartier makes mention of a strange kind of Fish, found in the River of
Canada, like unto a Sea-Hog, but having the Head of a Hare, it is called by the
Natives Adhothuys.

Not far from this is a little Island, called by the French, Isle de Sable, or
The Sandy Island; and another on the West of Terra Nova, called Isle de
Bretons, or The Island of St. Laurence, besides several little scattered
Islands in the Gulf of St. Laurence, as Menego, and The Three Islands of Birds;
in which are found a kind of amphibious Animal, called by the French, Cualrus,
and by the Russians, Morsh; somewhat like a Sea-Calf, but more monstrous.

CHAP. XII. The Bermudas, or Summer-Islands.
Situation of the Bermudas.
THe Bermudas, or Summer-Islands (probably so termed as to the first Appellation
from certain black Hogs, by the Spaniards called Bermudas, which from a Ship
bound with them to some other parts of the West Indies, and cast away upon that
Coast, swam ashore, and there increased; or, as others say, from John Bermudes,
a Spaniard, who is said to have been the first Discoverer; or, as to the
second, from one George Summers, an Englishman, who there suffered shipwreck)
are situated in thirty two Degrees and twenty five Minutes of Northern
Latitude, about sixteen hundred Leagues from England, twelve hundred from
Madera, four hundred from Hispaniola, and three hundred from the nearest Coast
of Virginia. The first that endeavored to settle Plantations here was a
Spaniard named Hernando Camelo, being designed Conductor in this Expedition:
And this Undertaking was so much the more eagerly prosecuted, upon
consideration that the Plate-Fleet Sailing from Havana through the Straights of
Bahama, might here have a convenient Harbor; but those who were invited to
become Adventurers, with proffers of great Advantage, showing themselves very
slack in the Business, and Charles the Fifth being at that time entangled in
War and other troublesome Affairs, the Design came to nothing, and for above
sixty years after no farther Attempt was made by any for the Planting of these
Islands, till at last the French made a Voyage thither under Captain
Barboriere, but by Shipwreck were frustrated of their hopes; nor made they any
more Preparations in this Design. In which nevertheless the English were not so
easily discouraged; for first Captain Gosnol and Smith set forth, at the
Charges of Mr. Edward Wingfield; next, Captain Nelson; then successively West,
Gates, Argal, and Wyat, but all with little or no success, till at length in
the Year 1612. a Company was established in London by the King's Letters
Patents, who sent one Mr. Richard Moor with sixty Men to the Bermudas, where he
spent three years in fortifying those Islands: but that which put a little stop
to this good beginning, was a kind of Misfortune that happened; for the Rats
which were gotten ashore from a Shipwreck increased so exceedingly, that they
devoured all the Plants in the Field, and the Provision in the Houses, insomuch
that a great Famine proceeded from thence, all means to destroy the Vermin
being in vain; till at last Providence sent a Disease amongst them, which
^^ill'd them all in a very short time. Mean while Moor went on in the
fortification of the Island, and was ere long supplied with fresh People. Mr.
Barlet was sent over with sixty Men, and carried from thence* with him eighty
Pound of Ambergreece. And soon after three Ships more, viz. the Blessing, the
Star, and the Margaret, conveyed thither four hundred and ten, Men and Women.
As soon as Moor was called away, Daniel Tuckard coming from Virginia to succeed
him, bestirred himself very much, Planting all places full of Trees fetched
from the West-Indian Islands; as also Tobacco, with which he fraighted a Ship
to London. Moreover, the Country was divided into Acres, that every Planter
might have an equal share, and know his own Lands. Anno 1619. Tuckard was
succeeded by Nathaniel Butler, who in four Ships brought thither five hundred
Men and Women, to supply the first Plantation, which was much decayed since the
Rats had devoured their Provisions, so that it was little looked after by the
Company in London: But now they built a Church and erected a Court of
Judicature, and all things were ordered conveniently for the public good.
After which many Noble Persons set Sail thither in the Magazine Frigate; and the
Planters being now fifteen hundred in number, inhabited twenty Leagues of Land
in length.

Forts built upon the Bermudas.
On the longest Island, called St. George, (for the Bermudas consists of several
Islands, great and small) they built Warwick and Dover Forts, with other
Fortifications and Towers, which had their Denominations from those Noblemen
and Gentlemen that were Undertakers in this Plantation, as Cavendish, Paget,
Herbert, etc. from the Earl of Devonshire, the Lord Paget, the Earl of
Pembroke, and others.

^orts and Havens.
Amongst the Havens the eminentest are, Southampton, the Inlet Harrington, and
the Great Sound.

All these Islands lying together resemble a Half Moon, and are surrounded with
Rocks, which appear at Low Water, and at High lie but shallow; for it seldom
Ebbs or Flows above five Foot. The Shore, for the most part Rocky, and hardened
by the Sun and Wind, receives no damage by the Waves which continually beat
against the same.

Nature of the Soil.
The Ground it self differs; for in some places it is sandy or clayie, and in
others partly black, and partly white, or Ash-colored Earth; which last is
accounted the worst, and the black the best. Three Foot deep under the
Ash-colored Earth lie great Slates, and under the black, a white spungie
Stone, like the Pumice, in whose moist Crevises Trees take root.

The Pits or Wells, though they Ebb and Flow with the Sea, yet produce a
wholesome and sweet Water.

Temperature of the Air.
The Sky is generally serene, but when over-cast with Clouds, is subject to
Lightning and Thunder; yet the Air is of a good temper, being neither exceeding
cold, nor excessive hot: for which reason the European Fruits grow better there
than in their natural Soil.

Their Harvest is twice a year; for that which they Sow in March, is ripe and
gathered in June; then what they Sow again in August, they gather in January.

Productions of the Country.
These Islands breed no hurtful Creatures; nay, the yellow Spider which spins
silken Cobwebs, is free from Poison.

The Plant Nuchtly, which bears speckled Pears, grows betwixt the Rocks which
are drenched with Seawater.

The Hogs which above a hundred and fifty years since swam ashore out of the
Spanish Wrack, are exceedingly increased there, but because of their poorness
are scarce eatable, they feeding only on the sweet Berries which fall from the
Palmito-Trees.

About the white and red Mulberries, which grow plentifully there, breed
thousands of Silkworms, which spin Silk according to the color of the
Mulberries.

The Sea produces some quantity of Pearls and Ambergreece.

From the beginning of the year till May, the Whales are seen to swim not far
from the Shore.

A strange sort of Sea-Fowl breed in Holes like Rabbets; and amongst other
Birds, here are also store of Cranes.

The Tobacco which the English have planted here grows very well.

Tortoises Laying of Eggs.
Here are likewise great Tortoises, which Lay their Eggs in the Sand on the
Shore, where they are Hatched by the Beams of the Sun, and are taken after this
manner: In the Night some are set to watch where they Land, and whilst they
are digging a deep Hole in the Ground, are thrown on their Backs, and not being
able to get upon their Legs again, they lie and groan very pitifully: some of
them having above two Basins full of Eggs in their Bellies; which being about
the bigness of a Tennis-Ball, have a thin Shell, which incloseth a Yolk and
White. If these Eggs lie buried six years, then the young Tortoises breaking
the Shell, come out of the Sand, and instantly creep into the Sea. Their Flesh
is not only wholesome but toothsom. The Oil made of them is not inferior to
Butter.

Cedars of an excellent kind.
Moreover, the Bermudas produce Cedars, the like of which are not to be found in
the whole World: The Leaves are douny and prickly at the ends, almost like
those of the Juniper Tree: The Wood has a sweet smell, and the Berries, which
are like the Myrtle, of a pale Red, enclose four white Kernels; the outermost
Skin whereof is sweet; the innermost, which covers the Kernel, sharp, and the
Pulp tartish: The Trees are always flourishing, being at the same time full of
Blossoms, green, and ripe Fruit: The Berries, when grown ripe, begin to gape,
and fall off in rainy Weather, leaving a round Stalk on the Boughs, which loses
not its Rind till two years after; half which time the Berry requires, before
it attains to its perfect ripeness, which generally happens in the Winter: The
Boughs shoot straight upwards, and become in time so heavy, that they cause the
Body of the Tree to bend. This most excellent Wood grows in diverse places of
the Bermudas.

We shall conclude with the resolute Exploit of five Seamen, Anno 1616. who,
to the great admiration of all People, set Sail from thence in an open Vessel
of three Tun through the main Ocean, and after having suffered terrible
Tempests, arrived in the space of seven Weeks safe in Ireland.

These Islands are remarkable for diverse sorts of Plants, unknown in other
Parts, as the Prickle Pear, Poison Weed, Red Weed, Purging Bean, Costive Tree,
Red Pepper, and the Sea Feather. Also several strange Birds, as the Egg Bird,
Cahow, Tropic Bird, and the Pemlico, which presageth Storms.

CHAP. XIII. Hispaniola.
THe Islands called De Barlovento, by which are understood Hispaniola, Cuba,
Jamaica, and Boriquen, as also the Lucaies, with the Caribes, and lastly the
Isles called De Sotavento, viz. Margareta, Cabagua, and Tabago, are by some
comprehended all under the general Name of The Isles Antilles; though others
reckon the Antilles to be the same with the Caribes only. But leaving this
Controversy undecided, we shall begin with the Isles De Barlovento, the chief
whereof is Hispaniola.

Bounds and Description of Hispaniola.
Hispaniola, or Little Spain (as Columbus named it) is, though not the largest,
yet the fairest and goodliest of all the American Islands, called by the
Natives anciently Hayti and Quisqueia: It lies about fifteen Leagues Westward
of Porto Rico, and distant from the main Land of America about one hundred and
twenty; it is of a triangular form, the sharpest Point whereof is that toward
Porto Rico, which they call Cabo de Enganno: that toward the West inclines to
a Semicircle, containing a good and convenient Bay betwixt the two Points,
viz. St. Nicholas to the North, and Cabo de Donna Maria toward the South. It
is not thought to be less than a hundred and fifty Leagues in length, and in
breadth from threescore to thirty, and to contain in the compass of the whole,
four hundred Leagues at least, lying betwixt eighteen and twenty Degrees of
Northern Latitude, having an Air somewhat infested with the Morning Heats, but
well cooled again in the Afternoon, by a constant Wind from the Sea, which they
call there Virason. It is, for the fertility of the Soil, one of the richest
and most flourishing Countries in the World; the Trees and all things else
there continually clad, as it were, in their Summer Livery, the Meadows and
Pastures always green, and of such an excellent Herbage, that Cattle both breed
and thrive there beyond belief; both great Cattle and small, as Kine, Sheep,
Hogs, etc. brought thither out of Spain, having multiplied to such numbers,
that they live wild now in Herds in several places, and are both hunted and
killed, like Stags or other Venison, only for their Hides, which they send
yearly into Spain and other parts of Europe, as a great Merchandise and
Commodity of huge profit to them.



Wild Hogs also have been formerly seen to feed in the Woods in great
multitudes, but the Dogs since they were brought over hither, have made great
havoc amongst them.

Beasts peculiar to Hispaniola.
The Animals peculiar to this Island are 1. A little Beast called Hutias, not
much unlike our Coneys. 2. Chemi, almost of the same form, but a little bigger.
3. Mohui, A Beast somewhat less than the Hutias. 4. A Beast called Coxi.

The Fly Cuyero.
Likewise amongst other strange sorts of Creatures here, the Cuyero is very
observable, being about an Inch big, and having four Wings, of which two are
larger than the other: when they fly they shine after such a manner, that in
the Night they make a Room as light as day, insomuch that some have made use of
them in stead of Candles to Read by.

The Fish Manate.
No less wonderful is the Fish Manate, whose shape has been described
elsewhere: It breeds for the most part in the Sea, yet sometimes swimming up
the Rivers, comes ashore and eats Grass. The Casique Caramatexi kept one in the
Lake Guaynato, which was so tame, that when called by the Name Maton, it used
to come out of the Water, and go directly to the Casique's House, where being
fed, it returned to the Lake, accompanied with Men and Boys, who with their
Singing seemed to delight the Fish, which sometimes carried ten Children on its
Back over the Water; but at last a Spaniard striking at it with a Pike, it
would never come forth again when it espied a Clothed Man: It lived twenty six
years in the forementioned Lake, till by accident the River Hayboaic
overflowing into the said Lake, the Fish returned to the Sea.

The Fish Abacatuia.
Besides this great Fish, here is also a sort of small Fish, called Abacatuaia,
with a little Mouth, black Eyes encompassed with Silver-colour'd Circles, four
black Fins, two long ones under its Belly, one on the Back, and one on each
side of the Head, the Tail slit and covered with a glittering Skin: It is as
big as a Flounder, and not ill Meat, but thick and round.

The Insect Nigua.
When the Spaniards first settled on Hispaniola, they were exceedingly tormented
with a sort of leaping Insects called Nigua, which used to eat through their
Skin into the Flesh in such a nature, that many of them lost their Arms and
Legs; but at last they found out a Remedy against this Evil, viz. the searing
the Wounds with hot Irons.

Besides the aforesaid plenty of Flesh, they have many excellent Fruits all the
year long, as Banana's, Fruits.
Pine-Apples, Custud-Apples, Plantens, Papans, Muskmelons, Water-melons, and
many other peculiar Plants, as 1. the Auzuba, a fair large Tree, the Fruit
whereof is called Pinnas, resembling a Malecotoon: Of this Tree there are three
sorts, Jaima, Boniama, and Jaiqua; 2. Quauconex; 3. Axi; of which there are
also several sorts, as Carive, Huarahuac, Axiblanco, Acafran-Axi, and
Axi-Coral; 4. Yuca, the Root of which serves in stead of Corn; 5. Certain Trees
called Guaibes, besides plenty of Mint and Potato's.

The Provinces of this Island.
The Island of Hispaniola was formerly divided into several Provinces, amongst
which the Mountainous, Country Hyguey lies toward the Isle of Porto Rico. On
the Mountains, which are flat on the top, are great variety of sharp-pointed
Stones. The Soil is a sort of colored Earth, which produces all sorts of
Fruit, especially the Root Casabi, and Melons.

Hyguey also conterminates with Ycayagua; Northward lies Samana; Southward,
Yaquimo, where there is store of Brasile Wood: And between the City Domingo and
Yaquimo, is the Country Baoruco, which with its Mountains extends sixty
Leagues in length, and above twenty in breadth, without any Water, Pasture, or
Food for Cattle or Mankind.

Next follows the Country Xaragua, lying at the great Inlet which divides
Hispaniola; for one side extends to the Promontory of St. Nicholas, and the
other to the Point Tiburon. This Country produces abundance of Cotton.

Lastly, the Provin^^s Guahaba, Haniguagya and Cahay, are very eminent; as also
Cibao, which is full of Gold-Mines; and Lavega Real, with Magnana, which lie
between the two great Rivers Neyba and Yagui; the stony Country Ciguayos, and
the low Coast Darica, where Christopher Columbus built the City Navidad, which
he afterward deserted.

Ginger was formerly brought hither from the East Indies, but now grows here in
such great abundance, that above two and twenty thousand Kintalls are yearly
Transported from thence to Spain.

With as good success grow here also the Sugarcanes and Maiz.

Peter Martyr, a Councellor to the Emperor Charles the Fifth, relates, That
Hispaniola produced in his time, besides Silver, Copper, and Iron, five hundred
thousand Ducats in Gold: Nevertheless the rich Mines lay undisturbed, because
they wanted People to work in them, insomuch that had they not planted their
Royal Seat in Domingo, the Island had long since been deserted, notwithstanding
the exceeding fruitfulness of the Soil, because the Spaniards exercised their
Cruelty in such a nature, that of sixty thousand Inhabitants from the Year
1508. to Anno 1514. scarce fourteen thousand of them were left alive; all which
is affirmed by the Bishop De las Casas. Nay, the forementioned Peter Martyr
relates, That the Men wearied with working in the Mines, killed themselves,
despairing of ever, being released from their Slavery; and Women with Child
destroyed the Infants in their Wombs, that they might not bear Slaves for the
Spaniards. He adds hereunto, That of a hundred and twenty thousand Persons, few
were left in a short time.

The Gaiety of the ancient Casiques.
These Provinces in former times had each of them their Casique, whose splendour
consisted chiefly in Dancing to his Devotion, with a Girdle full of Bells about
his Middle, a String of Pearls about his Arms, a Covering over his Privities,
and a Plume of Feathers on his Head, with a Drummer before him, and a small
Train of Armed Men after him.

Ports and Havens.
On the Coast are first the Point of Nisao, ten Leagues to the West of Santo
Domingo.

Eighteen Leagues farther is the Port Ocoa, which is a Bay where the Fleets of
Nova Hispania take refreshing, when they do not Anchor in the Nook of
Sepesepin, which is near unto it, or in another called The Fair Haven, two
Leagues before you come to Ocoa.

Twenty Leagues beyond Ocoa is the Port of Asua.

Thirty Leagues more Westwardly is a large Point right against the Island of
Bola, which lies five Leagues from the Coast.

The most Westerly Point is called Cape Tiburon: It has an Island three
Leagues from it Westward, called Caprio; and Sailing along the Coast, you will
see an Island called Camito; and farther in the Nook of Yaguana another called
Guanabo of eight Leagues long.

On the North side of the Island, the most Westerly Cape and Port is St.
Nicholas, from whence North-East and by East, lies the Island of Tortuga, near
the Coast of Hispaniola: It is of five Leagues length.

Farther along the Coast is Monte Christo, the West Cape of Natividad; to the
East of which there is a great Bay called Port Real.

This Island is so full of Harbors, that he that will Coast it, cannot well
miss of one where he pleases, most of which afford fresh Meat and good Water.

Moreover, Hispaniola has many brave Rivers, the chiefest of which are Hayna;
Nizao, along whose Shore the first Sugarcanes were planted; Neyba, a great
River; Yaquimo; Yaqui, which Columbus called Rio de Oro, because the Ground
thereof glittered like Gold; and lastly, the Rivers Nicayagua, amongst whose
Sands is Gold; Nigua, which borrows its Denomination from the forementioned
leaping Insect; the swift Stream Juno, whose Banks are crowned with handsome
Houses; and Jaquin, which has many Salt-pans.

The Rivers Itabo, Ocoa, Cepi, Bia, Cazui, Sanate de Plata, and Chiabon, have
some one, others more Sugar-Mills upon them.

But the chiefest River is Ozama, broad, and so deep, that the biggest Vessel
may lie close by the Shore; and also washes St. Domingo.

Description of the City of St. Domingo.
This City, the Metropolis of all the Isles round about, was built by
Bartholomeus Columbus, and was peopled Anno 1494. after which it flourished
eight years, when, a terrible Storm blowing the same down to the Ground,
Nicholas Olanda removed it to the Western Shore of Ozama, that the Spaniards,
who had for the most part settled toward the West, might not be necessitated to
Ferry over: but the first place stood much more conveniently, being not only
provided of a Fountain of sweet Water, but also freed of those unwholsom
Vapors which daily rise with the Sun at this new-built City. To prevent the
inconvenience of crossing to the forementioned Fountain, of which the
Inhabitants found themselves oftentimes in great want, Olanda went about to
lead the neighboring River Hayna into the Ozama, but the Design not being
prosecuted, bereaved Domingo of the only thing which would have made it able
to stand in competition with any City in the World; for it lies on a Plain, the
South side whereof is washed by the Sea; the East side, by the River; on the
North and West are many delightful Fields.

The City, which in a manner is built square, is divided into long straight
Streets, full of fair Houses after the Spanish manner: in the middle thereof is
a square Marketplace, with a handsome Church, the Yard whereof is encompassed
with a high Wall, which upon occasion would serve for a place of great Defense.

The Collectors of the King of Spain's Revenue dwell in stately Palaces; and
the Dominicans, Franciscans, and Monks De la Merced, have brave Cloisters,
besides two more for the Nu^s.

The Latin School and Hospital belonging to the City, are Endowed with great
yearly Revenues.

The Archbishop of St. Domingo has Command over the Bishopric of Conception,
La Vega, Cuba, Venezuela, and Porto Rico.

The City is surrounded with a Stone Wall, and fortified with a Castle, which
with two Bulwarks reaches to the River Ozama, and within them two Half-Moons.

On the utmost Shore stands a round Tower near the Southern Bulwark.

Before the new discovered Countries enticed away many People from St. Domingo,
and the Silver Fleet put into Havana, the Inhabitants drove a great Trade in
Hides, Tallow, Sugar, Cassia, Horses, and Hogs.

Anno 1586. Sir Francis Drake Landed here with twelve hundred Englishmen, took
the City by Storm, staid a whole Month in the same, and upon Composition with
the Spaniard, left it undestroy'd.

Other chief Towns of Hispaniola.
Other chief Towns in Hispaniola are 1. Salvaleon, twenty eight Leagues distant
from St. Domingo, toward the East.

2. Zeybo. 3. Cotny, formerly inhabited by those that worked in the Gold-Mines;
the last especially was once a rich Town, and much frequented, but now in a
manner deserted.

4. Azua, or New Compostella, eight Leagues distant from St. Domingo, famous
for the Sugar-Mills not far from it, and one of the Ports beforementioned.

5. Yaguana, for its brave Harbor also called Maria del Puerto, in the more
Western parts of the Island; a small Town not above a League distant from the
Sea; It was burnt by Captain Christopher Newport.

URBS DOMINGO IN HISPANIOLA


6. Conception de la Vega, adorned with a Cathedral and Cloisters of Friars,
and lying twenty or thirty Leagues Northward of St. Domingo: It was built by
Columbus, and from thence he had his Title of Duke de la Vega.

7. Sant Jago de los Cavalleros, a very pleasant Place, ten Leagues Northward
of St. Domingo.

8. Puerto de Plata, or The Silver Haven, four Leagues distant from St. Domingo
toward the North: It has been counted the second Place of Trading and Wealth
in the whole Island, being commodiously seated on an Arm of the Sea, and
fortified with a Castle.

9. Monte Christo, one of the Ports also abovementioned: It lies fourteen
Leagues Westward of Plata, and extends it self along the Northern Coast: it is
washed by the River Yagui, on whose Banks are many Salt-pans.

The Island dispeopled by the cruelty of the Spaniards.
All those Cities are much decayed, and thinly inhabited, the Spaniards being
most of them drawn by the temptation of new discovered Gold and Silver Mines in
other places, and the first Inhabitants having been miserably destroyed. The
Bishop De las Casas, an Eyewitness, relates, That the King Gauccanarillo
secured the Goods of a stranded Ship, of which Columbus was Commander, and
received the Spaniards very courteously; but not being able to continue
supplying them with that quantity of Gold they required, wanting Men to gather
so much out of the Streams and Mines, and seeing no way to rid himself from the
Spaniards Oppressions, fled to the Province of Ciguayos, the Casique of which
was his Deputy; whereat the Spaniards were so enraged, that they burnt all that
they could meet with, neither sparing young nor old; and at length taking
Guaccanarillo, put him in Irons, Their barbarous usage of Guaccanarillo and
others.
and thought to have carried him to Madrid; but the Ship in which he went
suffering Shipwreck, he with many others was cast away, being before almost
dead with grief for his Consort, who had been Ravished by a Spanish Commander.
Likewise Anacoana, Sister to the Casique, or Governor of the Province Xarana,
and Partner with him in the Government, seeing three hundred of her Counselors
burning in a great House, set on fire by the Spaniards, and her Subjects torn
by Dogs, or cut in pieces, hung her self out of despair. The same Death died
Higuanama, Queen of Huguey. Others say that Anacoana was put to death together
with her Brother in a most barbarous and cruel manner, by Nicholas de Olanda,
who succeeded Diego de Arana in the Government of this Island. Many Women and
Children were kept alive only to Manure the Ground. The Men dying of their
hard Labor in the Gold-Mines, and those which endured stoutly the cruel Labor
under Ground, were never suffered to go to their Wives; from whence proceeded a
great decrease of People, the Spaniards seeming purposely to design the
destruction of the Natives of Hispaniola, though they received great benefit by
their Service; for Gold in former times was found between the Cracks and split
Stones of the Mountains, whose Veins the Mine-workers dug for not without
great and dangerous Labor.

First original of the People of Hispaniola.
The first Planters of Hispaniola are, according to the common opinion, derived
from Matinio, a high and Mountainous Isle, from whence the most eminent
Inhabitants were driven by certain Rebels, as formerly the Syrians under the
Government of Dido, were driven from Tire to Lybia, and the Batavians from
Hessen to the Country between Rhyne and Wall, at present inhabited by the
Gelders and Hollanders. These Matininoensians thus expelled from their native
Country, settled themselves on Cahonao, near the River Bahaboni: The first
House they called Camoteia, and afterward turned it into a Temple, to which
they showed Reverence, and made great Presents: In like manner the Tyema, which
stood on a high Rock belonging to one of the Canary Islands, was by the ancient
Inhabitants of the Place had in great veneration, insomuch that many leaped
down from the same, being persuaded by the Priests, That the Souls of those
which threw themselves off this sacred Break-neck, should immediately be
translated into a place of everlasting happiness.

The ancient Name of this Island.
This Island was, as we said before, first called Haity, which signifies Wild,
because in many places it swells with wondrous high Mountains, and in other
places is overgrown with great Woods: it was afterward by the ancient
Inhabitants named Xusqueia, that is, Unmeasurably great, because they supposed
it to be the whole World, and that the Sun shined in no other place.

Indian Songs or Ballads called Areitos.
The Natives of this Island, though wholly rude of acquired Knowledge or
Literature, like the generality of the Americans, yet they took care to
instruct their Children in the Original and Antiquities of their Country, and
the Wars and Exploits of their Predecessors, both which they contained in Songs
called Areitos, which they used to Sing to the sound of Drums and Trumpets; but
especially their Persons of chiefest Quality studied most these Areitos, and
exercised themselves in Dancing.

Strange Prediction of the Spaniards Arrival.
The most remarkable of these ancient Areitos, were such as pretended to
prophecy of things to come, which if of sad consequence, were Sung very
mournfully and with many Sighs; nor were they always, however inspired, without
effect, as appeared at last by woeful event: for long before the Spaniards
Landed on Hispaniola, it was foretold by one of them, that Maguacochios,
signifying Clothed People, should Land on Hispaniola, who with sharp Weapons
should cut off Heads and Arms, and under whose insupportable Yoke their
Successors must spend their days without hope of ever being released.

It might be disputed whether these Predictions were dictated by good or evil
Spirits; but it is generally believed, that all their Oracles, whether happening
true or false, were suggested by diabolical Spirits to the Priests, who
commonly conversed with them; and that these Spirits knew the Design of several
People to discover new Countries.

The Images of their Zemes.
Their Images Zemes, stuffed full of Cotton, were fashioned into very frightful
Shapes, and might pass for those things which we call Terricula, or Bugbears;
of which some were made very small, and those they tied on their Foreheads when
they went to the Wars. Every Governor had a peculiar Zemes, to whom he showed
Reverence, in return whereof he expected Rain, fair Weather, and to conquer his
Enemies, supposing him to be a Messenger of a perpetual and endless Being, by
them called Jocauna Guamaonocon; whom nevertheless they supposed to have a
Mother, to whom they gave five Names, viz. Attbeir, Mamona, Guacarapita,
Liella, and Guimazoa.

The Islanders Opinion of the Creation.
Their opinion of Man's Creation was thus: They say, that out from a Mountain in
the Province Cuanana, out of certain small and great Caverns therein, came
little and great People: The biggest Hole, called Cazibaragua, and the little
one, named Amaiauna, were said to be locked up every Night, that none might
pass the Sentinel Machchael, who out of curiosity leaving the Mountain Cuata,
and going up into the Country, was discovered by the Sun, whose Beams he not
being able to endure, was turned into a Rock. The like Mischance happened to many
others, who in the dark Night going to Fish, in the Morning at their Return
were changed into Oaken Trees, only one of the Fishermen Was sent away by the
chief Commander Vaguoniana, who moved at the Complaint of a Nightingale's
Singing, suffered all the Men to go into the Hole, and the Women and Children
he Transported to Matinino, But to make short of these non-sensical Stories, in
conclusion, the Men being let out of their Caves, saw many strange Beasts
amongst the Woods, which being turned into Women, Were entertained by them, and
brought forth a numerous Progeny, which spread over all Hispaniola.

Their foolish Opinion of the Original of the Sea.
No less ridiculous an Account do the Priests give concerning the Original of
the Sea, Viz. That Jaia, a mighty Man, buried the Body of his deceased Son in a
Pumpion, which some Months after, out of mere affection to the Deceased, he
cutting open, abundance of Whales sprung out of it. This Wonder being every
where known, amongst others, enticed four Brothers born at one Birth (whose
Mother died in Childbed) to get the Pumpion into their possession; which their
Design proved successful: but afterward struck with a pannick fear of Jaia's
coming thithither (who oftentimes came to mourn over the Bones of his dead Son)
they fled, and threw away the Pumpion, which breaking with the fall, the Sea
gushed out of all places thereof, and covered the Plains in such a manner, that
nothing of them was seen, only the tops of the highest Mountains appeared; at
which the four Brothers terribly afrighted, ranged through barren Deserts, in
which they had died of Hunger, had they not come to a Baker's House, which one
of them entering, asked for Cazabi; but the Baker denying them Bread, spit on
them, which caused a mortal Dropsy, which the Brothers upon consultation found
no way to cure, but by cutting a hole in the Skin with a sharp Stone, and to
let out the Water; but out of each running Wound sprung a Woman, who bare them
four Sons and four Daughters.

The Cave Jovanabeina.
There is a certain Cave called Jovana-beina, which is adorned with a thousand
Pictures, in great esteem amongst them; at the Entrance on each side whereof
stands a Zemes; that on the right side is called Binthaitelles, the other
Marobur, to which they come from all places to pay their Devotions, because
(they say) the Sun and Moon came out of the said Cave to lighten the World.

Their absurd Opinion of the Deceased
Much after the same absurd rate is their Opinion of the Deceased; for they
suppose that they range through Woods and Forests in the Night, eat of a Fruit
called Guannaba, and steal to the Embraces of Women in Moon-shiny Nights. A
Traveller, say they, if he be frighted at the appearance of a deceased Person,
great inconveniences will certainly attend him, but if he goes stoutly toward
it, then the Goblin vanishes.

These Delusions are made great Mysteries amongst them, and contained in Songs,
which their Priests Boiti Sing to a kind of Tabor made of a piece of hollow
Wood, pretending that they have familiar Conversation with the Zemes concerning
future things.

Their Ceremonies about their Sick.
Their Ceremonies about their sick, especially if Persons of Quality, are
likewise very remarkably odd and conceited: First they chew a strong kind of
Herb, called Cohobba, with which having sufficiently intoxicated their Brains,
they foam at the Mouth, and run with a Stone and a piece of Flesh in their
Mouths to the sick Person, whose Family they drive all out of Doors, except one
or two, whose presence the Patient requires; then the Boiti walks four times
about the sick Person's Bed, making strange Gestures, pinching his Lips and
Nose, blowing upon his Forehead, Throat and Temples, and sucking several parts
of his Body, alleging, that thereby he draws the Distemper out of the Veins;
after that he chafes and rubs his Shoulders, Thighs and Legs, and ties his
Hands and Feet together, then running to the Door, proclaims, That the Sick in
a short time shall be restored to his former Health; which said, he returns
with his Arms stretched out toward the sick Person, takes the piece of Flesh
out of his Mouth, which he gives him backwards, saying, You shall rise and go
forth in Health, for I have taken away your Sickness: But if he judges the
Distemper not curable, he makes the Sick believe, that Zemes is displeased with
him, because he did not build a House for him, or consecrate a Garden to him,
or in some respect or other did not worship him as he ought to have done. When
the Soul departs out of the Body, they conjure the Body with many Adjurations,
to reveal whether it died according to God's decree, or through neglect of the
Boiti, as not having sanctified himself enough by Fasting when he went first to
the Sick, or not prescribed sufficient Medicines: wherefore if (as they say)
the Devil answers them from the Mouth of the Deceased, that the Boiti did not
perform his due Office, then the nearest Friends revenge themselves on the
Boiti, but if otherwise, then they are highly esteemed amongst them. The Women
taking the Stones which the Boiti kept in his Mouth, wrap them up in a fine
Cloth as a holy Relic, supposing that they will much facilitate their
Childbirth.

Their manner of Consulting with their Zemes.
The Casiques desirous to know future Events of War, or whether the approaching
Years will be fruitful, go into a Chapel consecrated to the Zemes, and snuff
the intoxicating Herb Cohobba up their Nostrils; whereupon they break out into
loud Exclamations, and some kind of strange extravagant Actions, till the power
of the Cohobba begins to decay, and the Frenzy cease; then coming again to
their Senses, they bow their Heads, and lay their Elbows on their Knees, in
which posture they sit for a considerable time, then lifting up their Eyes they
yawn as if they they came from sleep; then they mutter to themselves whilst
their Retinue which stand about them (for no common Person is suffered to be
there) thank them with a loud Voice, for the pains they have been at in
discoursing with the Zemes; then the Casiques begin to declare what has been
revealed to them, viz. whether they shall be fortunate in the Wars or not;
whether it will be a fruitful or unfruitful, healthy or sickly Year.

Moreover, Gossipping.
at the Birth of the Casique's Children, the neighboring Governors visit the
Women in Childbed, and every one gives the Child a peculiar Name, from whence
it happens that one Man has oftentimes forty Names, and is highly incensed if
any one of them chances to be forgot in any Writing directed to him.

Manner of Succession.
Their manner of Succession in Government is not unremarkable; for not the
eldest Heir-male of the Family, but first the King or Casique's Brother, if he
have any, and after his Decease the eldest of the Sisters Inherits the Realm or
Seigniorie: if the Sisters have no Male-issue, then the Brothers Sons Inherit;
and in case they have no Male-heir, then the next of Blood, whether Male or
Female: but if the Prince or Casique dies without Children, Nephews, or other
near Relations, the next in Power in the Country Inherits, and Marries as many
Wives as he pleases; of which she that he loves best is burned alive in her
best Apparel with her Husband when he dies, and near the Corpse stands a Cup of
Water and some of the Bread Cazabi.

There are several Languages in Hispaniola, Languages.
but differing from each other: for in the Province Bainoa they have a
different, both Pronunciation and Dialect from that in Caizimu.

In the said Province of Caizimu is a very remarkable Rock, or vast Stone to be
seen, at the Foot of a high Mountain; and underneath the said Stone is a great
Cave, into which they go through a large Passage, not unlike a Temple Door;
near which conjoyn many deep Rivers, with such a Noise and Foam, that they lose
both their Sight and Hearing, whoever approach the same.

An Example of the Bainoan Language.
Of the Language of the Province Bainoa, Peter Martyr gives us this Specimen:
The Wife of a Casique (says he) went to Prayers in a Chapel which was built by
the Spaniards; at her Return from whence her Husband desiring to enjoy her, she
refusing, said, Teitoca, teitoca, techeta Cynato guammechina, that is to say,
Be contented, Be contented, God would be highly incensed: to which the Casique
answered, Gnaibba Cynato machabucha guamechyna, that is, What care I if God be
angry,

Since the Spaniards had first possession of this Island, The taking of St.
Domingo by Sir Fran. Drake.
it has been twice Invaded by the English, the first time under the Conduct of
Sir Francis Drake, who took the Town of San Domingo, staid in it a good while,
and could if he had pleased, have totally dispossessed the Spaniards; the
second time under Colonel Venables, sent thither by Oliver Cromwell during his
usurped Dominion; at which time it might as easily have been taken as at first,
had not the Business been rashly and indiscreetly managed, as shall presently
be declared more at large. The first Expedition of Sir Francis Drake has been
already hinted, but for the memorableness of that bold Exploit, we shall give a
particular Account of it from a late Writer, who has set forth the Life of
that brave English Hero. In the Year of our Lord 1580. about the end of
February setting Sail from St. Christophers for Hispaniola, by the Way they met
with a small Frigate bound for San Domingo, and the Men of her being Examined,
one assured them that the Haven of it was a barred Haven, and the Shore well
fortified, so that there was no convenient Landing within ten English Miles of
the City, whither this Man undertook to conduct them. January the first they
Landed ten Miles from the City, and marching thither under the Command of the
Lieutenant General, arrived about one a Clock in the Afternoon; when they came
near, about a hundred and fifty Gentlemen well Mounted, presented themselves
against them; but the small Shot playing upon them, they departed, and the
English proceeded toward the two Gates of the City that lay toward the Sea,
both which the Spaniards had Manned, and planted their Ordnance without the
Gates, and some small Shot in an Ambush by the Way-side: The English being
about twelve hundred Men, divided themselves; the Lieutenant General leading
the one half to one Gate, and Captain Powel the other half to the other Gate,
vowing that with God's assistance they would not rest till they met in the
Marketplace: No sooner had the Spaniards discharged their Ordnance, doing some
little Execution, but the Lieutenant General hasted, or rather ran upon them,
to prevent their Charging again, and notwithstanding their Ambush, entered Pell
Mell with them into the Gate, not staying till he came into the Marketplace,
unto whom shortly after came Captain Powel with his Companies. This Place they
strengthened with Barricado's, the City being too large to be guarded by so
small and weary an Army. And after Midnight they in the Castle, hearing some
of the English busy about the Gate, quitted it, some being taken Prisoners,
and others escaping by Boats. The next day the English enlarged their Quarters,
and fortified themselves, and held the Town for a Months space. During this
time the General sent a Negro Boy with a Flag of Truce to the Spaniards, who by
the Way was met by some Officers of the Galley which the English had taken,
together with the City, who furiously thrust the poor Boy through the Body; who
returning to the General, and having declared how barbarously they had used
him, fell down and died in his Presence. The General being much moved herewith,
commanded the Provost-Martial to take two Friars, and to carry them to the same
place with a sufficient Guard, and there to hang them; and withal he sent one
of the Prisoners to inform the Spaniards why he did it, and to tell them, that
till the Party who had thus murdered his Messenger were delivered to him, there
should no day pass wherein he would not hang two Prisoners, till all were
consumed. Hereupon the day following the Murderer was brought, and an Offer
made to deliver him to the General, who yet thought it more honorable to make
them perform the Execution themselves in the sight of the English, which was
done accordingly.

During their abode here, Commissioners often passed between the Spaniards and
them about the Ransom of the City, but not agreeing, the English spent every
Morning till the heat of the Day in firing and destroying the Houses in the
outward part of the City, two hundred Mariners being employed therein for
diverse days; yet were the Houses built so magnificently and strongly of Stone,
that they could not consume one third part of the Town all that time; whereupon
the General was contented to accept of twenty five thousand Ducats of 5 s. 6 d.
apiece to spare the rest.

Here his Soldiers met with good Pillage, especially of rich Apparel, but
Treasure they found none; for the Spaniards by their Cruelties had so destroyed
the Natives, who used to work in the Mines of Gold and Silver, that they were
wholly given over; and in that Island they were forced to use Copper Money: yet
they found store of Wine, Oil, Vinegar, Wheat, Woollen and Linen Cloth, some
Silks, etc. which much relieved them: there was but little Plate found, but
good store of Porcelane, or China Dishes; yet some they found, and very costly
Household Stuff.

Venables his Expedition to San Domingo.
Venables his Expedition was in the Year 1654. when Cromwell having gained the
supreme Power under the Title of Protector, and having used so many Engines for
the getting of Money to maintain his Greatness and usurped Authority, that he
was almost brought to his last Shifts, bethought himself of this Project, (or,
as some suppose, had it put into his Head by Cardinal Mazarine, the then great
Minister of State in France, with whom he had intimate Correspondence) thinking
thereby to kill two Birds with one Stone: for on the one side, he thought by
this notable Exploit to advance his Fame abroad, and gain Credit and Applause
with the People at home, by enlarging his Empire, and spreading the Renown of
the English Nation, and so consequently to establish himself the more firmly in
his new gotten Power; and at the same time by the great Riches he promised to
himself from this Adventure, to recruit his Stock, which all his griping
Exactions, especially from the King's Party, could scarce supply for the
keeping up of his Army, maintaining Intelligence, and other vast Expenses: To
this end he sets forth a considerable Fleet with extraordinary speed and
secrecy, it not being known whither this Fleet was designed till they were
almost upon the very Place, that the Spaniard might not be forewarned to
provide against them, only in general terms it was given out, that the Design
was both advantageous to the Nation, and would prove a great enrichment to all
that went upon it; so that it is no great wonder, if within a short space a
good competent Army was got together of such as having neither Estates nor
Employments, willingly offered themselves, as Men that went from the fear of
Iron Grates, to the hopes of Golden Ingots; and many of them were such as
having been in the late King's Army, and disdaining to take any Employment at
home under that Government, were easily induced to List themselves in this
Armada: nor was Oliver a little glad of this occasion of sending out of the
Land, and employing upon a desperate Adventure those Men, who he had reason to
suspect would, upon any opportunity offered, be the first Opposers of his
usurped Power. This Army being sent to Portsmouth for Embarquation, and there
making such Preparations as was convenient, which a Months time or thereabouts
was thought would accomplish, a Messenger came from Desborough (who was there
to set them going) to the General, that he should prepare to Embarque on
Christmas Day; which at the first the General received with great impatience,
alleging, That it was not possible so to do, and that he would not set Sail
without his Arms and other Necessaries, which were not yet come from London:
however, at his going to Desborough he was prevailed upon to set Sail, with a
promise that the Ships with the Arms should immediately follow him to the
Barbado's, where he was to stay till their arrival; so on Christmas Day they
set Sail, and about the fourteenth of February arrived at Barbado's with three
thousand Men, and a Company of Reformado's, which there were doubled, and then,
and not till then, it was told them, That the reason of their so sudden going
away, was because there was a Plot forming in England for restoring the King,
and that they were not thought fit to be left there at the Head of their
Regiments, to be tempted with the advantage of joining with any such Party. At
Barbado's they staid till they had almost undone that Place by eating up their
Provisions, the Planters there seldom preparing more than they have occasion to
spend in their Houses, and for their Servants (having better and more
profitable Employments upon their Hands) and the Soldiers not being content
with such Provisions as their Servants would be well pleased with, so that they
were in danger of starving the Island and themselves too: Thereupon a Council
of War was called, and the necessity of leaving that Island declared, and
Orders issued out to set Sail for Hispaniola, where they might make such
Attempt as their Condition would allow, wanting Arms and other Necessaries;
when they came within five or six Leagues of Hispaniola the Fleet lay by, and a
Council of War was called by the Commissioners (for such they had who were
never Soldiers) with some few Officers of the Army, where it was resolved to
attempt San Domingo, and an Order made, That in case it be taken, no Soldier
should offer to Plunder, but that satisfaction in lieu thereof should be given
by the Commissioners; the Officers of the Army in vain opposing and protesting
against it, which occasioned the Soldiers to say, That the Commissioners should
take the Town themselves, for they would not; Lots were there drawn by the
several Colonels who should first Land, which fell upon the Black Regiment, who
had no Arms but Half-pikes of eight Foot long, made of Cabbage-Tree in the
Barbado's; And Orders were then given out to the several Colonels to Land at
the River Hind, within two Leagues of San Domingo; so they steered their Course
thither, as was thought, by Night, but the next Morning found themselves twenty
Leagues at least from the place of Rendezvous, though one Regiment Landed
there, who durst not attempt the Town for want of Orders, though doubtless they
might have taken it, had they not staid in expectation of the General and the
rest of the Fleet; but when they were thus cast Leeward of the Town, they must
Land their Men, who no sooner went on Shore, but the Order against Plundering
was read, and the Soldiers in a Mutiny to whom it was read, which made the rest
forbear to read it, judging it no time now to disoblige them, who had in their
Officers opinion too just a cause of discontent: However this was made known to
the rest, and discoursed as they marched, That they had not thought to be under
a Committee here, but they would make them weary of their Employment ere they
had done: And this indeed was enough, besides the faintness and unusual Heat of
the Country, to disanimate Men of good Resolutions, especially the ordinary
Soldiers, whose hopes of Plunder is the chiefest prop to their Courage, and
exected Gain the spurr to their Valor. After they had Landed their Men, next
Morning early they marched toward San Domingo; but before Noon the Heat and
Drought which they felt made them sensible of their first Error and
Inadvertency, in coming from England without their Necessaries; for through
want of Bottles, which were left behind, and came not till three Months
afterward, the Men fell down dead in the Highways, every one fainting and
languishing, and crying out for Water: shortly after they met with a Field of
Oranges, which was no unwelcome sight, with which they stored themselves; but
ere they had marched four or five Miles thought they had quenched their present
Thirst, and their Drought began to increase however, they marched on, leaving
some of their Men dead on the place, others fainting, were set upon the
Troopers Horses till they came that Night to some Water, which gave them new
life, and the Morrow early marched again till they came within some Miles of
the appointed Rendezvous, where they heard of the other Regiment that Landed at
the right place: And now having refreshed themselves with Rest, Water, and
Provision, they marched to the taking of the Town; the General himself, with a
small Party and a Guide, went toward the Town to find out some Water, which he
knew the Soldiers would want, (not having Bottles to carry any) but as they
were on their March, which was very leisurely by reason of the Heat, they heard
a firing of Muskets, then making more speed in their March, supposing an
Engagement, in the Highway, about a Mile from the Town, was found one of the
General's, Secretaries, with others, dead; and not long after some came back to
the General, and told him, That looking for Water with the Guide, an Ambuscade
issued out, and had killed the Guide that should have showed them the place of
Water, and some others; and although some which Commanded the foremost
Regiments were very forward and willing to assault the Town, yet it was not
thought fit so to do till the Army came up, by which time it was Night; and
though they were then within half a Mile of the Town, yet the Soldiers were so
impatient for Water, that they could not stay till the next Morning to assault
the Town, but were forced to march back to the River Hind about eight Miles;
(and this Relater did at that time drink his own Water) there they staid till
they had again refreshed themselves, and then prepared for their Return to
attaque the Town; and notwithstanding the March it self in a hot Country was
irksom enough, yet they were forced to make the Soldiers to draw the Ordnance
and other Carriages for want of Harness and other Necessaries, which were left
behind; however, they willingly underwent it by Turns: And now a Forlorn was
drawn out, and other Orders given for a March, especially it being taken notice
of, that the Enemies manner of Fight was and would be by Ambuscades, a File in
every Company were ordered to stand till the other came up, and to face to the
Right and Left to the Woods, which were all along as they went, for fear of a
Surprise; and the Forlorn marching near an old Fort, called Jeronymo, which we
had been possessed of before, but thought not worth the keeping, and fearing
they might meet with some small opposition there, began to fortify themselves,
and took a Dram of the Bottle, which as they were drinking, and others eating a
bit, suddenly rushed forth an Ambush of about a hundred and twenty Blacks, with
a Spanish Commander in the Head of them, which so amazed and surpised them,
that some few only Discharging, the rest immediately fled; the Blacks quickly
falling in with their Lances, and doing such Execution as the time would allow
them; for presently the Alarm being taken, and Supplies marching out for their
relief, the Enemy, who had done more than they could possibly expect to have
done, retreated into their Fort, which they had better fortified than before,
and had planted some small Drakes there upon it; the Execution was so short,
that they had not time either to strip or pick a Pocket, lest they had paid too
dear for it. After this Defeat a Council of War was called, and there it was
agreed the next Morning early to fall on upon that little Fort, and so proceed
to the taking of the Town; but very early, as they were in that expectation,
Orders came from the General to the Army to march back to the River Hind, for
what reason this Relator (though a considerable Person) never yet knew; where
after they had staid some time, that Miscarriage was questioned at a Council of
War, and one of the chief view of Puerto Rico PORTO RICO
Officers of the Forlorn ordered to have his Sword broke over his Head, with
other dis^graceful Impositions, and two Colonels of the Army were ordered to
draw up the Causes of this Miscarriage to send to England; which, because 'twas
th^ought would too much reflect on them in Power that were to supply them, was
by those Colonels judged inconvenient, and so 'twas never done. The number of
Men lost by Straggling, Sickness, and this unhappy Engagement, amounted in the
whole to about two hundred and thirty. In a short time after this, it was
ordered to Ship the Men; which done, after some Debates amongst the
Commissioners what was best to be done, Provisions nor Utensils yet coming fit
for the Design intended, which was to possess some considerable Place in the
Main, it was agreed, That they should steer their Course for the Island of
Jamaica; which they did accordingly, and on the tenth day of May 1654. with
little opposition possessed it: where the same Soldiers have showed not only
such Courage and Resolution upon all occasions, (in many and frequent
Encounters and Invasions made by the Spaniards, not only with Soldiers of
those Parts, but such as have been sent from Spain, Naples, Catalonia, and
other Places) as might speak them Englishmen, but such has been their
Patience and Sufferance, as none of this Nation in the memory of Man have ever
been put to, the Effects whereof their King and Country, it is hoped, will have
occasion to remember, to their immortal Honor and Renown.

Hispaniola is surrounded with several other Isles, as 1. Eastward appears
Saona, full of pleasant Woods and Pastures, with Cattle feeding on them: in
former times it produced much Cazabi for the City Domingo; but since the
Spaniards murdered all the Inhabitants Anno 1502. it has never been inhabited.
2. The Rocky Shelf St. Catalina. 3. Abaque. 4. Navaza. 5. Guanabo. 6. Tortuga,
abounding in Hogs. and 7. Beata, famous for the excellent speckled Wood which
grows there, and a swift River, which oftentimes detains the Ships there whole
Months.

CHAP. XIV. Porto Rico, and Monico.
Bounds and Extent of Porto Rico.
ANother of those called The Isles of Barlovento, is Boriquen, anciently so
named, but now more generally Porto Rico, from St. Juan de Porto Rico, its
chief Town, is an Island fifteen Leagues distant from Santa Crux, to the
North-West, and about as many from Hispaniola to the South-East, but from the
Continent or main Land of Paria (which seems to be the nearest) a hundred and
thirty, or a hundred thirty six, as some reckon. It lies almost in a
quadrangular Form, being supposed to contain about thirty Leagues in length,
and not less than twenty in breadth, in eighteen and nineteen Degrees of
Northern Latitude.

The Island on the North, which is less fruitful than the South part, produces
Gold, and is generally watered with many Rivers. There is also Silver, Tin,
Lead, Quicksilver, and Azure, used by Painters. The Rain generally falls there
between May and August. A little before, or in the beginning of Harvest, the
Hurricanes breaking forth from the Clouds, rage in such a manner, that it is
impossible for any Ships to endure the Sea, and a Northern Blast generally does
great damage to the Plants here.

Sierra del Loquillo.
Ten Leagues toward the South-East beyond Porto Rico, appears Sierra del
Loquillo, being a continued Ridge of Mountains which runs through the whole
Island from East to West, extending both ways to the very Seashore.

Twenty three Rivers discharge their Waters also into the Ocean; Rivers.
amongst which the chiefest is Cairabon, particularly noted for ten Sugar-Mills
which are erected upon its Banks.

The Hills, Trees.
Plains, and Valleys, are invested with variety of Trees peculiar to this
place, as Tabunuco, which affords a medicinal Gum, good against Lameness, and
green Wounds: it is also of great use to preserve a Ship's Keel from the Worms.

Another Tree called Maga, is everlasting Wood, and bears a great Flower like a
Rose.

The Leaves of the Higillo Pintado-Tree cures all manner of Bruises.

The same power is also in the little Tree Sancta Maria; as likewise in another
by the Spaniards called Balsamo.

The Body of the Tree Zoyla is so thick, that fifteen Men holding Hands
together, cannot encompass the same.

The speckled Wood, and Cassia Fistula grow also here in great abundance.

The poisonous Apple Tree.
Here is likewise Apple Trees, which grow by Rivers sides, or on the Seashore,
whose Fruit is rank Poison, and who-ever sleeps under the shadow of them, will
certainly be Lame: The Fruit eaten generally causes Death; or if Nature be so
strong in him that eats of it, to overcome the same, yet he is certain to lose
his Hair.

As hurtful is the prickly Herb Quibey, which bears white Flowers like Violets.

The Tree Gaiaba.
But this Island receives the greatest prejudice by the Tree Guaiaba, because it
grows in most places, and over-runs Plains and Hills, so spoiling all the
Grass, between which and the forementioned Tree there is such an antipathy,
that none will grow near it. The Tree bears a brown Apple full of Kernels,
which are eaten by Beasts and Fowls, and from which falling on the Ground when
ripe, grow up in new Trees, which makes the Country a mere Wilderness: The
Body of it is smooth and of a pale color, the Leaves hard, and glittering, and
grow two and two over one another; the Flowers have also five Leaves, in the
middle of which rises a Crown like that on a Peacock's Head: The Fruit, which
is covered with a soft Down, and somewhat longer than the European Apple, when
cut through, has a pale red Pulp, full of eatable Kernels: before it is ripe,
it is of a sharp taste, yet good boiled, but when ripe, of a most delicious and
pleasant relish; nevertheless too much of it causes a Lask: The Roots, which
are red without, and white within, are juicy, sweet, and very long, the Leaves
sallow and sour of taste.

The Beast Javaris.
Amongst the strange Beasts the Javaris, Opassum, and Tatow are the most
remarkable. The Javaris are taken for a sort of wild Hogs, and have short Ears
and a Navel on their Backs, little Tails, some black, and some spotted white.

The Opassum
The Opassum is as big as a Cat, has a sharp Mouth, the upper Jaw Bone hanging
over the lower, long, straight, and broad Ears, and a very long Tail, bald at
the end, which winds in a Circle; on its Back black Hair sprinkled with gray
Spots, and with its sharp Claws climbs up the Trees, where it feeds on Fruit,
and sometimes preys on Fowls. Nature has furnished this Beast with a strange
Bag under its Belly, whereof the inside has a far softer Down than the
outside, in which the young ones lie and suck, after which the Bag opening,
they creep out upon the Ground. The Males have also a Bag, which serves only
to carry their Young in, for they and the Females carry them by turns.

The Tatow.
The Tatow, which is armed with sharp Scales, has the Mouth of a Hog, and at
each Foot five sharp Nails: when it is Hunted, or goes to sleep in the Night,
it draws its Head, Legs and Tail under its scaly Coat of Mail, like a Tortoise,
and in that manner lies secure against all manner of danger.

The Venison taken here is very delicate, but difficult to be got; for this
Beast having a breathing-place in its Back, never tires with running, and when
encompassed by the Dogs, falls valiantly on those that are nearest to it, and
often tears them in pieces.

Chief Towns and Citi^s.
The chief Towns in this Island, are 1. Porto Rico it self, commonly called St.
John de Porto Rico (so termed by Christopher Columbus, as being the first Land
discovered by him in the Year 1493. at that time when he could not persuade his
Seamen, wearied out with continual hardship, from returning, if they discovered
not Land in two days) a strong and neat Town, built by the Command of Philip
the Second, King of Spain: It was attempted by Sir Francis Drake in the Year
1595. without success, but a few years after taken by the Earl of Cumberland.

2. St. Germans, in the West part of the Island, three or four Leagues distant
from the Sea.

3. Arrecibo, Westward from Porto Rico, where the most noted Haven is of those
Parts, for all the others are full of Rocks and Sands.

The ancient Inhabitants of this Island maintained continual Wars with the
Cannibals (probably the Natives of the Islands so called) who used every year
to come thither: those that were conquered, as well of the one side as of the
other, were eaten by the Conquerors, so that in effect, both sides were but a
different sort of Cannibals.

Columbus Landing here, found a great House surrounded with twelve others, but
all of them empty and desolate.

This Island (which formerly is said to have been under the absolute Power of
one sole King) the Spaniards not much regarded at first, having enough to do
with Hispaniola, where they found more Gold than on Porto Rico.

The building of St. Germans.
Anno 1510. John Ponce de Leon obtained a Commission from the Court of Spain,
to be chief Governor of this Island, and built Caparra; which Place was
inhabited twelve years, notwithstanding it stood behind a scraggy Mountain, in
a desert place far up in the Country; but their thirst after Gold, of which
some Veins were discovered there, made them dispense with all other
inconveniences: yet at last beginning to be weary of this desolate and barren
place of Settlement, they removed to Guanica, watered by many Rivers, whose
Sands had great quantities of Golddust. Not staying long there, they went four
Leagues farther, and called their new Plantation Soto Major. Lastly, returning
again, they settled themselves in the former Valley Guanica, and built the
forementioned Town St. Germans by the River Guaorabo, which makes an
inconvenient Haven.

The Situation, Description and ^ate of St. Juan de Porto Rico.
Juan de Porto Rico stands Eastward at the beginning of the North Coast, on a
small Peninsula, joined to the Island by an high Isthmus called Puente de
Aguilar. Near the Mouth of the Haven lies on a rising Hill the Fort Morro
Empinado, built triangular by John de Texila and Baptista Antonelli (who also
planted there forty Guns), and surrounded with the Sea, which renders it a well
fortified place. The Governor Diego Mendez de Valdez had in it fifteen hundred
Men and eighty Horses, when the forementioned valiant Duke of Cumberland with a
far less number fell upon him in the Year 1597. and not only took the City
Porto Rico, but several other Fortifications; and besides an invaluable mass of
Treasure he carried away eighty Guns. Sometime before this Defeat the Spaniards
under the Government of Christopher, Son to the Portuguese Duke of Camigna,
were Invaded by the Cannibals, and all that were then upon the place utterly
destroyed, none of them escaping but the Bishop and his Servants, who betimes
fled away with the Church Ornaments; so that the Islanders from that time were
put out of doubt that the Spaniards were mortal, for they supposed them
immortal when first they saw their great Ships, and heard the noise of their
thundering Cannon.

The Casique Yaguara's Experiment.
Hugh Linschot relates, That the Casique Yaguara threw a Spaniard into the
Water, to try whether he would drown or not, and seeing him wholly deprived of
Life, he concluded by consequence that the rest of them were mortal, and
thereupon he set upon them when they were seeking for Gold, and killed above a
hundred and fifty of them.

Peter Martyr relates farther, That these People, though very expert in Arms,
yet were oftentimes beaten by the Cannibals, who at one time carried above five
thousand People out of Porto Rico for their Winter Provisions.

The Avarice and Cruelty of the Spaniards.
Nor was their Condition bettered after the Spaniards conquered the Island, for
those that could not furnish them with Gold, were certain of Death: Nor were
their Cruelties in other places undivulg'd to this People before their Arrival;
whereupon (as is related by Peter Ordonnez de Carellos) the Casique Hatvey
being informed of the Spaniards Approach, took an Oath from his Subjects, That
they should never discover where the Gold lay, though they should be put to
death for it; For (said he) Gold is their God, for which they make so many
cursed Blood-baths wherever they come; therefore throw the Gold into some
very deep Waters, for when the Spanish God is sunk, the Spaniards will lose
their Courage, and not plague us so much for it.

Ceremonies of the old Natives.
Many were the Idolatrous Ceremonies of the old Natives of this Place, which
would be too tedious to relate; but amongst the rest, they annually kept a
great Feast, at which the Casiques summoned all their Subjects to a Temple
appointed for that purpose, where the Priests had prepared an Idol ready set
forth in all its Pageantry; near which the Casique placed himself, when upon
the beating of a Drum all the Commonalty came also into the Temple; the Men
painted with diverse Colors, having on their Heads Plumes of Feathers, about
their Necks, Legs, and Arms, Strings of Sea-shells. The Married Women had a
light Covering about their Middle, but the Maids went stark naked, all of them
Dancing and Singing Songs in praise of the Idol; after which having saluted the
Casique, they thrust little Sticks down their Throats, so to bring up all they
had upon their Stomachs; which done, and sitting down with their Legs under
them, they began to Sing anew, often bowing and showing Reverence to the
Casique; whilst some Women carried Baskets of Bread amongst those that Sang,
and uttered certain Prayers, which were answered by some of the Men; the Bread
being blessed by the Priests, they gave every one a piece, with which they
returned home very merry and jocund.

But the God of this Island, whoever he was, has been a long time left without
Worshippers; for those that were left by the Invading Cannibals, were cruelly
massacred by the Spaniards, insomuch that they have been thereby necessitated
to furnish themselves with Negro's to work in their Mines and Sugar-Mills; and
these also not able to endure such hard Entertainment, ran most of them away;
for when a Negro did not bring Gold enough home at Night, his Master tying him
naked to a Stake or Post, and beat him with Rods or Switches so long, till the
Blood ran down his Back, then poured boiling Oil into the Wounds, and then
threw Pepper and Salt into them, and so let him lie, or else put him into a
Pit, out of which his Head appeared only. But those that fled gathering
together, sometimes met with the Spaniards, and paid them in their own Coin.

The Islands Mona and Monico.
EAstward of Porto Rico, and betwixt it and Hispaniola, there lies a little,
but fruitful Island called Mona; and Westward of that, another called Monico,
or Monetta; which last the English, when time was, found so admirably stored
with a sort of wild Fowl, that the huge Flights of them seemed to darken the
Air over their Heads, and upon their Landing found such plenty of their Eggs
upon the Shore and Ground thereabouts, that they presently laded two of their
Boats with them. But how peopled or possessed, not so well known.

CHAP. XV. Cuba.
The several Names of Cuba.
VVEstward, or rather to the North-West of Hispaniola, lies Cuba, accounted one
of the four Isles of Barlovento, and by Columbus, upon his first Discovery,
called Joanna, afterward Fernandina, then Alpha and Omega, till at last the
present Name prevailed; it is parted from the other by a Frith, or narrow
Channel, which runs betwixt the Capes of St. Nicholas, belonging to
Hispaniola, and that called Mayzi, belonging to Cuba: Its Bounds.
On the North it has a Fry of little Islands called The Leucayae Islands, of
which more in their proper place, so many and so thick scattered, that they
serve for no small Security and Defense of the Island on that side; besides, a
part of the Peninsula of Florida, which Coasteth it likewise Northward; on the
West it has the Country of Jucatan, which is part of the Continent, but at a
distance of forty or fifty Leagues; and on the South, Jamaica. It is reckoned
to be in length from Cape Mayzi, which looks toward Hispaniola to the Cape of
St. Anthony, which is upon the Bay of Mexico, two hundred and thirty Leagues;
but in breadth in some places not above fifteen or sixteen Leagues over; in the
broadest place from Jardines to Lucanaca, not above forty, in others sixty
five. But for fertility of Soil, contending with Hispaniola it self, and for
temperature and healthiness of Air, much exceeding it; nor less rich formerly
in good Mines both of Gold and Silver, and plentifully stored at present, not
only with Sugarcanes of the best Growth, but likewise with abundance of
Ginger-Roots, Cassia-Fistula, Mastick, Aloes, Cinnamon, Long-Pepper of America,
as they call it, and diverse other sorts of Spices. The Pastures no less
abounding with Cattle of all sorts, especially of European Breed; the Rivers
and Coasts of the Sea with good Fish; no scarcity of Fowl, whether wild or
tame; good Brass and Iron still found, with some Gold in the Rivers, especially
those which fall into the Bay Xagua on the South side of the Island; the
chiefest thereof are Arimao, La Luna, De Mares, and Cauto; the biggest of them
falls Southward into the Sea; all of them breed store of Crocodiles, which have
oftentimes seized both upon Men and Beasts, and carrying them into the Water,
devoured them there.

The Cedars breathe forth a most excellent sweet smell, Trees.
and grow so large, that out of the single Trunks of some of them Boats are
said to have been made, capable to hold forty, sometimes sixty Men.

There are also many other very odoriferous Trees, yielding a certain Rozen or
Gum, no less precious than the Storax.

But nothing grows here more plentifully than Vines, Birds.
the Bodies or Stocks of which are as thick as a Man's Middle, and bear
excellent Grapes.

Besides Partridges, Turtle-Doves, and other Fowl, the Seashore breeds
thousands of Cranes, which when young, are white, but when old, become of
several Colors; they stand commonly with their Legs in salt Water, which they
drink.

Manner of taking Parrots.
The Parrots which breed here used to be taken by the Natives after a strange
manner: A Boy having a Bundle of Herbs about his Head, climbs up to the top of
a Tree, holding a Parrot over his Head, which by griping he forces to make a
noise, and thereby draws others to come flying about him; upon which, being
expert in this Art, he throws a String with a Noose made fast to a Stick about
them, and pulls them to him.

There are a sort of four-footed Serpents, by the Natives called Yguanas, of
which they used to eat.

The Flesh of Tortoises or Turtles, was accounted a great Dainty amongst them,
especially those of the biggest size, of which some have been known to weigh a
hundred and thirty Pound: The Feet of them are said to cure the Leprosy and
Scabs.

Amongst the peculiar Trees of this Country, are the Zagua and the Caninga.

The Cotton, which is of the natural Growth of this Place, is exceeding fine.

Here is also the Bird Flamingo, and another sort of Bird called Bambayas.

In former times Cuba was Governed by several Lords, each Commanding over his
own Province.

Chief Provinces of Cuba.
The chiefest of these Provinces are Mayzi, Bayamo, Cueyba, Camguey, Macaca,
Xagua, Habana, and Uhima; some of them are plain, others mountainous, and being
more or less fruitful, were very populous, before the Spaniards came thither,
but since their cruel Massacres, scarce any of the ancient Natives are left:
Nor are the Spaniards here at present very populous, considering the largeness
of the Island.

In the Province of Camaguey is a Valley three Leagues in bigness, where Nature
produces a great number of large Stones so exactly round, that no Man with a
Compass can make a more exact Circle.

Though the Gold, which is dug out of the Mines, and found in Rivers, is
none of the purest, yet the Copper which this Country affords is accounted
excellent.

view of Havana HAVANA


The Serpents here are about the bigness of a Hare, having Heads like Weezles;
Serpents.
they prey on little Beasts called Guabiniquinazes, and have been accounted
delicious and wholesome Meat.

Ancient Customs of the Natives.
The ancient Natives went formerly naked. The Men made it a Custom to forsake
their Wives when they pleased; yet the Women were still obliged to be faithful
to them, though from the very first day of their Marriage they were taught to
Cuckold them, by a certain wicked Ceremony in use amongst them; for the
Bridegroom lay not with his Bride the first Night, but suffered her to be
enjoyed by one of his Friends of equal Quality with himself, whether he were
Lord, Merchant, Laboring-man, or what Estate soever.

The Spaniard at first beaten by the Natives.
This Island was reduced under the Spanish Government not without great effusion
of Blood; for the Natives having had continual Wars with the Cannibals, as has
been said, were not ignorant in the Exercise of Arms. The first Spanish
Commander sent against them was Valdivia, whom they slew with all his Men, and
hewed his Ship in pieces. Little better escaped Fogeda, whose Men were all cut
off, and he himself escaping very miraculously, died not long after of his
Wounds in St. Domingo.

St. Jago built by Valasquez.
Within two years after, viz. Anno 1514. Diego Valasquez with better success set
forth for Cuba, where the first thing he did was to build a City, which he
called St. Jago, lying near a Southern Bay, full of Fish, and defended with
several small Isles, behind which the Ships in the greatest Storm may Ride very
secure; by reason whereof the new City increased so much, that in a short time
it could show two thousand Inhabitants, a brave Church, a Cloister, and was
made a Bishop's See, but subordinate to that of St. Domingo.

The Copper Mountains.
Three or four Leagues from the City are those famous Mountains, by the
Spaniards called Sierra de Cobre, or The Copper Mountains, from the abundance
of that Metal which the Mines in them afforded, and do yet afford; but the City
was afterward almost left desolate, (diverse Houses in the same standing empty)
having in it scarce two hundred Inhabitants; St. Jago taken by the English.
which made it the easier to be taken by a hundred and sixty Englishmen, led
by Captain Cliff, Anno 1601. who carried from thence a hundred thousand Pieces
of Eight, and a Ships Lading of Hides and Sugar.

2. Besides St. Jago, Valasquez built the Town Baracoa, on the Eastern Shore of
Cuba, Baracoa.
washed by the River Mares, which falls into the Ocean between two Mountains on
one side, and a flat Point on the other, and is a most excellent Harbor: Not
far from which grows the best Ebony Wood.

3. He also built the Town St. Salvador, St. Salvador.
one of the most healthful Promontories of all Cuba, near the River Bayamo,
which produces round Stones, used there in stead of Bullets.

4. He likewise built Trinidad, Trinidad.
before which hardly accessible Harbor many a Ship has been cast away: But
this Fort was by a mighty Storm levelled even with the Ground.

Puerto del Principe.
5. Near the Haven before the Town Puerto del Principe is a Fountain, out of
which at certain times flows liquid Pitch.

Villa Sancti Spiritus.
6. The Town called Villa Sancti Spiritus, six Leagues from the Ocean, boasts
fifty brave Houses, and is washed by the River Saaz.

7. The chiefest City which the Spaniards possess in the West Indies, Havana.
and the present Seat of their Governor, is Christovall de Havana; which stood
first on the South side of Cuba, but was afterward built on the North,
opposite to Florida: The Harbor before it is large and safe, for it is able to
contain a thousand Ships, without the least endangering of one another, and yet
the Entrance so narrow, between a Promontory and a square Fort, that two Ships
cannot Sail in together: the shallowest part thereof has six Fathom Water. On
each side the Mouth of the Harbor is a Fort, the one called Mesa de Maria,
which stands built on a Champain Ground; the other called Morro, which lies at
the Foot of two Hills, on whose tops several Guns are planted, which Command
the Town and Haven.

Betwixt these two Forts is a Tower covered, on the top whereof is a round
Lantern, wherein stands continually a Watchman, who puts forth as many Flags
as he discovers Ships at Sea, to give notice thereof to the City, which is a
Mile from thence.

Before Havana stands a third Castle, well stored with Guns, as likewise the
rest are, in all to the number of two hundred and forty, and strongly
Garrisoned; of which great care was taken by the General Jean de Texeda, and
Baptista Antonelli, an Architect, sent thither by Philip the Second, King of
Spain, to secure the Place from all foreign Assaults, because the Plate-Fleet,
and other Ships that come out of the West Indies, have their place of
Rendezvous here, and from hence set Sail altogether for Spain. The City stands
along the Haven, and has two Churches with spiry Steeples. The Houses are now
built after the Spanish manner.

Havana several times Assaulted and taken.
But Havana was not so strongly fortified in former times, for Anno 1536. it
could not resist a mean French Pyrate, who losing the rest of his Fleet was
driven hither by Storm, and conquering Havana, had burnt the same, consisting
at that time of wooden Houses covered with Thatch, had not the Spaniards
redeemed them from the Fire for seven hundred Ducats; with which Money the
French set Sail, when the day following three Ships arrived from New Spain
before Havana, and having unladed their Goods, and preparing themselves for
Battle, pursued the Pyrate; whom getting sight of, the Admiral, who Sailed
before, durst not venture to Engage him alone, but staid for the other two
Ships: from which cowardly Action the French Pyrate taking Courage, fell on the
Spanish Admiral, who without firing a Gun ran his Ship ashore, and deserted the
same: the next Ship thereby discouraged, Tacking about, made away from the
Enemy; on which the third also followed, insomuch that at last they were all
three taken by the French; who encouraged with this unexpected Victory, steered
their Course a second time to Havana, where they got as much more Money from
the Inhabitants as before. After this the Spaniards built all their Houses of
Stone, and a Fort at the Mouth of the Harbor, yet nevertheless the City lay
open on the Land side; of which the English Fleet, Cruising about in those
Seas, being informed, Landed not far from Havana, and entered the City before
Daybreak: the Spaniards thus suddenly surpised, fled into the Woods, whilst
the English plundered and ransacked the City without any resistance. But this
was not the last Blow which Havana received, for during the Wars between the
Emperor Charles the Fifth, and the French King Henry the Second, a Ship set
Sail with ninety Soldiers from Diep to Cuba, where they made themselves Masters
of St. Jago, and carried great Treasure away with them: Thus enriched, they set
in the Night on Havana, but found their Expectations frustrated, for all the
Houses were empty, the Spaniards (being so often Plundered) having removed all
their Goods to their Country Houses, which lay scattering about the Island.
Whilst the French were searching the Houses, two Spaniards came under pretense
of agreeing with them, but their Design was chiefly to take an Account of their
Enemies Forces. The French demanded six thousand Ducats of them: to which the
two Spaniards replied, That all their Goods would not raise so much: then going
to their Party, informed them of the number of the Enemies, and their Demands;
whereupon Consulting, some judged it best to comply with a forced Necessity,
and if they could not get any thing abated, to pay the demanded Sum: but most
of them were of another opinion, alleging, That the number of the French was
not equivalent to their Demands, and that it would not be for their Credit, to
yield up their Estates so tamely, without trying their Title by the Sword: This
being judged fittest, they marched to Engage them with a hundred and fifty Men,
which about Midnight fell on the French, and at the first Onset slew four of
them; but upon the firing of the Gun they were all alarmed, and after a small
Skirmish, put the Spaniards to flight. The Conquerors enraged at this
treacherous Plot of the Spaniards, set fire on Havana, in which at that time
was a good quantity of Pitch and Tarr; with which the Gates, Windows, Roofs,
and Pent-houses being all bedaub'd over, were in few hours all in a light
Flame; after which the Churches in order for their firing, were also going to
be over-laid with the same combustible Matter; at which a Spaniard boldly
desired, that the Temples erected for Gods Service might be spared: to which he
was answered, That People who keep not their Promise, nor had any Faith, had no
need of Churches to profess their Faith in. The French not satisfied with
burning, pulled down the Walls, and utterly demolished the Fort.

The Haven Xagua.
The Haven Xagua also is not inferior to any, the Mouth thereof being a Boweshot
wide, and within, ten Leagues: The Ships are securely sheltered behind three
Islands, and also the Mountains, which rise along the Shore.

Moreover, the Inlet Matanca is not only eminent, by reason of the round
Mountain Elan de Matancas, which rises from a low Ground; The Success of
Admiral Peter Hein.
but chiefly for the Expeditions of Admiral Peter Peterson Hein, who being sent
out by the West India Company, to Cruse up and down before Havana with one and
thirty Sail, was from thence by a strong Current driven down to Matanca; where
he stood from the Shore, when ten Ships came just running amidst his Fleet, and
were all taken but one: About Noon they discovered nine Ships more, which
Sailing along the Shore, got into the Inlet Matanca, where they ran aground;
whither Hein following, came up to them the next Morning by Break-of-day, and
after a small Resistance took them, being valued to be worth above a hundred
and fifteen Tun of Gold, besides the Musk, Ambergreece, and Bezoar with which
two other Ships were laden, and another rich Prize.

This large Island Cuba (as we have before observed) formerly divided into so
many populous Territories, is now in a manner desolate; for according to the
Spaniards Relation to the Admiral Henry Jacobson Lucifer, when he was before
Havana, Cuba had upon it not above sixty thousand Persons in all, in Anno 1627.
But who-ever Reads that which Bishop Bartholomeo de las Casas has written in
his Book, (Printed first in Sivill in the Spanish Tongue, and afterward, with
the King of Spain's leave, in French at Antwerp) will easily find the reason,
why Cuba and many other Indian Countries lie so desolate; and how sensible the
Indians were of the Spaniards usage, appears by this following Story, related
by the said Bishop, of a Casique called Hathuey, who before the Spaniards
approached his Country, Anno 1511. fled from Hispaniola to Cuba; where
afterward he was taken by the Spaniards, and condemned to be burnt alive with
green Wood: whilst he was tying to a Stake, a Franciscan Monk Preached to him
the Mysteries of the Christian Religion, of which he had never heard; and
likewise that he should ascend up to Heaven if he died in that Belief; but if
not, burn perpetually in Hell: Whereupon Hathuey asking the Franciscan, If
there were any Spaniards in Heaven? and being told there were, answered, I will
rather converse amongst the Devils in Hell, than amongst the Spaniards, whose
Cruelty is such, that none can be more miserable than where Spaniards are.

Before we conclude the Description of Cuba, it will be material to add some
Passages of a Letter from Major Smith, Governor of the Isle of Providence, who
was taken there in the Year 1665. which will give light to the knowledge of the
present State, not only of Cuba, but of some other parts of America, belonging
to the Spaniards; which is as follows:

Maj. Smith's Letter concerning Cuba and other Parts.
CUba is a very good Island, and in it is generally the best Land, for so large
a Country, as I have seen in America, although I have traveled the main
Continent in several places, and have crossed from the North Sea to the South
Sea, as also the North side of Hispaniola, and most parts of Jamaica.

This great Island is easy to be conquered, and would make the best
Plantation, besides the prejudice it would be to the Spaniard, and the great
advantage to our Nation; for instance, Had we the Port and City of Havana,
which might in all probability be reduced with two Regiments of good Soldiers
from Jamaica, carrying with them two or three Sloops or Shallops for Landing
Men, fitted with good Arms and other Necessaries for an Assault, presently
after their Armado has passed out of the Indies, which is once in two years,
toward the latter part of the Summer. There is good Landing on the West side
of the City, where it lies open; and you need fear no Ambuscado's: but not on
the East side on the Harbor, for there you will be gawl'd by the strong Castle
of the Moare, until the City be secured; but when that is once taken, you may
easily reduce that Castle also, there being no danger of their re-taking it,
until the next Armado arrives there, which will be almost two years, against
which time you will have Planters enough from other of our Islands, to Manure
the Land, and assist the Soldiers in defense thereof: This once effected, would
utterly ruin the Spaniards, for these Reasons: Our Ships lying both here and
at Jamaica, would be at all times ready to gather up their straggling Fleet,
which it is difficult to keep imbodied without the help of that Port of Havana,
it being impossible for their great unruly Ships to turn up to Windward from
the Bay of Mexico, or Puerto Bello, without separation; and on the other side,
to pass the Gulf of Florida, is for them as impossible, where they always
Rendezvous, Victual, Water, and provide all things necessary for their Return
into Spain; after all which they diligently wait for a convenient Season of
Winds and Weather (being much observed from the Changes of the Moon) when to
pass that dangerous Straight: for to say truly, the Spaniards are neither very
fit for Sea nor Land-Service, excepting some Officers and Soldiers bred in
Flanders for Land-Service, and a few Biscainers for Sea-Affairs. They are so
sensible of their Weakness, and jealous of their Riches in those Parts, that it
is very difficult for any ingenious Man to get his Liberty, being once taken,
fearing he might give such Intelligence, as to be thereby the cause of their
ruin, witness their blind-folding of all Strangers, when they pass their
Cities and Castles; for they much dread an old Prophecy amongst them, viz. That
within a short time the English will as freely walk the Streets of Havana, as
the Spaniards now do; which indeed had been easily performed with a third part
of the English Army sent to Jamaica, and a far geater advantage to the Nation:
for I esteem that Port and Harbor of Havana in the West Indies, equivalent
(against that Nation) to Tangier in the Straights of Gibraltar; and if we were
at once Masters of both, it would without doubt so straiten the Spaniards, as
absolutely to admit us a free Trade into their Ports of America, where they
impart our Commodities, and sell them for ten times more than they first cost
in Spain, by reason of the great plenty of Silver: which Trade would not only
be of infinite advantage to us, but also prevent them of their future enslaving
of our Nation in Chains as now they do; map of Jamaica Novissima et
Accuratissima JAMAICAE DESCRIPTIO per JOHANNEM OGI^UIUM Cosmographum Regum.
for being employed about their Fortifications, they are worse used, all things
considered, than if they were taken by the Turks.

I have seen other parts of the West Indies, where the Spaniards might be
fleeced of considerable quantities of Riches, as at Panama, where their Silver
Bars lie pyl'd up in Heaps in the open Streets Day and Night without Guard for
five or six Months together, waiting the arrival of the Armado; which when
arrived in Puerto Bello, they Transport it thither with so slender a Guard, for
so great a Treasure, as would be an easy Prey to a thousand resolved Men
(although of extraordinary value for so small a Charge;) but here is no
resting, nor long remaining, they being so numerous (as in all other places of
the main Land) though of great Wealth, and easily gotten with a Catch and away:
But to my purpose,

This Island of Cuba has adjacent to it great Conveniences of Salt and
Fishing; and in it are very great plenty of Horses, Neat, Sheep, and Hogs, both
wild and tame, of a far larger and better breed than any other parts of
America: It has also many very rich Mines of Copper already open, and is the
only Place that supplies all the West Indies with Metal for the infinite
number of Ordnance they have in all their Ports and Castles, both in the North
and South Seas; but whether it has any Mines of Silver or Gold, I know not;
but if there were any such, they would not adventure their opening and
discovery, fearing the Invasion of that Island, whereunto is so easy access by
Sea, and of so great import to their whole Interest in America: for which
reason also they refuse to work any Mines in Florida, that are nigh the North
Sea, (although they have there very many) but do rather employ themselves about
others farther up in the Country, although with greater Labor and Cost, for
conveyance of the Product by Land to Mexico. And lastly, (for its full praise)
this Island has many very good Ports and Harbors of great advantage to Ships,
for safe passing the Gulf; and should the Spaniards keep three or four Frigates
always plying between the Western end of Cuba and that of Havana, off and on,
it were impossible for any Ships of ours that came from Jamaica to escape them;
the Scales turned would be their Case to all America. Neither wants it great
Sugar-works, which have Water-mills and Horse-mills, and very many large Cocoa
Walks, the most and best Tobacco: and in short, it produces all other
Commodities, that any of our American Islands have knowledge of.

CHAP. XVI. Jamaica.
Situation and Extent of Jamaica.
THe Island of Jamaica lies North from the Southern Continent of America, in
the Sea called Mare del Nort; and South from the Isle of Cuba about twelve
Leagues; and West from Hispaniola twenty, in eighteen Degrees of Northern
Latitude; and bears from Rio de Hacha North-West, a hundred and fifty
Leagues; from Santa Martha North North-West, a hundred and thirty five; from
Rio Grande North-West, a hundred and thirty; from Carthagena North, fourteen;
from Porto Bello North-East and by North, a hundred and ninety; from the Bay of
Darien, North and by East, a hundred and seventy; from the Bay of Mexico, a
hundred and fifty. It is of Form something nearly resembling oval, being in
length from East to West, about fifty four Leagues, or a hundred and seventy
Miles; from North to South in the broadest and middlemost part, about three and
twenty Leagues, or seventy Miles over, and so grows narrower and narrower
toward each Extreme; in circumference about one hundred and fifty Leagues, or
four hundred and fifty English Miles.

Nature of the Country.
This Island is well watered with Springs and Rivers, and is all over,
especially in the Western parts, full of high Hills and Mountains: It is also
well Wooded; for the North and South parts chiefly abound with tall and large
Woods: Nor are there wanting every where Savanas, or Pastures, which are
thought to have been Fields of Indian Maiz, till the Spaniards arriving here,
brought in Horses, Cows, Hogs, and Asinego's to feed.

Temperature of the Air.
The Air in this Place is more temperate, and the Heat more tolerable, than in
any of the rest of the Barloventi, by reason of the cool Breezes which
constantly blow from the East, and the frequency of Showers of Rain, and
refreshing Dews which fall in the Night.

This is also the only Island of the Barloventi, which is not subject to
violent Storms and Hurricanes; and the Diseases which are predominant here, are
only bred by Intemperance, as Surfets, Fevers, and Agues, or occasioned by
ill Diet or Slothfulness.

Commodities of the Island.
The Commodities of this Island are very many; and first for Vegetables, the
Sugars are so good, that they now out-sell those of Barbado's 5 s. per Cent.

Cocoa, of which there are many large Walks; and greater plenty by improvement
may easily be produced.

Tobacco, so good, that the Merchants give Six pence a Pound for it, and buy it
faster than the Planters can make it.

Indigo is producible in great abundance, if there were Hands sufficient
employed about it.

The Cotton of this Place is accounted very firm and substantial, and preferred
before any that grows in the neighboring Islands.

Of Tortoise-shell there is also good store, by reason that much of that sort
of Tortoise is taken on this Coast.

Here are also great variety of Dye-woods, as Brasiletto, Fustwick, Red-wood, a
kind of Log-wood, and several others, besides diverse of those that are
accounted the most curious and rich sorts of Woods, as Cedar, Mohogeney,
Lignum-vitae, Ebony, Granadilla, and others, which are frequently Exported.

Moreover, there are very probable testimonies, that there are Mines of Copper
here, since both there have been those who affirm to have seen the Oar wrought
out of one of them, and the Spaniards report the Bells that hang in the great
Church, to have been Cast out of this Island Copper. As for Silver, the English
are said to have been showed a Silver-Mine behind the Mountains, West of Cagway.

Ambergreece the Spaniards report to have been often found on this Coast.

Salt might be made here in great abundance, there being three good Salt-pans;
and Saltpeter has been found in many Parts.

Ginger is reported to grow better here than in most of the Caribbee Islands;
and Cod-pepper very plentifully; and also a certain kind of Spice called
Piemete, being in the form of East India Pepper, of a very aromatical and
curious taste, partaking as it were of diverse species together: it grows wild
in the Mountains, and is very highly valued amongst the Spaniards.

Of Drugs and medicinal Plants there is here a very great abundance, as
Guaiacum, China-Root, Cassia-Fistula, Veuillard, Achiotes, Tamarinds,
Contrayerva, Ciperas, Adiantum Nigrum, Aloes, Cucumis Agrestis, Sumach, Acacia,
Misselto, with several others, both Drugs, Balsoms and Gums.

Cochinele is produced by a Plant that grows in this Country, but it is not
made without much care and curiosity, and the English are not yet well
experienced in the Husbanding thereof, besides that the Growth of the Plant is
much obstructed by Easterly Winds.

There is here greater store of Cattle than in any of the rest of the English
Plantations in America, Beasts.
as Horses, which by reason of the great number of them, are bought very cheap.

Cow's, of a large size, and of which vast numbers are yearly killed.

Asinego's and Mules, both wild and tame, being a very serviceable sort of
Cattle in those Countries.

Sheep, large and tall, and whose Flesh is counted exceeding good, but the
Fleece worth little.

Goats in great abundance, being a sort of Cattle very peculiar to that
Country.

But of all other Cattle, Hogs are here in the greatest plenty, both wild in
the Mountains, and tame in the Plantations; and they are more in request for
Food than any of the rest, their Flesh being counted both of a better relish,
and more easily digestible than the Hogs-flesh of our Parts.

The Fish that is very plentifully caught in these Coasts is of infinite
variety, Fish.
and quite of another kind from what we have in this part of the World, the
principal whereof is the Tortoise, which is taken in great abundance both on
these Coasts, and in the Islands Camavas.

The tame Fowl in this Place, are chiefly Hens, Turkies, and Ducks; Birds.
but of wild Fowl infinite store, as of Guinee Hens, Flamingo's, Teal, Ducks,
Wigeon, Geese, Pigeons, Snipes, Plovers, Parrots, Turtles, Parachites,
Machaw's, with diverse others.

Fruit Trees and other Plants.
Choice and excellent sorts of Fruits are here in great abundance, as
Cocao-Nuts, Man's, Maumees, Supatas, Suppotillias, Avocatas, Cashuds,
Prickle-Apples, Prickle-Pears, Sower-Sops, Custud-Apples, and many others.

For Timber Trees, Platanes and Pines.

And for Garden-Herbs, Radish, Lettice, Parsley, Cucumbers, Melons, etc.

The ancient Inhabitants used two sorts of Bread, the one made of stamped
Roots, and the other of Corn, which is Reaped thrice every year, and grows with
such success, that one Pint sow'n yields two hundred.

They had a strange way to make their Cazari Cakes of the Root Juca, which keep
good a year: They first pressed out the Juice with great Weights, which if
drunk raw, occasions sudden Death; but boiled, is pallatable and good.

Potato's are here in great abundance, and grow like Artichokes in a moist
Soil, and shoot forth Leaves of a dark-green Color, like Spinach; they spread
upon the Earth by Stalks, and bear a Flower like a Bell, at the end of which
grows the Seed: the Roots are generally White, but sometimes Red,
Marble-colour'd, Yellow, and Violet; they are not only pleasing to the Pallat,
but accounted very wholesome when stewed in a close covered Pot, with a little
Water.

But much daintier are the Ananas, which grow on a Stalk of a Foot long,
surrounded with sixteen large sharp Leaves, between which grows a Fruit like a
Pineapple, but much bigger, with an uneven Rind, of a pale Green, and
inclining to a Carnation on a yellow Ground; on the top shoots out a red Bunch
of Leaves and Flowers; the innermost Pulp melts on the Tongue, and is of so
delicious a taste, that it exceeds all other Dainties; the Seed produces Fruit
once.

Of this Fruit there are several sorts, the chief whereof is accounted a
special Remedy against a bad Stomach, Gravel, Poison, and Melancholy.

The Drink made of Ananas is no way inferior to Malvasia Wine.

A sort of sensitive Plant.
Here you may observe a remarkable Secret of Nature in a certain ever-green
Plant, which grows either on the Bodies of old Trees, on the Rocks, or in the
Woods; the Stalk whereof surrounded with Leaves, full of dark red Spots, bears
a sweet smelling Violet-colour'd Flower, the Leaves whereof as soon as touched,
close up together and die, and according as they are held in the Hand a shorter
or longer time, this strange alteration continues.

Since the Spaniards planted Ginger on Jamaica, Ginger.
it has grown there in great abundance; the Male Plant (for it is divided into
Male and Female) has generally bigger Leaves than the Female; the Stalks,
which are without Knots, have more Leaves upwards than downwards, and spreads
along the Earth, still take Root anew; when the Leaves wither, then the Ginger
is commonly ripe, but it has not that poinancy whilst green as when dried.

The Cotton of this Island (of which the Clothes and Hammocks that are made,
Cotton.
are vended in most parts of the Western World) grows on a Tree of equal
height with a Peach-Tree, with a straight Stem or Body, out of which shoot
Boughs of an equal length, and at equal distance; between the Leaves, which are
narrow and long, grow red Flowers, and from them, oval Gods, which when ripe,
enclose the Cotton, and a Seed like Pepper.

Description of the Alligator.
Of hurtful Creatures here, besides the Manchonele, and a sort of Snakes called
Guaana's, wherein it is thought there is little or nothing of a poisonous
quality; the most observable is the Alligator, with which many Rivers and Ponds
abound; it is a very voracious Creature, but is seldom known to prey upon a
Man; it moves swiftly and strongly forward, but turns slow; the biggest of them
are about twenty Foot long, their Backs scaly and impenetrable, so that they
are hardly killed but in the Belly or Eye; they have four Feet or Fins, with
which they go or swim indifferently; are observed to make no kind of noise;
their usual course for getting their Prey, is to lie on their Backs as dead,
then with a sudden onset to surprise whatever Fowl or Beast comes fearlesly
near them; the best caution other Creatures have of them is from the strong
smell that flows from their Bodies: to requite the harm done by them, they have
something of virtue, for the Fat or Oil of their Bodies has been experienced
to be an admirable Ointment for all kinds of Pains and Aches; they Lay Eggs no
bigger than a Turkies by the Water side, still covering them with Sand, which
heated by the Sunbeams, hatcheth the young ones, who naturally creep into the
Water.

Muschilli and Merrywings.
In some parts of the Country there are also a sort of stinging Flies, called
Muschilli and Merrywings, but the English Quarters are little infested by them.

Hugh Linschot writes, That the ancient Natives of this Place were a subtle
and sharp-witted People, skilful in Handicrafts, and expert in warlike Affairs,
above all the Americans besides.

First Discovery of the Island.
The Island was discovered by the Spaniards under the Conduct of Columbus, who
first built there the Town of Mellilla; which disliking, he removed again to
Oristana; and finding that an incommodious and unhealthy Situation, he removed
again to another Plantation, where he built a very fair Town, first called
Sevilla, afterward St. Jago de la Vega, consisting of about seventeen hundred
Houses, two Churches, two Chapels, and an Abbey, being the chief, if not the
only Seat of the Spaniards before the arrival of the English, for their
Estanchas, or small Plantations, were committed wholly to the custody of their
Slaves.

Diego, the Son of Christopher Colonus, (or, as he is vulgarly called,
Columbus) was the first that was constituted Governor of this Island, and sent
Juan de Squibello Commander, who upon their first arrival here committed such
horrid Cruelties and Massacres, that (as the forementioned Bartholomeo de las
Casas writes) five thousand Inhabitants were in a short time reduced to less
than three hundred, multitudes being put to death in a most inhumane and
barbarous manner, some roasted alive, others torn in pieces by the Spanish
Dogs, besides many other studied ways of Butchery, too dreadful to be read with
patience; nor were they free from Civil War amongst themselves, which first
began in this Island.

Attempts of the English upon this Island.
The first and only Attempters upon this Island since the Spaniards made
themselves Masters thereof, have been the English, who in the Year 1592. under
the Conduct of Sir Anthony Shirley Landed upon it, and got clear possession
thereof, none of the Spaniards that were then upon the Place daring to make the
least resistance; but not thinking it worth the keeping, they soon deserted it,
and made Sail back again for England: after which they remained unmolested for
a long time, till in the Year 1654. a Fleet of English was set out for
Hispaniola by Cromwell, under the Command of Colonel Venables, with a Design
for the taking of St. Domingo; but meeting with ill success in the Enterprise,
and being forced to quit that Island with loss of Men, and frustration of their
hopes, they steered their Course for Jamaica, and on the tenth of May in the
Year abovesaid, with little opposition possessed themselves of it. Upon their
approach to St. Jago the Inhabitants thereof deserted it, and betook them to
the Mountains, gaining time by a pretense of Treaty, to secure their Women and
Goods; and oftentimes making Incursions upon the straggling Parties of the
English, slew and took many Prisoners by surprise: but being weary of this wild
and irregular kind of living, they betake themselves at last to the Isle of
Cuba, where many of them, the Grandees especially, were permitted by favor to
continue, the rest being by the Viceroy commanded back, with promise of speedy
and considerable Supplies; by that time this remnant of the Spaniards was near
tired out with hardship and necessity, some being very much discouraged and
driven to utter despondence of Mind, others destroyed outright, part of the
long promised and expected Supply arrives, the greatest part being to follow
soon after; but finding the Islanders so few in number, and in so sickly and
necessitous an Estate, they would not join with them, but maugre all the
Governor's Persuasions or Commands, retreat to the North part of the Island,
and there fortify at a place called Chireras, expecting every day fresh
Recruits; which not coming time enough, and their Quarters being discovered,
they were set upon by the English, and most of them either slain or taken
Prisoners: not many Months after the rest of the Spanish Forces Land, being in
all about thirty Companies, with Ordnance and good store of Ammunition; who
falling presently to make strong Fortifications at Rio Novo, are nevertheless
in a short time utterly defeated by the English: Upon which, and several other
ill Successes, despairing to re-gain the Island, they Ship off their Women and
the richest of their Goods; and the Negro Slaves grown Masterless, by the
general either slaughter or departure of their Patrons, shake off their
Obedience to the Spaniards, and constitute a Governor of their own, a Black,
yet submit themselves, and own Subjection to the English Government, the
Spaniards from Cuba, both by their Persuasions and monthly Contributions, in
vain endeavoring to reduce them; only some few there were that stood out, whom
the rest not only made it their business to discover, but helped the English
to take them, insomuch that at last the Spanish General not having above fifty
Men left him, was forced to seek for Peace, and offered Terms of Accommodation;
which the English General would not be drawn to accept of, unless upon
Condition that he should deliver up to Justice as many as were left of those
that had barbarously murdered any of our Men, either in time of Treaty, or
after Quarter given.

The English in this Island are settled for above a hundred Miles along the
Country from the Eastward.

Chief Towns.
Their chief Towns are 1. St. Jago, (built by the Spaniards, as before mentioned)
which lies six Miles within the Land, North-West from the Harbor of Cagway.
Here the English have built a small Fort.

2. Passage, a small Town, built also by the English six Miles from St. Jago,
for the convenience of going to Cagway, consisting of about fifty Houses and a
Fort, whence cross this Harbor, about three Leagues distant is the Town of 3.
Cagway, seated on the Extreme end of the Point, containing in it above six
hundred Houses, all built by the English, besides the Governor's Palace, and
the Houses where the Stores for the Army are kept.

This is counted the most healthful Place in all the Island, and the very Scale
of Trade, where all Merchants, Strangers, and Sailors reside.

Here, upon the utmost Angle of the Point toward the Sea, is a round Tower,
built of Lime and Stone; about which is raised a strong and regular Fort,
containing sixty pieces of Ordnance.

Port Royal.
This Town is now called Port Royal, and is thought to contain about sixteen
thousand Inhabitants.

A Mile from hence is another Fort, Landward.
called Landward, which runs from the Harbor to the Sea, to defend the Town
from any Attempt by Land.

Off the Mouth of the Harbor toward the Sea, lie diverse small Islands, the
most Western of which being within half a League of the Fort, and between which
and the Fort every Ship that comes into the Harbor is necessitated to pass: It
is called Little Island; Little Island.
where a Fort is likewise raised, to defend the Mouth of the Harbor, containing
eight pieces of Ordnance.

Another Fortification is at Portmorant, which we shall make mention of amongst
the Harbors.

Chief Ports and Harbors.
The chief Harbors of this Island, are 1. Port Anthony, on the North, a very
safe Land-lock'd Harbor, only the coming in is somewhat difficult, the Channel
being narrow'd by a little Island that lies off the Mouth of the Port.

2. On the East of the Island is Portmorant, a very capacious Harbor, where
Ships do conveniently Wood and Water, and Ride safe from all Winds.

3. On the South is Port Cagway, a Harbor wonderfully convenient, secure and
capacious, being five Leagues over in some places, in others four, and at the
narrowerst, three; it is Land-lock'd by a Point of Land that runs twelve Miles
South-West from the Main of the Island, having the great River that comes by
Los Angelos, and St. Jago running into it, and diverse Springs about it, where
Ships do conveniently Wood and Water. Here is every where good Anchorage, the
Road being so deep, that a Ship of a thousand Tun may lay his sides to the
Shore of the Point, and load and unload with Planks afloat.

4. On the West is Point Megrill, a Port very convenient and secure; to
Windward from which, a little North-West, is the Seat of the old Town of
Mellilla, founded by Columbus, as before mentioned.

The chief Plantations of this Island, are 1. Portmorant, above the Harbor
before mentioned, and by the two Rivers that run into it. Here are good
Plantations of Sugars, Cottons, Tobacco's, etc.

2. Hence about ten Miles lies Morant, where a thousand Acres of Land have
been taken up for my Lord Willoughby, and a Company of Merchants.

3. Hence farther Leeward lies Yallow, having good Plantations of Cotton,
Tobacco, and other Provisions, excellent Savana's, and some store of tame
Cattle.

4. Thirty Miles hence, on the North side of Cagway is Ligonce, where are
excellent Plantations of Sugar, Cotton, and Tobacco, very pleasant Savana's,
and some store of wild Cattle.

5. Twenty Miles farther West, nines Miles from the Harbor of Cagway, is Los
Angelos, having some Plantations of Sugar, Cacao, and Tobacco, all which were
old Spanish Plantations, and are less considerable than those made by the
English in other places.

6. Eight Miles from hence, North-West, is Guanaboa, where likewise were some
Spanish Plantations, since improved by the English, who have very many
excellent Plantations of Sugar, Cacao, etc.

7. Hence West South-West lies Guatabacoa, a most pleasant rich and fertile
part of the Country, abounding with Cattle, and excellent Savana's. Here the
Negro's settled that revolted from the Spaniards, who are endeavoring to make
some Plantations of Tobacco's and Provisions, and with them are settled some few
English, who have diverse Walks of Cacao.

The several Governors of the English in Jamaica.
The several Governors of this Island since the taking of it by the English, are
as follows: General Robert Venables staid upon the Place about three Months
after the taking of it, and at his coming away for England he left the chief
Command to Major General Richard Fortescue, who lived Governor about three
Months; after which Lieutenant General Edward Doyly was by the Army elected
President; but upon his coming away soon after for England, Lieutenant General
William Brain was sent over Governor in his room; who living in the Government
about three quarters of a year, did as it were bequeathe it again to Doyly, for
he was chosen by virtue of a Blank Commission, wherein Brain had inserted his
Name whom he would have succeed, and remained Commander in Chief both by Land
and Sea till His Majesty's Restoration, and then by His Majesty's Letters
Patents was confirmed in the Government, and so was the first that was Governor
there for His Majesty: The next that succeeded was the Lord Windsor, upon whose
coming away Sit Thomas Muddiford was sent Governor, and after him Sir Thomas
Linch, who remains Governor at present.

CHAP. XVII. The Islands called the Lucaies.
Situation and Description of the Lucaies
HAving done with the four Islands of Barlovento, as they are termed, viz.
Hispaniola, Cuba, Porto Rico, and Jamaica, we come next to the Lucaies, so
called, as some think, from Lucaioneque, one of the biggest of them; they lie
over against Florida, Westward from the Bermudas, South-West and North of
Hispaniola, and the rest of the Barloventi; and because they are but small
ones, and lie so near the Continent, Geographers sometimes describe them as a
part, or appertaining to the Continent. The chiefest of these Islands are
Lucaioneque afore-mentioned, Bahama, and Guanahani; Lucaioneque is accounted
the biggest of them all, and lies in twenty seven Degrees between Bahama and
Guanahani. Bahama lies nearest to the Coast of Florida, and gives Name to the
Straights so called, which run between the Cape of Florida and it, with such a
violent Course and Torrent, that although it be above sixteen Miles broad, yet
many times neither Wind nor Oars, can prevail against it; that though the Winds
be prosperous, Ships cannot enter it; and if it be cross, they go with the
Current; yet those Straights the Spanish Fleet must pass in their Return from
the Havana toward Spain. Guanahani was the first piece of American Ground
discovered by Christopher Columbus, and therefore by him called San Salvador,
or St. Savior, because that thereby he was delivered from the mutinous rage of
the Seamen, who threatened to throw him overboard, if they discovered not Land
in such a time. There are besides a number of small Isles scattered up and
down, which are generally comprehended in the number of the Lucaies; one is
Little Island, encompassed with a company of Shelves called the Bimini, so that
it is hardly accessible: there goes a Tradition, that it has been inhabited by
very beautiful Women, the fame of whom drew many to attempt to Land there and
take up their Habitation; in which Attempt many were cast away: There is said
to be a Fountain in the midst of it, of such a Virtue, that whosoever drank of
the Waters of it, had their Youth renewed. Also three Islands, or rather Rocks,
called Los Martyrs, lying to the South-East of Cape Florida, and covered for
the most part with a whitish Sand and a few Bushes growing on them: they seem
at a distance to bear a resemblance of Men, impaled, or bound to Stakes, as the
Martyrs in the primitive Times usually were, which occasioned the Spaniards so
to Name them; it is very dangerous to come too near them, but to have sight of
them is of great use to Men at Sea; for by passing these Rocks, and leaving
them on the South-East, they certainly know, that they are now entered the
Straights of Bahama, that is, that they have left the Ocean, and are fallen in
amongst those many Islands, which do, as it were, Barracado and Block up the
Eastern Coasts of America, toward Nombre de Dios and Terra Firma, as they call
it, through which the Continent is sometimes dangerous, by reason of contrary
Winds; and always such, that it requires the skill and care of an experienced
Pilot to conduct the Ships well thither. The rest are Abacoa, twelve Leagues
long; Yuma, twenty Leagues in length, and eight in breadth, between twenty four
and twenty five Degrees; Yumeata, fifteen Leagues in length, between twenty
three and twenty four Degrees; Jamana, seven Leagues every way; Yabague, ten
Leagues likewise, and lying between twenty two and twenty three Degrees;
Magaguana, twenty Leagues long, and ten broad; Quagua, ten Leagues every way,
and lying between twenty and one and twenty Degrees; Caycos, five Leagues in
length, and in the one and twentieth Degree; Mackre, in the twentieth Degree,
encompassed with Shelves; Abreo, environed also with Shelves, and fifteen
Leagues long; also Guatao, Cigateo, Guanima, Jabaka, Triangulo, and several
others.

The Lucales left desolate by the Spaniards.
On these Islands are no Inhabitants; those that did live there were a harmless
simple People, and therefore the easier taken and carried away by the Spaniards
that have made them so desolate: Many of them seem of a good Mold, and the
Latitude promises much fertility. The Air is certainly good and wholesome, and
not so extreme hot as other Parts of that height. There is scarce any Beast on
them, save a Coney that has a Tail like a Rat, but Pigeons and other Birds in
great numbers.

There is the Gum Benjoin, of the best and worst sort; Guaiacum, Sasaparilla,
and Sassafras; and on some of them Red-wood and Ambergreece.

Our English Seamen are little acquainted with these Islands, though they Sail
round them yearly.

English Landing upon them.
In the time of the Rebellion one Captain Sail and others, obtained a Patent,
making thither on the Coast of an Island, which was called Illutheria; his Ship
was wrackt, but the People recovered the Shore with a few Necessaries.

The Coasts of most of them are dangerous, and bad to make, and that Ship that
shall be near or amongst them, must keep the Lead always going; but with a wary
Pilot, and care in giving the Islands a fair Birth, they are easily recovered.

The Spaniards know this Place well, and have a yearly Trade thither for the
aforesaid Commodities, and amongst the Islands are Wracks of diverse of their
Ships.

CHAP. XVIII. The Caribby Islands.
Situation and Names of the Caribbee Islands.
THe Caribbee Islands, as they are generally called, are a Row or Ridge, as it
were, of lesser Islands, which extend themselves almost in fashion of a Bow,
from the Coast of Paria as far as St. John de Porto Rico; they are otherwise
called The Caraibes, sometimes The Camercanes, and by some The Islands of
Cannibals, or Man-eaters, (though this Appellation cannot in reality be more
appropriated to these Islands, than to many other, either Islands, or Parts of
the Continent of America;) lastly, whereas all the Islands between Florida and
New Spain, and Southern America, are by some comprehended all under the Name of
The Antilles; yet the Caribbees and the Antilles are most generally, and, we
conceive, most properly accounted the same; and they are so called, either as
lying like a Bar before the greater Islands, or Quasi Ant-Isles, i. e.
Opposites Isles; they lie all under the Torrid Zone, between the eleventh and
nineteenth Degrees of Northern Latitude, and are twenty eight in number: but
before we come to treat of each of them in particular, we shall take notice of
the most observable of those things which are common to them all in general.

Temperature of the Air.
The Air of all these Islands is of a good temperature and healthy, and the Heat
not so excessive in them at any time of the year, as might be conjectured from
their Situation under the Torrid Zone, by reason of a gentle East Wind, which
rising in the Morning, continues most commonly till toward the Evening,
allaying the scorching heat of the Sun, and refreshing the Air; but the Nights
are commonly very cold; and it is observable, that by how much the hotter any
Day has been, so much the colder the Night following happens to be; whereof
this reason is given; That the Vapors raised in the Daytime by the Sun, and
falling down condensed at Night, do very much cool the Air; but it is never so
cold as to Freeze.

For half a year together Day and Night are equal in these Parts, and the rest
of the Year the Day fourteen hours long, and the Night ten.

From April to December there commonly fall here great Rains, and all that
Season is accounted Winter, and the Drought and Heat of the other Months is
taken for Summer; but the Woods of these Parts looking ever green, make as it
were continual Summer.

Nature of the Soil.
The Soil is generally as fertile as in most places of Europe, and each Island
furnished with fair Rivers, Brooks, Lakes, Springs, Wells, and other Sources of
fresh Water, besides in many places Mineral Waters, which are used with good
success in the cure of several Diseases; also out of some Mountains store of
Brimstone is dug, and it is conjectured that there are not wanting Mines of
Gold and Silver, if they were well looked after; and there has been often
found Crystal upon the Sands by Rivers sides.

Vines growing naturally in the Caribbees.
The Vine, though wild, and naturally growing in the Woods, yet yields a very
large fair Grape; and those which are cultivated in their Gardens or Vineyards,
bear excellent Grapes twice a year, but very little Wine is made of them, in
regard they find it will keep but very few days.

Wheat not apt to grow there.
Wheat in the Caribbees grows up no farther than the Blade, and the reason is
judged to be, because through the rankness of the Soil, and for want of Winter,
this Grain springs up fast, and has not substance enough left in the Root to
supply it up to maturity; but no doubt but Barley, Rye, and those other Grains,
to the ripening of which more Heat is required, would thrive there very well.

Besides Lemmon-Trees, Orange Trees, Citrons, and Pomegranates, and other
Fruit Trees growing in Europe, there are very many sorts of Trees, Herbs,
Pulse, and other Plants, of a different kind from those amongst us, and
peculiar for the most part to these Islands.

Fruit Trees.
Of Fruit Trees, the most observable are the Goyavier, somewhat resembling the
Laurel, only having a softer Leaf, and of a brighter Green; its Fruit about
the bigness of a Pearmain, but full of little Kernels like a Pomegranate.

The Papayer, which is of two kinds, one generally growing in all the Islands,
the other proper to Santa Crux; the first has a Leaf not much unlike that of
the Fig Tree, and the other bears a Fruit about the bigness of a Melon, which
by the Portuguese is called Mamao, from its resemblance of a Woman's Breast: the
Tree is hollow and spungy within, and grows up sometimes to the height of
twenty Foot.

The Monick, called by the Islanders Corsot, from the Name of an Island from
whence the Seeds were first brought by the Dutch, and bearing a Fruit like a
small Cucumber not perfectly ripe.

The Junipa, or Jenipa, by the Portuguese called Jenipapo; and by the
Brasilians, Jenipaba; having Leaves like those of the Walnut-Tree, Flowers like
the Narcissus, and a Fruit like a baked Apple, which when it falls from the
Tree makes a noise like the Report of a Gun discharged, which is said to
proceed from the bursting forth of the Seed out of the thin Skin enclosing it,
and breaking with a violence; the Juice, of it Dies of a Violet-colour, and the
Swine and Birds that feed upon it, are said to have their Flesh and Fat of the
same color.

A sort of Vine commonly called The Raisin-Tree, and by the Caribbeeans,
Ouliem; whose Fruit being like a large Violet-colour'd Grape, has in stead of
the several small Grain-stones which are enclosed in the Husks of common
Grapes, one hard Stone, like that of a Plumb.

The Acajou, bearing for Fruit a kind of Chestnut, in form of a Hares Kidney,
which serves for a Crest to a very fair Apple that by degrees grows under it,
of which the Islanders make a Drink, very much in esteem amongst them, being of
an excellent taste.

The Icaco, a kind of small Plumb-Tree, so much coveted, and held for a
Delicacy by some People that live near the Gulf of Hondures, that they are from
thence called Icacos.

The Monbain, which Fruit being a kind of yellowish Plumb, is chiefly made use
of to mix in the Drinks of Ouicon and Maby, to make them taste the better.

The Courbury is by some reckoned to be but a species of the Monbain, only
more full of Leaves, and growing higher and bigger; but the Fruit of the
Courbury is sufficiently different from that of the Monbain.

The Indian Fig Tree, differing in Leaf from the common Fig Tree, but whose
Fruit both in figure and taste is not much unlike the Fig growing in these
Parts: This Tree is commonly of such a vast Bulk, that the Branches of some of
them have been seen to afford shelter to two hundred Men.

A kind of Service-Tree, differing from ours, by its exceeding height, fair
Leaves, and pleasant Fruit.

The Prickly or Thorny Palm, so called from its being armed all over with
Prickles, both Trunk and Leaves; by incision into its Branches a sort of Wine
is made, and it is conjectured to be the same Tree which the Brasilians call
Ayry.

The Franc-Palm, an exceeding high and straight Tree, bearing on the top of its
Trunk a whitish marrowy substance, by the French called Choude Palmiste, or
Palm-Cabbage; for being boiled with the thin Leaves that incircle it, and well
seasoned, it is reckoned amongst the Delicacies of the Caribbees.

Latanier, another kind of Palm; and Cocoa, which is also reckoned amongst the
several sorts of Palms; this last is a Fruit-Tree famous all over America, and
has been at large described elsewhere.

There are also many other Trees fit for Dying, Joyners Work, and Building,
(besides the Acajou before mentioned, of the single Trunks whereof are made
those long Shallops called Pyrages, which are able to carry fifty Men) as

The Acomas, of the same bulk and height with the Acajon, and equally esteemed
by Joyners and Carpenters, and of the Fruit whereof the Woodquists grow fat at
a certain time of the year.

The Rose-wood, to be ranked amongst the chiefest of those Trees that are made
use of by Workmen.

Indian Wood, a very precious and useful Tree for several sorts of Materials,
and of a very fine scent.

The Iron-Wood, so called from its hardness, weight and solidity, above all
that have hitherto been spoken of, and beyond either Cypress or Cedar for
incorruptibility.

Brasile-Wood, so called as growing most plentifully in Brasile.

Yellow-Wood, denominated from its Color, and much esteemed for its usefulness
in Dying green Ebony, easily taking the luster of the true Ebony, and being
very useful for the making of Cabinets and other curious Pieces of Work; It
also Dies of a very fair Grass-green.

The Roncon, by the Brasilians called Urnex, in the Husks, succeeding the
Flowers whereof, which grow in little Bushes at the end of the Branches, is
enclosed a most rich Vermilion Dye, of a very soft and viscous Matter.

Here are also many other Trees, either useful in Medicine, or other ways
advantageous, as the Cassia-Tree, of the bigness and figure of a Peach-Tree;
the long Pipes or Cods whereof, containing the Medicinal Fruit, are well known
amongst us by the Name of Cassia-Fistula, and to be had at every Apothecaries.

Medicinal Nuts, each Nut containing three or four Stones in so many Cells,
every one of which is enclosed within a thin white Pellicle, pleasant enough to
the taste, and out of which is extracted an Oil, used by the Portuguese in
several both Culinarie and Physical occasions.

The Cinamon-Tree, so noted for its aromatic Bark; also Sandal-Wood, Guaiacum,
and Sassafras.

Cotton-Tree and Soap-Tree, whose Uses the very Names imply, and which Trees
have been touched upon elsewhere.

The arched Indian Fig Tree, the Bodies of which Trees have been anciently the
sculking Holes and Retreats of the Inhabitants from their Enemies; the Bark is
useful for Tanners.

The Gourd-Tree, of the bigness and height of a great Apple Tree, and of which
are made most of the Household Vessels and Utensils, which are in common use at
present amongst the Inhabitants.

The Mahot-Tree, of the Bark of which are made Laces and Points.

The Manyoc, or Mandioque, of whose Root the Cassava Bread is made, and which
growing in several places of America, has been already taken notice of; as
likewise the Banana-Tree, and that called The Apple Tree of Paradise, otherwise
Adam's Fig Tree, the Fruit being reported to be of a very delicious taste.

Other Trees not known in Europe, are the Maposu, diverse kinds of Thorny Wood,
the Milky Tree, being of a venomous quality, the Mancenilier, and that whose
Root beaten to Powder, and thrown into Rivers, intoxicates the Fish, with
several others of less note.

Innumerable sorts of Shrubs might here in like manner be reckoned up, but the
chiefest are, That remarkable Plant, anciently known by the Name of Ricinus,
and commended for its Virtues by Galen and Dioscorides.

Coral-Wood, so called from its little Seeds, which being as red as any Coral,
are used for Bracelets.

The Jasmin, bearing a Flower of an admirable sweet scent.

The Candle-Wood, so called from its combustibleness, by reason of an aromatic
Gum which is within.

The Herbs, Flowers, Roots, and Pulse which grow here, are some of them common
in all parts of Europe, as Cabbages, Onions, Chibols, Melons, all sorts of
Millets, Cucumbers, Citruls, Parsnips, etc.

Others, if not peculiar to this Island, yet growing chiefly there, and in some
few parts of America besides, as the Raquettes, so called from the resemblance
its Leaves have with a Racket, a thorny-spreading Bush, whose Fruit being of a
Vermilion color, makes the Urine of those that eat of it as red as Blood. Some
liken this Plant to the Tunas, already described, which yields that rich
Scarlet Dye called Cochinele.

The Torch, so called by the European Inhabitants; by the Native Islanders,
Akoulerou; a great Thistle, or thorny Bush, putting forth from the middle of it
long straight Stalks like Torches, and bearing Fruit like a great Fig, not
unpleasing to the taste.

The Lienes, creeping upon the Earth, and spreading up and down like Ropes, and
bearing brown Husks of a Foot long, wherein are enclosed a Fruit called
Sea-Chestnuts, of which are made Boxes to keep Snush, Tobacco, or the like.

A sort of Sempervivum, which runs twisting upon Rocks, Trunks of old Trees,
like Misseltoe, and sometimes on the Ground.

A sort of sensitive Plant, called by the Inhabitants Haestiel, or The Living
Herb; of which kind of Plant something has been already touched upon, and
which being transplanted, is kept in several Gardens of the Curiosi as a Rarity.

The Sweet-Rush, whose small Root dried, and reduced to Powder, helps Women in
Travail.

The Balisier, whose Leaf applied, mollifies and cools inflammations of Wounds.

The Dart-Herb, whose Root bruised and applied, draws away the Venom of
empoyson'd Darts; besides Scolopendria, a sort of Aloes, several kinds of
Maidenhair, and other medicinal Herbs.

The Granadilla, or Passion-Flower, growing in several other parts of America,
and described elsewhere.

There is also a sort of Pease in some of these Islands, differing from ours,
and called The Pease of Angola, as first brought from thence. Likewise a sort
of Beans called The Seven-years Beans, by reason the same Stalk bears seven
years one after another.

The Herb called The Musk-Herb, from the dusky color of its Flower, and the
sweet scent of the Seed, grows also in these Parts very frequent.

The Pyman, or American Pepper, is the same with that before described under
the Name of Axi.

Their Potatoe is a Root not unlike the Topinambous, or Jerusalem-Artichokes,
otherwise called Saligots, growing plentifully in our Gardens, but more
wholesome, and of a better taste.

The Anana's, or Pineapple, accounted a most delicious Fruit, of an admirable
sweet scent, and very pleasant to behold, grow not only plentifully in these
Islands, but in most places of America; besides the Sugarcanes here, and in
many other places, but not so generally.

The Plant from which is got the Dying Material called Indico, is very
different from that which grows in Madagascar, which bears small odoriferous
Flowers, of a white and purple Color mixed together.

Of these Trees, Herbs, and other Plants, which are produced in these Caribbee
Islands, some are more peculiarly of the Growth of one Island, some of another;
so that we shall have occasion to speak more largely of some of them, when we
come to speak of each Island in particular.

The four-footed Beasts found in these Islands, are chiefly the Opassum, the
Javaris, the Tatan, the Agouty, and the Musk-Rat, which being all of them no
less known in other Parts of the New World, have been already taken notice of,
and of which we may have also occasion to treat more at large in the particular
Islands, we shall therefore only name the other Animals, whether Birds,
Reptiles, Insects, or Fishes, as partly having been heretofore treated of, and
partly to be described hereafter.

The Birds are, the Fregates, Fauves, Craw-fowl, or Grandgawsiers, Flammans,
Swallows of America, Arras, Canides, Parrots, Parroquito's, Tremblo's, Sparrows
of America, Eagles of Orinoca, Manstenys, Colibrys, besides what are common
amongst us, as Herons, Coots, or Moor-bens, Black-birds, Feldivars, Thrushes,
Turtles, Woodquists, Pintado's, etc.

The Reptiles are, Reptiles.
Anotis, Zoquets, and Maboujats (of which farther mention will occur in the
Isle of St. Christopher) Globe-mouches, named by the Caribbeeans, Oulleouma,
Scorpions, and several sorts of Lizards, called by the Caribbeeans, Ouamayaca;
by the Brasilians, Senembi; and by other Indians, Jaquanas.

The Insects are, Insects
besides these common with us, as Glowworms, Palmer-worms, Spiders, Bees, etc.
the Cucuyos, mentioned in Hispaniola, and the Flying Tiger.

The Fishes are, Fishes.
Sea-Parrots, the Dorada, by some called The Sea-Bream, by others, The
Amber-fish; the Bonite, the Needle-fish, the Epadon, or Sword-fish, the
Marsovin, the Requiem, the Remora, the Lamantin, the Becune, the Sea-Urchin,
the Sea-Woodcock, besides Whales, and a certan Fish called, for its hideous
shape, The Sea-Devil, and lastly, the Sea-Unicorn, with a particular
Description of which we shall conclude, as having it from Monsieur du Montel,
who was an Eyewitness thereof.

Description of the Sea-Unicorn.
This Unicorn (says he) was pursuing a Carangue, or some other lesser Fish,
with such earnestness and impetuosity, that not considering that it needed a
greater depth of Water than the other, it stuck with half the Body dry on a
Sand-bank, whence it could not recover the deeper Waters ere it was destroyed
by the Inhabitants: It was about eighteen Foot in length, being at the largest
part of its Body about the bigness of a Barrel: It had six great Fins like the
ends of Galley-Oars, whereof two were placed near the Gills, and the other four
on the sides of the Belly at equal distances; they were of a Vermilion red
color: All the upper part of the Body was covered with great Scales, about the
bigness of a Crown-Piece, which were of a blue color, intermixed with several
Spangles of Silver; near the Neck the Scales were closer, and of a dark color,
seeming as it were a Collar; the Scales under the Belly were yellow, the Tail
forked, the Head somewhat bigger than that of a Horse, and near the same
figure: It was covered with a hard and dark-colour'd Skin; and as the Land-
Unicorn has one Horn in his Forehead, so this Sea- Unicorn had a very fair
one issuing out of the forepart of his Head, about nine Foot and a half in
length; it was as straight as could be, and from the place whence it came out
it grew smaller and smaller to the very Point, which was so sharp, that being
thrust hard, it would enter into Wood or Stone, or some more solid Substance;
it was at the place where it came out of the Head, about sixteen Inches about,
and from thence to two thirds of the length it was like a Screw, or, to say
better, made waving like a wreathed Pillar, save that the Channels grew smaller
and smaller, till they gently ended in a Point, which was two Inches beyond the
fourth Foot: All the lower part had over it an Ash-colored Skin, which was all
over covered with a small soft Hair, short as Plush, and of the color of a
withered Leaf, but under that it was as white as Ivory: As to the other part,
which seemed naked, it was naturally polished, of a shining Black, marked with
certain small white and yellow Strokes, and of such solidity, that a sharp File
could hardly get a little small Powder from it: It had no Ears standing up, but
two spacious Gills, as the other Fishes; the Eyes were about the bigness of a
Hens Egg; the Ball, which was of a Skye-colour Enameled with Yellow, was
encompassed with a certain Vermilion, which had beyond it another as clear as
Crystal: The Mouth was wide enough, and furnished with several Teeth, whereof
those before were extremely sharp, and those toward the Throat in both Jaws
were broad, and a little knobbed: The Tongue was of a length and thickness
proportionable, and covered with a rough Skin of a Vermilion color. What was
further remarkable, is, that this Fish had upon the Head a kind of Crown,
rising above the Skin about two Inches, and made oval-wise, the Extremities
whereof ended in a Point. Above three hundred Persons of that Island did eat of
the Meat of it, and that plentifully, and thought it extremely delicate; It was
interlarded with Fat, and being boiled it came up in flakes like fresh God, but
it had a much more excellent taste.

Those who had seen this rare Fish alive, and had with great Levers broken the
Back of it, affirmed, That he had made prodigious Attempts to thrust them with
his Horn, which he turned with an inexpressible dexterity and nimbleness, and
that if he had had as much Water under him as would have born him up, he would
have been too hard for them all. When the Entrails were taken out, it was found
that he lived by Prey; for there were within him the Scales of several kinds of
Fish.

What could be preserved of this miraculous Animal, especially the Head, and
the precious Horn fastened in it, hung up near two years at the Guard-house of
the Island, till Monsieur Le Vasseur, the Governor of it, presented one
Monsieur Des Trancarts (a Gentleman of Xaintonge, who had given him a Visit)
with the Horn. Not long after, coming over in the same Ship with the Gentleman,
who had that precious Rarity put up in a long Chest, our Ship was cast away
near the Island of Payala, one of the Assores, and all the Goods were lost, but
nothing so much regretted as the loss of that Chest.

The Natives how called.
The Natives call themselves Cubao-bonon, that is, Inhabitants of the Islands,
and Caribbeeans; which last Denomination was not only received amongst the
American Isles, but also on the Main Continent of the Northern and Southern
America, long before the Spaniards coming thither.

Concerning the original of these People, there are several Opinions; Their
Original.
for those who make them to be Extracted, from the Jews, have no other
testimony, but that they abstain from Swines-flesh: Those that take them for a
People fled from the great Islands, Hispaniola, Jamaica, Cuba, and Porto Rico,
to save themselves from the Spaniards Cruelty, dispute against a known Truth;
for who knows not, that the Indians who escaped the Spanish Slaughter, have not
the least resemblance either in Language or Customs with the Cannibals? nay
more, they are mortal Enemies to them; besides that, the Cannibals at that time
when Columbus first arrived, possessed those Places which they now inhabit. The
Cannibals seem ignorant themselves in this Point: for they affirm their
Extraction to be from Guyana, where the Calibites speak the same Language, and
also observe the same Customs and Religion: The occasion of their removal they
ascribe to the King of the Arovages, who made all the adjacent People about his
Court, Slaves to him; which to prevent, they first went to Tabago, where being
strengthened by new Comers, they resolved to take revenge on him; and Engaging
with him in a Field-Battel, utterly defeated him, and spat'd none of his Party
alive, except the Women; whence it proceeds, that the Arovage Women have the
same Customs and Language with the Caribbeans. But Bristock, an English Knight,
by long Conversation experienced in the several American Tongues, says, That
the Caribbeeans have their Original from the Apalachites in Florida, who being
a valiant People, destroyed many of the Natives that inhabited Mexico, that so
they might Settle themselves there; to which purpose they built a City like
that of Apalache. The Cofachites inhabiting Northerly, and spread over a barren
and Rocky Country, made use of this opportunity to conquer their deserted
Habitation: for on a set-time they set fire to all the Villages, and spoiled
all things which they could not carry away with them, that not the least hopes
of returning might be left them; therefore they must either Conquer or Die:
which resolved upon, they fell unawares on the Apalachites, whose King had
nevertheless so much time, that he Guarded the usual Paths which directed to
the inhabited Villages: But the Apalachites leaving the common Roads, climbed
over almost inaccessible Mountains, and so got into the heart of the Country,
which exceedingly amazed Paracousis (for so that King was called) who lay
Encamped at the Foot of a Mountain, whether the Van of the Apalachites were
marching: whereupon he sending his Army to meet them, they began a most fierce
Combat; when at last both Parties wanting Arrows, they fell upon one another
with Clubs till the Night parted them; The Cofachites come to Terms of
Agreement with the Apalachites.
and neither could boast of the Victory. At last this War was turned into
Peace, and the Articles of Agreement were these, viz.

That the Cofachites should for ever possess the Province Amana, and become one
People with the Apalachites, and acknowledge the King of Apalache for their
Chief Governor.

After which the Cofachites were called Caribbeeans, which signifies Accidental
Subjects: But these two sorts of People did not long agree; They fall off
for the Caribbeeans slighted the Customs of the Apalachites in the Country
Bemarin, and at the same time threw off their Obedience to the King, chose one
Ragazin for their Governor, subdued the neighboring Province Matika, and at
last defied the Apalachites; who inferior to them in Strength, and making use
of subtilty, supposed it the best way to make a Difference amongst the
Caribbeeans themselves; to which the Priests freely proffered their Assistance,
and their Design proved also successful; for the Caribbeeans regarding no
Religion (only dreading the angry Deity Mabouya) the Apalachite Priests called
Jaova's, Are brought to worship the Sun.
took great pains to persuade their Neighbors to the worshipping of the Sun;
which so prevailed, that a considerable number of them ascending the Mountain
Olaimi, fell down and showed Reverence to that celestial Luminary; which
Opportunity Paracousis taking notice of, caused the Jaova's to publish amongst
the Caribbeeans, That in the beginning of the Maairims, or March, a great Feast
should be held in Reverence to the Sun on the usual place, where the King would
Entertain, and give Presents to all the Worshippers thereof.

The Sun generally worshipped by the ancient Heathens.
How great a Religion this Sun-worship was anciently amongst the Gentiles,
appears from the Writings of several authentic Authors.

The Syrians, whose Idolatry the Israelites learned, honor the Sun by the Name
of Bahal, which signifies Lord.

The Phenicians called the Sun Beel-samen, Lord of the Heavens; and the
Citizens of Accaron, Baal-zebahim, Lord of the Offerings; but God changed the
Name to Baalzebub, or The God of Flies.

Moloch, or Milcom also signified the Sun amongst the Ammonites; in honor of
which Children were carried by their Parents, and set between two great Fires,
or else by the Priests, upon pretense of cleansing them; and sometimes parched
to death in an Image of Moloch, which had seven Cavities heated like Ovens.

Macrobius tells us, That the Assyrians ascribed the supreme Command to the
Sun, under the Name of Adad, and to the Goddess Adargatis, representing the
Image of Adad with Beams darting downwards, and Adargatis with those that shot
upwards: by the first they expressed, that the celestial Power consisted in
Sunbeams, which shooting downwards warm the Earth; and by the second, that all
things by those Beams were cherished and enlivened.

The most magnificent Temple which Syria Apamena boasted, was Consecrated to
the Sun.

The Arabians Offered Myrrh on the tops of their Houses at the Rising of the
Sun; who also was the Chamos and Baal-Peor of the Moabites and Medians.

Near the Red Sea, lay the City Baisamsa, which signifies The House of the Sun,
famous for the many Feasts which were kept there in honor of this Planet.

The Persians accounted this Luminary for the greatest God, and Consecrated to
him three several Feasts, looking upon him as the Author of Wisdom, Goodness,
and Power, and is expressed by three several Operations, viz. Warmth, Light,
and Distinction of Time.

The Egyptians honored the Name of Ofiris, whom some will have to be the same
with Misraim, or Chamszoon, the first Founder of the Egyptian Monarchy.

In Egypt also was famous amongst many other Cities that of Heliopolis, which
signified The City of the Sun; where the Ox Mnevis or Menapis being Consecrated
to the Sun, was religiously worshipped. This Image is described by Macrobius.

The Moors made likewise great Offerings to their Assabin, for so they called
the Sun; and allowed their Priests only the privilege to gather Cinnamon, and
that with this Proviso, That they should first Offer forty four Oxen, besides
Goats and Rams, to Assabin, nor should fetch the least Stick of Cinnamon either
immediately before or after Sunset: The Cinnamon brought altogether, was to be
divided by the Chief Priest, and the rest having each their Portion assigned,
that which remained was sold to the Merchants, to Trade with into Foreign
Parts; but if the Sun chanced to set the Cinnamon on fire, then they concluded
they had not dealt justly.

The Greeks, according to Proclus, hung a long Pole full of Laurel and Flowers
on every seventh day of the Month; on the top thereof was a great Copper Ball,
from which hung others still lesser and lesser; about the middle of the Pole
hung three hundred and sixty five Garlands; and the bottom thereof was covered
with a Woman's Garment of a yellow color; The uppermost Ball represented the
Sun, the lesser the Stars, and the Garlands the Days of the Year; in which
manner they worshipped the Sun.

The same Luminary the Massagetes and old Germans adored in ancient times; and
to this day the People in the utmost North, Japanners, Chinese, Tartars, and
the East and West-Indians, pay their chief Devotions to the Sun; Why Divine
Worship so generally given to the Sun.
the reason of which may easily be made out: for it is the common Opinion of
all Men, as Aristotle, Simplicius, Themistius, and other Heathens witness, to
place the Omnipotent Godhead in the uppermost Orb, which surrounds the Earth;
wherefore those that Pray, lift up their Hands to Heaven: but because the rest
of the Heavens appear not so resplendent as the Sun, therefore they take the
Sun for the only chief God, whether for its exceeding luster and glory, or for
its being a hundred and sixty times bigger than the Earth; or for its swift
Course, in running ten hundred thousand Leagues in so short a time, or for
its-nourishing and genial Warmth, which gives Life to all things, or for its
necessary Light, by which all worldly Affairs are managed, or for its measuring
the Days by its moving from East to West, and the Seasons of the Year, by a
Course from the South to the North; for all these excellent qualities being
well considered by the most Learned Heathens, or observed by those of lesser
Judgment, have made them show that Honor to a visible Creature, which is only
due to the invisible Creator.

These and such like Arguments induced the Caribbeeans to go to Bemarin, where
the Feast of the Sun was to be kept.

The Apalachites and Caribbeans unake an Offering to the Sun on the Mountain
Olaimi.
The Apalachite King also Entertained the neighboring People exceeding
courteously in the chief City Melilot; from whence he was carried in a Chair on
the Shoulders of four Men, with sound of Pipes and Drums, and an innumerable
company People, to the top or the Mountain Olaimi, where he made a stately
Offering to the Sun, and afterward Feasting and Caressing the Caribbeeans with
Gifts, he sent them home all well contented and satisfied with their
Entertainment. This Custom was yearly observed, Part of the Caribbeans revolt
from the Apalachites.
when at last they began to neglect their Duty, wherefore Toltlabin resolved to
proclaim War against the Caribbeeans, if they did not continue paying their
Devotions to the Sun: which Injunction was differently received; some judged it
to be inconsistent with their purchased Freedom, to receive Laws for Religion
from a neighboring King, alleging, That if any Reverence was due to the Sun,
it might as well be given on the Mountains of Amana as within Toltlabin's
Realm: others, who loved Peace, and had a zeal to the Olaimi Religion, would
not be against the Proposals, which occasioned a Contention amongst themselves,
and every one applied himself to those that were of his Opinion; nevertheless
those that stood upon their Freedom, were of the greatest Party; wherefore the
Worshippers of the Sun closed with the Apalachites, who going out with their
Forces, routed the other Party, And received those Caribbeeans that joined with
them in Religion into Co-partnership also in the Government, so that they
united into one People: But those that were routed rallied again, and not
without thousands of Inconveniences made toward the Sea, where Embarquing,
they Landed first on the Isle Ayay, now called Sancta Crux, They people the
Caribbees and grow powerful.
and in process of time grew very populous; for from thence by degrees have
been peopled all the little Isles which lie before America, and grew so
considerable, that they were sought to by the Calabites, to side with them
against the Arovaces, Yaos, Sappayos, and other People their Enemies on the
Main Continent, where they have taken many large Countries, extending as far as
Brasile, where they are greatly respected and feared for their Valor and Policy
in warlike Affairs.

But because the memory of antique Passages has no firm foundation in Books,
having been only taken by Tradition from time to time amongst the Caribbeeans,
therefore we cannot give you an exact Account of their Removal from Florida;
yet it remains without contradiction, that it happened above five Ages before the
Spaniards Arrival, which time at least was required to the peopling of so many
great Islands and Kingdoms.

Original of the Apalachites.
Concerning the Original of the Apalachites, they themselves affirm, that they
cannot certainly determine the time when they first Settled here: however, they
report that they have peopled the Provinces Bemarin, Amana, and Matika, many
Ages ago. That they are Extracted from the Tartars, appears not obscurely, by
their Customs, Idolatry, and Language. Amongst other things, they have learned
from the Tartars religiously to remember those Kings which performed any grand
Exploits in the Service of their Country. Amongst others, the Apalachites make
mention in their Areitos, or Songs, of a King called Maydo, eminent for his
noble Achievements, and prudent Governing of his People.

Their Opinions in Religion.
They believe that the Sun many Ages since was Darkened or Eclipsed twenty four
Hours together, during which time the Waters over-flow'd the highest Mountains,
except that of Olaimi, where there stood a stately Temple, built in honor of
the Sun; in which all those that fled thither were preserved, and dispersed
afterward into several parts to re-people the World as soon as the Waters were
abated, and the Sun appeared in his full luster again: whereupon they imagine,
that to this day their Bird Tonatzuli, at the Rising of the Sun congratulates
his appearance with great joy, and at his Setting, requests his speedy return
from under the Horizon.

The Bird Tonatzuli.
The Tonatzuli is a Bird like a Bull-Finch, only its Belly and Wings are of a
Golden color, the Back and Tail blue, its Head adorned with diverse colored
Feathers, its Claws and Bill like Ivory, and it Sings like a Nightingale.

Description of the Mountain Olaimi.
As for Olaimi, it is a perfect round Mountain; the Way which leads to the top
thereof runs winding two Leagues long, and is planted on each side with Cedar,
Pine-Trees, Cassine, and Sassafras; the top of which is a fair Plain a League
in circumference; Eastward from it is a Cavern, to which Nature has afforded
more Convenience and Ornament than could be given to the same by Art and
Charges: The first Beams of the Rising Sun dart into the Cavern, which being
oval, appears like a white Vault, which on the top has a great Hole for the
Air to go in at: The bottom is like the purest Marble; on the Floor stands a
Stone Cistern to receive the Moisture which drops out of the Rocks. Whilst the
People Danced on the forementioned Plain, Feasted and Sung, the Priests
Offered Myrrh, and all manner of Perfumes.

The Clothes, which the Rich gave to the Sun, were distributed amongst the
Poor, according to a List which was taken of them.

The occasion of the Apalachites embracing Christianity.
But in process of time the Apalachites have most of them embraced the Christian
Religion; the first occasion thereof was this: When John Ribauld had brought a
French Colony to Florida, and gained a Fort, (which from King Charles the Ninth
he named Charles-Fort) the Spanish Commander Peter Melendez fell unawares upon
him, and so far empowered his Men, who had of themselves a natural hatred
against the French, that they spared neither Man, Woman, nor Child; only ten
Men escaping the bloody Banquet, fled to the Floridan King Zaturiona, where
they were kindly received, and hearing of the Civility and Power of the King of
Apalache, desired that they might go thither; which Zaturiona not only
granted, but also furnished the seven Frenchmen (for the other three were
dead) with good Guides, who visited Zaturiona's Relations, living in several
Villages along the pleasant Stream Selay, over which they passed on large
Boughs artificially joined together, and traveled through Woods, Marshes, and
Mountains full of ravenous Beasts, and sometimes Engaged with the straggling
Floridans which lurked in the most desolate Wildernesses: having traveled two
days Journey, by an Ambuscade of King Timago's People, they lost two of their
Guides, the rest being dangerously wounded, and through many Difficulties came
at last to Avoeka, and from thence to the King of Apalache's Court, who
received them all with great kindness: Whereupon they resolved, being induced
thereto by their courteous Reception, fruitfulness of the Soil, and good
Customs of the Inhabitants, to Settle themselves, all but two of them, who
returned with the Guides to Zaturiona: the rest that stayed there, endeavored
by promulgating the Christian Religion, to reduce the Pagans to the belief
thereof; which-many embraced, and also learned the French Tongue,
notwithstanding their Priests Jaova's opposed the same. After the death of the
French (which the Apalachites much bemoaned) their Idolatry had like to have
gotten the upper hand again, had not some English Families, fleeing from
Virginia from the Cruelties of the Indians, and notable to reach New England,
Landed at Florida, with intention at first only to get fresh Provisions, but
Rowing up the River Selay, and taken with the pleasantness, they chose the
Province Bemarin for their Habitation, where accordingly they Settled Anno 1621.
Amongst them were several Learned Men, which so effectually persuaded the
Heathens to embrace the Christian Faith, that in twenty eight years time the
King and most of his Nobles were Converted and Baptized by them in the chief
City Melilot.

But since our Design is only to give you an exact Account of those People
which inhabit the Islands lying before America, it is sufficient that we have
showed you how they are Extracted from the Cofachites and the Apalachites.

As to the Customs of the Caribbeeans, since they are very much altered by
their long Conversation with the Europeans, we cannot better inform our selves
of their ancient Gustoms, than from those which to this day are observed on St.
Vincent, and some parts of the Main Continent, where the Caribbeeans have learn
d nothing from any Strangers.

Description of the Caribbeeans.
The Caribbeeans are a well proportioned People with broad Shoulders and Hips,
round Faces, without Beards, wide Mouths, white Teeth, little Eyes like the
Tartars, Feet so hard, that they are almost Dart-proof, flat Noses, so made by
squeezing them down in their Infancy, and long black Hair. There are few or no
deformed People amongst them; all of them go stark naked, and paint their
Bodies Red witlr a Plant called Rocou, and Oil; about their Eyes they draw a
black Circle with the Juice of the Apple Junipa. This their Painting serves
them both as an Ornament, and to make them strong. Others anoint their Bodies
all over with a glewy Stuff, on which they stick all sorts of Feathers. Others
use Gum and Flowers. Moreover, they adorn their Head with Plumes, their Ears
with Fish-bones, or Scales of the Caret, or pieces of Crystal, which they also
hang in their Lips and Noses. The Men wear Armlets near their Shoulders, and
the Women about their Wrists; about their Legs they tie for Garters Strings of
Seeds: others take a pride in wearing the Bones of their slain Enemies, and the
Teeth of the Agouty, Tigers, wild Cats, or Cockle shells. When they appear in
greatest luster, then they wear Armlets under their Armpits, and also Scarfs
of Feathers, which either hang over their Shoulders, or are girt about their
Middle, so that one end thereof touches their Thighs. They set an exceeding
value on certain pieces of Copper called Caracolis, the least of which they
hang in their Ears, and the biggest before their Breasts: and because they are
fetched out of the Province of the Arovages their Enemies, they are esteemed as
Marks of true Valor, and he is highly esteemed that wears them.

The Caribbeeans which Converse with the Europeans, Their Language.
speak two sorts of Languages, the oldest of which is smooth, acceptable,
fluent, and for the most part spoke between the Lips. According to the several
pronunciations one word has diverse significations: but the Mystery of their
oldest Language they will discover to none. It is very observable, that the
Caribbeean Men speak several words, which though the Women understand, yet are
never spoken by them: and also the ancient People use several Sayings which the
younger never mention, and the Youths such likewise as are never spoken by the
Ancient, which being spoken apart by each in the time of War, are understood by
none but their Soldiers, that so their Designs may the better be kept secret.
But their mixed Language has many of the European words, especially of the
Spanish, which they speak whensoe're they converse with the Europeans.
Moreover, though the Caribbeeans on the least occasion laugh aloud, yet they
are of a dull Spirit, stubborn, and nothing to be got out of them but by fair
means.

Their Employment is Hunting, Their Manners.
Fishing, Tilling, Building of Houses, and the like. Theft is not known amongst
them, so that no Man is suspicious of his Neighbor; wherefore they leave their
Huts open both Night and Day. They are also seldom at Variance one with
another, but generally Love sways amongst them; yet if a Quarrel does happen,
then the injured Person revenges himself to the height. Persons that profess
Chastity are much honored amongst them; and here Youth bears great respect to
Age.

They are also very ignorant in natural Knowledge, Their Ignorance.
insomuch that when the Moon is Eclipsed, they suppose that it is devoured by
Maboya; and wheresoever they smell any ill scent, they believe the Devil to be
not far from thence. Gunpowder they suppose to be a Grain, and are very fearful
of Firearms: Though they have many brave Salt Pits, yet they use no Salt, nor
eat any Swines-flesh, though all those Islands abound in that sort of Animal,
fearing that if they should eat the same, it would cause them to have little
Eyes, which they account very homely, though it is a property generally
incident to them; neither will they eat any Tortoise, because they would not be
so gross as that Creature. Lastly, they know now no greater Number than they
reckon on their Fingers and Toes, for what exceeds twenty is to them
innumerable: They hold that good Spirits, whom they call Akamoue, residing in
Heaven, never trouble themselves with Earthly Affairs.

Their Offerings consist in Cassave and the first of their Fruits, which are
set at the end of their Huts in Vessels on small Tables, covered with Leaves or
Rushes, without uttering any Prayers; for they never Pray but in public in
company of the Boyez or Priests, and that either for revenge against Injuries,
or for recovery from Sickness, or that they may know the Events of War, or for
Protection against the Maboya.

Each Boy has his peculiar God which, Singing with a conjuring Verse, he
calls to him in the Night whilst he Smoaks a Pipe of Tobacco.

Their Fear of the Maboya.
Some have been of Opinion, that this Conceit of the Maboya proceeds from the
phlegmatic Nature of the Caribbeeans, who in their melancholy Dreams imagine
themselves to be grievously beaten by the said Maboya. But there are sufficient
testimonies to prove, that these Heathens have often really suffered much by
this Maboya, often appearing to them in such horrid shapes, that the poor
Caribbeeans would sweat and quake at the sight thereof, and inflicting such sad
Pinches and bloody Stripes all over their Bodies, that they lived in perpetual
fear of this evil Spirit: and yet notwithstanding these cruel Sufferings, they
showed no manner of Worship to Maboya, only they believed that they had some
ease, when they wore little Pictures about their Necks, made resembling the
Shapes in which Maboya appeared to them; but their best Remedy was to fly to
the Christians.

Their Consultations about the Death of any Relation.
They believe their Boyez able to resolve any Question they ask of them;
particularly, when any one dies, the nearest allied to him asks the Boy this
Question, Who is the occasion of his Death? to which if the Boy names any one,
they never rest till they have dispatched him to the other World. Concerning
their original brutish way of living, they give much credit to an ancient
Fable, which is to this effect:

The most ancient Caribbeeans, Fabulous Tradition.
living under no other Roof than the Canopy of Heaven, fed on nothing but what
the Fields naturally produced, which salvage Life an old Man much beamoan'd;
when a certain Deity clad in white Apparel descending down on the Earth, said,
That he would have come sooner to have shown them the way of a civil Life, had
they requested it before. Moreover, the Angel showed them a place along the
Shore where there lay sharp-cutting Stones, with which he told them they might
cut down Trees, and with the Timber build themselves Houses, and cover them
with the Leaves of the Palm Tree to keep out the Rain; which said, he broke his
Staff into three pieces, which being Planted, soon after produced the Root
Manioe, which stamped and dried, made good Bread.

Their Opinion concerning the Soul.
The Caribbeeans have also a strange Opinion concerning the Soul, that is to
say, That every one has as many Souls as he has Pulses, but the chiefest is
the Heart it self, which after Death removes with Jeheizi, (that is every ones
peculiar God or Genius) to the Company of the other Deities, where they live
after the same manner as here on Earth; wherefore those that are Persons of
Quality give Charge at their Deaths, that their Servants may be killed and
buried with them, that so they may serve them in the other World; That the
other Souls, which are the Pulses, are of two sorts, whereof the first called
Maboya's, range through Woods and Wildernesses; and the other called The
Oumekous, reside along the Sea, and over-turn the Ships that Sail by; That the
Souls of Heroes remove to pleasant and delightful Islands, where they are
served by the Arovages; That Cowards at their Death go behind a high Mountain,
where they become perpetual Slaves to the Arovages.

So soon as they hear a clap of Thunder they run into their Huts, and place
themselves on little Stools round the Fire, cover their Faces, and laying their
Heads on their Knees, make a doleful noise, as supposing that Maboya is
exceedingly enraged against them.

Their manner of Dwelling.
Their Huts, for the most part built near Rivers and Streams, are of an oval
fashion, their Roofs made of Palm Tree Leaves or Sugarcanes, the Walls nothing
but Boughs set in the Ground and pleited together, and the Floor of sifted
Earth or Sand, ramm'd in and kept very even and smooth; besides a Room wherein
they Sleep and Entertain their Friends, they have also a Kitchen to dress their
Meat, and a place to lay their Bows, Arrows, Clubs, and the like, in; they use
Mats in stead of Walls, to separate one Apartment from the other. Their
Household Stuff is little; the richest of them have Hammocks in stead of Beds;
the meaner sort use Sticks laid cross one another, and covered thick with the
Leaves of the Banana-Tree, made fast at the four corners with Cords. Hollow
Calabashes; and Earthen Ware called Canaris, serve them for their Kitchen
Utensils. In the little Canaris they prepare their Tumalis, or Pepper-pottage,
and in the biggest their Liquor Ovicou.

Their Cleanliness may appear by this, that when they go to ease Nature, they
make a Hole in the Ground with a Stick, and after they have done, stop it up
again, burying their Excrement that it may not be seen.

Round about their Huts feed many Hens and Turkies, which they breed not so
much for their own use, as to exchange for Iron.

They remove their Habitations very often, either out of fear of being haunted
by the Ghost of some deceased Person, or to avoid some Smell which they find
noisome and offensive, or because their Hut has been set on fire by Lightning.

Their Household Affairs and Diet.
The Women are always employed to keep their Families in good order, to prepare
Venison and Fish for the Men's Tables, to spin Cotton, Comb their Husbands, and
paint them Red. The Men spend their time in the Wars, Hunting or Fishing. They
have also learned of the Europeans to burn Train-Oyl in Lamps in the Night,
when as before they burnt Twigs of a gummy Shrub before mentioned, which for
that reason the Hollanders called Candle-Wood. Each has a little Stool, and a
Table called Mantoutou, on which he eats his Meat when he pleases, having no
set-Meals. The broad Banana-Leaves serve them for Napkins and Table-clothes.
Their chiefest Dainty is Crabs roasted in the Shell with the Juice of Lemmon
and Pyman. At great Feasts they dress their Meat with the Fat of their Enemies,
being the Arovages. Their usual Drink is Mabby, made of Potato's, which
refreshes, and is good against the Phlegm; also another Liquor called Oko, made
of steeped Cassadar, and is like Beer in taste, strength, and color. They also
by making an incision into the Palm Trees, tap a Liquor from the same in
Calabashes, like White Wind. They use little of the Drink Couscou, because it
swells the Body, notwithstanding it is pleasing to the Palate; But the Liquor
which is most esteemed amongst them, is the Wine made of the Sugarcanes, which
are squeezed in Mills made for that purpose, and then boiled in great Kettles.
During the dressing of their Meat (which being done leisurely, is sometimes
half a day before it is ready), they Sing, and Dance to the Time, which one
keeps with a Calabash filled full of little Stones, in which they believe the
greatest happiness they shall enjoy in the other World consists: But the
Caribbeeans never Dance more antique than when they meet in the Carbet, which
is a public House of Entertainment; whether the Women carry a Drink made of
Cassave, which makes Drunk as soon as Wine: The Men bring Fish and Hedge-hogs;
all of them painted with Roucou, and adorned with Plumes of Feathers, commit
all manner of Debaucheries. At other times they also keep Feast-days, which is
either when they are preferred to some Office, or Place of Honor, or when they
have defeated their Enemies, or when they mourn for the Death of one of their
nearest Relations.

Their Boats, which they call Periaquo's, are made of single hollow Trees,
Their Beast.
full of Benches, and painted with several strange Shapes, and are able each to
carry fifty or sixty Men.

Their Musical Instruments.
Their Musical Instruments in which they take most delight; are Drums, Strings
of Silk-grass stretched upon Calabashes, and Flutes made of the Bones of their
Enemies.

Their watchfulness against Enemies.
They keep Watches on high Hills, to descry the Ships off at Sea, and no sooner
have they espied one, but they immediately give notice to one another;
whereupon those that are most valiant put off to Sea in their Canoos, and know
by the Languages to distinguish between a Spaniard, Frenchman, Englishman,
and Hollander. If they find that it is an Enemy who Lands on their Coasts, they
guard all their Avenues, lie in Ambuscades, and gather together in by-ways, and
where they see any advantage they shoot thousands of Arrows; which done, they
fall in amongst them with great Clubs: but if they chance to be defeated, then
they lurk behind Bramble-bushes, or climb up inaccessible Mountains, or else,
if near the Sea, they save themselves by Diving and Swimming under Water above
two hundred Paces before they appear again; and if a Party of them chance to
meet together afterward, they venture a second Engagement: Their Entertainment
of Friend.
But if those that come on their Coasts are Friends, they Swim, or go in their
Boats to meet them, climb up their Ships, and carry the Seamen on their
Shoulders ashore, where the Casique in the Name of the whole Island bids them
welcome, and conducts them to the Carbet, where an ancient Man salutes the old
Men, and a Youth the young Men; after which asking their Names, the Couban
calls himself by that Name ever after, and desires the Strangers to accept of
his Name; during which their changing of Names they use many Ceremonies of
Friendship: this done, they proffer them Cotton Hammocks to rest themselves in,
and pleasant Fruit to eat, till they have prepared other Meat; which is no
sooner Ready, but a little Table is set before every one of them, and a Dish of
Meat consisting of boiled Hedge-hogs, boiled Crabs, and Potherbs; which if the
Guests do not eat heartily, or drink up all the Liquor which they give them,
they take it as a great Affront; but if they eat and drink heartily, they take
it kindly, and show great sorrow at their departure.

Their Offices of Government have been usually three; the meanest belonged to
the Tiouboulihauthe, whose Place was to Govern over the Carbet, a House where
Strangers were Entertained, Matters of War disputed of, and public Feasts
kept. Tiouboutonti Commanded the Canoos in the time of War, that is, under the
Nahalene, who Commanded the whole Fleet: But the chiefest Officer of all was
the Ouboutou; to which degree of Honor none attained, unless he had killed
several Arovages, or at least a Governor.

When the Caribbeeans drew all their Forces out of the Islands to a Battle,
then they chose one out of the Ouboutou, who during their March Commanded the
Army as General, which his Office ended with the War, and extended no farther
than his own Island.

Their warlike Consultations
Their warlike Consultations were no less observable, for the Ouboutou appointed
a Day, on which the Islanders met at a Feast in the Carbet, whither they
accordingly came all at the time appointed, and having Eat and Drunk, and
Danced a considerable time, an ancient Woman with tears in her Eyes, and
mournful Countenance, entered the Carbet, and desired Audience; which being
granted her, and every one silent, she began to relate the Damages which from
ancient times the Arovages did to the Caribbeeans; and that in the last
Engagement so many valiant Men were slain, and afterward devoured by them;
therefore it would be a shame not to take Revenge; which being seconded by the
Ouboutu, put Valor into the Hearts of all that were present: Whereupon the
following day Messengers were sent to the other Islands to acquaint them with
their Intentions, that they might prepare their Clubs, make sharp and poison
their Arrows, String their Bows, prepare Provisions, and fit out their Canoos:
They poisoned their Arrows with the Juice of Manchenillo's, which made the
least Wound mortal. Their Provisions and Arms they laid up in their Canoos, so
to preserve their Periaguo's (which are Boats that can carry fifty Men), if
they should chance to over-set, which often happened, though they were soon
turned up again. They went from one Island to another, where they not only
stored themselves with fresh Provisions, but increased their Fleet with new
Assistants; with which approaching the Main, they haled their Boats ashore in
the Evening, and driving four Stakes into the Ground under the Trees, made fast
their Hammocks to the same, in which they slept till Midnight, and then fell
on their Enemies, but if discovered by them, they retrea^ed to their Boats and
returned home; but if they were not discovered, they fell upon the Huts of the
Arovages; who resisting, they shot Arrows with burning Cotton into them, and so
setting them on fire, forced the Arovages to venture a Battle in the open
Field; where having spent all their Arrows, they Engaged one another with great
Clubs, with which at one Blow they broke either Arms or Legs, or knocked out
their Brains. If the Caribbeeans chanced to be defeated, then those that
remained of their Party made a lamentable noise, howling for those that were
killed, and mixed their Tears with the Blood of their slain Friends, whom not
without the greatest danger they fetched from amongst their Enemies, and
carried them aboard of their Boats: But returning Victors, they were wont to
insult over their Prisoners with all the bitter Taunts imaginable, and then
taking advantage of those sharp Upbraidings which their cruel usage extorted
from them, to put them to death with most inhumane Tortures, and then to Feast
themselves upon their mangled Bodies, all claiming a Right to their several
Prisoners, as to so many Beasts appointed to the Slaughter; But of late Ages
they have contented themselves to dispatch them speedily with their Clubs, and
so assign them to their Shambles.

Their Enmity to the Spaniard.
As the Arovages had been formerly, so the Spaniards at length became the Object
of the Caribbeeans irreconcilable Hatred, insomuch that oft-times being Invaded
by them, they gave them such rough Entertainment, that they were glad to save
themselves by flight; for the Caribbeeans not regarding their Guns, pressed
upon them, and many times took Vessels richly laden from them, till of late
years that a Peace has been concluded between them; wherein nevertheless those
of the Caribbeeans refuse to be concerned, that inhabit St. Dominico and St.
Vincent, who cannot to this day forget the cruel Outrages committed by the
Spaniards.

To come to their Marriages, Their Marriages.
they were allowed as many Wives as they pleased to have, insomuch that their
Governors were in esteem according to the number of their Wives; nor were
degrees of Consanguinity so regarded, but that an Uncle might take his Niece;
whom he no sooner had carried to his House, but the Marriage was finished. They
seldom Divorced their Wives after they had bore them Children, but otherwise
the Man would break the Bond of Matrimony when he pleased. A young Man that had
no Relation might court a Stranger, and if her Parents allowed of it, the Match
was made. One that had behaved himself valiantly against the Arovages was sure
of several good Matches, for he was refused by none whom he Courted; and the
abundance of Wives was the greatest testimony of their Valor. Each Wife had a
peculiar Dwelling, so to prevent all Dissentions: So soon as one of them was
with Child, her Husband Lay not with her till after Delivery. If any Woman
committed Adultery, her Husband was permitted to knock out her Brains, or rip
open her Belly; which done, he acquainted her Father with the Deed, who
returned him thanks for the same. Murderers were either burnt or cut in pieces.
Children were born here with little trouble, for the Women were no sooner
Delivered, but they carried the Infant to wash at the next Brook; which done
they returned home to their Household Labor, whilst the Man on the contrary
kept his Bed, and ate nothing but a piece of Cassava Bread, which he hollowed
out in the middle, and left the edges till the Feast, which was kept at the
Naming of the Child: Moreover, he fed on all manner of Dainties for a whole
year after. But this Custom was observed only at the Birth of the first Son,
at which time they scratched the Father's Shoulder with a sharp Curry-combe, at
which if he flinch'd not, it was accounted a good Omen of the Child's future
Valor. At fifteen days old they made Holes in the Child's Ears, Lips, and
Nostrils, through which they put a String for the tying on of whatever
Ornamentals. With the like Ceremonies the Child received a Name, taken from his
Predecessors, Trees, Fishes, or some remarkable Passages during the Mothers
bearing of the Infant in her Womb, or of the Father's Lying-in: But this Name
was changed so soon as they went to War, or killed a Commander of the Arovages,
whose Name they exchanged for their own: After which the Mothers took special
care in bringing them up, and at six Months the Children were able to run
alone: When they attained to the age of two years, they cut off their Hair, at
a great Feast made for that purpose; from which time forward they exercised
them in Shooting with Bows and Arrows; to which purpose they hung up pieces of
Meat for them to shoot at, which they must either hit down, or Fast.

Initiation of Soldiers.
Their Ceremonies to make Soldiers were very strange, viz. The Father conducted
his Son to the Carbet, where he told him the Duties of a Soldier, beat him with
a Bird of prey, called Mans-fenis, till he had bruised the Head of the Bird,
and scratched his whole Body all over with a Curry-combe till the Blood came,
and then put Lemmon Juice into the Wounds, afterward put him in a Hammock, and
hung him up for several days without giving him any Meat; all which Torments
and Trials if he endured with patience, then he was accounted a good and
approved Soldier.

Of their Priests.
Few bred up their Children to be Boyez, or Priests; yet those that were brought
up to it, abstained from certain Food from their Infancy, and before they could
be received into the Order of Priesthood, they were forced to draw Blood from
every part of their Bodies.

Great age of the Caribbeeans.
The Caribbeeans attain to an exceeding great Age: Charles de Rotchfort
witnesses, That in his time there lived Men who remembered the first Arrival of
the Spaniards under the Command of Christopher Columbus, which considered, they
could not be less than each of them a hundred and sixty years old. Many Women
also were found thcre, who bare Children after they were eighty years of age:
yet nevertheless they are not free from Sicknesses and Distempers, which cannot
justly be attributed to the Climate, that being extraordinary healthful, but to
their ill Diet. Besides the troublesome Disease called Pyans, which makes their
Bodies swell full of great Knobs, they have been much troubled with
pestilential Sores, occasioned by the eating of Crabs, and poisonous Tortoises,
Lamantins, and Hedg-hogs. Against which Evils they wanted not Medicines,
consisting of Herbs, Roots, Gums, and Oil. The bitter Bark of the Chipiou-Tree,
steeped in Water, and mixed with Lanbys, has a sovereign operation. The like
virtue is in the Juice of the Myby-Tree, which they used to take inwardly: and
for outward Means, they used a Salve made of burnt Caneashes, tempered with a
Water pressed out of a certain Tree. To draw the Matter out of the Sores, they
used the Juice of Junipa. Letting Blood was never customary amongst them, but
to cut and scratch the sore part was to them in stead of Phlebotomy. But if all
the forementioned Medicines would not help them, they fled for aid to the
Boyez, who immediately ordered the Hut wherein the Patient lay to be made
clean, the Table called Matoutou to be overspread with Cassave, Ouycou, and
Garden Fruits, for an Offering to the evil Spirit Maboya, and as many Stools to
be placed about the same as there were People to be present at the Ceremony;
and after that all the Fire and Candles were put out, the Boy entered into the
Hut about Midnight with a Lighted Roll of Tobacco, then muttering some words to
himself, stamped with his left Foot, and blew the Smoke of the Tobacco up into
the Air, which done, and tearing the Tobacco in pieces, he threw the same over
the Hut, and called up his Spirit, who shaking the Roof of the House, made a
terrible noise; then the Boy drew near to the Patient, sucked his Sores, and
anointed them with the Juice of Junipa; after which if the sick Person
recovered, he made a great Feast, and an Offering to the aforesaid Spirit: But
if the Distemper were mortal, then the Boy informed the Patient's Relations,
That his Spirit had compassion upon the Sick, and was resolved to carry him
above the Stars, to accompany the other Gods which reside there.

Thus much in general of the Inhabitants of the Isles that lie before Northern
America; it will next be requisite to give you an Account of them in particular.

The number of the Caribbee Island.
There are generally reckoned of these Islands twenty eight by Name, though
there are many more in number; for besides that there are a multitude of small
obscure Islands that are not named, there are of the more considerable
sometimes two or three that go under one Name; Their several Names.
the twenty eight are these following: Anegada, Sombrero, Las Virgins,
Anguilla, Saba, St. Crux, St. Martin, St. Bartholomew, Barbouthos or Barboude,
Rotonda, Nevis, Eustathius, Antego, Montserrat, Guadalupe, Deseado,
Marigalanta, Todos Sanctos, De Aves, Dominco, Martinego, St. Lucia, Barbados,
St. Vincent, Bekia, Granada, Tabago, St. Christopher.

SECT. II. Anegada and Sombrero.
Situation of Anegada and Sombrero.
Toward the North-East of Porto Rico, at eighteen Degrees and thirteen Minutes,
lies Anegada, seven Leagues long, surrounded with Shoals and Banks, as also the
neighboring Sombrero, being in the same Latitude with the other, and so called
by the Spaniard, because it appears like a Hat: Both of them being uninhabited,
The Mansfeny.
harbor abundance of Birds, amongst which is the Mansfeny, a little Eagle, and
the remarkable Colibry, whose Body being a little bigger than a Wren, The
Colibry.
is adorned with diverse colored Feathers, resembling a Rain-bowe; about its
Neck is a Carbuncle red Circle; the Belly and ends of the Feathers are of a
Golden color, the Sides of an Emerauld green, the Bill and Legs black like
polished Ebony, the Eyes glittering like Diamonds, on the Head a curious green
tuft of Feathers: the Cocks far exceed the Hens in beauty; they fly swifter
than any Bird whatsoever, and the fluttering of their Wings makes a noise like
a Whirlwind: they live upon the Juice of Flowers, and especially of
Cotton-Flowers; they smell like Amber, and build their Nests amongst the thick
Leaves of a little Bough, where they cannot easily be found; the Nest it self
open toward the South, is curiously made of the fine Fibers of the Plant Pite,
surrounded with pieces of Bark, and within filled with Cotton, douny Feathers,
and Silk; the Eggs oval, are somewhat bigger than an ordinary Pearl.

In the Month of May that sort of Crabs called Painted Crabs (for some have
Violet-colour'd Shells, others yellow, full of purple Specks, and others tawny,
Painted Crabs
with red Streaks) come creeping down the Hills in good order, eat up all the
Herbs and Plants, and go four times one after another into the Water to wash
themselves, which done they return to the Woods; but the Females at a set-time
betake themselves to the Sea, in which they Lay their Eggs, which afterward
being cast on the sandy Shore, and warmed by the Beams of the Sun, produce
young Crabs in a short time, which no sooner come out of the Shell, but creep
toward the Woods, when grown somewhat bigger they climb up the Rocks, where
the old ones keep in vast multitudes, and stop up the Entrance of their Holes
in such a manner, that they cannot be found out, whilst they cast off their
Shell, creeping out backward through an opening at the Tail scarce discernable;
thus for a certain time they lie bare, and stripped of their Shells, being only
covered with a thin Skin, which growing harder and harder, becomes at last a
firm Shell like the former.

These Crabs are a wholesome Meat, unless they feed under the Mancheneel. Trees,
which commonly are poisonous.

SECT. III. Las Virgins.
Situation of Las Virgins.
NEar Sombrero, at eighteen Degrees, lie also the two Isles Las Virgins,
surrounded by ten others (and flat Shelves), without Trees or fresh Water; but
the Sea thereabouts abounds with Fish, and chiefly with the Perroket, which
has Scales like a Carp, but greenish; the Eyes surrounded with Silver Circles
shine very bright; in stead of Teeth they have strong Jaw-bones, wherewith they
Grind all manner of Shellfish, which are their Prey. These Fish have an
excellent Relish, and weigh generally twenty Pound.

The Fish Dorade.
Here is likewise great plenty of the Dorade, which is a very large Fish, and
about five Foot long, full of little Scales, with a prickly Back, two Fins at
the parting of the Head, and as many under the Belly. This Fish swimming very
swift, oftentimes follows the Ships that Sail that way.

SECT. IV. Anguilla.
Situation of Anguilla.
SOuthward at eighteen Degrees and twenty Minutes, on this side of the Line,
appears Anguilla, inhabited by the English, containing ten Leagues in length;
It makes a pleasant Prospect, because of the many Junipa-Trees which grow upon
the same, whose Boughs bend toward the Ground; the Leaves are not unlike those
of an Oak; the Flowers both in smell and shape come near the Narcissus; the
Wood firm and gray, may be neatly Plan'd; the Tree bears fresh Leaves every
Month, and a Fruit like Apples, which generally crack in their fall from the
Tree, because of their thin Shell, as has been already described.

Oculiem a sort of Vine.
The Oculiem, or Vine, makes the Shore also very pleasant; the Leaf round and
thick, has a mixture of Red and Green; the Bark incloseth a Violet-colour'd
Wood; the Boughs whereof are loaded with Violet Grapes, which in stead of
Kernels contain hard Stones.

SECT. V. Saba.
Situation of Saba.
VVEstward from Anguilla, at seventeen Degrees and thirty five Minutes, lies
Saba, which shows at a great distance like a Rock. The Inhabitants of St.
Eustathius going thither, found a pleasant Valley, able to maintain many
Families.

The Sea about this Island is so clear, that a Stone may be seen lying on the
bottom of it.

The Fish Bonito.
Amongst many other sorts of Fish, the Bonito is the most remarkable, which is
thick and fleshy, two Foot long, with a dark green Back, and white Belly
without Scales; It devours greedily all manner of Carrion.

SECT. VI. St. Crux.
Situation and first Plantation of St. Crux.
NOrth of St. Christophers, in eighteen Degrees and some Minutes, lies St. Crux,
which the Caribbeeans who were beaten by the Apalachites, first inhabiting,
called Ayay, where Columbus found great opposition, for the Women themselves
shot poisonous Arrows at the Spaniards; and before the Islanders submitted to
them, they took many Spanish Ships, burnt their Villages, and flayed many of
the Spaniards alive. The Soil, though Hilly, is rich and fruitful.

The English Landing here Anno 1587. found a standing Pool, whose Water made
swell the Faces of those who washed themselves with the same before Sunrising,
in such a manner, that they were not able to see for several days after; but
they at last found a Fountain of wholesome Water.

The several Changes of Dominion of this Island.
Since the Spaniards destroyed the Inhabitants of this Island, it lay desolate
for a considerable time, notwithstanding it has fourteen Leagues in length,
and little less in breadth, till at last the English and Hollanders took
possession of the same, each in a peculiar place; but not agreeing together,
the English fell upon the Hollanders, and made themselves Masters of the Island
in 1649. and not long after they were served in the same kind; for the Spaniard
judging them to be weakened by the Hollanders removing from the Island, set Sail
thither from Porto Rico, burnt all the Houses, slew the Inhabitants, and
brought St. Crux again under the Spanish Government. Mean while the Lord Poincy
fitted out two Sail of French Ships, to drive the Spaniards from St. Crux, and
succeeded in his Enterprise; for the Spaniards immediately fled to their Ships,
left at liberty some Holland Prisoners whom they had taken, and the Island in
possession of the French; who straightway sent Captain Auger thither view of
St. Martin DE STADT St. MARTIN
URBS MARTINI
A. (...). B. (...). C. (...) vigilune D. Mons Calvariae. E. Littus, in quod
Hollandi descendant. F. Area, abi in ordines distrituti milites. G. Vit, per
quam urbem invadem. H. Stutiones Hollandoram. I. Templum cathedrale. K. Domus
Prafecti urbis. L. Templum Nosocomii. M. Templum Dominici. N. Monasteriam
Franciscanorum. O. Sacellum. P. Littus, quo appellabantur cijmba Hollandic^. Q.
Sinus irgens R. Thevius aquae recontis. S. Statis navium ante arcem.


as Governor, who designed to build a Fort to secure the Harbor, but died
before the same was finished. Poincy succeeding him, made an end of the Fort,
and stored the Island with Ammunition and Provision. The Cross-Church built
there by the Order, and at the Cost of a Company of Flushing in Holland, was
delivered also to the French.

The Trees which grow here are of four beneficial kinds, Fruit Trees.
serving for four several uses; some yield Fruits of a pleasant taste, and
wholesome to eat; some excellent Medicines; others Timber for Building; and
others Stuff to Dye with.

Granates, Oranges, Lemmons, and Citrons, grow better here than in any place of
the World.

But the Papaye-Tree is particularly worthy of our Description; The Papaye.
It grows twenty Foot high, without Boughs, thick and straight, hollow and
spungy within, bears three-corner'd Leaves hanging on long Stalks, hollow in
the middle, and of a Fingers thickness; on the top round about the Body of the
Tree, grow a sort of Fruit like Quinces.

This sort of Papaye-Tree grows on most of the Caribbee Islands; but the second
sort called Mamoa, is to be found no where but on St. Crux; it has more Leaves
than the first, and a yellow Bark with green Streaks, within full of round and
sharp biting Grains; the Blossoms thereof yield a sweet smell; every Month the
Tree produces new Fruit, not unlike a Woman's Breast (whence it has its
Denomination as before observed,) and rellishing incomparably well.

SECT. VII. St. Martin.
Situation of St. Martin.
NOt far from St. Crux, at eighteen Degrees and sixteen Minutes, lies St.
Martin, which has seven Leagues in length and five in breadth, and is famous
for many excellent Salt-Mines; to preserve which, the Spaniards built a City
and Fort there.

The Dutch Land ther^.
Adrian Peter and Martyn Thyszoon, sent with eleven Sail of Ships from the
Texel by the West India Company, to Cruse for the Spanish Plate-Fleet before
the Flemmish Isles, finding their labor lost, Steered to the Inlet of Todos los
Sanctos; where finding no Enemies Ships, they Sailed along the Coast of
Pernambuck, and from thence (meeting with no Prize) to the Caribbee Islands;
and Landing on Granada, received some damage from the Inhabitants: thence going
to Blanca, they got above a thousand Goats, and ten thousand Lemmons from
Hispaniola; near Cuba they were surprised with continual Thunder, Showers, and
Storms, which forced them to stand to and again off the Island a considerable
time, where they thought to wait for the Spanish Ships that came from Nombre de
Dios; but being defeated of their aim, by reason that Fleet was re-inforc'd
with a considerable Supply, they set Sail Anno 1629. toward the City and Fort
of St. Martin, where coming to an Anchor they found the Place in this
condition: On the right side of the City glides a Fresh Water River, with many
meandring Streams from the Mountains; on the left side the Ocean makes a great
Opening or Bay, which for a little space growing narrower, becomes at last an
Inland Lake; from the Country opposite to the City on the other side of the
forementioned Inlet, runs a Ridge of Hills toward the Sea; on the utmost Point
thereof stands a square Fort, defended from the force of the Water with great
Stones, pyl'd up at the Foot thereof, covered like a House, having on the top
of it a Watchtower, and not far from it a Chapel; moreover, the Mountain
Calvaria, rises on each side and behind the City, with high Precipices; not far
from the Mouth of the River appears a strong Castle with several Bulwarks, and
thereon great Guns; along the Inlet is a fair Marketplace; in the middle of
the City stands a Church Consecrated to Dominicus, near which there is a large
Hospital, which fronts the Sea; the Cathedral stands at the farther end of the
City, and on the declivity of a Mountain a fair Chapel; near the great Fort
the Governor has a pretty Palace; nor are the Franciscan Cloisters much
inferior to any of the other Structures of this City, which taken altogether
bears a good Form, by reason of the uniformity of the Streets.

The Island possessed by the Dutch.
But Anno 1648. the Spaniard totally deserted this Island, which Michael
Adriaenszoon Ruiter hearing of, brought several People from St. Eustathius, and
took possession of it in the Name of the States of the United Netherlands: Yet
they enjoyed not long the entire Propriety, for the Spaniards again went and
claimed those Places which were theirs upon the first gaining of the Island;
which the Hollanders allowing them, they lived peaceably and quietly together,
each having their own Churches, Storehouses, Land, and Negro's. The Dutch
Plantation was maintained by the Zealand Lords, Lamsen and Van Ree.

There are diverse Pools of salt Water in this Island, which afford the
Inhabitants store of Fish, and especially Tortoises.

The Woods produce wild Hogs, Pigeons, Turtle-Doves, and Parraquito's
resembling a Parrot, and which though much smaller, are more apt to be taught.

Near the Salt-pools also breed Birds called Flammans, Flammans.
not unlike a Jack-daw, only differing in Feathers, for they are first white,
next ash-colored, and at last turn red; they seldom fly or sit alone, but for
the most part in great Flocks in open places, and Moorish Grounds; when some of
them seek for their Food under Water, one of them stands Sentinel, and on the
least noise or appearance of a Man, gives notice by Chirping to the rest, who
hereupon immediately flee away; those that shoot them lie commonly hid under an
Ox Hide.

About the same Pools breed likewise the American Swallows, American Swallows.
with crooked Bills, Feet like Ducks, black Bodies, white Bellies, and long
Tails.



SECT. VIII. St. Bartholomew.
Situation and Description of St. Bartholomew.
NEar St. Martin, at sixteen Degrees, lies the Island St. Bartholomew, which
being about five Leagues in circumference, is surrounded with Rocks, and was
first Planted by De Poincy: It makes a delightful Prospect, because of the many
Trees which grow on the same; amongst which the most noted are the Soap-Trees,
whose Wood makes the Water Lather, and washes as well as Soap; but they are of
two sorts, for in some this soapy Quality is contained in a round yellow Fruit,
not unlike a Plumb; in others a white soft Root supplies the office.

The little Tree Canopia, out of whose Bark drops a Gum, The Canopia-Tree.
grows also very pleasant, the Body being divided into several Branches; the
Leaves are discolored, being underneath of a dark Green, and of a brighter at
the top; the Flower consists of five Leaves, and closes at last into a kind of
Cherry, full of yellow Juice, and white Pulp; it blossoms generally in October
and December, and bear ripes Berries the two following Months: a Fire being
made about the Tree causes the Bark to crack, whereby it yields abundance of
Gum, chiefly used in Medicine for its opening and loosening Quality.

Likewise the Paretuve-Tree, which grows along by the Seaside and by Pools,
The Paretuve-Tree.
sufficiently remarkable, for the Boughs thereof grow downwards, twined and
pleited together so thick, that in time of War they serve for Bulwarks, and are
the Recesses of wild Swine.

Moreover, on this Island, as on all the other hereabouts, grow Calabash-Trees,
The Calabash-Tree.
which have thick Boughs and oval Leaves joined one to another, and bear every
Month fresh Flowers and Fruit, gray Flowers, marked with green Streaks and
black Spots, and Fruit with hard Shells, full of juicy Meat and flat Seeds,
which being taken out serve for Boxes, Cups, or little Dishes.

Along the Shore is also found a sort of Fish called the Sea-Star, Sea-Star.
which is a yellowish Fish, whose hard Skin full of little Knots shoot forth
five Darts or Beams; in stormy Weather they fasten themselves to the Rocks.

No less wonderful is the Fish called the Sea-Apple, Sea-Apple.
whose brown Skin is full of Prickles, which when the Fish dies fall off,
nothing remaining but a white Shell, curiously embroidered with little Holes.

On the Banks, and near the Rocks, grow also Sea-Trees, whose thickest Boughs
putting forth still lesser and lesser Branches, are pleited together very
wonderfully, and being all glazed as it were with Saltpeter, seem greyish.

SECT. IX. Barboude.
Situation of Barbouthos.
BArbouthos, which some call Barboude, others Barbada, being five Leagues in
length, lies at seventeen Degrees and thirty Minutes, and North-East from
Monserrat, in a shallow Sea.

English molested by the Caribbeeans.
Here the English Planting, have from their first Arrival been much molested by
the Caribbeeans of Dominico, who for a great while used twice a year to Invade
them in the Night, killing and destroying whom and whatsoever they met with,
only Women and Children, with some other Booty, they carried to Dominico.

SECT. X. Rotonda.
Situation of Rotonda.
THe Isle Rotonda, which is much lesser, has received that Denomination from
its round Form, for it rises in the middle into a Hill, which at a distance
appears like a Steeple; It lies at seventeen Degrees and ten Minutes. The Sea
about the same being very deep, makes a good coming to the Island with Ships.

SECT. XI. Nevis.
Situation of Nevis.
IN sight of Rotonda, at seventeen Degrees and nineteen Minutes, lies Nevis,
which has six Leagues in circumference. Out of the middle of the Island rises
a Mountain all over woody; round about which the English, who Settled there
Anno 1628. have their Plantations, and have increased from a small number to
above three thousand, and make a good Advantage of their Sugar, Ginger, Cotton,
and Tobacco, which they Plant there.

Good Government of the English there.
They are Governed by a peculiar Governor and a Council, who punish Thieves, and
all manner of Deboshes very severely.

There are also three Churches, which on the Sabbath Day are all thronged with
People, who resort thither for the Worship and Service of God.

The Harbor called Bath-Bay, and the Storehouse built about the same, are
secured by a great Fort full of great Guns.

Several Springs on this Island afford the Inhabitants good Water. Here is also
a Mineral Spring, a place to Bathe in, which has been found to cure the same
Distempers which the Waters at Bourbon have done.

Moreover, this Island abounds with the Pistacie or Pistick-Nuts, The
Pistick-Nut.
which grow on small Trees, with soft long Leaves, round at bottom, and ending
in three Points: These Trees being commonly full of thick Boughs, serve
commodiously for Hedges; the Wood and Leaves sweat a milky Juice, dropping out
of the same with the Rain; the yellow Flowers which grow on the same are like
glittering Stars, and the taste of the Nuts like a Hazle; but if the Skin which
covers the Kernel be not pulled off before they are eaten, they purge to Death.

But the great Profit which Nevis receives by Nature is attended with some
Inconveniences, The Musticho.
which trouble this and all the other Islands: amongst many may be reckoned the
Musticho's, a sort of little Bugs, whose poisonous Sting causes such
intolerable Itching, that those who are stung by them cannot forbear to scratch
themselves till the Blood comes, by which their Sores festering, prove often
very dangerous.

Also the Muringoins, who are so much the less dangerous, The Muringoins.
because they make always a great noise before they sting.

Wasps likewise are here very troublesome, but their Stings are cured with Rue,
as the Stings of Scorpions are with the Juice pressed out of the same Animal.

The Wood-Lice, which are here in great abundance, Wood-Lice.
have a soft and white Body, only the Head, which is marked with a black
Speck; their Mouths are so very hard, that in two hours time they eat through
thick Chests. And no less damage do the Banettos.

But the Chigos are a kind of small Fleas, that breed in Dust, Ashes, and the
like, Chigos.
and are of all the most pernicious; they first get in under the Nails of the
Toes, and from thence run over all the Body, but especially the bottoms of the
Feet, where they first occasion an Itching, and then eat Holes through the
Skin; they make Blisters as big as Pease in the Flesh, wherein a swarm of young
ones breeding, cause Ulcers and rotten Flesh, which must be eaten away with
Aquafortis and burnt Allom.

SECT. XII. Eustathius.
Situation of Eustathius.
EUstathius, which is rather a Mountain, rising out of the Ocean like a
Sugar Loaf, than an Island, lies at seventeen Degrees and forty Minutes: It
has scarce five Leagues in circumference, yet received some while since a
Colony of above sixteen hundred People, sent thither from the States of the
United Netherlands, under the Command of the Lords Lampsen and Ree. Besides the
natural Strength of the Place, whereby a few are able to keep off a great
number, it is fortified with a strong Fort, which Commands the Harbor. The
Inhabitants are very industrious, and make great profit of the Tobacco which
they Plant.

In the midst of this Island is a Mountain overgrown with Trees, which seems
to end in a Point, and has about it a pleasant Plain.

The abundance of Fowls, Hogs and Goats, afford the Inhabitants store of
Provisions; for their Storehouses are never so empty, but that they can supply
their Neighbors Wants.

The want of fresh water Brooks they supply with Rainwater, which they
preserve in Cisterns.

Though the Air of the Island be wholesome, and the Soil fruitful, yet it is
subject to many great Inconveniences; for besides the terrible Thunderclaps
and Earthquakes, that rend the Ground, Terrible Hurricanes.
the Inhabitants are exceedingly troubled in August, and September with the
Winds, which in twenty four hours blow from all Points of the Compass with such
mighty Gusts, as if they would turn all things into their first Chaos. The
Caribbeeans call these Tempests Hurricanes, which formerly used to happen but
once in seven years, but of late every two years, and sometimes twice in a
year. What damage these Winds cause is scarce to be expressed; the Sea raising
its turbulent Waves up to the Skies, casts the Ships on the Shore, which though
in Harbor, are certain to be wracked, whilst the Land seems to labor under a
general Ruin, whole Woods being rooted up by the same, or at least bereaved of
Boughs and Leaves; the Corn is beaten down, the Plants blasted, Houses turned
topsie-turvy, Mountains rent asunder, and sometimes pieces of Rocks blown into
the Sea. Before the Hurricanes there are several forerunners, which give
notice of their sudden approach, viz. the Sea on a sudden is so calm, that the
least motion is not perceived; the Birds fly from the Mountains into the
Valleys, where they lay themselves flat on the Ground; and the Rain which falls
is bitter and salt.

Charles de Rochfort observed, that in his time some Ships laden with Tobacco
being lost in a Hurricane before St. Christophers, soon after the Tempest
ceased, thousands of Fishes were seen swimming with their Bellies upwards,
intoxicated no doubt with the Tobacco.

SECT. XIII. Antego.
Situation of Antego.
BEtween Nevis and Montserrat, at sixteen Degrees and eleven Minutes, lies
Antego, being seven Leagues long, and about six broad; It is dangerous to come
at with great Ships, because of the many Rocks which lie before it, and
remained the longer uninhabited, because of the want of fresh Water; yet at
last the English taking possession of it, dug Pits, and made Troughs to
catch and preserve Rainwater in, so that it is now inhabited by at least eight
hundred People, who live on Plants, Venison, and Fish.

Upon the Seashore appears oftentimes the Sword-fish, The Sword-Fish.
which has no Scales, but a gray Skin, and white Belly, rough like a Fyle, a
flat Head, two Fins on each side, two on the Back, and one in stead of a Tail,
with which it makes a swift motion: the Sword of it is a long Bone, armed on
each side with twenty seven white and strong Teeth. This Fish striving to be
Chief of the Sea, Encounters with all other Fishes whatsoever, even with the
Whale himself, whose Belly he often rends open; near his Eyes are two Nostrils,
out of which he blows the Water he drinks into the Air.

SECT. XIV. Montserrat.
Description of Montserrat.
MOntserrat, lying just at the seventeenth Degree, is so called from a Spanish
Hill beyond Barcellona, whose shape this Island represents off at Sea; It is
about three Leagues in length, and almost as much in breadth, and is very
Mountainous, except a little toward the East, and as much Westward.

The English have a Church here, lined in the inside with Cedar, which this
Island produces in great abundance.

Also the Acajou-Tree, which grows an exceeding height, The Acajou-Tree.
with mighty Boughs, under which many judge it very wholesome to sleep: But there
are two sorts of the Acajou-Tree, the one differing from the other in tallness
of Body and Color; of which the most esteemed is the red and sweet smelling,
which is not subject to any decay; for that which is white, and yields Gum when
cut, is of a less value.

The Acomas-Tree.
The Acomas is also no way inferior in bigness to the Acajou, which bears long
swarthy Leaves, and yellow Fruit not unlike a Plumb; but because of their
extraordinary bitterness they are not eatable, only the wild Pigeons at a
certain time of the year feed on them, after which their Flesh becomes bitter
also; from the Bark when cut, runs a milky Juice.

The Cypress-Tree.
The Cypress-Trees when plan'd, yield a pleasant Marble color to the Eye, and a
delightful fragrance to the Scent.

The Iron-Tree.
The Iron-Tree, with sharp-pointed Leaves, cracked near the Stalk, blossoms in
March and September; after the Violet Blossoms follow a black kind of Fruit
like a Cherry, being an excellent Food for Birds; the Wood whilst flourishing
is red, but cut down changes its color, yet is so hard that it never decays.

Moreover the Musk-Herb yields a sweet smell, The Musk-Herb.
and grows like Brambles without Thorns; between long dusky Leaves hang yellow
Flowers, which afterward become Cods full of Seeds, that smell exactly like
Musk.

SECT. XV. Guadalupe.
Situation of Guadalupe.
GUadalupe, or Gardelupe, formerly called Carricueira, lying at about sixteen
Degrees, and containing sixty Leagues in circumference (for it is the biggest
and noblest of the Caribbee Islands,) is divided in two by a narrow Channel;
wherefore one part is called Grand-Terre, and the other properly Guadalupe;
whose Eastern Point, named Cabes-Terre, and its Western, called Basse-Terre,
are both inhabited by the French.

Several high Mountains, especially toward the Center, Mountains.
start up from very low Grounds, with their barren Crowns toward the Sky,
some whereof are overgrown with Trees.

At the Feet of some of the Mountains are large Plains, ^^^ter'd by sweet
Streams which formerly invited the Spanish Fleets thither to water.

There is also a sulphurous Mountain, which smoking continually gives the
taste of Sulphur to the Streams which flow about the same.

This Island boasts likewise several boiling Springs which cure the Dropsy,
and all other Distempers proceeding from Colds.

Toward each of the two forementioned Points, Strange Fish.
are large Gulphs that produce abundance of Tortoises, and all manner of Fish,
and amongst others one sort not known by Name, which is generally about four
Foot long, having a sharp and big Head, with glittering Eyes, a Back streaked
with blue and green, and a Belly half white and half red, eight yellow Fins,
and a broad Tail, with which it swims exceeding swift.

Near the Shore swim the Sharks, an ugly Sea Monster, The Shark.
which bites a Man asunder in the Middle at once; their Head is hard and
prickly, their flat Mouths opening discover three rows of Teeth.

After this Fish swims generally the Pilot-Fish, The Pilot-Fish.
which is so curiously speckled, that Nature seems herein to excel whatever
can be represented by the artificial Pencil) and move either swifter or slower,
according as the Shark leads. The Brain of this Fish is judged exceeding good
against the Gravel and Stone.

The discovery of Guadalupe
Guadalupe was first discovered in the Year of our Lord 1635. by the French,
under the Command of the Lords Du Plessis and De Olive, and after them one of
the Captains of St. Christophers: Since which the Champain Ground being Tilled
and Manured, brings forth in great plenty, Rice, Maiz, Manicock, and Potato's.

Father Raymond Breton got possession of the fruitfullest part of the Island
for the Reformed Jacobines, or White-Fryers, and since the present Governor
Monsieur De Howell sent also for the Jesuits and Carmelites, to build Cloisters
in a new City, which lies in Basse-Terre, and which is also built full of
Storehouses and Dwelling-houses two Stones high:

The Castle, which lies near the City, has four Bulwarks, with great Guns.

The next neighboring Mountain is also crowned with Garrisoned Fort.

The Moubane-Tree.
The Country hereabouts bears Moubane-Trees, which produce yellow oval Plumbs
with great Stones, wherewith the Hogs are exceedingly fatned.

The Corbary.
The Corbary, which grows higher than the Moubane, has a hard shelly Fruit, in
which lies a douny Pulp of a Saffron color: The Gum which drops out of the
Tree is hardened by the Sun, and becomes very clear, wherefore the Caribbeeans
make use of it for Arm-rings, and other Ornaments.

SECT. XVI. Deseado.
Situation of Deseado.
TEn Leagues to the North-West of Guadalupe, and at sixteen Degrees and ten
Minutes, appears Deseado, or Desirado, like a Galley, of which the North-East
end has a low Point; to the Northward lie Sand-Hills full of red Veins: It was
so called by Christopher Columbus in his second Voyage, from obtaining of his
Desire, it being the first of the Caribbees which he discovered, as St.
Salvador the first Land in all America.

The Guano.
The Soil is wholly barren, and destitute of Trees, and breeds the amphibious
Creatures called Guano's, which in stead of Fins to swim withal, have four
Feet; the biggest of them are fifteen Inches long; their Skin full of little
Scales shines like Silver, and in the Night they make a loud and shrill noise
from the Holes in the Rocks.

The Frigates.
On this desolate Island are an innumerable company of Fowls, called Frigates,
which have a Body like a Duck, but larger Wings, and fly swifter; so soon as
they perceive a Fish in the Water, they falling upon the same, catch them in
their Claws, and especially devour abundance of flying Fish.

The Fauves.
But the Fauves, which are much leaner, are no way so swift; they resemble a
Moor-Hen, have Feet like Ducks; Bills like a Snipe, and in rainy Nights rest on
the Ships in stead of Rocks, so that many times they become an easy prey to
the Mariners.

SECT. XVII. Marigalante.
Situation of Marigalante.
NOt far from hence, at fifteen Degrees and forty Minutes, appears Marigalante,
like a Wood in the Water.

On the South-East side, about half a League from the Shore, lie black (...)
full of white Specks. Westerly the Shore is very plain, whither the Governor
Monsieur De Howell sent some People from that Island, of which twenty were
killed by the Caribbeeans, who had Gardens and Fish Ponds thereon: Not long
after which Howell built a Fort here, and Garrisoned the same with Frenchmen.

The Woods afford a delightful sight to the Eye, as also the Cinamon-Trees,
whose Leaves never wither, a sweet smell to the Nose.

The Fish Lamantin.
The Ocean hereabouts produces plenty of Lamantins, which are dried like
Haberdine. This Fish grows eighteen Foot long and seven thick; the Head thereof
is like a Cows, with little Eyes, and a thick brown Skin, rough and speckled in
some places, and has two little Feet in stead of Fins; it feeds on Weeds,
which grow on the Rocks and Banks; the Females bring two young ones at a time,
which suck for some days; their Flesh palatable and wholesome, is streaked with
Fat, which when melted never putrifies; they are oftener taken in the Mouths of
Rivers than in the Ocean.

The Sea-Devils.
About this Isle, as well as the rest of the Caribbees, are Fishes called
Sea-Devils, four Foot long, and proportionably thick, their Skins rough, their
Heads flat, their Backs armed with Prickles, little black Eyes, wide Mouths
full of Teeth, and two Tusks that stick out of the same, four Fins, a long slit
Tail, with which they swim exceeding swift, above their Eyes stick broad sharp
Horns turned toward the Back; the Flesh is deadly poison.

The Becune.
The Becune, which is eight Foot long, falls upon a Fish like a mad Dog, biting
great pieces of the Flesh out of the Body, which occasions present Death; its
Flesh is likewise poison.

SECT. XVIII. Todos Sanctos.
Situation of Todos Sanctos
SOuthward from Guadalupe, and at the same Latitude with Marigalante, lie four
desolate Isles, called Todos Sanctos, and on their Shores a sort of Shellfish
called Lambis, from the resemblance of a Tongue; Curious sorts of Shells.
the Shells whereof the Indians Sound in stead of Horns when they give an
Alarm; as also another sort called Porcelenes, of which the most esteemed are
without of a Carnation, and within of a Silver, or Skye-colour mixed with
Golden Beams. The next are the Black, mixed with a pale Blue, and little Veins.
But the most remarkable Shells are those, whose Back Nature has marked in such
a manner with Musical Notes, that one might almost express a Tune by them.

Mother-of-Pearl Oysters.
Moreover, it would amaze the Beholder, to see the Mother-of-Pearl Oyster moving
at the Foot of a Rock; for at the Rising of the Sun they appear above the
Water, and gape for the Dew, of which they have no sooner received a Drop, but
they close their Shells, and fall to the Ground again.

SECT. XIX. De Aves.
Situation of De Aves.
VVEstward from Todos Sanctos, at fifteen Degrees and forty five Minutes, lies
the Isle De Aves.

Besides Ducks, Pluvers, Moor-hens; Geese, and the like Fowls (that suffer
themselves to be caught by the Hands of Men, which are very strange to them)
there are here also many rare sorts of Birds, as the white Birds called
Aigrettos, Aigrettos.
which are somewhat bigger than Crows, with red Bills and Feet, and curious
Plumes on their Heads; they often fly a great way off at Sea.

The large Bird called The Craw-fowl, Craw-fowl.
which feeds on Fish, has a thick Head, a long flat Bill, hollow Eyes, and a
short Neck, under which hangs the Maw, big enough to contain a Pail full of
Water: On the Trees along the Seaside they watch for Fish which swim near the
top of the Water, and by their attentiveness on their Prey, are easily shot
themselves.

Here is likewise the Bird Arras, Arras.
of the bigness of a Pheasant, but more resembling a Parraquito: their long
Tail consists of diverse colored Feathers, some have shining skye-colour'd
Heads, Backs, and Necks, their Bellies and Wings of a pale Yellow; they are so
stout, or rather so simple, that if they are not hit with the first Shot, they
will stay for a second: They also learn to talk, but not so distinctly as the
Canides, which are no way inferior in beauty to the Arras, nay exceed them very
much: Monsieur du Montell above mentioned, seeing one at Corassao, describes it
after this manner:

Description of the Canides.
It deserves to be numbered (says he) amongst the most beautiful Birds in the
World: I took so particular notice of it, having had of them in my Hands many
times, that I have the Idea's of it still fresh in my Memory. Under the Belly,
Wings, and Neck, it was of a waving Aurora-colour, the Back, and one half of
the Wings, of a very bright Skye-colour, the Tail and greater Feathers of the
Wings were mixed with a sparkling Carnation, diversifi'd with a Skye-colour, as
upon the Back a Grass-green and shining Black, which very much added to the
Gold and Azure of the other Plumage: But the most beautiful part was the Head,
covered with a Murrey Down, checkered with Green, Yellow, and a pale Blue,
which reached down wavingly to the Back: The Eyelids were white, and the Apple
of the Eye yellow and red as a Ruby Set in Gold: It had upon the Head a certain
Tuft or Cap of Feathers of a Vermilion Red, sparkling like a lighted Coal,
which was encompassed by several other lesser Feathers of a Pearlcolour.

If it were recommendable for all these extraordinary Ornaments, it was much
more for its Familiarity and Innocence; for though it had a crooked Beak, and
that the Claws with which it held its Meat and brought it to its Beak, were so
sharp as to take away whatsoever it fastened upon, yet was it so tame as to play
with little Children and never hurt them; and when one took him into his Hand,
he so contracted his Claws, that the sharpness of them could not be felt: He
had this Quality of a Dog, That he would Lick with his short and thick Tongue
those who made much of him and gave him something he liked, put his Head to
their Cheeks to Kiss and Caress them, and expressing his Acknowledgments by a
thousand pretty Insinuations, he would suffer himself to be put into what
posture one would, and took a certain pleasure in diverting those he thought
his Friends: But as he was mild and traceable to those who were kind to him, so
was he mischievous and irreconcilable to such as had injured him, and he could
distinguish them from others, and make them feel the sharpness of his Beak and
Claws.

He pratled in the Dutch, Spanish, and Indian Languages, and in the last he
sung Airs as a natural Indian: He also imitated the Cries of all sorts of
Poultrey and other Creatures about the House; he called all his Friends by
their Names and Sirnames, flew to them as soon as he saw them, especially when
he was hungry; if they had been absent, and that he had not seen them a long
time, he expressed his joy at their return by certain merry Notes; when he had
sported himself till they were weary of him, he went away, and perched himself
on the top of the House, and there he talked, sung, and played a thousand
tricks, laying his Feathers in order, and dressing and cleaning himself with
his Beak. He was easily kept; for not only the Bread commonly used in that
Island, but all the Fruits and Roots growing there, were his ordinary Food; and
when he had more given him than he needed, he carefully laid up the remainder
under the Leaves wherewith the House was covered, and took it when he had need.
In a word, I never saw a more loving or more amiable Bird; 'twas a Present for
any Prince, if he could have been brought over the Sea. This Bird had been
brought from the Caribbee Islands to Monsieur Rodenborck, then Governor of the
Fort and Dutch Colony, which is in the Island of Corassao.

SECT. XX. Dominico.
Situation of Dominico.
AT fifteen Degrees and thirteen Minutes, lies the Island Dominico, so called
because it was discovered on a Sunday, about thirty Leagues long, and not much
less in breadth, and diversifi'd with high Mountains, and exceeding deep
Valleys; of which the Caribbeeans that dwell there relate, That formerly in one
of the deepest of them, a huge and monstrous Serpent had an Army of Serpents to
defend an invaluable Carbuncle which he had in his Head; which being covered
with a thin Skin, was only discernable when he drank or played, for then the
luster thereof lightened the whole Valley.

When first the French approached this Coast with their Ships, the Islanders
going Aboard in their Canoos, bartered Provisions for Coral, Crystal, and other
Trifles.

The Manchenile Tree.
On this Isle also grows the famous Manchenile-Tree, which bears long Leaves,
and sweet smelling Fruit, streaked red, and tasting like a Hazle-Nut, but
bringing a deadly Sleep upon those that ea^ of it; it seldom rots though it
fall into the Sea, or any fresh Rivers, but is crusted over with a Shell
resembling Saltpeter, and poisons the Water in such a manner, that all the
Fish dying, are seen floating upon it; in the Trunk and Boughs thereof is a
milky Juice, which dropping upon the Body, causes it to break out in Scabs, and
if it chances to touch the Eyes, it takes away the Sight for nine days: and not
less hurtful is the Moisture which drops from the Tree.

The Caribbeeans dip their Arrows in this poisonous Juice, against which Nature
has provided an excellent Medicine, being as follows:

A Medicine against the poison of the Manchenile.
There are amongst the other Reptiles of America a sort of Snails, which creep
into the Legs of dead Crabs, to keep themselves from the Weather; when taken
they make a noise, and being laid before the Fire they come forth; the Water
squeezed out of them, or the Oil drawn from them by the Sun, cures the Parts
poisoned by the Manchenile-Tree.

SECT. XXI. Martinico.
Situation of Martinico.
OPposite to Dominico lies Martinico, by the Indians named Matunina, which lying
at fourteen Degrees and thirty Scruples, is forty five Leagues in
circumference; It appears at a distance like three Mountains, the highest
whereof resembles a Hat, and is seen in all parts of the Island, which, on the
North where three Rocks deny access for Landing, seems to be divided into three
Isles.

The Caribbeeans have been forced, after many bloody Battles, to surrender up
this Island to the French: But before they were well settled, the Caribbeeans
marching over exceeding high Mountains, deep Concavities, and thick Woods, fell
upon them with all the Rage imaginable: the Reasons of which some attribute to
Du Parquet, who in prejudice of the Martinican Caribbeeans, sent Frenchmen
over to Granada and Alouzia: others suppose, that they took up Arms to revenge
the Death of their Contrymen on St. Vincent, who were destroyed by the
French with poisoned Brandy. But the French furnished with new Supplies, took
sufficient Revenge; for they drove the Caribbeeans out of their Houses, and
chased them into Woods and Deserts.

The Hills that are overgrown with Trees, are Receptacles for wild Beasts,
especially Hogs and Serpents. The other Hills are Tilled and Sow'n, though not
without great trouble.

The Tobacco which grows on the steep Ascents much exceeds that which grows in
the Valleys, or in the Tracts of Land shaded with Trees.

The Island divided into five Wards.
Since the French, Anno 1635. (being sent from St. Christophers by the Lord
Desnambuc) Settled themselves on this Island, under the Command of his Deputy Du
Pont, they divided it into five Wards, separated from that part of the Isle
which was inhabited by the ancient Natives: Each Ward has a Church, or at
least a Chapel, Armory, Storehouses, and Dwelling-houses, like an entire
Village.

The first Ward is called Pyloot, from a Caribbeean Captain, who was very
familiar with Du Parquet, and informed him of his Peoples Designs.

The second, named Capot, is washed by a River of the same Denomination, and
has many fruitful Plains.

The third retains the Caribbeean Name, being Carbet, signifying a Public
Structure, to which they used to resort to Feast, or hold Councils of War; not
far from which the Governor dwelt in a Stone House: Near the Harbor stood also
an Armory in a Valley, watered by a fresh River which falls out of the
Mountains, shaded with Trees and Gardens full of Rarities: But since the
Governor gave this and many other fair Buildings to the Jesuits, he removed to
the fourth Ward, called St. Peter, where he built a Castle, and furnished the
same with Brass and Iron Guns to defend the Harbor.

A Stones-throw from the Governor's House lies the Jesuits Cloister, on the
Banks of a pleasant Stream, built very artificially of Marble and Freestone,
and having a pleasant Prospect over the River, and adjacent Gardens, beautified
with the choicest of Flowers, Fruits, and Trees; and also a Vineyard, out of
which they press a considerable quantity of Wine.

The last Ward, called Preacheur, extends East and West, some parts whereof
swell into high Mountains, at the Feet whereof stand fair Structures; others
sink into low Valleys or Savannas.

map of Barbados Novissima et Acuratissima BARBADOS. DESCRIPTIO per JOHANNEM
OGILUIUM. Cosm ographum Regium


The Mahot-Tree.
Between the French Settlements and the Caribbeeans, runs an Arm of the Sea,
along whose Shores grows abundance of the Mahot-Tree, which is full of Boughs
from the top down to the Ground. The Bark of this Tree serves in stead of
Ropes, and is also used to tie up Tobacco; the Wood it self is durable, and
good for Building, wherefore most of the Houses built on Hills are of this
Timber.

The best Harbor for Ships is between the Wards Carbet and St. Peter, defended
from the Winds by high Hills.

The Diamond.
Not far from the Inlet of the Salt Pits, appears about half a League off at
Sea, a Rock called The Diamond, being a Receptacle for an innumerable multitude
of Birds, and especially wild Pigeons.

Besides the Streams that in the rainy Seasons run through the Dales and
Savana's, there are ten Rivers, which falling from the Mountains, glide through
the Valleys into the Sea. Sometimes they swell in such a manner, that
overflowing their Banks, they wash down the Trees and Houses; which
Inconvenience has taught the French to build their Houses on Hills or rising
Grounds.

The good Situation of this Island has invited many Families thither.

SECT. XXII. St. Lucia.
Situation of St. Lucia.
ST. Lucia (by the French, Alouzie) is so called because it was discovered on
the thirteenth of December, Dedicated in the Calendar to the Virgin Martyr
Lucia, who was burnt at Syracuse: It lies Southerly from Dominico at thirteen
Degrees and forty Minutes, and is ken'd at a great distance by two fiery
Mountains; the most Easterly of which is higher than the other.

At the Feet of these two Mountains lie pleasant Valleys, shadowed by close
Woods, and moistened by clear Springs; near which heretofore a small number of
Caribbeeans dwelling, maintained themselves with Fishing; they went stark
naked, and painted their Bodies with red Oker, and drew a Vermilion Stroke from
their Ears to their Noses.

An English Ship sent to Guinee to supply the Plantations there, Landed sixty
six mutinous Persons here, who were all killed by the Inhabitants; but when
Henry Jacobson Lucifer putting into the Bay of Lucia to Water there, Anno 1627.
Landed to discover the Island, he found neither Man nor House, nor any thing
but a barren Soil; yet notwithstanding Du Parquet sent his Deputy Rosselan with
a Colony to Plant in this Island.

SECT. XXIII. Barbados.
Situation of Barbados.
THe Island Barbados, which was Planted by the English, Anno 1627. lies between
thirteen and fourteen Degrees, and has twenty five Leagues in circumference,
and somewhat more in length than breadth, and is supplied with a Fresh Water
River, and several Pools. The Ground being fruitful in the producing of
Tobacco, Cotton, Ginger, and especially Sugar, invited many People to Settle
there, insomuch that in a short time it could show twenty thousand Inhabitants
besides Negro Slaves.

The Trees which grow on this Island, are not only delightful, but profitable;
amongst which the Roucou is one, with sharp Leaves, white Carnation Flowers
like Stars, which hang by Clusters at the end of the Boughs, and after a while
turn to a Cod full of vermilion Kernels: The Juice dried in the Sun and kneaded
into Balls, is of a great value. Of the Bark of this Tree they make strong
Ropes; and the Root is very wholesome, and of a pleasant taste.

The Fly Cayouyou.
Moreover, amongst the Insects that breed here, there are a sort of Flies worthy
of a short Description; the Caribbeeans call them Cayouyou, being about the
bigness of a Beetle; they have two strong Wings, and under them thinner, which
they never spread abroad but when they fly, and then they carry such a luster
in them, that they give as much Light in the Night as a lighted Candle, (their
Eyes also at the same time glittering like Fire) making no noise when they
fly; they feed on the Juice of Flowers, and are so smooth, that they are very
apt to slip through ones Fingers, and when they find themselves to be taken,
they hide their glittering Wings under the other.

The Indians tie these Flies to their Hands and Feet, so to have the benefit of
their Light in the Night; and anoint their Bodies all over (at certain
Solemnities wherein Candles are forbidden) with the Juice squeezed out of them,
which causes them to shine like a Flame of Fire: They catch them with a piece
of Wood which they move in the Air, whereupon the Flies going to sit, are taken
with a Hat; but their Light vanishes if they are killed.

But as to what may farther be added concerning this Island, being one of the
chief of our Plantations, we cannot better satisfy the curiosity of those who
desire a true Information of all things that concern that Place, than by
inserting verbatim a Letter from an intelligent Person who has been long
resident there, viz. Colonel Robert Rich, of no older Date than May 31. 1670.
by which the present State and Condition of the Island, the Buildings and other
Improvements made there by the Planters since they first possessed it, in what
Commodities of the Growth of the Country their chief Trade consists, their
Strength, Militia, Government, and flourishing Commerce, and whatever else is
material to be imparted, may be clearly understood.

SIR,
Colonel Rich his Description of the Barbados.
I Have lately seen your Proposal concerning an English Atlas, and having read
Dr. Heylin's Book of Chorography and History of the whole World, his third
Edition Corrected and Enlarged, Printed Anno 1666. 1 find him very short and
erroneous in his Description of the Caribbee Islands, especially of this Island
of Barbados, wherein I have been an Inhabitant more than eleven years. He says,

1. The Island is seventeen or eighteen Miles in compass.

2. On the South it is furnished with a large and commodious Harbor.

3. The chief Commodities are Tobacco, and a kind of course Sugar, called
Barbados Sugar, which must be quickly spent, or 'twill melt to nothing.

4. That this Island is worth all the Plantations made by the English, and yet
that we hold it at the Courtesy of the Spaniard, without whose Leave and
Liking, not of Force to hold it.

This Description of Dr. Heylin's, in it self very false, is also much to the
Dishonor of the English Nation, which makes me presume to trouble you with my
own Observations, wherein having only aimed at the Truth, you shall not have
cause to doubt of being misguided.

This Island of Barbados is seated in thirteen Degrees and twenty Minutes, in
longth twenty two Miles, and in breadth fourteen and an half; It is na^urally
fortified with Rocks and Shoals on the North and East side of it, where no Ship
may safely Anchor, only in two or three places small Boats may go out and in
to Fish. On the South-East and Westerly part, it is all along a Road where
Ships may Ride at Anchor, but more especially in four chief Places, Roads and
Bays thereof.

The principal Road or Bay is called Carlisle Bay, and lies on the South-West
part of the Island near its Center, and is a good Road, where five hundred
Ships of any Burden may Ride safely from all but South and Westerly Winds,
which seldom in these Parts happen, they generally blowing Easterly, whence it
is that we call the East parts Windward, and the West parts Leeward. Here lies
also the chief Town for Trade, called formerly the Bridge-Town, but now St.
Michaels, and having two Forts, answering each other, and a Platform between,
which Commands the Road, and Defends the Town; the first and chiefest Fort is
called Charles Fort, standing on Nedhams Point, lying out in the Sea to
Windward of the Bay and Town, so that an Enemy keeping out of Command of this
Fort, cannot (probably) come to do the Ships or the Town injury, for that they
must come full in or against the Wind. This Fort is built strong with Stone and
Lime; the Platform joins to the Windward part of the Town; also the other Fort
joins to the Leeward part of the Town, all which are well fortified and stored
with great Guns. The Town consists of several Streets and Lanes, being about
thirty Chain in length, and fifteen in breadth, and has many fair and large
Buildings, whereof the most are of Stone and Lime.

The second Road and Town is lately called Charlestown, situate on
Oysters-Bay, and lies about two Leagues to Windward of St. Michaels, having
also two Forts and one Platform; the two Forts stand the one to Windward, and
the other to Leeward of the Town and Road, and the Platform in the middle, all
well furnished with great Guns. And although this Town be not a Place of much
Resort for Shipping, yet here are many considerable Storehouses for Trade,
wherein Monthly are kept the Court of Common Pleas for that Precinct, and
Weekly Markets.

The third Road and Town is lately called St. James's, formerly the Hall, and
is about two Leagues to the Leeward of St. Michaels, has one very large
Platform, and is otherwise well fortified with Breast-works; and although few
Ships come to Ride here, yet in this Town is maintained a great Trade with the
Inhabitants adjacent; here also is kept Monthly the Court of Common Pleas for
this Precinct.

The fourth Road and Town is lately called Little Bristol, but formerly
Sprights-Bay, which lies about four Leagues to Leeward of St. Michaels, and
has two Forts well built, and strongly fortified. To this Place come many
Ships, especially from the City of Bristol, the which here Ride, unload and
re-load, it being the next greatest Place of Repute to St. Michaels in the
whose Island.

This Island is divided into eleven Parishes, and has in it fourteen Churches
and Chapels, and being subdivided into diverse Plantations, small and great,
has Sugar-works accordingly, with fair and large Buildings made of Stone and
Brick, the which generally are pleasant Habitations, and delightfully situated,
most having pleasant Prospects to the Sea and Land.

The Inhabitants of this Island are English, Scotch, and Irish, and some, but
very few of the Dutch and French Nation, who formerly lived here a time of
Servitude, and now dwell as Freemen, some by their Trades, and others on
Plantations; also some few Jews live here and Trade as Merchants, they having
obtained License from Hit Majesty so to do; besides Mulatto's and Negro's which
are here kept, and accounted for Slaves, the number of which some years since,
upon search, were found to be sixty thousand Persons, viz. forty thousand
Whites, and twenty thousand Blacks.

The standing Militia of this Island that are in readiness to meet together on
all occasions, and which at other times are often and well Disciplined, consist
of two Regiments of Horse, and five Regiments of Foot, wherein several
Companies have near two hundred in a Company, and in some Troops more than a
hundred Horse in a Troop; by all which you may easily apprehend how little of
truth there is in that Saying, That we hold this Island at the Courtesy of the
Spaniards, when those few English in Jamaica give the Spaniards such work to
defend themselves.

The Growth and Manufacture of this Island and parts adjacent, is Sugars of all
sorts, viz. Muscovado, Clay'd, and Refined; (I suppose I have seen here as good
Sugar made as any is in the World) Gingers, Indico, and Cotton-wool; also
Tobacco, Logwood, Fustick, green and yellow, and Lignum-vitae: Of these four
last heretofore much, but now no quantities to be had in this Island, only to
the Leeward great store. The first four mentioned Commodities receive prejudice
to their Product by abundance of Rains or Droughts not happening in their
proper Seasons: also violent Winds lodge the Sugarcanes, thereby the quantity
and goodness is lessned. The chief time for Expectation is from January to
September, when comes in the wet Season, that makes the Roads not Cartable, and
usually puts an end to Making and Transportation of them. We have two Crops of
Corn in a year, Planted usually when the Rains first come in, in May and
November, which is gathered in about October, and in March and April following.
Wines of all sorts are here Imported, but of Portuguese and French the greatest
quantities, viz. of Madera, upwards of fifteen hundred Tun yearly; of Spanish,
upward of two hundred Tun; of French-Wines, upward of seven hundred Tun;
besides Brandy and English Spirits; but of these latter now no great quantities
Imported or spent, by reason of the general use of the Spirit of Sugar-Cane,
called Rum, which the meaner sort, as Servants and Slaves, do not only drink
in great abundance, but much also is hence Transported into Virginia, Bermudas,
and New England. Here is also Imported great store of Provisions of all sorts,
viz. Beef, Pork, Fish, etc. from Ireland, New England, Virginia, Bermudas,
Newfound Land, etc. also Pease, Flour, Butter, Cheese, and Bisquet; likewise
Timber, Boards, Pipe and Hogshead, Staves, etc. also Negro-Slaves from Guinee,
and live Cattle, as Bulls, Cows, Asinego's, and Horses, from the Cape de Verd
Island, New England; and from England, Servants, and all other Commodities for
Plantations, and for Apparel; of all which great quantities are hither brought
and sold.

The Shipping that comes to Trade to this Island belongs generally to England;
some few Vessels are here built, and pass to and fro to the Leeward Islands;
and some belong to New England, Bermudas, etc. The number of Vessels which come
hither to Trade in one year is found upon search to be about two hundred of all
sorts, (some years more, some less) as Ketches, Sloops, Barques, etc.
containing in Burden fifteen thousand five hundred and five Tun, according as
they were here Entered, which is at the least a third part less than their true
Burden, by reason every Ship pays one pound of Powder per Tun, the means
ordained by this Country for storing the Magazine; the greatest part of which
Ships re-load with Sugars for England, and many go for New England, Bermudas,
Virginia, Tangier, etc. not always full laden with this Countries Growth. The
usual Rate for Tunnage from hence to London, is from 4 l. to 5 l. per Tun;
sometime when Ships are very plentiful, it is at 3 l. and less, and at other
times when scarce, from 6 l. to 7 l. in the late War with the Dutch, it was at
10. 11. and 12 l. per Tun.

The Government is Constituted by the Laws of England, and Laws not repugnant
to them, only some particular Laws are here made, proper for this Place, by
the Governor (or Deputy) and his Council, (which usually are from seven to
twelve in number) and an Assembly that consists of twenty two Persons, chosen
by the Freeholders, two out of every Parish.


SECT. XXIV. St. Vincent.
Situation of St. Vincent.
THe Island of St. Vincent, South-West from St. Lucia, and having sixteen
Degrees of North-Latitude, was so called by the Spaniards, as having discovered
it on that Saint's Day, being the fifth of April: It is accounted eight Leagues
long and six broad, and rises round about with high Grounds and several
Mountains, which are seen at a great distance.

This Island has a very fruitful Soil, and for the bigness of it has been
long since well peopled with Caribbeeans before the arrival of the Spaniards,
possessing here several. Villages, to whom they are still sworn Enemies, but
Truck'd with the Hollanders for Provisions, Horns, Axes, Knives, and other
Trifles. At the West and South sides are convenient Bays to lie at Anchor and
take Water in.

The Fruit Momen.
The Inhabitants highly esteem the Momen, growing to the bigness of an
Apple Tree; the Fruit which it bears resembles a green Cucumber, and is of a
pleasant Juice, the Skin always green and prickly; the Seed which is in the
same about the bigness of a French Bean, is generally black, and streaked with
Golden-colour'd Veins.

The Granadilla.
Here is also that Plant mentioned elsewhere, by the Spaniard called Granadilla,
by the Dutch Rhang-Apple, and La Fleur de la Passion by the French; and it is
so called, as being fancied to represent the thorny Crown of our Savior,
together with the Cross, Nails, Hammer and Pillar; the Plant runs along the
Ground, unless it meet with a Pole by which it runs up.

SECT. XXV. Bekia.
Situation of Bekia.
NOt far from St. Vincent lies the Island Bekia, which reckons twelves Leagues
in circumference, and lies at twelve Degrees and twelve Scruples of Northern
Latitude: It has a secure Harbor against all Winds; but because it is without
fresh Water, is is only frequented by the Caribbeeans that dwell on St.
Vincent, who come hither to Fish, and visit certain little Gardens which they
have there for their pleasure.

The Soil produces store of Water-melons, whose red juicy Pulp yields, when
squeezed, a great quantity of sweet Liquor, which is very refreshing, and good
to create an Appetite; their white Flowers, notch'd at the end of the Leaves,
afford a delightful smell.

Anno 1633. Captain John Johnson Van Hoorn putting in to Bekia to catch
Tortoises, found a fine Inlet on the West, and Eastward a Ridge of Rocks,
Cotton growing wild in the Fields, and upon the Shore a kind of Snails called
Burgun, under whose first Shell appeared another of a Silver color with black
Specks.

SECT. XXVI. Granada.
Situation of Granada.
GRanada, lying at twelve Degrees and sixteen Scruples, like a Half Moon, from
the North to the South, is full of Woods. Toward the South-West runs a fresh
River into the Sea. The Shore very low affords good Anchorage at twelve Leagues
distance. The Current grows exceeding strong here, and the Water also ebbs and
flows in a few hours. Dirick Simonszoon Witgeest Sailing from Tobago, was
amazed to see with what force the Current drove him to Granada.

The French possess it.
Hither Du Parquet at his own Charge sent three hundred Men from Martinico, who
scuffled with the Inhabitants six Months before they could possess the same in
Peace; and scarce had they obtained it at last, but by telling them that the
French Assistance would be very advantageous unto them against the Arovages.

The Duke Seryllac in Paris informed of the Fertility of this Island, bought it
of Du Parquet for a considerable Sum of Money: And inded Granada is none of the
meanest of the Caribbees, the Soil producing very good both Fruit and
Timber Trees, amongst which is the Latine-Tree, of a tall Body, but ordinary
thickness, and in stead of Boughs, hang Leaves like Fans in long Stalks, which
being tied together, serve for Roofs of Houses.

There is also the Tree Cocoa, which yet grows not so high here as in other
parts of the West Indies.

SECT. XXVII. Tabago.
Situation of Tabago.
THe next which comes in view is Tabago, (so called, as some think, from the
quantity of that Drug there Planted) eight Leagues long and four broad, lying
in the eleventh Degree and sixteen Minutes of Northern Latitude, and has many
high Mountains full of Wood, out of which glide eighteen Streams, which
watering the Plains fall into the Sea.

Captain Vitgeest coming to an Anchor here, found a convenient Inlet on the
East, and fresh Water to fill his Casks. Half a League from the Shore rise five
Rocks, through which he Sailed with his Ships. Within the Cliff opens a Bay,
into which runs a River well stored with Fish. More Westerly lies a larger
Inlet, which receives two delightful Streams. From the Western Promontory runs
also a Cliff Northward into the Sea.

This Island is easily known by high Coasts which rife on the East side, and so
grows lower by degrees. It is likewise made pleasant by many Walks of Trees.

The Sea produces abundance of those sorts of Fish which are common amongst us,
besides Tortoises, that lay their Eggs in the Sand.

The Cra-fish thereabouts are not much unlike Lobsters, Cra-fish.
have white and well tasted Flesh, but hard to digest; they catch them in the
Night on sandy Shelves with lighted Torches.

The Crabs get their Food very wonderfully here; Crabs.
for when they observe the Mussles or Oysters to Gape for fresh Air, they put
Stones between their Shells, so that they not being able to shut them, they
pull out the Fish with their Claws.

The Woods feed an innumerable company of Beasts somewhat resembling Hogs,
(whose Navels are on their Backs) Opassums, Javaris's, and Tatows, as also the
Agoutys's and Musk-Rats.

The Agoutys's are of a dark brown color, Agoutys.
and have little Tails, two Teeth in their upper, and as many in their lower
Jaw; they make a noise as if they spoke, crying Couye; if hunted by Dogs, they
run into hollow Trees, out of which they are routed by Smoke.

The great Musk-Rats are as big as a Rabbet, Musk-Rats.
and like them live in Holes made in the Ground, but resemble an European Rat,
only their Skins are black, except one part of their Bellies which are white;
they smell so strong of Musk, that it overcomes those that carry them.

Amongst the Brambles breed also Serpents of a green color, Serpents.
two yards long, and an Inch thick, feeding on Locusts and Birds, which they
take in their Nests, but do no hurt to Mankind.

The Sassafras Tree.
But Tobago boasts chiefly of the Sassafras-Tree, which resembles the Pine Tree,
has a firm and straight Body, and on the top Boughs spread like a Crown, the
Bark of a dark color and smooth, and smelling very sweet; the Leaves thin,
notch'd, and of a deep Green, have also a delicate smell; the thinnest Roots
appear above the Ground, and are exceeding good to cure green Wounds, stoppings
and shortness of Breath occasioned by Colds.

The Tobacco, by the Caribbeeans called Y-ouli, Planted among the Fruit Trees,
grows very plentifully here; it shoots up from a stringy Root, bitter of taste,
with a thick Stalk, which shoots out Boughs with great Leaves, woolly
underneath, and bears a kind of Violet Flower, which when dried, are succeeded
by little Cods full of black Seed; and to prevent the over-growing of it, they
cut off the top of the main Stalk.

The Bird Colibry.
The Bird Colibry, which is exceeding beautiful, makes his Nest under the
Tobacco-Leaves.

A company of Townsmen of Walcheren, having a Grant from the States of the
United Provinces, sent a Colony to Tabago; but they being scarce two hundred in
all, were for the most part destroyed by the Caribbeeans; the rest weak or
sickly, fearing the same Entertainment, sought to save themselves; so that the
Island has not formerly been frequented but by the French from Martinico, and
Guadalupe, who for some time came over only to catch Turtles and Lamantins
there.

The Caribbeeans also either in their March against, or Return from the
Arovages, Landed here for necessary Provisions; But of late the Lord Lampsen
has Settled a Plantation in this desolate Island.

SECT. XXII. St. Christophers.
Situation of St. Christophers Island.
ST. Christophers, a pretty distance from Tobago, received its Denomination
from Christopher Columbus, invited thereto by the shape of a great Mountain,
having as it were another lesser on one of its Shoulders, being fancied to
represent the Figure of the supposed Giant Christopher, who is reported to have
carried our Savior in the appearance of a little Child on his Shoulders
through a deep Sea.

This Island lying seventeen Degrees and twenty five Minutes Northward of the
Equinoctial Line, has twenty five Leagues in circumference.

The Soil light and sandy, refuses not the production of diverse sorts of Fruits
common amongst us.

In the middle of the Island rises a high Mountain, out of which run fresh
Streams, that sometimes swell so high with sudden Rains, that they drown all
the Country near them.

The Division of the Island into several Wards.
This Island being jointly the Plantation of both English and French, was
divided into four Wards, two whereof have been long since in possession of the
French, and the other two in possession of the English, strangely divided one
from another; for the English in one Ward cannot go to the other without
troubling the French; and so on the contrary: the English have more Rivers and
People, the French more plain Land, fitter for Cultivation, and Forts furnished
with Guns and Soldiers. At the Entrances of the Paths which lead into the
several Wards stand Watch-houses, where Sentinels, or Watchmen stand daily in
their turns.

In a Bay of the Sea they found a brave Salt-pit, from whence a sandy Cliff
runs so far into the Ocean, a that some have swum from the end thereof over to
the Island Nevis.

A Silver Mine has been long since discovered on this Island, in which the
English and French claim equal Interest, but neither Party make any benefit of
it for want of Miners.

The high Mountains, the Springs of boiling sulphurous Water, and brambly
Woods, hinder all passage through the middle of the Island: The Ground runs
more and more sloaping to the Seaside, and is divided into several Highways,
along which stand convenient Houses, covered with red or glazed Slate, shaded
with Trees, and environed with pleasant Gardens, to which there is a delightful
Prospect from the Fields, of the green Tobacco-Leaves, the yellow Sugarcanes,
Ginger, and Potato's.

Basse-Terre the chief Town belonging to the French.
Besides the scattered Buildings, the French have built a complete Town near the
convenientest Harbor of their Quarter, called Basse-Terre, where the Merchants
dwell in fair Houses built of Brick and Freestone; whither all sorts of People
bring their Commodities, and Truck their European Goods for such as St.
Christophers produces. All manner of Trades and Handicrafts live also in this
Town, and a Court of Judicature is kept every Week. Tde Church built of
Freestone, is covered with the aforesaid red Slate, and was formerly Governed
by the Capuchins; but they being dismissed Anno 1646. the Government was given
to the Jesuits and Carmelites; who also built themselves other stately
Edifices: but the Jesuit Henrick du Vivier was the first whobore the chiefest
Command over all.

The Sick that have not sufficient Means to maintain them, have an Hospital
appointed, where all Necessaries are provided for them; and to which is added a
School for the bringing up of poor Children.

Description of the Castle.
But the chiefest Structure is the Castle, on the building whereof the Lord
Poincy spared no Cost; it is built half a French Mile from the Sea at the Foot
of a high Mountain, shadowed with great Trees. In the Way thither stand the
Houses of the prime Officers; and a long Walk of Orange and Lemmon-Trees leads
to a large Court before the Front of the Castle it self, which is built square
with Bricks and Freestone three Stories high; and the Entrance into it is
ascended by a large pair of Stairs; near the Gate which opens to the West,
stand great Stone Cisterns, into which they receive the Water through Pipes
laid under Ground; the Chambers (...) Halls are very lightsom and high, and the
Walls of them adorned with Cedar; a flat Terrace on the top yields a pleasant
Prospect all over the Country; the Windows in the Front look open not only
upon the Orange Walk, but also upon several delightful Plantations of
Sugarcanes and Ginger.

Westward appear several Mountains, whose high Heads are invested with
ever-flourishing Trees; and between the Palace and those Mountains a very large
and stately Garden, full of all manner of Flowers and other delightful Plants,
as well those commonly known amongst us, as those peculiar to that part of the
World; in the middle thereof stands a Fountain, deriving its Source from the
Foot of a neighboring Hill.

The Winds which blow from the Hills, and especially those cool Blasts daily
coming out of the East, so tempers the hot Climate, that it becomes very
tolerable.

When any News arrives here of the French Conquests in Europe, they sound the
Trumpets on the top of the Castle, and the Standards and Ensigns formerly taken
by the Governor in the Field, are hung out of the Windows.

On one side of the Castle stands a Chapel, and somewhat farther on a rising
Plain, a row of Houses, inhabited by certain Retainers to the Governor, and is
called Angola. The Offices and Lodgings for the Governor's Servants are built
of Brick, about the Castle, which is fortified with five Sconces, whereon are
planted several Guns.

The Governor keeps nine hundred Slaves, and a hundred Frenchmen, to work in
his three Sugar-Mills, to till his Ground, and for his Houshold-Service.

Several French Gentlemen have also built many fair Houses here; amongst which
the chiefest are those on which Poucy, Treval, Benevent, Girand, Auber, de la
Roziere, de St. Andant, de l' Esperance, and de la Loche spent great sums of
Money.

The English also are not much inferior to them in their Counties.

The English Plantations in this Island.
Their Churches are five in all; first on the Point of the Palm Tree stands a
fair Church; a second near the great Road, below the English Governor's House;
a third at the Sandy Point; which are all well built, and large enough for a
considerable Congregation; the other two at the Inlet Cayoune are short of the
three first. The Ministers thereof received formerly their Benefices from the
Bishop of Canterbury, in Cromwell's time from the Tryers, as they were called;
but of late, since the King's Restoration, from the Bishop of Canterbury again.

The best Houses belonging to the English were built by Mr. Warner, Mr. Rich,
Mr. Evrard, and Col. Geffreyson all successively Governors of the Place.

Their success at their, first Landing.
It was in the Year 1625. that the English and French jointly ( Desnambuc
Commanding the French, and Thomas Warner the English) Landed on this Island of
St. Christophers, at a certain time when the Caribbeeans, persuaded by their
Boyez to destroy all Strangers, were ready up in Arms, but they met with such
Entertainment, that they soon lost their Courage, and yielded possession to the
Assailants: Not long after which Desnambuc and Warner went (the one to Paris,
and the other to London) to inform their Kings of the Condition of St.
Christophers, and to raise a Company which might promote the Planting of it:
Both attained their Desires, and had fresh Assistance given them; for both
Kings favored the Design, in regard of the good Conditions that were proposed
to those that should go Undertakers thither: And to prevent all Contentions
between the English and French, they made Boundaries on each side; but Hunting,
Harbors, Fishing, Mines, Trees for Wainscoting, and the like, were to remain in
common; and each was to assist the other. The English Plantation increased
daily more than the French, having constant Supplies from the Company in
London; when as on the contrary, the Merchants at Paris grew weary, being
desirous first to have a Return for what they had already spent, though the
Country was not yet Manured: wherefore Desnambuc going thither himself, made
the Company understand that they could not possibly expect to receive a Return,
unless the Country were Planted with Tobacco, Indigo, Ginger, and Sugar, which
required both Time and People. But whilst the Business seemed to go on
prosperously, a great Accident happened which threw down the Work to nothing: for
the Spanish King set out a Fleet within the forementioned Year, of one and
thirty Gallions, three Galeasses, and four Pinnaces, with seventy five hundred
Men, under the Command of Frederick de Toledo, Emanuel de Mineses, and John
Fajardo, from Cadiz, when before the Island St. Jago there lay at the same time
twenty two Portuguese Galleys, fourteen Carvils, carrying four thousand Men,
Commanded by Antonio Nunnez Barreio, and Francisco de Almeida, who joining with
the Spaniards, took the City St. Salvador, and went about wholly to chase out
of the Caribbee Isles all the English and French: in which Attempt nine English
Ships lying before Nevis, were all taken by Toledo, who Sailed within
Cannon-shot of St. Christophers, Commanded at that time by the French Captain
Rossey, the Forts cast up by the English and French not being stored with
Provisions nor Ammunition, and consequently no way able to endure a Siege, and
the less, because the Works were not quite finished; nevertheless Desnambuc
immediately drew up his Soldiers to the Low-land, where he lay Entrenched along
the Coast, to prevent the Enemies Landing; but Rossey suffered the Spaniards to
Land without the least Resistance: whereupon young Du Parquet Sallying out of
the Sconces, fell valiantly upon the first Company, but being forsaken by his
Men, was run down by the Multitude and killed: In the mean time all their
Sloops full of Men Landed, insomuch that Rossey fearing to be surrounded, left
his Trench and went up into the High-lands, whereby the Spaniards became
Masters of the Fort, but did not pursue their Victory, as suspecting that the
French might lie in Ambuscade in the next Wood; and indeed they suspected not
in vain, for the French having undermined their Forts, had laid Gunpowder in
some of the Cellars, which firing, blew up very many of the Spaniards, whilst
Desnambuc Embarquing himself, saved those which were not slain by the Enemy's
Sword. Mean while the English relying on the League between the King of England
and the Spaniard, made no Resistance, (notwithstanding they were informed that
Frederick Toledo had quite ruined the French Plantation, and put them all to
the Sword) but sent Agents to Toledo, to put him in mind of the League between
Spain and England, which he not taking notice of, alleged, That Pope Alexander
the Sixth, when a Controversy arose concerning the new Discoveries in the East
and West, between the Crowns of Castile and Portugal, had determined that
Castile had sole Right to the Western World, and therefore that St.
Christophers, being a part of the Western World, according to the Pope's Gift,
belonged to his Master Philip; and insisting upon that Allegation, he commanded
them to quit their Right to the Place; to which purpose he restored them six of
the nine Ships taken at Nevis, on Condition that they should immediately set
Sail for England, only those whom the six Vessels were not able to carry, were
permitted to stay on the Island till the next opportunity: After which Toledo
weighing Anchor, was scarce out of sight, when the English began to take new
Courage, and gathering together to repair their ruined Works as well as
possibly they could with what Forces they had left; for besides those who went
for England in the six Ships, being near two thousand, the Spanish Admiral took
six hundred choice English, which he distributed amongst his Fleet; whilst
Desambuc suffered a great deal of hardship, not only through ill Weather at
Sea, but also for want of Provisions; Having during this time been on the
Islands St. Martin, Montserrat, and Antego, thinking to have possessed himself
of some or other of them in stead of St. Christophers, but not finding such a
fruitful Soil, and convenient Situation, as what he had been forced to forsake,
he was not forward to fix there, but rather judged it convenient to enquire
concerning the Condition of St. Christophers, and at last being informed by a
Ketch, that the Enemy was gone to Havana, and the English were busy in Tilling
their Lands, he returned to his old Station; where nevertheless their Endeavors
to repair what was ruined, had been in vain, by reason of the scarcity of
Provisions, and want of other Necessaries, had not in their greatest extremity
some Netherland Vessels arriving there, furnished them with Provisions,
Clothes, and other Necessaries, on bare promises of payment: But not long after
growing rich with Tobacco, Sugars, Ginger, and Indigo, they made Satisfaction
to all their Creditors, and at last attained to the Condition before mentioned.

In the late War between Us and the Dutch, the French taking advantage of our
Engagement, endeavored to destroy our Plantations there, and to make themselves
Masters of the whole Island; but the Matter being at last brought to some
Agreement, Sir Charles Wheeler has been very lately sent over thither by His
Majesty to re-settle Affairs there, and order the Capitulations between the
French and English.

CHAP. XIX. The Islands Sotavento, and the Isle Trinidado.
IN the Division we found to be made of the Islands that lie between Florida
and New Spain, and Southern America, the last are the Isles of Sotavento, which
are reckoned to be these three, Margareta, Cubagua, and Tabago, but the last is
by most accounted, and has been mentioned amongst the Caribbees.

Situation of Margareta.
Margareta, so called from the abundance of Pearls (of which the Spanish
Appellation comes near the Latin Margaritae) found there by the Spaniards at
their first Discovery, lies about the twelfth Degree of Northern Latitude over
against the Main Land of Cumana, from which it is distant about seven Leagues:
It is accounted sixteen Leagues long, and half as much in breadth, and was
discovered by Columbus in his third Voyage in the Year of our Lord 1498. and
was at first in great reputation, in regard of the rich Pearl-fishing upon its
Coasts, wherein the Spaniards (more favorable it seems to the Natives of this
Place than usual, because of their readiness to discover their Treasures)
employed Negro's, brought from the Coast of Guinee, whom by severe Punishments
inflicted, they forced to such excessive Labor, that many of them, though
excellent Diverse, were drowned, others either devoured, or lamed by the
ravenous great Fish thereabouts, and by destroying the very Seed through their
insatiable greediness after Pearl, brought the Trade of Pearl-fishing in a
short time to a very small Account, in respect of what it might have been, had
it been well husbanded. Nor has this Island of late Years been much
frequented, only in the Year 1601. Captain Parker with a Fleet of English put
on Shore here, and took as many Prisoners as he had five hundred pounds of
Pearl for the Ransom of, and at his coming away took a Ship he met from off the
Coast of Angola, with three hundred and seventy Negro's aboard her, who were
going to be sold for Slaves.

The Soil is not unfruitful, bringing forth several sorts of Fruit, and store
of Maiz, and probably if improved, would as well bear Wheat, and other usual
kinds of Grain; but there is great want of Water, which the Inhabitants are
troubled to fetch from the neighboring Continent.

Towns and Places of chief note.
The Places of chief note, are 1. Monpater, a Fort built by the Spaniards in a
Nook of the Island, lying Eastward to secure the Pearl-fishing Trade, and to
defend the Town where the Governor resides, as also the Treasurer of the King
of Spain's Customs of Pearl, which have been formerly valued at 50000 l. yearly.

2. El valle de Santa Lucia, two Leagues from this Town, and as much from the
Sea, a Spanish Colony.

Macanao, the only noted Place belonging to the Natives.

SECT. II. Cubagua.
Situation of Cubagua.
CUbagua lies South-West of Margarita, about the eleventh Degree of
North-Latitude, a League or thereabouts distant from Margarita, and six Leagues
from the nearest Continent, and about three Leagues in circumference. This is
also a very great Place for Pearl-fishing, the benefit whereof has been so
considerable, that the King of Spain's Fifths are said to have amounted some
years to fifteen thousand Ducats; but otherwise of a poor and barren Soil, not
only destitute of Water, but of Fruit, Grain, Herbage, and all manner of
Cattle and eatable Beasts, except a few lean Coneys; nevertheless, in respect
of the Pearl-fishing Trade, the Spaniards have Planted here a Colony, which
they called New Cadiz, having plenty of Provisions brought them from the
adjoining Coasts, and soon after their first Planting grew in a short time so
powerful, that they became Masters of one of the best Ports of those Seas,
called Maracapana Venezuela; but upon an Alarm of the Salvages of Cumana, for a
while deserted the Island, and betook themselves to Hispaniola; from whence
nevertheless being remanded back with fresh Supplies, under the Command of
James de Castellon, they soon re-instated themselves in their former
Plantation, and made it more strong and flourishing than before; in which state
they remained as long as the Pearl-fishing Trade continued, but that decaying,
the splendour also of this Colony declined: so that at present the only thing
which makes the Place remarkable, is a Fountain on the East part of the Island,
not far from the Sea, yielding a liquid bituminous Water, of singular use in
Medicine, and sometimes found floating on the Sea at two or three Leagues
distance.

The Island Coche.
About four Leagues distant from Cubagua there is an Island called Coche, about
three Miles in compass; It was discovered in the Year 1529. and was formerly
little less considerable for Pearl-fishing than the other two.

SECT. III. Trinidado.
Situation of Trinidado.
THe Island of Trinidado was first discovered by Columbus, Anno 1447. in his
third Voyage, and by him so called, as some guess, from its three Points or
Promontories; but that seems not so probable, in regard it is otherwise called
La Trinidad, or Insula Sanctae Trinitatis, and therefore is likely to have been
denominated upon a religious Account: It lies nine Degrees or thereabouts
distant from the Line, at the Mouth of the River Orenoque, and is separated
from the Coast of Paria, over against which it lies by a Straight that is three
Miles over, and which for the dangerousness of passing it, Columbus, the first
Discoverer of it, called Bocca del Draco; the length thereof from the most
Southern Angle called Punta del Andrada, to the North-East, called Punta del
Galera, is reckoned twenty five Leagues, (those that reckon fifty, may be
supposed to mistake Leagues for Miles) and the breadth about eighteen.

Chief Commodities of the Island.
The Air of this Place is so impure, that it is accounted the unwholsomest
Island of all the Indies; nevertheless the Soil is not unfertile, as bringing
forth Sugarcanes, Cotton, Maize, Tobacco of the best kind, with other
Commodities of the general growth of the West Indies, besides store of good
Fruit and Cattle; and one part of the Island called Terra de Bea, produces
great plenty of Pitch, but not of the best kind; and there have been discovered
several Veins of Gold and other Metals.

The Natives, some say, were anciently called Cairi, or Carai, and were
distinguished into several Clans or Tribes, each under the Government of a
Casique, or petty Prince; but most of them dreading the Spaniards Cruelty,
deserted the Island, and Settled themselves in Guiana; and at present both this
Place, Guiana, and El Dorado, have of Custom one and the same Governor, whose
Place of Residence here is St. Joseph's, the chief, if not only Town of the
Island; it stands Southward upon the Carone. Here most of that Tobacco is made,
which is sold amongst us for Spanish. In the Year 1595. Sir Walter Raleigh
possessed himself of it, being then but a petty Village of about forty Houses,
and took Prisoner the then Governor Antonio Berreo, who, in all probability, to
ingratiate himself with him, gave him some light toward the discovery of
Guiana.

On the North-East of Trinidado, and not above eight Miles distant from it,
Tabago.
lies the Island of Tabago, which has been already treated of, as one of the
Caribbees, though some will have it one of the Sotavento; it is otherwise
called New Walcheren, from a Town of that Name in Zealand, from whence a Colony
of Netherlanders was sent to Plant it.

Amongst others of the small obscure Islands hereabouts, is Virgin Gorda,
Virgin Gorda.
which is sometimes reckoned amongst the Caribbee Islands; but since there is
nothing considerable to be spoken of it, it is sufficient that it has been
mentioned, though not punctually in its proper place.

CHAP. XX. California.
California how distinguished.
HAving before made mention of California, as it is by some taken for that large
portion of Northern America which lies most Southward, and also utmost West of
all that is known of the New World, and having treated of those several
Provinces which are generally reckoned to be comprehended in it, (excepting
California strictly taken, as it is generally granted to be an Island) viz.
Quivira, Cibola, and Nova Albion, lying on the Continent (though there want not
those who make Nova Albion only the North part of California) we shall close
up our Discourse of these Islands that lie Northward of the Equinoctial Line
with the aforesaid California, specially so called, which was by many thought
and described to be but a Peninsula, or half Island, by reason that the Bay
which divides it from Quivira and New Gallicia, toward the North runs much
narrower than it does Southerly (...) that some where or other at the North it
wa^ joined to the (...) been said, have ^^und it to b^^^ (...) ^a^e from the
Continent: for about the Y^^ (...) upon those Coasts Northward, accidentally,
(...) fell upon a Straight, the Waters whereof ran with such (...) that they
brought them into Mar Vermiglio, whether they (...) no, and before they knew
it, and by that means discovered that California was an Island, and that the
Waters which were observed to fall so violently unto that Sea toward the
North, were not the Waters of any River emptying it self into the Bay from the
Main Land, as was formerly thought, but the Waters of the North-West Sea it
self, violently breaking into the Bay, and dividing it wholly from the
Continent: It lies North and South, extending it self in a vast length, full
twenty Degrees of Latitude, viz. from twenty two to forty two; but the breadth
nothing answerable: The most Northern Point of it is called Cape Blanch; that
to the South, Cape St. Lucas, memorable for that rich and gallant Prize which
Captain Cavendish, in the Year 1587. being then in his Voyage about the World,
took from the Spaniards near to this Place. As for the Island it self, it is at
present little, if at all inhabited by the Spaniards; whether it be that they
want Men to furnish new Plantations, or that they find no matter of invitation
and encouragement from the Country, or perhaps that the access thither be not
so easy: for it is reported to be wonderfully well peopled by the Natives, and
that there were found only upon the Coasts and along the Shore of Mar
Vermiglio, twenty or twenty three Nations, all of different Languages; though
from the particular Narrations that have been made of the Voyages of several
eminent Persons into these Parts, it appears that the Spaniards have taken
great pains in the discovery thereof, and also from the several Spanish Names
of Places, that they have had Plantations here formerly, however neglected at
present.

The Customs and Manners of the Natives.
The Country is abundantly well stored with Fish and Fowl, as appears partly by
the Natives, who take a huge pride in making themselves gay with the Bones of
the one, with which they load their Ears, and sometimes their Noses also; and
with the Feathers of the other, which ordinary People wear only sticking about
their Wastes; but Great Persons, and such as will be fine indeed, beset their
Heads strangely with them, and have commonly one Bunch of them bigger than
ordinary hanging down behind them like a Tail.

Having no knowledge of the true God, they worship what the Devil will have
them, that is, the Sun, attributing to it only the increase of their Plants,
healthful Seasons, and most of the other good things they enjoy, or are
sensible of.

Their Government is said to be only Oeconomical, Their Government.
each Father ordering the Affairs of his Family apart, without subjection to
any other Superior; yet so well managed, that they live in good Peace one with
another; not without many good Laws and Customs, viz. That they allow but one
Wife to one Man; That they punish Adultery with Death; That they suffer not
Maids to talk or converse with Men till they be Married; That Widows may not
Marry till they have Mourned at least one half year for their Husbands
deceased; and diverse others of like nature, which perhaps, if the truth were
known, do more properly belong to the Natives of Utopia, or New Atlantis, than
to these of California.

Placs of note.
The Places therein, as yet observed, are only upon the Seacoasts, 1. The
Capes of St. Clara and St. Lucas, the one at the South-East end of the Island,
looking toward New Gallicia, the other at the South-West, looking into the
Sea, and toward Asia.



2. St. Cruce, so named from its being first discovered on Holy-Rood-Day, being
a large and convenient Haven, not far from Cape St. Clara.

3. Cabo de las Playas, so called from a company of little bare Hillocks
appearing from the Sea, and is more within the Bay.

4. Cabo Baxo, so termed, as lying toward the bottom of the Gulf.

5. St. Andrews, another convenient Haven upon an Island of the same Name.

6. St. Thomas, an Island at the Mouth of the Gulf or Bay, of about twenty five
Leagues in compass, rising Southerly with an high mountainous Point, under
which is a convenient Road for Shipping, and twenty five Fathoms of Water.

On the other side of the Island, toward the Main Sea, there is 1. St. Abad, a
good Haven, and almost surrounded with a pleasant and fruitful Country.

2. Cape Trinidado, a noted Promontory.

3. Cape de Cedras, so called (together with a small Island near it) from the
store of Cedars growing thereabouts.

4. Enganno. 5. Puebla de las Canoas, so named from the abundance of those
little Boats which the Americans generally use, and do call Canoos, whereof
perhaps some store are made there.

6. Cabo de Galera, from its resemblance to a Rat.

It is believed there are many more Promontories and Bays on both sides of this
Island, besides Rivers and Islets, yet not named, and altogether unknown.
Moreover Dr. Heylin has well observed, that those abovementioned are the
Names only of Places, and not of Towns and Villages, though doubtless there
must needs have been some scattered Houses, built formerly by the Spaniards in
so many Expeditions.

Cortez the first Discoverer of these Parts.
The first Discoverer of these Parts was Ferdinando Cortez, who having in the
Year 1534. set out two Ships to that purpose from St. Jago, a Haven of New
Spain, and not finding the Success answerable to his Expectation, went next
Year himself in Person, and passed a good way up the Gulf, but for want of
Provisions was forced to return without having done any thing to the purpose.

In 1539. one Francisco, a Companion of Cortez in the former Expedition, Set
out upon his own Charges, and having Coasted all about, both upon the Eastern
and Western Shores, he at last Landed, but not without notable opposition from
the Natives, who with much clamor, and many antique Gestures set upon his Men
so furiously with Stones and Arrows, that they had met with a shrewd Repulse,
had it not been for the Valor of their Auxiliaries, the Mastiff Dogs, which it
seems they used to carry along with them in those kind of Voyages; but at last
he got footing so far, that he took possession in the Name of the King of Spain
with the usual Formalities; and following the Example of Columbus, set up a
Cross in the Place for a Memorial and Testimony of his having been there.

Marco de Nisa his Relation of these Parts.
Much about the same time Marco de Nisa a Franciscan, undertaking a Voyage into
these Parts, reported Wonders at his Return, of the plenty of golden Mines,
stately Cities, set out with magnificent Buildings, the very Gates whereof were
enriched with Turquoises, and other Precious Stones, and whose meanest
Inhabitants went glittering in Gold and Mother of Pearl, and of the flourishing
Condition of the Kingdoms of Acu, Tonteac, and Marata; whereupon the Governor
of New Gallicia was sent by the then Viceroy of Mexico, with great hopes of
bringing back a Confirmation of these Reports; but whether out of spite to be
deceived in his Expectation, or having real cause so to do, he represented all
things as mean and despicable, as the Friar had proclaimed them rich and
glorious.

De Alarcon his Voyage.
The next that went upon this Design was Ferdinando de Alarcon, who is reported
to have Sailed many Leagues up a River called Buena Guia, and there to have
received Homage of Naguacatus, one of the Heads of the Californian Tribes.

Cabrillo his Expedition.
One more Attempt was made in the Year 1642. by Roderico Cabrillo, who
discovered the Island of St. Luke, and another called The Island of Possession;
and this was the last we hear of that thought it worth while to go an
Undertaker to these Coasts, and ever since all Undertakings hither have been so
wholly laid aside, that whatever was once discovered in these Parts, seems
rather to be lost and forgotten, than any way improved.

As for Nova Albion, whereas many determine it to be only the utmost Northern
part of California, though it does not absolutely appear to be so from the
Relation of Sir Francis Drake's Discovery of it, we judge it agreeable to
Method and Decorum not wholly to omit the mention of it in this place, though
it has been already spoken of, and the aforesaid Relation delivered at large
amongst the rest of those Provinces of largely-taken California, which were
taken for granted to be upon the Continent.

Drake's Account of the Country.
Drake and his Company brought home this Description of the Country and its
Inhabitants, viz. That the Country was exceedingly well stored with Deer,
Grazing up and down the Hills by thousands in a company; That the Men generally
went naked all over, the Women using only a piece of a Mat, or some such thing
in stead of an Apron; That their Houses were built only of Turf and Osier, yet
so wrought together, that they served very well to keep out the Cold; in the
midst of it was their Hearth where they made their Fire, and lay all round
about it together upon several Beds of Bull-Rushes. What their Towns were, or
whither they had any, is altogether unknown.

The Third Book, CONTAINING A DESCRIPTION OF PERUANA, OR, Southern America.
CHAP. I.
Situation and Form of Southern America.
HAving completed our Description of Mexicana, or Northern America, being that
great Peninsula which lies Northward of the Isthmus, or Straight of Darien,
together with all the Islands on the North side of the Equinoctial Line, we
come now to the Southern Part, otherwise called Peruana, from Peru the chief
Kingdom thereof, being the other great Peninsula, which lies Southward of the
aforesaid Straight: It is generally resembled to the form of a Pyramid
reversed; the Basis whereof, that is to say, the more Southerly parts of it
toward Magellanica and the Straights, extend themselves largely both East and
West, becoming more sharp and straight toward the North, and those parts by
which it is joined to Mexicana: in the whole it is supposed to contain a
Circuit of seventeen thousand Miles at least, and is watered with four of the
greatest Rivers of the World, besides abundance of lesser Streams, which
issuing from the Andes and other Mountains of the Country, do run from all
Parts both into the North and South Sea, much fertilizing the Countries through
which they pass; the four principal are these following:

The chief Rivers thereof.
1. Orellana, so called from the first Discovery thereof by Franciscus de
Orellana, otherwise the River of Amazons, from a Generation of warlike Women,
who (as the Tradition goes) inhabited certain Countries lying upon the Banks
thereof. This rises in the Province of Peru, and runs a Course of little
less than five thousand Miles, discharging it self at last into the North Sea,
through a Channel, as some say, of threescore Leagues broad, and yet with such
a violent Current or Stream, that it is said to keep its natural color and
taste almost thirty Miles in the Sea.

2. Orenoque, by some called Raliana, from Sir Walter Raleigh, who endeavored
to discover it, a River of the Province of Guiana, whose Head or Spring is not
yet discovered: It is said to be Navigable a thousand Miles together by the
tallest Ships, and no less than two thousand by Pinnaces and smaller Vessels,
and discharges it self likewise into the North Sea by sixteen several Channels
or Mouths, making thereby several Islands; some whereof are said to be of good
bigness, and to lie at a distance of a hundred Miles or more one from the other.

3. Maragnon, a River of a yet larger Course than any of the former, being, as
it is said, no less than six thousand Miles from its Head, which is out of the
Andes in Peru, to its Fall, which is likewise into the North Sea about Cape
Blanco, by a Channel of seventy Leagues in breadth.

4. Rio de la Plata, otherwise called Paraguay, a River of two thousand Miles
Course, and falling as the rest into the North Sea, by a Channel of threescore
Miles over, and about thirty Degrees Southward of the Line, toward the
Straights of Magellane.

The Mountains Andes.
The Andes, or Mountains before mentioned being the most noted, and biggest of
all America, and indeed of the whole World, and thought by Cortesius to be the
same with Sephar, spoken of in the tenth Chapter of Genesis, run above a
thousand Leagues in length from Timama, a Town of New Granada in the Province
of Popayan, and are in the narrowest place about twenty Leagues broad; and also
of equal height with, if not higher than Caucasus it self: the Ascent to them
is unpassable, except in very few places, by reason of craggy Precipices, and
wild overgrown pathless Woods, serving only for a shelter to Serpents and
other poisonous Animals, which are there so numerous, that a whole Army of one
of the Kings of Peru is reported to have been destroyed by them; and whatever
People there are inhabiting in any of these Woods and Fastnesses, must needs be
in the very utmost degree of rude and brutish salvageness.

Some divide Southern America into Peruviana and Brasiliana: Peruviana they
subdivide into Terra Firma and Peru; Brasiliana into Brasile and Paraguay: But
the most received and commodious Division is into these particular Provinces
following, all of them wealthy and large, viz. 1. Castella Aurea, or Golden
Castile. 2. Nova Granada, or The New Kingdom, as they call it. 3. Peru,
specially so called. 4. Chile. 5. Paraguay. 6. Brasile. 7. Guiana. 8. Lastly
Paria, with some lesser Islands adjoining to all or most of these Provinces,
and commonly reckoned as part of them.

CHAP. II. Castella Aurea, otherwise called Terra Firma.
Description of Castella Aurea.
CAstella del Oro, as the Spaniards call it, or Golden Castile, takes up all
the rest of the Isthmus, or Straight of Darien, which has not been yet spoken
of, being bounded Eastward, and to the North-East, with the Atlantic Ocean;
and on the West with Mare del Zur, and some part of Veragua; Southward it has
the new Kingdom of Granada. It is called sometimes Terra Firma, because it was
one of the first parts of firm Land which the Spaniards touched upon, after
they had passed so many Islands, as seemed for some time to block up, and bar
them from the Continent of America: It is subdivided into these inferior
Provinces or Countries, viz. 1. Panama. 2. Darien. 3. Nova Andaluzia. 4. St.
Martha. 5. Lastly, the little Province De la Hacha.

The chief Rivers of the Province of Panama are 1. Chagre, as it was anciently
called, Rivers.
but afterward from the great number of Crocodiles that harbor in it, Rio de
Lagartos, falling into the North Sea between Nombre de Dios and Porto Bellano.
2. Sardinilla. 3. Sardina. 4. Rio de Colubros, so called from the abundance of
Snakes breeding thereabouts. 5. Rio de Comagre, which falls into the same Sea.
6. Chepo, famous in times past for its Gold-Sands. 7. Rio de Balsas, whose
Banks are shaded with good Timber Trees. 8. Rio de Congo, which falls into St.
Michaels Bay.

SECT. II. Panama.
Description of Panama.
PAnama, commonly called The District, or Circle of Panama, is bounded Eastward
with the Gulf, or Bay of Urraba, by which it is separated from the rest of the
Continent of this Southern part of America; on the West it has Veragua, one of
the Provinces of Guatimala; being on both the other sides washed with the Sea:
It is supposed to contain in length from Carthagena and Popayan, to the
Confines of Veragua, about eighty or ninety Leagues, in breadth not above
threescore in any part; and where it is narrowest, viz. betwixt the City of
Panama and Nombre de Dios, if measured by a right Line, not above six or seven
over from Sea to Sea. It lies almost under the Equinoctial Line, but a few
Degrees Northward of it, and therefore somewhat hot, and by the neighborhood of
both Seas subject to a foggy and gross Air, in comparison of some other parts;
so that it is not counted generally so healthful a Country, especially for
Strangers, and in Summertime.

The ancient Division of Panama.
The ancient Division of Panama, according to the Lordships of the Casiques that
then Governed, were these following: Careta, Aila, Comagre, Chiam, Coyba,
Chame, Chiru, Nata, Tobre, Trota, Haylia, Burica, and Escotia, where the South
Sea with the Spring-Tides flowing over the Plains, at its return being hardened
by the Sea, is turned into Salt; but as it has always happened in all other
Countries of the World, that with the alteration of Government, the Division,
of the Country, and the Names of Places have totally changed, so also here the
ancient Division of Regions and Territories must give place to the Modern.

The Nature and Customs of the ancient Inhabitants.
The ancient Inhabitants of these Parts were a very warlike People, the Women
always accompanying their Husbands in the Wars. They used to hang on the tops
of their Standards the Bones of their greatest Heroes, thereby to animate their
Soldiers. Their Arms consisted of poisonous Arrows, Stone Swords, and Pikes
made of the Palm Trees. They also carried with them the Idol Chiapa, to whom
they Offered living Children at the beginning of their Wars, and afterward
making Merry with the Flesh, anointed the Image with the Blood: Moreover, if
they returned home Conquerors, they spent several days in all manner of
Debaucheries, as Drinking, Singing, Dancing, Cutting their Prisoners Throats,
with their Blood also anointing their Image. But if they were conquered, then
they invented new Offerings to reconcile themselves with their Idol.

Towns and Places of chief note.
The chief Towns and Places which the Spaniards inhabit here, are 1. Panama, the
chief City of the Province, being also a Bishop's See, which is Suffragan to
the Archbishop of Lima, and the ordinary Residence of the Governor and Courts
of Justice for these Parts: It is seated likewise upon the South Sea, and so
near, that at High Water the Ships are said to Ride even under the Walls.
Through this Town the Wealth both of Peru and Spain passes once every Year;
from Spain by Nombre de Dios and Porto Bello, from whence whatsoever
Merchandise or other Commodities come from Spain, are Transported to Panama by
Land, and from thence by Sea to all the Parts of Peru; and by Panama whatsoever
comes from Peru, is sent into Spain: It has commonly a strong Garrison of
Soldiers in it, and is doubtless a Place otherwise well fortified, being of so
great importance. From the Haven Pericos three Ways lead to Panama, the first
along a Bridge over a River, whose Banks are great Fortifications to the City,
the rather because the River is deep, and next it a Pool overgrown with Weeds.
The Way from Nombre de Dios plain and without Woods, is washed by the Brook
Levendero. The third runs along over a Stone Bridge and Champain Grounds, that
extend from the Haven Pericos to the City. Eastward from Panama appear seven
Royal Houses on a Rock, wherein the Courts of Judicature are kept. Five hundred
Rods into the Sea lies an Island resembling a Half Moon, and the Haven wherein
the Ships when they unlade cast Anchor, there being else not Water enough for
laden Barques, and all lie dry the Tide being out: At the Mouth thereof stands
a wooden Sconce. The Places Venta de Cruze, Chagre, Quebrada, and Ballano, are
also fortified against any Invasion, where else an Enemy might easily Land: But
the strictest Watch is kept at the River Chagre, which Westward below Nombre de
Dios falling into the Northern Ocean, brings the Ships up to Venta de Cruze,
from whence a Way scarce five Leagues long leads to Panama. The Spanish
Commodities consisting most in Meal, Oil, Biskets, Cloth and Silk, are all
brought from Nombre de Dios along the same Way; or else in Winter when they
cannot stem the Current of the River Chagre, then they bring their Goods by
Land, not without great danger of being taken by the runaway Negro's, who set
upon them out of the Woods with poisoned Darts and Arrows; and as many
Spaniards as they take, so many several ways they put them to death, because
they formerly in the time of their Servitude were used with all imaginable
Cruelties. The Provisions sold here at a reasonable Rate are Maiz, Peruan-Meal,
Poultrey, Honey, Cattle, Swine, Oranges, Lemmons, Cabbage, and all manner of
Garden Herbs or Plants. Round about the forementioned Royal Houses lie
Bulwarks, with a strong Castle on one side. A fair Cathedral denotes the Place
to be a Bishop's See: And the Franciscans, Dominicans, and Monks of the Order
De la Merced, inhabit several fair Cloisters here. Two Leagues Westward is the
Haven Pericos, which being secured from all Winds by three high Isles that lie
before it, is the chief Harbor in which the Peruan Plate-Fleet (consisting most
in small Barques) comes to an Anchor before they touch at Panama. The Country
is for the most part Mountainous, and in many places sends forth stinking Damps
out of muddy Pools; yet in some places are Savanna Grounds for Cattle to Graze
in. The Air would also be more unhealthful, if it were not cleared by the Winds
which blow from the Sea. From July to October there fall continual Rains, mixed
with terrible claps of Thunder. The Inhabitants often recreate themselves in
Hunting wild Hogs, with Nets made of the Brambles called Nequen or Henachen,
and that after a strange manner: for they set on fire the Bushes all about the
place where they suppose the Game to lie, which to shun the Fire runs into
their Nets; so that the same Bushes are both their shelter and destruction, as
affording Material to make the Nets wherein they are taken. Besides other Birds
the Woods also abound with Pheasants and Turtle-Doves; and amongst Beasts,
those that carry their Young about them in a Bag, as also wild Cats. The Sea
abounds with Fish, and produces Crocodiles of a large size, by the Spaniards
called Lagartos. The Trees are seldom without Leaves, but bear little or no
Fruit.

2. Nombre de Dios, which has broad Streets, high wooden Houses, and a fair
Church: It extends from East to West along the Northern Ocean, in the middle of
a great Wood on Moorish Ground, having a great Fen on the West; being situate
under an unwholsom Climate, it has occasioned the death of many People. The
Merchants which dwelt here had also Habitations in Panama, (the rest of the
Houses being most of them Inns for Strangers) from whence as soon as they had
gotten an Estate they went to Spain. The Country round about lies under Water
in many places. The Oranges, Cassada-Roots, and the like, which grow here,
occasion many Distempers to those that eat of them. In the Harbor, which has
on each side a Ridge of Rocks, on which lies decayed Forts, the Sea is
oftentimes so turbulent, that the Ships are forced to Ride at six Anchors
apiece. Eastward from the City a Fresh Water River falls into the Haven, on
whose Banks stand several Garden-Houses and Orchards. Anno 1595. Sir Francis
Drake arriving here, found a Mill beyond the City; not far from which on a Hill
stood a Watch-house, of which having made himself Master, he set fire on the
Town Nombre de Dios, as also on all the Vessels that were in the Harbor. The
original of the Name Nombre de Dios was on this occasion, viz. Diego Niquesa
setting Sail with three Ships out of the Haven Carthagena to the Golden
Country Veragua, was surprised by a violent Storm, in which two Ketches,
Commanded by Lupus de Olano and Peter Umbria were driven out of sight, whilst
he suffered shipwreck, and getting ashore, ranged up and down in a desolate
Country, where he found no other Food but Roots, till at last he met with
Olano; when the Famine began to increase amongst them in such a nature, that
being scarce able to carry their Arms, many of them were killed by the
Inhabitants with poisoned Arrows, insomuch that of seven hundred there remained
scarce ninety: Niquesa shipped as many of them in a new Vessel which they had
made as it could possibly carry, and promised to fetch the rest off from
Veragua as soon as he had discovered a Place fit to be inhabited: The first
Place he Landed at was Puerto Bello; from whence being necessitated by the
Indians who gathered together to Retreat Aboard, not without the loss of
several Men, he set Sail to the Promontory Mormor, beyond which he Anchored in
a secure Haven; where, as he was going ashore he called to his Men, saying,
Saltiamo in tierra al Nombre de Dios, that is, Let us Land in the Name of God,
and casting up a Fort against the Assaults of the Natives, called it Nombre de
Dios.

3. St. Philip, or Puerto Bello, so denominated by Christopher Columbus from
its Haven lying along the North Sea, wonderful convenient and secure, by reason
of the good Ground for Anchoring, and a Creek in the same, defended from all
sorts of Winds; and which being surrounded with Woods, has much over-flow'd
Land about it, as also abundance of good Gravel for Ballast; for which and
several other Reasons, the famous Architect Baptista Antonelli advised the
Spanish King, to build this City for a Staple of Trade (in stead of Nombre de
Dios, which was found unhealthy) having pitched upon an excellent Situation for
it, viz. on a Plain at the Foot of a Hill, where there are three fresh
Rivulets, meeting with a fruitful and hot Country: wherefore his Advice being
taken, they first built a Fort at the Mouth of the Haven, put five Guns into
the same to defend the new City, and on the Shore a strong Tower with eight
Drakes: Moreover, the Rocks along the Shore, and close Woods about the Haven
prevent the Landing of an Enemy: But at the very time that this City was just
begun to be built, Sir Francis Drake having burnt Nombre de Dios, ran into the
Haven Puerto Bello, where he found ten Houses, besides the Governors Palace,
and a Castle whose Breast-works which the Spaniards had lately raised of
Timber, Stone, and Earth, were all demolished by the English: But the Spaniards
have since rebuilt the same, and fortified the Haven, with two strong Castles,
notwithstanding in the Year 1661. it was surpised and taken by the English
under the Command of Captain Parker, and the Governor Petro Melendez taken
Prisoner.

4. Nata, commonly called St. Jago de Nata, situated on the West side of this
Province, upon Mare del Zur, or The South Sea, about thirty Leagues distant
from Panama, toward the Borders of Veragua.

5. Acla, a Town upon the same Coast, but lying South-East of Nombre de Dios:
It was at first only a Fort built by Peter de Arias, but afterward grew up
into a small City, of which at present there is nothing remaining but the
remembrance of the famous Vasquez Nunnez, Beheaded by his Father-in-law Arias.

6. Lastly, La Crux Real, a few Leagues distant from Panama, for the most part
inhabited by a sort of Negro's called Simmerones.

Along the North Coast of Panama are two small woody Islands called Cattiva and
Comagre, lying low in the Water; also the Isle De Pines, which rises high out
of the Sea near the Main Land.

The Isles of Pearls.
On the Southern Coast are Isole de las Perlas, or The Isles of Pearls, about
twenty five in number, but indeed rather Rocks than Islands, excepting two,
viz. Taroreque and Del Rios where in former times the Indians took great store
of Pearls, by diving for them to the bottom of the Sea; and they were esteemed
of greater value and excellence than those of Cubagua, and great profit was
made of them by the Spaniards, till by their Cruelties exercised upon the
Natives through excessive greediness, they depopulated the Islands, and lost
that altogether of which before they were so insatiable: they are now only
inhabited by a few Moors and other Slaves, who keep Cattle there for their
Masters.

Captain Oxenham's Expedition.
It will not seem amiss to conclude our Description of Panama with a short
Account of the English Captain John Oxenham's Exploits in these Parts: He being
incited by the Treasure which Sir Francis Drake fetched from hence, resolved to
Steer for the Northern Coast of Panama, where he haled his Ship of a hundred
and twenty Tun on Shore, and covered the same with Trees, buried his Guns, and
marched with two Fieldpieces and seven Men up into the Country, and was by
the Indians conducted to a River which falls into the South Sea, where he built
a Pinnace of forty five Foot long, and Sailing into the South Sea, Landed on
Tararequi, one of the Islands of Pearls; where he soon after took a Peruan
Barque with sixty thousand pieces of Gold, store of Wine and Bread, and the day
following another which came from Lima, laden with a hundred thousand Pound in
Silver Bars, and some Pearls; with which being enriched he returned to the
Main: The Governor of Panama being informed of it, put a hundred Soldiers into
four Barques, besides a considerable number of Negro Slaves; over which Juan de
Ortego having the chief Command, was informed at Tararequi what Course the
English had steered; whereupon he pursued them to the River whither they were
gone, which falling with three Arms into the Sea, they could not have known
which way the English went, unless they had seen some Feathers of Fowls driving
in the Mouth of the least Branch, by which they judged that they were not far
off; therefore Rowing up they found after four days Journey the Pinnace haled
on Shore, and watched by six Men, who were ordered to stand Sentinel, whereof
one being shot by the Spaniards, the other five fled; whom Ortega pursuing,
found half a League from the Shore a Hut made of Boughs, wherein the Booty lay,
which he speedily carried to his Barques; but Captain Oxenham informed hereof,
fell with two hundred Indians up-the Spaniards, who having a Wood on their
Backs made such advantage thereof, that eleven English were slain, and seven
taken, and had not the rest fled, they had all been either killed or taken
Prisoners: Those that were taken informed Ortega that they had been at
difference amongst themselves about dividing the Booty, which was the reason of
their staying so long: moreover, they discovered where and how their Ship lay;
all which the Governor of Panama writ to Nombre de Dios; from whence four Sail
were immediately sent to find out the Ship and the buried Guns, as also to take
all such English as they should find preparing of Boats or Barques, and bring
them to Panama; whereupon very many were taken, who were all miserably slain,
except a few Youths.

SECT. III. Darien.
Description of Darien.
DArien, which by some Authors not being thought considerable enough to make a
distinct Province, is reckoned one and the same with, or at least part of,
Panama, has on the North the District or Circle of Panama; on the South, the
new Kingdom of Granada; Eastward it is bounded with the Gulf of Urraba
abovesaid, and some part of the River Darien, which gives Name to the
Province; and to the West, with the South Sea; of a more temperate Air by far
than that of Panama, and a Soil so admirably fruitful and lusty, that they say
Melons, Cucumbers, and generally all other Fruits of the Garden, are ripe and
fit to gather within twenty days or less, after their first sowing, but very
much infested by noxious Creatures, as Lions, Leopards, wild Cats, Crocodiles,
Serpents, and Bats, after whose Bitings a Man bleeds to death, unless he washes
the Wound well with Seawater, or stop it with hot Ashes; and no less by the
unwholsomness of the Air, which is infested by the many stinking Damps that
arise from the muddy Pools. The Inhabitants are sickly, and seeming generally
to be troubled with the Yellow Jaundice, never attain to a great Age: they go
naked, the Men only covering their Privities with a Shell or Cotton-Cloth: The
Women wear a Cloth which reaches from the Middle down to their Knees, but if
Women of Quality, to their Feet.

Sebastian and Antiqua, by whom built.
The Spaniards have many years ago made themselves Masters of this Province of
Darien, in which Alphonsus Fogeda built the City Sebastian, which was inhabited
till a Spanish Knight called Ancisius, Anno 1510. built Antiqua, and made it a
Bishop's See, which by reason of the unwholsomness of the Place was removed to
Panama, when Vasquez Nunnez discovered the Southern Ocean, Anno 1590. because
Antiqua lay on a low Ground between high Mountains, where the Sun burnt
exceedingly, and the Way to the South Sea, being three Leagues from thence, it
was very troublesome to convey Merchandise thither.

But a worse Accident befell the Town St. Cruiz, which being built by the
Spanish Captain Peter de Arias, was ruined by the Indians.

The chief Rivers are 1. Darien, Rivers.
which gives Name both to the Province and the Provincial Town, and falls into
the Gulf of Urraba, being a large Arm of the Sea, eight Leagues over at the
Mouth thereof. 2. Rio de las Redas, which runs in like manner through the
Province of Nova Andaluzia, and falls also into the same Gulf. So likewise does
3. Rio de la Trepadera. 4. Corobaci. 5. Beru, chiefly remarkable upon this
Consideration, that some curious Etymologists have endeavored to derive the
Name of Peru from this River, by the alteration only of the initial Letter.

Places of chief note.
The chief, and indeed the only Town of this Tract is Darien, built as
aforesaid by Encisus, a Spanish Adventurer, and by him called St. Maria
Antiqua, and by others The Antique of Darien, being one of the first Towns that
were built by the Spaniards on the firm Land; though there are who make mention
of two other small Towns or Villages, the one named at least, if not built by
the Spaniards, viz. Los Angelos, scarce inhabited at present by any but the
Salvages; the other an ancient Town of the Natives, called Bizu.

SECT. IV. New Andaluzia.
Description of New Andaluzia.
EAstward of Darien and the Gulf of Urraba, lies the Country of New Andaluzia,
otherwise called Carthagena, from the Name of its principal City: On the East
it has the Country called St. Martha; on the North, the Main Ocean; and New
Granada toward the South. It is for the most part a Mountainous Country, and
full of Woods, which they say yield abundance of Rozen, Gums, and some very
good Balsams; also a sort of Long-pepper, much sharper than that of East India.
But the Plains, by reason of much Rain, to which the Country is subject,
especially for some times of the year, of but a spewy and cold Soil. The
Spaniards at their first coming found it a rich Country, not so much from the
Nature and Profits of the Soil (though it be said to have some Mines in it, and
those of Gold) but by reason of a certain Opinion and Respect, which the
Americans of these Parts are generally said to have born toward this Country,
insomuch that they would be brought and buried there from other Places very
remote; and accordding to the Custom of the Country, not without good store of
Gold and other Jewels, according to the Quality and Condition of the Person
that was buried; of which the Spaniards soon gained Intelligence, and in
ransacking the Graves and Monuments of the Dead, are supposed to have found an
infinite Mass of Treasure: but those Mines are long since exhausted.

Nature and Customs of the ancient Inhabitians.
The Inhabitants of old suffered great prejudice by Tigers and Serpents; yet
nevertheless this Country was very populous before the Spaniards arrival here;
the Natives wore Cotton Aprons before, and Golden Rings about their Arms and
Legs, as also Strings of Pearl, and the like. The Women here, as in the rest of
these Parts, went with their Husbands into the Wars, and behaved themselves
valiantly, shooting poisoned Arrows, insomuch that Martin Ambesus took a Maid,
Anno 1509. who had killed twenty eight Spaniards.

The Country Vrraba.
To the Province Carthagena belongs also the Country Urraba, which is so
fruitful, that all kind of Spanish Trees and Seeds grow better here than in
Spain: Besides which it has its own Fruit, as also abundance of Pine and
Palm Trees, whose Leaves serve for Brooms. The Guaiana-Tree bears a sharp kind
of Fruit like a Lemmon, the Guaravana a kind of Cittrons, the Mameisa a Fruit
not unlike an Orange, but tasting like a Melon, and the Hovos a great Plum.

Their Gardens abound with the Root Batata, whose Leaves send forth several
Strings, which over-spreading the Ground fasten in the Earth, and take new
Roots; it is yellow without, and whitish within, and bears pale green Flowers,
which at last turn to a Cod full of Seed. These Roots roasted in hot Ashes,
exceed our European view of Cartagena CARTAGENA
Turnip; and beaten and put in Water till it works over, makes a Drink, with
which the Indians Drink and Carouse till they are Drunk.

A strange Beast.
Moreover, Urraba abounds in Venison, Fish, and all sorts of ravenous Creatures,
as Tigers, Lions, and a particular strange Beast as big as an Ox, having an
Elephants Nose, Horses Feet, and hanging Ears.

The Trees likewise swarm with Birds; and especially near Lakes or Pools breed
Pheasants and Parrots, of which some are bigger than Capons, others no bigger
than Chickens.

The Mountain Abibe.
Against Urraba juts the Mountain Abibe, whose length Westward remains unknown;
the breadth thereof in some places is about twenty Leagues; it has many Ways
which cannot be traveled with Horses. The top of this Mountain is uninhabited;
but along the Valleys, which are many and large, dwelt formerly a People that
possessed great Riches in Gold, which they gathered out of Rivulets that fell
Westward from the tops of the Mountains. It Rains here almost all the year
long, which makes the Ways very bad for Travelers to pass.

At the Foot of this Mountain, toward the South, lie two small ancient
Casiquedoms, if we may so call them, formerly inhabited by a valiant People,
called Tarabe de Zenu, whether chiefly the dead Bodies were brought from all
the adjacent Countries, to be buried in great State, as has been before
intimated.

Towns and Places of principal note.
The principal Towns and Places of note are 1. Charthagena, (so called either
from the resemblance of its Situation with the City Carthagena in the Kingdom
of Murcia belonging to Old Spain, or because the first Inhabitants were
Citizens of the said City) which was begun to be built Anno 1532. by Peter de
Heredia, but fully finished by Georgio Robledo, eight years after the first
Foundation thereof was laid. This Episcopal Metropolis is on the North washed
by the North Sea over a plain shallow Ground; on the Land side the Sea flows
through a narrow Bay by the City toward the Lake Canupote, which ebbs and
flows equal with the Ocean, and receives and discharges its Water through two
Pipes which lie under along Bridge, The Description of Carthagena.
joining Carthagena to the Main Coast. This City boasted long since above five
hundred Stone Houses, being divided into twenty six large Streets, whereof four
are six hundred and twenty Paces long: behind each House is a Garden; and the
Church appears above all the other Buildings: The Dominicans Cloister is also
fairly built; neither is the Franciscans inferior to it, who also possess a
second Edifice on the Main Continent over the Bridge. The Custom-house and
Court where the Courts for the whole Province of Carthagena art kept, are also
stately Structures. The Haven has two Entrances, the chiefest whereof lies
half a League Eastward from the City, and the Western, called La Boca, is as
far again; both very dangerous, because of the many blind Rocks that lie before
them. Anno 1585. when Sir Francis Drake took Carthagena by Storm, the whole was
fortified with Sconces, besides two Forts for the better security thereof,
whereof one locked up the narrow Mouth of the Haven with a strong Chain; not
far from which stood an Abbey, Dedicated to the Franciscans, and Walled round
about; since which they have several Outworks, Forts and Towers, to prevent
all foreign Invasions. The City grows wealthy daily by the Peruan Plate-Fleet
putting in there before they go to Spain, and especially by the Trade from New
Granada along the River Magdalena. The Island before the Haven, anciently
called Codega, now Carex, inhabited by Fishermen when the Spaniards Landed
there, is now desolate, the remainder of those that were destroyed by them
being fled to wild places from the Spaniards Cruelties; notwithstanding the
People hereabouts were valiant enough to Engage with them. But since the
Devastation made by Sir Francis Drake, Carthagena has received a more fatal
Blow; for it was scarce fully repaired, when five French Privateers burnt the
City to Ashes: which Mischief was occasioned by a Spanish Seaman, who being
whipped by Command of the Governor, resolving for Revenge, went from Spain to
France, and conducted the forementioned Ships to Carthagena, where he revenged
himself on the Governor; for finding him asleep, he first waked him, and after
having told him of his causing him to be Whipped, he killed him. The Booty which
the Spaniards carried from thence at that time amounted to above a hundred and
fifty thousand Ducats.

The Balsam of Tolu very famous.
2. Tolu, by the Spaniards now called St. Jago, twelve Leagues distant from
Carthagena, a Place memorable for the excellent Balsam which is brought from
thence, and commonly called The Balsam of Tolu; it is gathered in a Spoonful of
black Wax, stuck under the Hole cut in the Bark of a low Pine Tree, out of
which in hot Weather runs a Golden colored Gum, very sovereign, and of an
excellent smell.

3. St. Crux de Mopox, a neat Town, seated a little above the confluence of the
two Rivers, St. Martha and Magdalena, which waters this Province.

4. Baranca de Nolambo, a Place of great Traffic, especially for all
Commodities of the new Kingdom of Granada; it stands upon the Banks of the
River Magdalena, and about six Leagues distant from the Sea.

5. Buena Vista, otherwise called St. Sebastian de Buena Vista, a Town
commodiously seated upon, a rising Ground not far from the Gulf of Urraba, or
the Sound of Darien, about a League and a half from the Sea.

6. Villa de St. Maria, thirty Leagues Southward of Carthagena.

Rivers of Carthagena.
The Province of Carthagena is stored with many Brooks and great Rivers, amongst
which the Stream Cauca falls into the River Magdalena, beyond Popayan near
Mopox.

The River Zenu, which gives Denomination to the abovementioned Territory,
makes a very convenient Harbor with its Mouth, where much Salt is to be had.

The Daria, which runs between Panama and Carthagena into the Inlet Urraba,
gives its Denomination to the foregoing Province, through which it also runs,
as has been already mentioned.

The River which for its greatness is called Rio Grande, or Magdalena, (because
it was discovered on the Day Consecrated to that Saint) falls with such force
into the Northern Ocean, about twenty three Leagues Eastward from Carthagena,
that running two Leagues broad and ten long into the Sea, it retains its
freshness of Water; in which there lying many Rocks, makes the same very
dangerous for Ships. In the Mouth of the Haven lies an Island, which is divided
by the River, the widest and most frequented Channel of which respects St.
Martha, where those that carry the Merchandise up this Stream to New Granada,
spend two Months in Toeing, whenas they come from thence in three Weeks.

Thunder and Lightning rages here many times after a terrible manner from
Midnight till Morning. In January there falls also abundance of Rain, which
gliding from the Mountains swells the River exceedingly.

SECT. V. St. Martha.
Description of St. Martha.
ST. Martha, so called from the chief City of the Province, is bordered on the
West with New Andaluzia; on the East, with Rio de la Hacha; on the North, with
the Ocean; and on the South, with New Granada; It is about threescore and ten
Leagues in length, and not much less in breadth: It was anciently distributed
into several little Seignories, Governed by Casiques, or petty Princes, viz.
Pozigueica, Betoma, Buritaca, Chimola, inhabited by valiant Men and beautiful
Women, and above all the rest, Tairona, (whose People for a long time
maintained War against the Spaniards) lying at the Foot of the high Mountains
Sierras Nevadas, whose snowy Crowns are seen thirty Leagues off at Sea, and run
along in a continued Ridge through Peru and Chili to the Straights of Magellan.

This Country was Discovered, and part of it Planted, Anna 1524. by Roderic de
Bastredas, who afterward was murdered in his Sleep by his own People.

The Nature of the Climate, and Commodities of the Country.
The Sun shines so exceeding hot near the Seacoast, that there is no enduring
of the same; but up in the Country the snowy Mountains occasion great Cold,
and in Harvest and October it Rains exceedingly, whereas at other times it is
very dry Weather, and the Winds blow generally out of the East or North-East,
yet the Land-Breezes coming out of the West bring sometimes Rains with them.
From the Mountains, which are stony and barren, fall many Brooks and Rivers,
which water diverse Plains, the Grass and other Plants of which are often
blasted by violent Storms; nevertheless Oranges, Lemmons, Granates, and all
sorts of Spanish Garden Fruits grow here in great plenty. The Woods afford
likewise Pigeons, Partridges, Venison, and the like; the Rivers all manner of
Fish, which are seen to swim in great numbers twenty Yards under the Water,
especially in the Haven St. Martha, near which formerly lived many Fisher men,
who with Nets made of tough Twigs pleited together, caught such plenty of Fish,
that they furnished all their Neighbors. The Highways are made dangerous by
Lions, Tigers, and Bears.

Great plenty of Precious Stones in these Parts.
The Country Buritaca affords the Inhabitants Gold; Tairona, excellent Stones
against Bleeding and the Gravel, Jasper, Porphyr, and Gold; the Valley Tunia,
many rich Emeraulds, which Stones used to be in great esteem before America
produced such great numbers of them. Acosta relates, That a Spaniard desiring
to know the Price of an Emerauld, showed two to an Italian Jeweller, who valued
the one at a hundred, the other at three hundred Ducats; but soon after seeing
a Chest full of them, said they were scare worth a Ducat apiece; and that the
Suit which the Roman Lady wore, being beset with Emeraulds, and valued at four
hundred thousand Ducats, would not sell now for half so much. This Stone or
Jewel exceedingly fortifies the Sight, wherefore the Emperor Nero represented
the bloody Encounters of Fencers in an Emerauld. It is also judged to be good
against the Falling Sickness, wherefore the Indians hang them in their Noses to
this day, and adorn their Idols with them; they grow in stony Rocks along
Veins, not unlike Crystal, and in time obtain a glittering Greenness; the
biggest of them that are found in this Age are most esteemed of in Genua. The
Emerauld Pillar, which as a wonderful Ornament stood in Hercules's Temple in
the City of Tyrus, being very famous amongst the Ancients, was without doubt no
more than a green Stone; and perhaps of the same Material, was the Pillar
erected by the Arabian King Miramamolines, in the Cathedral at Corduba. But the
great fame of these Emeraulds incited Gonzalvez Zimenes, Governor of St.
Martha, to leave his Place and seek for them; to which end he Sailed up the
Rivulet Gayra with two Ketches and forty five Spaniards, who meeting with the
Casique Bagotta, got much Gold of him, and afterward went to the Valley
Tessuca; of which Simandoca being Governor, conducted Ximenez twenty three
Leagues farther to an Emerauld Rock, from whence he returned exceedingly
enriched; the rumor of which spreading up and down, made several travel
thither; amongst whom was Peter di Lugo, Governor of Terra Firma, who sending
for Aid from Carthagena, fought his way to Bagotta, who resisted him for some
time, till at last being defeated he made Peace with them for a considerable
quantity of Gold; Peter di Lugo his Treachery to the Natives.
which when Peter di Lugo had received, not regarding his Word, he plundered
all the Country, and having committed all imaginable Cruelties on the Natives,
returned home with an invaluable Mass of Gold and Emeraulds to St. Martha. The
Welsares Journey.
Not long after the Welsares, German Knights, came from Venezuela, (which City
the Emperor Charles the Fifth Morgag'd to them Anno 1518.) and traveled
through the snowy Mountains of St. Martha with Indian Guides, whose
Instructions following, they dug many Emeraulds out of the Valley Funia; the
Inhabitants of which affrighted at the sight of the Strangers, hanged
themselves out of despair, though naturally valiant, and ingenious in working
in Tapestry the shapes of Tigers, Lions, and other Beasts, and painting on the
Walls of their Houses variety of Figures of diverse colors, covering their
Floors with Mats neatly pleited of Rushes. They fed on Fish, Venison, and
Mans-flesh, and also on the Roots Agies, tasting like Chestnuts, Yuca, Maiz,
Batata, and Cassada.

Chief Cities and Places of note.
The chief Cities and Places of principal note in this Province are 1. St.
Martha, which gives Denomination to the whole Province, it stands built at the
North Sea, which makes a large and convenient Harbor, being defended from the
Winds by high Mountains and two Isles, is a Bishop's See, and has a large
Cathedral. The Houses built of Canes are covered with Palmito-Trees, and some
with wooden Shingles, The Haven has neither Fort nor Castle to defend it,
because there is no Trade but with the Indians, which bring Earthen Ware and
Cotton Clothes to sell; and because the Spanish Ships seldom come hither, the
Place is much gone to decay, and the more, because it is no way defended
against any Assault of an Enemy, which the French, and afterward the English,
under the Command of Sir Francis Drake, and the following Year under Captain
Anthony Shirley took advantage of, and plundered and burnt the City.

2. Teneriff, built on the Banks of the River Magdalena, forty Leagues from St.
Martha.

3. Tamalameque, otherwise called Villa de las Palmas, twenty Leagues South of
Teneriff, lying on a high stony Ground; between which are plain Pastures for
Cattle, surrounded with high Woods, as also Pools made by the overflowing of
the Rivers, whose Banks are inhabited by the Indians, who are much addicted to
Sleep and Drinking. The Pools before mentioned produce abundance of Fish, as
also Crocodiles, and the terrible Manati before described.

4. Ocanna, which has an Inland Haven.

5. Ramada, formerly called New Salamanca, standing at the Foot of the Mountain
called Sierras Nevadas. This Town is famous for its Copper and Brass Mines.

6. Cividad de los Reyes, which built in the Valley Upari, stands on the Shore
of the mighty River Guataporeya, where from the beginning of January till May
the Eastern Breezes moderate the Heat, otherwise intolerable: But the continual
Rains thereabout occasions the Quartan Ague, and many such like Distempers. The
Natives hereabouts, salvage and valiant, would never submit to the Spaniards.
The peculiar(...)

The Tree Xagua.
The peculiar Plants of this Place are the Tree Xagua, which bears a Fruit like
a Raisin, which dried and ground yields exceeding good Meal for Bread.

The Root Scorzonera.
The Root Scorzonera, which cures the Bitings of Serpents. The Indians also use
the Tail of a Serpent for a Remedy against the same Evil, as they take Tobacco
against the Falling Sickness, and snuff the Powder in at their Nostrils, and
drink the Juice thereof to cause Looseness.

Chief Rivers.
The chief Rivers of this Province, are 1. Polomino, so called from a Spanish
Captain, that was drowned there with his Horse, falling from the Sierras
Nevadas.

2. Guatupori, whose Water causes the Bloody Flux and Looseness, which again is
cured by the same Water drunk with beaten Cinnamon. Guatupori reckons many
Rivulets, amongst which the Caesar and Budillo are both large, deep, and
abounding with Fish.

Near the City Los Reyes are three great Water-pits, triangular between stony
Cliffs; nigh which a Tradition goes, That of old there lurked a terrible
Serpent, which at times devoured a thousand People; insomuch that none durst
dwell thereabouts, till certain Spaniards having the hardiness and curiosity to
go seek out this Serpent, heard a great noise in the Pits, but saw nothing like
the forementioned Animal.

Here are likewise several Fountains of Pitch and Tar.

SECT. VI. Rio de la Hacha.
Rio de la Hacha.
Rio de la Hacha is the Name of a little Province lying on the North-East of
St. Martha, washed on all other parts with the Waters of the Main Ocean, or
with the Gulf or Bay of Venezuela.

Chief Towns of this Province.
The chief Towns of this Province, are 1. A small Town called De la Hacha, which
gives Denomination to the said Province, having no convenient Haven, but
otherwise seated in a Soil very rich and fertile, not only of all sorts of
Fruits and Plants, especially such as are brought from Spain, but likewise in
many Mines of Gold, Gems of a large size and great value, and many excellent
Salt-Wiches, as they call them; it is eight Leagues distant from Salamanca
aforesaid, and eighteen from Cape Villa, the most Westerly Point or Foreland
of the Bay of Venezuela; and with the rest had the hap to be surprised and
pillaged by the English with Sir Francis Drake in the Year 1595. who refused
twenty four thousand Ducats, which the Governor proffered him for the Pearls he
had taken.

2. Rancheria, six Leagues Eastward of La Hacha, inhabited chiefly by
Pearl-Fishers, or such as get their Living for the most part by Fishing for
Pearl; which was wont to be good on these Coasts.

3. Tapia, five Leagues from La Hacha, and considerable, for that the adjacent
Parts were laid waste by the English, to revenge the perfidiousness of the
Governor of Salamanca, refusing to pay the four thousand Ducats he had
promised, upon Condition of their sparing the Town.

Abibeca the last King of this Province
The last King of those that Governed in any of these Provinces of Terra Firma,
was Abibeca, who could not be won to come down from his Palace, which he had on
the top of a Tree, till a Spanish Officer, one Francisco de Vanquez began to
lay an Ax to the Root thereof.

After Didaco Niquesa, Alphonso Oreda, and Anciso, had made very large
Discoveries in these Provinces, Valboa was the first that discovered the Way to
the South Sea.

CHAP. III. New Granada.
First Discovery of New Granada.
THe new Kingdom of Granada, as it is commonly called, was for the most part both
discovered and conquered by Gonsalvo Ximenes, about the Year 1536. and with so
good success, that in less than a years space, the whole Country was quietly
settled under the Spaniards Government, and the Captain with his small Company
had made shift to gather together such a Mass of Treasure as may seem almost
incredible, viz. from the Reguli, or petty Princes of those Countries, whom he
had either destroyed or made Tributary. But a more particular Relation of
Ximenes his Journey take as follows:

Gonsalvo Ximenes his Expedition.
Being sent out by Peter Ferdinando de Lugo, to discover the Countries that lay
along River Magdalena, he traveled upon the right side or it with great
trouble; for not only the brambly Woods, Moors, and deep Brooks, made the Way
exceeding bad to be traveled, but also the Inhabitants, who fell upon him from
their Ambuscades: yet at last he reached Tora, which Name he changed into
Pueblo de los Bracos, because four Rivers unite their Waters there. Here
ordering his Brigantines which were come up the River to cast their Anchors, he
judged it convenient to stay all the Winter, because the swollen Rivers had
drowned the adjacent Country. Ximenes observing that the Indians fetched Salt
from the Seaside, judged that the Country was inhabited, and therefore in
fair Weather marched up to the Mountain Opou, behind which he found a Country
full of Salt-pools, which produced Cakes of Salt. And somewhat farther the
Province Governed by the Casique Bogata, who at first resisting the Spaniards,
was soon put to flight, when he heard the noise of the Guns. The Panches
divided from Bogata's Country by a small Mountain, also maintaining continual
Wars with him, suffered the Spaniards unmolested to travel through their
Country, and the Valley La Trompetta, to a high barren Mountain, on the top of
which Ximenes found several Emeraulds; and going from thence fell upon the
Casique Tunia, and three days Journey farther, upon the Governors Sagamosa and
Diutama; from which three Countries he carried above a hundred and ninety
thousand pieces of fine Gold, fifty five thousand pieces of indifferent Gold,
and eighteen hundred Emeraulds; all which the Spaniards left behind with Guards
whilst they went back to Bogata, whom they found lying dead of his Wounds on a
high Hill: But Sagipa, Bogata's Successor, received Ximenes with great
Civility, to engage his Assistance against his Neighbors the Panches; which he
did not refuse him: but afterward he fell most perfidiously upon the said
Sagipa, whom he caused to be Executed, because he either could not, or would
not discover where those Riches were which Bogata had left behind him. After he
had pillaged the little Region Neyba, and brought into subjection the whole
Country, he gave it the Name of New Granada, from Granada the place of his
Nativity, being the chief City of the Kingdom of Granada in Spain, and built
the City Santa Fe; which done, he quitted the Place, upon information that
Sebastian de Bevalcazar coming from Popayan, was seeking a Way Northward; and
not long after him Nicholas Federman followed, each claiming New Granada as
their Right, whereas Ximenes alleged, That the first Discovery thereof was to
be ascribed to him only: at last Agreeing, they resolved that it should be at
the King of Spain's disposal.

The Nature and Custom of the Moxas
The ancient Inhabitants, named Moxas, divided their Country into two chief
Principalities, viz. Bogota and Tunica, which before the Spaniards Arrival were
each under their particular Casique or Prince. The Men were of a good
proportion; the Women also handsomer, and of a fairer Complexion than their
Neighbors: Their Habit also consisted of black, white, and diverse colored
Cotton Cloaks, and some also had Bonnets of the same. The temperateness of the
Climate makes little difference between Winter and Summer. Their Houses were of
Planks, and covered with long Rushes. Their chiefest Food was Maiz and Cassave,
which first grows on Stalks as large as Canes, containing very large and
weighty Spikes or Ears, each Ear generally yielding seven hundred Grains, which
are Planted in hot and moist Ground; one Bushel Sow'n, generally produces three
hundred. But the Maiz is distinguished into a courser or finer sort, which last
is called Moroche, the Leaves and Canes whereof afford a wholesome Provender for
Horses, and the Corn, Bread for the Inhabitants, who make it several ways; for
sometimes they boil it in Water, and at other times parch it in Ashes, or grind
it to Meal, which kneading into Dough, they make into Cakes, Biskets, and the
like: Moreover, Maiz steeped in Water, and after being boiled and set a
working, makes a very strong Liquor. They also use Cassada, which they make of
the Root Yuca, which being large and thick, is cut in pieces, grated, and all
its Juice, which is deadly poison, being pressed out, is Baked in thin Cakes.
There is likewise another sort of Yuca, which has not so poisonous a Juice,
keeping good a long time, and is both wholesome, and of a good taste. The Natives
of old lived much upon the Roots Yomus, and Cubias, all sorts of Venison,
Fowls, and Fish, which the Rivers and Lakes afford in great abundance. Those
that are left of the Natives, are a deceitful, crafty, and ingenious sort of
People, very apt to learn Art, and to Trade with Salt to Rio Grande, and the
Mountain Opou.

Besides Copper and Steel-Mines; this Country has also several of Gold; and
the Fields produce all manner of Plants.

The Nature of the Panchas.
The Panchas which remain are yet a salvage People, but their Country is an
indifferent fertile Soil, though not in all places alike; for those which
border upon Tunia fed much heretofore on Pismires; of which some being long,
have double Wings, others lesser and without Wings; which last sort being
roasted, are accounted a great Dainty; and a speedy Remedy against the
Distemper of the Gravel. There are also a sort of venomous Pismires, which
stinging a Man, cause a swelling and great itching, and these are called
Tayoques, whose Stings are cured by a Plaster of bruised Pismires.

The Bounds and Dimensions of Nova Granada.
The Country is bounded on the North with Castella Aurea aforesaid; on the
West, with Mare del Zur; on the East, with Venezuela; the Southern parts of it
being not well discovered, by reason of certain huge and unpassable Mountains,
which block it up wholly on that side, save only where a Passage is kept open
into the Province of Peru, specially so called: It contains in length about a
hundred and thirty Leagues, and not much less in breadth, being for the most
part a very healthful Country, and abounding in Mines of the best sort of
Metal, besides others of Brass and Iron. It is subdivided into these two
Provinces, viz. Granada and Popayana.

SECT. II. Granada.
Description of Granada.
GRanada, specially so called, is a Country of a very temperate and good Air,
as has been before observed, neither subject to overmuch Cold, nor to
extremity of Heat; which is the more to be admired by reason of its nearness to
the Line, from which it is distant Northward but a very few Degrees.

Towns of chief note.
The Towns and Places of chief importance are, 1. St. Foy, commonly called St.
Foy de Bogota, which was the old Name of this Province, and to distinguish it
from another St. Foy, in the Country of New Mexico above mentioned. It is the
Metropolis and Capital City of this Province, an Archbishop's See, and the
ordinary Residence of the Governor, built by the abovementioned Gonsalvo
Ximenes upon the Lake called Guatavita, and has been long since inhabited by
above six hundred Families of Spaniards.

2. St. Michael, twelve Leagues Northward of St. Foy, and a well Traded Town.
The Indians that dwell about this Place being above five thousand, pay great
Tribute yearly. Not far from hence lies the Lake Guatavita, where the
Inhabitants in former times Offered much Gold to their Idols.

3. Tocaima, fourteen Leagues Westward from St. Foy, within a Territory which
anciently belonged to the Panches, who yet possess the worst part of it, lying
still wild and unreduc'd: It is situate on the Banks of the great River Pati,
which falls into the Rivulet Magdalena. Commodities of the Country of Tocaima.
This City, which enjoys the benefit of a wholesome Climate, is surrounded with
Mines of Gold, Copper, Silver, and Lead. And besides the Fruits of the
Country, all Spanish Plants thrive exceedingly after once Planted; and though
Sheep will not breed here, yet Kine, Hogs, and Goats increase daily, but are
often devoured by Tigers, Lions, and Bears. The Woods produce Nut-Trees,
Cedars, Guaiacum, or Pock-Wood, and the wonderful Tree Zeyba, whose Leaves fall
off every twelve hours, and grow again. The Fowls of this Country are many and
several. Near the City are sulphurous Fountains, whose Waters cure Scabs and
Leprosy. In the Valleys also flow Springs of salt Water, which thrown on
Herbs, turns to Rozen and Pitch, and is good to make Boats tight. The tops of
the Mountains are continually covered with Snow, notwithstanding some of them
vomit forth horrible Flames and Ashes, which are blown several Leagues over the
Country. The vicissitude of the Weather occasions two Summers and two Winters;
the first Summer begins in December, and the second in June; the first Winter
accordingly begins in March, and the other in October. This alteration of
Seasons is not distinguished by any change of Heat or Cold, but the continuance
of fair Weather during the Summer, and in the Winter, of such terrible
Hurricanes, that blow from North to South, or from South to North, with such
Thundering and Lightning, as if the end of the World were at hand. The chiefest
Trees that grow here are Cedars, and one that bears exceeding great Almonds.
The Quaque also bears a pleasant Fruit about the bigness of a Goose-Egg; and
the Fig Tree, Figs as large as Oranges. The Agnapa which grows here is of such
a nature, that an European sleeping under it, swells exceedingly, but an Indian
bursts. The Bark and Sprigs of the Hobo, which grows high and round, serve
against Swellings and Ulcers, and occasion also Looseness. Sugarcanes grow also
here in great abundance, amongst which feed certain Beasts like Hogs, whose
Navels grow on their Backs; and large Stags. The Fountains in most places of
this Country run with salt map of Northwestern South America TERRA FIRMA et
NOVUM REGNUM GRANATENSE et POP^AYAN
Water; and sometimes Salt is found between Fresh Water Brooks. The Natives, who
are valiant, subtle, and well proportioned, are since their giving over eating
of Mans-flesh much increased, and many of them forsaking their Heathenish
Idolatry, have embraced the Roman Catholic Religion.

4. La Palma, built Anno 1572. in a certain Territory, the People whereof were
anciently called Musi and Colymae.

5. Trinidad, which is indeed the ancient Tudela renewed, or a City sprung out
of the Ruins thereof. This Tudela stood on the Shore of the River Zarbi, which
running between high Mountains, makes the Rivulet Turatena, and in the same
Territory as La Palma above mentioned, viz. of the Musi and Colymae, by whom
the Spaniards, who had here a Colony, were so exceedingly molested, that they
deserted the same, together with their Governor Peter de Orsua: yet not long
after the forsaken Place was again rebuilt by the Name of Trinidad; but that
Place proving incommodious, was again abandoned, and a new Trinidad built,
where now it is to be seen on a convenient place Eastward from the high and
cold Mountain Paramo. From several rich Gemmaries thereabouts are dug store
of Emeraulds, Crystal like Diamonds, white Marble, and the Beryl, especially on
the Mountains Ytoco and Abipi.

6. Tunia, having a Territory about it, to which it gives Denomination; It lies
on a high Hill, from whence the Church and two Cloisters of the Dominican
Friars are seen at a great distance. Here also is kept the greatest Market in
New Granada.

7. Pampelona, sixty Leagues distant from St. Foy to the North-East, abounding
with Cattle and Gold.

8. Merida, surrounded with Cornfieldsd, the farthest Town of this Province
North-Eastward toward Venezuela.

9. Belez, which though it suffers great prejudice by a burning a Mountain that
vomits Fire and Stones, and also Thunder and Lightning, is the greatest
Residence of several Orders of Friars.

10. Marequita, otherwise called St. Sebastian del Oro, which lies under a hot
Climate, and has much Pasture.

11. Ybague, the Habitation chiefly of Dominicans.

12. La Vittoria de los Remedios; and 13. Juan de los Lanos, or St. John of the
Plains, seated in a rich Nook of the Country, where there are good Silver and
Gold-Mines.

The Merchandise that come to these Towns, are brought up the River Magdalena
in Canoos of sixty Foot long.

SECT. III. Popayana.
Situation and Description of Popayana.
POpayana, the other part of this new Kingdom, is bordered on the West with
part of Granada last spoken of, from which the River St. Martha divides it for
the most part: On the North it has Nova Andaluzia, or Carthagena; on the West,
Mare del Zur; and on the South, Quito, or rather some unreduc'd Countries lying
betwixt them both; It extends in length above a hundred Leagues from North to
South, but in breadth, betwixt the River and the South Sea, not much above
forty or fifty. The Country is said to be a little too much subject to Rain,
yet not so, but that the fertility of the Soil answers the industry of the
Inhabitants in most places very well.

Sebastian de Bevalcazar, Governor of Quito, marching Anno 1536. with a Company
of Spaniards to Otabalo, where the Country Papayan begins, was often set upon
by the Natives from their Ambuscades, and the many Inconveniences which he
suffered for want of Provisions, and trouble of traveling over the high
Mountains, had necessitated him to return, had he not been resolutely bent to
discover the Country; to which purpose marching on leisurely, he came into the
heart of Popayan, where his wearied People sufficiently resting themselves
amidst a fruitful Country, where they found pleasant Fruit Trees, Houses full
of Provisions, and fresh Rivers, which glided from the Mountain Andes, and some
of the Rivulets also affording Gold, were encouraged to build several Villages;
in which nevertheless they made no Settlement, either because they could not
get Gold enough, or else being driven from thence by the valiant Natives.

Cities and Towns of chief note.
The Places of chief note in it, are 1. Popayan, situate on the Banks of a fair
River, but not named, and in the midst of a Plain in a place of great Wealth,
and enjoying a good Air. The original of the Name Popayan is from the Casique
who Governed there at the time of the Spaniards first Arrival. It is a Bishop's
See, and the ordinary Residence of the Governor of the Province. The chief
Buildings are the Cathedral, and a Monastery of the Friars De la Merced. The
Savanna Grounds toward the North feed many fat Cattle. The Fields produce the
best American Maiz. Some of the adjacent Mountains either vomit Smoke, Flames,
great Stones, or scalding Water, leaving a Salt behind it. Beyond the City
Popayan the great River Magdalena takes its original in the Valley Cali, where
several Brooks gliding from the Mountain Andes, inhabited by the Cocunocos,
unite their Waters.

2. Antiochia, otherwise called St. Fides de Antiochia, on the Borders of New
Andaluzia, and about a hundred Leagues from Popayan. In the midst of a small
Territory to which it gives Name, in the Valley Nore, between the River
Magdalena and Daria, washed by Rivulets, whose Sands are Golden, and whose
Banks are shaded with all sorts of Fruit Trees. The Inhabitants white and very
rational, sleep in the Night under the open Sky: Their Houses are built a good
distance from the Highways; near which the Pastures feed abundance of Sheep.
The Pools breed plenty of Fish, and the Mines store of Gold, especially in the
Mountain Buritica.

3. Caramanta, seated likewise on the Banks of the River St. Martha, within a
little Province also of the same Name; the Inhabitants whereof being valiant
and strong go naked, and dwell in little Huts, make white Salt out of a
Fountain and a little Lake: they generally go to Antiochia in six hours, which
is forty five Leagues, so swift runs the Stream.

4. St. Anne, in the Cantred or Hundred of Anzerma, a Town neatly situate upon
the side of an Hill betwixt two Rivers, and in the midst of Plain no less
pleasant than fertile: It was so called by Bevalcazar, because the Indians of
this Place name the Salt Anzer; it is surrounded with Villages and Woods on a
high Plain between two Rivers. The Air being exceeding hot, lightens generally
every day.

5. The Village Pueblo Llana, which is inhabited by little People, who Trade in
Salt, and have also Golden Rivulets. Near this Place is the Valley Aburra,
consisting of many fruitful Plains, moistened by several Rivers; the Inhabitants
whereof at the Spaniards first coming thither, hanged themselves, with their
Wives and Children.

6. St. Jago de Arma, built in a Wood of Palm Trees, so named from the
Territory in which it stands, rich and famous for its Mines of Gold, which it
is said to have many and very good: The Ground round about being Mountainous,
has several Rivers, the chiefest whereof called Di Arma, is dangerous to
cross, especially in Winter. The unwholsom Air hereabouts occasions many
Sicknesses. Amongst other Fruits that grow in this County, is the Pytahaya,
which whoever eats, voids Urine as red as Blood. Adjacent to it are the little
Provinces Paucuran, Pozo, and Picara, which possess Golden Mines: also the
Territory Carrapa, which has high and rugged Land, and many Rivulets: likewise
the County Quimbaya, which abounds with thick and long Canes, wherewith the
Natives build their Houses; in the hollow Bodies of these Canes the wild Bees
gather store of Honey; and amongst them breed also exceeding great Lions, the
four-footed Beast Chuca, which carries its Young in a Bag, Stags, Rabbets and
Guadaquinajes, which being bigger than Hares, are exceeding good Meat. The
Mountain Nevada, wonderful high, and smoking continually, produces the golden
Rivers Tacurumbi and De la Cequo. Twenty Leagues or more distant from St. Jago
is, 7. Carthago, the chief City of Quimbayaes, and by which the aforesaid
Rivers run. The temperate Climate here gives Health and long Life to the
Inhabitants, who have several Fountains of salt. Water, and the Fruit Caymito,
not unlike a Peach, black within, having little Kernels, and a Juice which Dies
so deep, that it can scarce be washed off. Horses and Cows they have likewise
very plentiful. Carthago it self stands in a pleasant Plain between two
Rivulets; the Ways that lead to the same are very dirty, because of the
continual Rain which falls there, with Lightning and Thunder. A League beyond
the City flows the Stream Consota; near which lies a Lake, out of which Salt is
made.

8. The City Cali, the Residence for the Governor and Collector, lying under a
hot Climate in a plain Valley at a River, which falling from the Mountain;
glides to the Stream Magdalena. Round about the same dwelt anciently several
People, viz. the Gorrones, so called, because they named a Fish Gorron, the
Chancos, Giants, with long Faces and broad Foreheads, the Aarbacoas, Agnales,
and Los Timbas, inhabiting among barren Mountains; but most of them were slain
by the Spaniards, or destroyed by one another, few only escaping to the tops
of the Mountains. The Country also swarms with wild Beasts, which have also
devoured many of the Inhabitants, both Indians and Spaniards.

9. The Haven Bonaventure, situate in a deep Inlet, about which live some
Families which send the Commodities that come from New Spain to Popayan, Cali,
and other Places; and though there be a Way along by the River Dagua,
convenient for Mules and Horses to travel, yet it is seldom used, because the
Cattle are so wearied out with the long Journey, that they cannot go through
with their Loads; wherefore they employ the Indians to carry their heavy
Burdens over the Mountains, which they do for a small Reward.

10. St. Juan de Pasto, giving Denomination to the Country about it, and being
built on the pleasant Plains of the Valley Atris, is situate in a wholesome
Climate, and is moistened by several Fountains and the River Angasmayo, the
Boundary of Peru. The Spaniards have several Houses here, and breed store of
Cattle, and especially Hogs. They have likewise Sugar-Mills, with which they
make abundance of Sugar. The ancient Inhabitants were salvage, deformed, and of
little Reason.

11. Timana, giving Denomination to the Country about, is placed under a hot
Climate, yet the Inhabitants live long; they drive a great Trade with Thread
spun out of the Herb Pita; and also with Sweetmeats, Fruits Preserved with
Honey and Sugar, and especially a Kernel not unlike an Almond. In their Gardens
they Plant the Herb Cocoa, which they chew constantly for the strengthening of
their Hearts. Near Pita is a Mountain with Load-stones; and somewhat farther
the Habitations of the valiant Yalcones in the Valley Aquirya, the Paezes,
Pixaos, and Manipos, which so molested the Spaniards, that they forced them, to
forsake the Towns Neyra, St. Vincent, and Ville de los Angelos.

12. Guadalajara de Buga; and 13. Sebastian de la Plata, built on a Plain near
the River Guali; the Country about which is exceedingly troubled with
Earthquakes, and the Inhabitants with their Neighbors the Nineres, who bring
the Flesh of their Prisoners to Sale in the public Shambles.

14. Almague, built on a high Mountain, and lying under a cool Climate, is
surrounded with fruitful Fields, which feed store of Cattle, and enriched with
several Gold-Mines.

15. Juan de Truxillo, which the Indians call Yscance.

16. Madrigall; 17. Chapanchipa; 18. Malaga; and 19. Agreda; the Mountains
about which enclose store of Gold.

Between the Promontory De Corrientes and the Island Palmas, are the Rivers
Salinas and Balsas, which fall into the Southern Ocean; St. Juan, whose Banks
are inhabited by a salvage People which dwell in the tops of the Trees, because
the River oftentimes overflows the Country. They sow Pease and Beans, and
catch Fish, but buy other Provisions, with Gold.

The Isle Gorgona.
Against the Mouth of this River St. Juan lies the Isle Gorgona, three Leagues
in circumference, which is compared to Hell, because of the dismal Woods which
are upon it, barren Mountains, Millions of Musticho's, whose Stings are
intolerable, and never-ceasing Rain, insomuch that the Sun never shines upon it.

The Isle Del Gallo.
West-South-West from Gorgona lies the round Island Del Gallo, about a League in
circumference; it is divided by several Rivers, and round about Planted with
Trees, on which the Indians dwell as at the River St. Juan.

CHAP. IV. Peru.
The Description and Division of Peru.
PEru, so called, as some think, from the River Beru before mentioned, in the
Southern part of America, was anciently a great and mighty Kingdom, as Mexico
in the Northern, and fell under the Power of the Spaniards much after the same
manner that the Kingdom of Mexico did, viz. through the Dissentions and
Differences amongst the People themselves, as in the History of this
considerable part of the New World will be related at large hereafter.

The Kingdom of the Kings of Cusco, which in some sense, and by some Writers
upon occasion, is called The Kingdom of Peru, was extended by the last Inca or
King, Huayna Capac, from North to South above a thousand Leagues together,
comprehending not only a great part of the Province of Chile toward the South,
but also the new Kingdom of Granada, and diverse other Provinces to the North;
but Peru, properly so called, contains little more than half so much, viz.
six hundred Leagues in length, and about fifty or threescore in breadth, except
only in some places, as in the Country of Chacopoyas, where it is thought it
may be a hundred Leagues from the Andes to the South Sea: It lies between the
first and fifth Degrees of Southern Latitude, and is bounded on the East and
North-East with that vast Ridge of Mountains which they call the Andes; on the
West it is washed with Mare del Zur; on the North it has the Country of
Popayan; and on the South, Chile: It is commonly divided into three parts,
which they call The Plains, The Hill-Comtrey, and The Andes; the Plains are
that part of the Country which lie map of Peru PERV
along upon the Seacoast, being for the most part a mere Level without any
Hills at all. The Sierra, as they call it, or Hill-Countrey, is that part of
Peru which is partly mountainous and partly plain, fertile and well inhabited
in both. The Andes are so high, rocky, and inaccessible, that they are scarce
inhabited at all but by Salvages, save only upon the skirts of them. The
Plains from the Seashore to the Hill-Countrey, are for the most part about ten
Leagues over or broad, upon which it scarce raineth all the year long. The
Hill-Countrey is commonly twenty Leagues in breadth where narrowest; and from
September to April has Rain, the rest of the Year generally being fair
Weather; but on the Andes, which take up all the rest of the Country of Peru,
it raineth almost continually all the year long. In the Hill-Countrey their
Summer begins in April, as is said, and ends in September; but in the Plains it
begins in October, and ends in May; so that in the space of a day a Man may
feell both Summer and Winter; be scorched with excessive Heat in the Morning,
and yet well nipt with Cold before Night. The Andes generally are covered with
thick Woods and wild Forests. The Hill-Countrey is for a great space naked and
open; the Plains in many places sandy and dry, and would be much more scorched
with Heat than they are, but for the neighborhood of the Sea, which affords
them many cooling Gales from the South and South-West Winds, whose property,
although it be natural in other parts to be tempestuous, to bring Rain and foul
Weather, yet here there is nothing but Serenity and fair Sunshine days all the
year long, although these Winds blow almost without ceasing upon the Country,
and no other at any time, whereas the Sierra, or Hill-Countreys have Wind from
every Coast, and such as brings all sorts of Weather with it, Rain, Hail,
Frost, Snow, great claps of Thunder, Commodities of the Country.
etc. The Country affords not so much Cattle of the breed of Europe as some
other Provinces of America; but in stead of Kine and Sheep, the Woods and
Pastures are replenished with multitudes of the Vicugnes and Pacos, which are
of no less Profit and Service. The Pacos here are said to be as big as some
young Heifers of two years old, bearing a Fleece like Sheep, and their Flesh no
less pleasant than the Mutton of Europe. But the great Wealth of this Country
lies out of sight in the bowels of the Earth, viz. in those rich and (as they
may seem) inexhaustible Mines both of Gold and Silver, which, as it is well
known, the Country of Peru affords more than any other Province of America
besides. The Sierra opens into large Valleys, amongst the chiefest whereof are
Xauxa, Andaguailas, and Yucay, all of them well inhabited and fruitful. Below
Cusco the Mountains Andes and those of Sierra run a greater distance than
elsewhere one from the other, leaving the great Plain Callao in the middle.
Moreover, several sandy Wilds, without Water, Herbs, Trees, or any living
Creature, except Birds, extend from Tumbez to Taparaca. From the Valleys flow
several Rivers into the Southern Ocean. On the Mountain Pira is a Fountain
called Puchio, which springs in the Night, The Fountain Puchio.
but is quite dry in the Daytime. Also near the chief City Quito in the Valley
Chilo, Another strange Fountain.
is a Fountain whose Waters boil faster or slower according as any one speaks
softer or louder; and when not a word is spoken, it stirs not at all. If any
thing exceed this for strangeness, A most wonderful Rock.
it is a Rock in the Province Concuchos, which is all composed of black and
white Stones, which are so neatly placed by Nature, as if Art had done a
Masterpiece, in the exact placing of them one between another: but the
chiefest thing belonging to it worthy of admiration, is a wonderful power
either to heal or hurt; for if the black Stones in this Rock be touched by any,
they cause immediate Death; whenas the white ones cure all manner of
Sicknesses, and being dug out, leave a Seed behind them, out of which grow
new Stones to fill up the empty place.

Iuca Garcilasso, Extracted from the Peruvian Kings, tells us concerning
Plants, That he saw a Raddish which a Man with both Arms could scarce embrace,
and that under the shade of their Leaves, Horses might stand. But of all the
Peruan Fruit the Cocoa is the crown, which grows on Trees of a Fathom long in
hot and moist Grounds of the Valleys between Andes and Sierra; from whence it
is carried to the Seacoast in long Baskets by Companies of three or four
thousand at a time on the Backs of the Sheep Pacos. Before the Spaniards coming
hither none might chew Cocoa without the Governor's leave: A handful thereof
chewed and sucked in the Mouth, enables a Man to travel two days without any
other Sustenance, and mixed with burnt Bones or Chalk, it is accounted an
excellent Dish; there is such extraordinary plenty of them, that the
Inhabitants spend yearly 90000 Baskets of the Leaves in Pottage. The Peruans
also esteem Mamayes, a Fruit which grows round, not unlike a Peach, with two
Stones, hard Rinds, and a well-rellish'd Pulp within, which dipped in Sugar is a
great Dainty; they grow for the most part in the Islands. The Guaiyavas bears a
wholesome and delicious Fruit like a large Plumb. The Palto, a Tree with many
Boughs, bears a Fruit resembling a Pear, having a hard Rind, and within the
Pulp a great Stone. The Fruit which grows on the Annona has outwardly the same
shape, but white within, and has many black Kernels, which taste very
deliciously. The Fruit Andas, so called from the desolate Peruan Mountains on
which they grow, resemble the forementioned Cocoa, but differ from the
East-Indian, because they are full of hard shell'd Almonds, the like whereof
grows on the Tree Cachapoyas, which are not inferior to any European Fruits
that grow on Trees; in that part of Peru which has its Name from that Fruit is
the best sort, being exceedingly devoured by Monkies, who plucking the
Cachapoya Almonds from their Stalks, throw them on the Ground to break their
prickly Shells, that so they may eat the Kernels without hurt. The Mille-Tree,
being a sort of Grapes, furnishes with Wine. But the greatest benefit the
Inhabitants receive is by their Sheep Pacos and Moromoros, which carry great
Loads, and feed on what they find by the Way; their Flesh is good and wholesome,
and being either Smoked or Salted, keeps good a considerable time; their Wool
dressed affords Cumbi, of which they make fine Table-clothes and Tapestry,
which on both sides is alike. The chiefest Weavers lived formerly at Copachica,
near the great Lake Titicacu: They Dye their Wool with the Juice of boiled
Herbs. It seems also strange to consider what Loads the forementioned Sheep
carried, for besides all sorts of Merchandise, they conveyed the Silver from
Potosi to Arica, a Way of sixty three Leagues; but in former times they brought
it as far again to Arequipa; and though they carried two thousand Bars at a
time, amounting to above thirty thousand Ducats, yet they had no other Guard
but a few Herdsmen, who driving them slept with them in the Nights under the
bare Sky, yet lost none of their Riches, but when the bald Sheep called
Moromoros, being wearied with their Loads, standing still, stretched put their
Necks, and looking on their Drivers; on a sudden ran up into the Mountains, by
which means the Silver was oft-times lost, if they were not suddenly shot. The
woolly Sheep Pacos have also strange Tricks, for they often fall down under
their Loads, and cannot be got up again, but must be let alone till they rise
of themselves. So soon as one of the Sheep has gotten the Mange (which the
Peruvians call Tecarache,) they bury them alive to prevent farther Infection.

The Customs and Habits of the ancient Natives.
The ancient Natives, though differing in Language and Customs, yet went all
Apparelled after the same fashion, the Men covered themselves with a shirt,
which came down below their Knees, and over that a Cotton Cloak; the Women wore
woollen Coats down to their Ancles: Their Head-Ornaments were different
according to an inviolable Compact between the Natives of several Provinces;
for some were wrought, some plain, some diverse colored Caps, with two, three,
or no Feathers, according to the Custom of the Place: They were generally of a
middle Stature; but those that were near the Equinoctial Line lesser. Giants
anciently in St. Helen^.
Their Histories make mention also of Giants, who formerly inhabited the
Promontory St. Helena, were each four times bigger than an ordinary Man, and
fed not only on the greatest Sea Monsters, but devoured each of them thirty
Peruvians at a Meal. The Stone Images of these Giants are at this day to be
seen not far from Puerto Viejo. They likewise kept for a long time Annual
Feast-Days, on which they lamented the loss of the Giants, which (as they say)
was as follows:

A Youth glittering in glory like the Sun descended from Heaven, and breathed
Fire, which rending the Rocks so terrified the Giants, that they fled into a
deep Cave, where they were all killed.

Helvius finds the Bones of the Giants.
Cornelius Whitefleet relates, That Helvius, Governor of Puerto Viejo, being
stirred up by the Report of the forementioned Images, caused all the Graves to
be broke open, in some of which he found Bones, which they supposed to be
Whale-Bones, had not the Sculls manifested the contrary.

The original of the Kingdom of Peru.
Concerning the original of the Kingdom of Peru the Natives give this Account of
it: That the most ancient Inhabitants flocked together like wild Beasts,
without constant Abodes, Customs, Laws, or Governors, which salvageness is
still retained in many Parts, amongst the Brasilians, Chunches, Chiruguanes,
Yscayungus, Piloconens, most of the Floridans, Chinchemeco's, and others, which
degenerate from all Humanity. In time when some kind of Government began to be
observed, it was rather Popular than Monarchical; yet generally those that were
most powerful, valiant and subtle, bore the greatest sway: Amongst whom the
first that five Ages since Commanded over the Inhabitants of the Valley Cusco,
was Ingaroca, a subtle and politic Person, who built the Fort Pucora,
Eastward near the Foot of the Mountain Andes, that so he might bridle the
People which inhabited in those Parts between the Rivers, Moors, and Lakes,
where the remainders of the Fort are to be seen at this day: Moreover, he
conquered all the Country along the Southern Ocean toward the North and
South, giving out that he was extracted from one of the seven Ingas (by which
Name the Peruan Kings have been styled ever since) which came out of the Cave
Pacaritambo, The original of the Ingas.
where they were preserved against the Deluge (of which the Heathens in America
had long since an obscure knowledge,) and restored the drowned Families;
wherefore every one not only obeyed, but paid him Tribute, and bound
themselves to receive of him the true Religion, which they desired he would
teach them, as none knowing the same better than he, whom they looked upon as
Extracted from the Ingas. Amongst these Ingas the chiefest was said to be
Mangocapa, who, according to their fabulous Tradition, climbed through the
Window Tambo out of the Cave Pacaritambo, and produced two Families, viz. Hunan
Cusco, and Urin Cusco; from the first whereof Ingaroca affirmed himself
Descended, and having first made himself Master of all the Countries about
Cusco, raised the Family Vicaquiquirao, and laid out a great part of his
Revenues upon Gold and Silver Utensils, and Ornaments for his Person and House,
which he in his last Will charged that none of his Successors should inherit,
nor dwell in his Palace, but that every one should build a new Habitation for
themselves: He also erected diverse Golden Idols.

Some Authors begin this Dynastie of the Kings of Peru in a very different
manner, making Mango Capa to be the first thereof, and to have been Succeeded
by his Son Chincaroca, which cannot but be the same with this Ingaroca here
mentioned. Yaguarguoqu (that is, Yaguarguoqu the second Inga.
Crier of Blood, because on a time being Commander, and taken Prisoner, out of
vexation and exceeding grief he cried Blood) Succeeding him after his Death,
raised the Family Aocaillipanaca, and was Succeeded by his eldest Son, the
wealthy Viracocha Inga, Viracocha Inga his great Riches.
of whom, when the Spaniards conquered Peru, went a Report, that great Riches
lay buried in the Earth with him; wherefore Gonzalus Pizarrus tortu'd the
Natives after an inhumane manner, to know of them where the Grave of the said
Inga was; at last obtaining his Desire, he dug for the Body, which he found
so well Embalmed, that it seemed to live, but no Gold with it; wherefore
Pizarrus deceived in his expectation, burnt the Corpse; the Ashes whereof the
Indians gathering in Urns, worshipped, though when he lived the Vulgar were
much incensed at him, for taking upon him the Name of Viracocha, who was their
supreme God and Creator of all things; but he pacified them, saying, That
Viracocha appearing to him in a Dream, had commanded him to take that Name upon
him.

Yupangui's Policy to gain an Opinion amongst the People.
The fourth Inga, called Pachacuto Yupangui succeeded in the Throne after the
Death of his eldest Brother, who was slain in a Field-Battel against the
Changas, inhabiting the Valley Andaguailas, where the Peruan Army was utterly
defeated, few of them only escaping by flight; among whom was Yupangui, who
persuaded the rest to a subtle Design, by alleging, That the Almighty
Creator, angry at their Destruction, had revealed many Secrets to him, viz.
That the Creator in Heaven was called Viracocha Pachayachachie; That he
resented it very ill; That whereas he formerly made Heaven, Sun, Moon, Stars,
and Men, none worshipped him for it, but in stead of him they reverenced the
Sun, Thunder, and the Earth, who had their Beings from him; That he would show
his Power against the victorious Changas by an unexpected Assistance of an
invisible Army. This being believed of every one, stirred up the Peruans far
and near, insomuch that in a short time a vast Army being raised, presented
themselves to Yupangui, who made good use thereof; and also told them that
Viracocha had decreed in Heaven, that he Yupangui should be his Vicegerent on
Earth; which the Army believing, set the Peruan Crown which they had taken from
his Father, on his Head: Thus promoted, he marched against the Changas, whom in
a bloody Battle he conquered, and brought them all under his Obedience:
Moreover, he made his Soldiers believe, that they were not the Conquerors, but
invisible Men, whom Viracocha had sent, and who could be seen by none but
himself; and that after the Battle they were turned into Stones, which they
must seek for. Whereupon they gathering a great number of Stones on the
Mountains, Gross Superstition.
Yupangui called them Pururancas, and ordered that they should be worshipped,
and carried with them into the Field whensoe're they fought another Battle,
hoping thereby to stir up his Soldiers to be courageous, who firmly believed,
that with the visible Stones walked invisible Heroes that would certainly
assist them. This Imagination wrought so much, that Yupangui's Army assured of
Victory with the help of the Stones, went on undauntedly on all Designs,
insomuch that being feared by all the adjacent People, he forced them all to
submission. This Yupangui raised the Family Yuaupococa, and placed a great
Golden Image called Indyllapa on a Golden Chariot, which since was religiously
worshipped, and afterward carried to Caxamalca, for a Ransom of the Peruvian
King Attabaliba, whom the Spanish General Pizarrus kept Prisoner, and at last
Strangled. The Councellor Polus opening Yupangui's Grave, found the Body
Embalmed, and no way defaced, but the Eyes covered with thin Golden Plates, and
on his Head appeared the Scar of a Stone which had been thrown at him; and
though the Body had lain eighty years in the Grave, yet it seemed rather living
than dead, being only a little gray. This Corpse, as also several other Inga's,
the Marquess Camette brought from Cusco to Lima, so to prevent the Peruvians
worshipping of them.

Yupangui after his Decease was succeeded by Sopa Inga, and he by his Son of
the same Name, who raised the Family Ayoac Aillo: The last (for nothing worthy
of memory was done by either of them) was succeeded by Guaynacava, The
Greatness and Riches of Guayacava.
a wealthy and valiant young Man, who was no sooner settled on the Throne, but
he managed all things with great prudence, maintained War with several People,
and conquered the Kingdom of Quito, four hundred Leagues beyond Cusco, whither
after his Death his Body was carried, and buried in the famous Temple of the
Sun, but his Entrails were buried in Quito not without many bloody Offerings,
thousands of his Servants Sacrificing themselves at his Grave willingly, that
so they might serve their Prince in the other World. The invaluable Treasures
which he left behind him were carefully hid by the Peruvians till the Spaniards
conquered that Country: The paved Ways, magnificent Buildings, and strong
Castles, testify as yet the Power of this Inga; wherefore in his lifetime he
was honored as a God. His Mother Mamaoclo lived to see above three hundred of
her Children's Children, all Extracted from her Son Guaynacava.

War between Huascar and his Brother Attabaliba.
The chief of the Family Tanebamba were Huascar and Attabaliba, Sons to
Guaynacava, (both by the Coya, or lawful Queen, however some have delivered to
the contrary) who falling at variance betwixt themselves, resolved to decide
the Quarrel by a Field-Battel, in which Attabaliba, being the youngest, was
Conqueror. This Civil War was at the height when the Spaniards invaded Peru,
which they could never have conquered, had not the Realm been so divided.
During Attabaliba's Imprisonment by Pizarrus, his two Generals, Quizaniz and
Chilicuchima, took the Inga Huascar (formerly called Tito Cusi Gualpa,
Attabaliba's Brother) in Cusco, Huascar burnt alive.
and carrying him to the Valley Sacfahuana, burnt him alive. It is set down as
remarkable, that Huascar after his being vanquished, made great Offerings to
Viracocha, thereby to gain his assistance in his extremity against Attabaliba;
when he was informed, that a strange People which came from a remote Place over
the Seas, had defeated Attabaliba's Army, and taken him Prisoner: From which
News Huascar taking courage, called the Spaniards Viracochas, and judged that
they were come from Heaven to his Delivery, and the more, because his Brother
had spilt so much Blood already: for Attabaliba had not only slain the Prince
Atoco, which led Huascar's Army, with three thousand two hundred Men, and drank
out of Atoco's Skull tipped with Gold, but had also plucked out the Hearts of
above a thousand Children, which the Cannrites sent with Palm-Boughs to him, to
desire Peace.

Mango Inga Settles in the Mountain Vilcabamba.
After Attabaliba's and Huascar's Decease, Mango Inga their Brother drove all
the Spaniards out of Cusco, whither they not long after coming with new Forces,
necessitated Mango, not without the loss of many Men, to take his flight up
into the Mountain Vilcabamba, where he Settling, his Successors Reign to this
day, secured from any Invasion by the natural strength of the Place. But the
Inga Saritopa coming from the forementioned Mountain, submitted himself to the
Spaniards, who allowed him the Valley Yucay to dwell peaceably in; but the rest
of the Family of the Inga's that fell into the Hands of the Spaniards, were all
of them killed in Cusco, not without great grief of the old Inhabitants, to see
so ancient and noble a Family, by which they had been Governed in great State
for three hundred years together, put to death by common Executioners.

Cusco the Residence of the Peruvian Kings.
The City Cusco, which was the Royal Seat of all the Peruvian Kings, was made
more splendid than ever before, by Guayanacava, of whom Augustine de Tarrate,
describing his Magnificence, relates, That when his Queen was Delivered of a
Son, who was to succeed in the Throne, Guayanacava kept a great Feast for
twenty days together, and on that day when the Child was to be Named, a Golden
Chain, each Link of which was as big as a Hand, and contained in all seven
hundred Foot in length, was carried by twenty Peruvians to the Temple.

The Manner of the Succession of their Kings.
The Succession of the Inga's was after this manner: The Inga's keeping many
Concubines had many Children by them, none of which could lay claim to the
Peruvian Crown, but only the Son begotten on the Coya, or Queen, being
generally the Kings own Sister, (whom they accounted lawful for them to Marry,
as in ancient times did the Egyptian Kings) Inherited the Realm, unless the
Inga had a lawful Brother, who Inherited before the Son, though born of a Coya;
or if the said Brother had a Son, he obtained the deceased Uncles Crown before
him, who in appearance was the elder Heir.

The same Succession was also observed by other Governors, which the Peruvians
call Curaca's.

Their Burials and disposal of their Treasure.
The Burials of their Kings were performed with great solemnity; and the
Treasures which they left behind were bestowed in building of magnificent
Guaha's, which were Temples or religious Houses, where a kind of solemn Worship
was to be performed, to celebrate the Memory of the Deceased. Some part of the
Treasure was also distributed amongst the Inga's Servants; but the Successor
inherited not the least Mite of what his Predecessor had gotten, but was
forced, according to an ancient Law, to build himself a new Palace, and
purchased anew every thing else belonging to it.

Their Crown.
Their Crown or Diadem was only a fine red woollen Coif with a Tassel, that
hung down over their Foreheads, which other meaner Princes wore hanging on
their right Ear.

Their Coronations.
Their Coronations were also kept in great Pomp and State, the Nobility and
Priests coming from all parts of the Country to Cusco, besides an innumerable
multitude of common People.

The Noblemens Presents to the Inga's consisted chiefly of Gold and Silver
Vessels, fine Cloth called Cumbi, all sorts of Sea-shells, and stately Plumes
of Feathers of inestimable value.

Thousands of Sheep differing in color served for Offerings: moreover, the
Chief Priest sacrificed a Child before the Image of Viracocha, on whom with
great Reverence he cried, O great God Viracocha, we Offer you this Child, that
you may keep our Realm in Peace, aid us in time of War, prosper our Inga in all
his Undertakings, make him more powerful and greater than any of his
Predecessors, and grant him wisdom to Govern this vast Country.

Their exact Form of Government.
No People in the World can be more respective, and show greater Reverence to
their Kings, than the Peruvians: for there were never any heard of in this
Country that ever Rebelled against their Prince; the reason of which was
chiefly, because they always Governed with great Justice and Mildness, placing
Governors over the respective Countries and Provinces, according to their
several Divisions, greater or lesser, with subordinate Power one under another,
so that they Ruled with great strictness, punishing with Death both Drunkenness
and Theft. Moreover, the Ingas observed a prudent way in Government, viz. They
kept their Subjects continually employed: The ordinary sort of Persons of
subdued Provinces were sent to remote Countries, and the Governors thereof kept
at the Court in Cusco; and Princes Descended of the Royal Blood sent in their
Places to Govern the new gotten Dominions: they divided the Inhabitants into
Companies, placed one to Command over ten, another over a hundred, and a
greater Officer over a thousand, and at last a Prefect or Major General, over
ten thousand; every one of which Officers were to bring in an Account every
Week to the supreme Governor, who was always of the Inga's Family, what Men
died of their number, or how many were born, a present Estimate of every ones
Stock, in Cattle or otherwise, and all remarkable Transactions that happened. On
the high Feast Day they were all to appear at Court, and to bring in the
Revenues gathered out of their Substitute Countries. The main Division of the
Country was into four grand Provinces, called Tahucantinsuyos, according to
the four Ways that went from Cusco through the whole Realm, viz. Chinchasuyo
toward the North, Coclasuyo toward the South, Andesuyo toward the East, and
Condesuyo toward the West. The Collectors were divided into Hanansayos,
Upper-Collectors, and Urinsayos, or Under-Collectors. The Quipocomayos, or
Accomptants, could ^ast up exactly with Buttons, not only what every Province,
but also what each Man was to pay, and that according to the ability of the
Country and Person.

Their stately Structures.
Many were the stately Temples, invincible Castles, magnificent Palaces, and
other wonderful Structures built by the Ingas, the chiefest whereof stood in
Cusco, Tiaguanaco, and Tambo; the Builders whereof were sent for by turns out
of the adjacent Countries, from which they brought exceeding great Stones, most
of them thirty eight Foot long, eighteen broad, and six thick, which were so
neatly joined together with Mortar or Iron-work, that a whole Edifice seemed to
be one entire Stone. Their Bridges that led cross the Rivers were made of Flags
and Rushes, fastened to each Shore with great Ropes. The like Bridge lay cross
the deep Mouth of the Lake Chicuito, on which great Bundles of the Rushes Toto
being tied together, and covered with Straw, so strengthened the Bridge, that
great Loads were safely carried over the same.

The great Riches of the Ingas.
No Prince ever possessed so much Riches and Splendour as an Inga of Peru, each
Country presenting him with what was most esteemed amongst them; the Chiches
bringing Sweet-woods; the Lucanas, strong Sedan-Carriers; the Chumbibilcas,
brave Dancers; and so accordingly every Country provided him with what they
best esteemed, besides the usual Tributes which they paid.

Those which dug the Gold and Silver out of the Mines, had Meat, Drink, and
Clothing from the Inga, though at other times he enjoyed the Labors of his
Subjects for nothing.

Their several sorts of Tribute from conquered Countries.
When at any time he conquered a Country by force of Arms, he made them pay
three several sorts of Tribute; the first was bestowed in religious Offices.
Each Guaca or Chapel received also a Revenue from the late conquered
Countries, the Fruit of which served for Offerings to their chief God
Pachayachachu, the Sun, their Thunderer Chuquilla, and to the Souls of the
Deceased, and for Food for the Priests. The Religion through the whole Realm
agreed with that which was observed in Cusco. But the second Tribute fell to
the Inga's Family, or Relation and Soldiers. Those who Tilled the Inga's
Ground, Sung before him in Festival Clothes. That which could not be spent in
the Court was laid up in Storehouses for ten years together, against a
scarcity should happen. Aged People, Widows, and such as were decrepid, paid no
Tribute. The third part was for the Poor, which had every Year a piece of
Ground allowed them to make use of as they pleased. In unfruitful Years they
received an Allowance out of the Storehouses before mentioned.

Their Provision for the Poor.
So likewise the Pasture, Meadows, and Arable Land was ordered for three several
Uses, one third for religious Uses, a second for the Inga's, and the last for
the Poor. The Sheep being shorn on a certain Day, yielded the Poor a certain
quantity of Wool to make them Clothes. As soon as any Beast grew Mangy (which
the Peruvians called Carache) they burnt them alive, so to prevent the
spreading of it farther. Those that belonged to the Inga's Family, wore all
Clothes made of the finest Wool, and the coursest, called Tabasca, was
distributed among the Vulgar.

Their Industry.
Besides this good Order of Government, it is wonderful to observe the Peruvians
manner of Living, each learning from their Infancy not only a Trade, but all
things which they accounted necessary in Housekeeping, as Weaving, Tilling of
Land, building of Houses, and making of Tools requisite for both; so that they
never made use of one another on any Account. Moreover, Master Artists, who
worked more for Pleasure than Gain, dwelt apart, being Silver-smiths, Painters,
Musicians, and Dancers.

Their Habits.
Their Habits were heretofore of one fashion through the whole Realm, only the
Covering of their Head were several, by which the People of one Country were
distinguished from the other, according to an inviolable Law made many Ages
since; some therefore wore thin Caps, others broad Pleits, others little Hats,
others round Bonnets, others woven Caps, and the like.

Their Post-Stages.
Their Post-Stages, called Chasquis, were little Houses, each standing a League
and a half from one another, wherein dwelt certain Officers, who with
extraordinary speed conveyed the Inga's Letters from one Chasquis to the other;
after which manner in two days time they conveyed a Letter a hundred Leagues.
But since the Spaniards conquered this Country, that Convenience was lost,
till the tenth Peruvian Viceroy Martin Enriques reestablished the same; for
he allowed a Sallary to those Posts, that they might with speed convey all
Letters and Packets from one to the other, being distant, according to his
Establishment, four Leagues.

Their severe Laws against Malefactors.
Lastly, the Ingas maintained strict Laws in criminal Affairs; for as they did
not neglect to encourage noble Achievements (for whoever had done a valiant
Act in the Wars, was made Governor of a Country, or had a certain quantity of
Land given him, or Married one of the Inga's Family;) so likewise they severely
punished all Malefactors: for Murderers, Thieves, and Adulterers suffered Death
without Mercy; yet they allowed store of Concubines, and it was free for any
one to Lie with his Neighbor's Concubine, but Death to have to do with any
Man's lawful Wife, who were served by the Concubines.

Their Marriages.
When a Bridegroom Betrothed himself to his Bride, he gave her (and put them on
himself) a pair of Shoes called Ajota, not unlike those of a gray Friar, which
were lined with Cotton if she were a Maid, but with Leaves if a Widow, who
nevertheless being generally younger than the Man, was to Mourn a whole year in
Black for her deceased Husband; till the expiration of which time she was not
to Marry another. Governors of Provinces and other Officers of State, received
their Wives from the Ingas, who enquiring out the beautifullest and most
accomplished Virgins they could hear of, put the Ajota on their Feet, and gave
them to such Persons as they most fancied; after which if they committed
Adultery they were certainly put to death. The Marrying of Brothers and Sisters
was also forbid, till the Inga Topa Yupangui, Father to Guaynacava broke that
Law, by Marrying his own Sister Mamoello, and made ah Order that the Ingas
only should have that liberty; nay, when he lay on his Deathbed, he strictly
charged his Son Guaynacava to take his own Sister Goya Cuissilmay to Wife; and
this incestuous Marriage produced Huascar and Attabaliba, (though some say
Attabaliba was begotten on a Concubine) in whose time the Peruvian Kingdom went
to ruin. Guaynacava also permitted the common People to Marry their Sisters of
the Fathers side, but not of the Mothers.

Their manner of living.
The Peruvian Houses were anciently for the most part light and small; and for
their Table they made but little preparation, satisfying themselves with a
little Beer made of Rice, Bread baked of Maiz, dried Flesh, Fish, and Roots.

In their Wars they used Slings, Darts, Arrows, Lances, Pikes, Halberds,
Pole-Axes, and Shields.

Their Funerals.
Their Funerals were also solemnly kept, especially those of Persons of Quality,
the Corpse was carried out on a brave Chair, from which he was put into the
Ground, with two of his Concubines whom he best affected, and also three
Servants, Gold and Silver Vessels, Maiz, and the Liquor Chica, which the
nearest Relation spurted into his Mouth through a Cane; all which they did that
the Deceased might make use thereof in the other World. But before the Funeral
the Relations Mourned over the Corpse several days, and after the Body was
Interred, they placed the Picture of the Deceased upon the Grave: but the
meaner sort of People had the Tools belonging to their Trade; and Soldiers
their Arms placed on the same.

Their Religion.
In their Religion they had various Fancies; their prime God Viracocha bore
several Denominations, and amongst others he was called Pacachame, or
Pachayachachick, by which he was signified to be the Creator of Heaven and
Earth; as also Usapu, that is, Wonderful. In honor to this Pacachama stood
formerly a magnificent Temple about four Leagues from Lima, where the Ruins
still manifest its former glory, it being the Place where the Devil answered
the Priests, who stood with their Backs toward the Image of Pacochame, bowing
their Heads to the Ground, and showing many antic Tricks. The second Temple
stood near Cusco, in which the Inga's had placed the Images of all the Gods and
Goddesses that were worshipped in Peru; and before each Image stood an Altar:
the chiefest of them, called Puachao, consisting of massy Gold, was Dedicated
to the Sun, on whose Forehead the Sun was Engraven on a Plate, which afterward
fell into the Hands of the Spanish Captain Mancius Sierra de Lequizamo; but
because he lost the same one Night at Gaming, this Proverb was raised upon it,
Lequizamo lost the Sun before it rose, because he got the Plate on which the
Sun was Engraven in the Afternoon, and lost the same in the Night: The Temple
it self, built of great Stones, curiously joined together in Mosaic Work, and
within linked with Golden Plates of a Finger thick, stood full of Golden
Chapels and Altars; round about it were several Galleries, into which the
Priests and Priestesses Chambers opened. Near the River Ticiquaque a third
Temple, Consecrated to the Sun.

The various Idolatry of the Peruvians.
This kind of Idolatry was common to the Peruvians, with several other Nations
of the ancient Heathens, as has been before observed, which made them mock at
the Spaniards when they told them of a Crucified Savior, saying they had a
splendid God, who appeared to them in glory every Morning. In the third Temple
near the River Taciquaque in Peru, which exceeded the other two, they
worshipped Thunder by the Name of Chuquilla, Catuilla, and Intillapa, which the
Peruvians believed to be a Man that Commanded the Air, and who being Armed with
a Club and Sling, throws down Rain, Hail, and Snow from the Clouds, and
shooting Bullets through the lower Region, causes Thunder and Lightning: They
worshipped him after the same manner as they did Viracocha and the Sun, with
holding up of a thing like a Glove, and sometimes Offering, especially in
Cusco, living Children: Also they adored the Earth of which they made the
Goddess Bathamama; also Mamacocha, the God of the Sea. The Rainbowe, which the
Ingas carried between two Serpents for their Arms, was also religiously
worshipped. Amongst the Stars they imagined Colca, by us called Aries, or the
Ram, as chief; yet held several others of peculiar Denomination, in veneration,
of which they craved such things as they wanted. The Shepherds adored the Star
Nereuchilla, or Capricorn, whom they judge to Rule over the Beasts. Others
worshipped Machacuay, which the European Astronomers call the Serpent, as
commanding Serpents and Dragons, that they might receive no hurt from them.
Tigers, Lions, and Bears, were Ruled by the Star Chuquichinchag; wherefore
those who would walk free from those ravenous Beasts, lifted up folded Hands to
the Constellations representing the same. They believed that there was no
Creature living on Earth, whose Likeness the Heavens could not afford; and that
those which were on Earth were under the influence of those in Heaven: from
hence proceeded the Names of the Stars Chacana, Topatatca, Mamana, Mirma, and
others. They likewise attributed a kind of Divinity to Fountains, Rivers,
Rocks, Mountains, some kinds of Herbs, Roots, and especially the Papas, of a
strange shape, and had a veneration for all manner of Creatures that were of an
unusual form. When they traveled they strewn Shoes, Plumes of Feathers, and
Cocoa in all cross Ways and tops of Hills, by them called Apachitas; and if
they want the forementioned things, then they throw a Stone for an Offering,
from whence it proceeds, that in all cross Ways, and on the tops of Hills, lie
heaps of Stones, which are accounted holy.

The like fond veneration of Stones the Saracens are said anciently to have
had, upon a Tradition, That Abraham had enjoyed Agar upon a Stone, and that
according to Euthymius and Libanius, he tied his Cammel to a Stone when he went
to Offer his Son Isaac.

The Images of their deceased Ingas, which they called Guaoiqui, were had in
great honor, and carried with them to the Wars, and up and down in
Processionings, and called upon for fruitful Seasons.

The Peruvians believed the Immortality of the Soul.
The Immortality of the Soul, the giving of Punishments to the Wicked, and of
Rewards to those that do well, was generally believed amongst the Peruvians,
but not the Resurrection of the Dead. Many suffered themselves to be buried
with their Friends, that they might accompany them to the other World. When the
Inga Guaynacava was buried, above a thousand of his Courtiers Sung several
Songs, kept a great Feast, and went with great joy to be buried with him, that
so they might serve their King on the other side of the Mountains. They Offered
likewise a great number of Children, and with their Blood crossed their Faces
from one Ear to another: But this barbarous Offering was never used but at the
Death of prime Persons of Quality; for the meaner sort of People set only Meat
on the Graves, and gave the Dead two Suits of Apparel, put Money in their
Mouths and Hands; for they believed that the Souls ranging up and down from
place to place, suffered many inconveniences.

Their Oracle.
The Peruvian Images consisted generally of Gold, Silver, Stone, or Wood, all of
them strangely deformed: Some of them were said to give Responces like the
Oracle at Delphos and Dodona, chiefly in the Temple Pacachama, whose greatness
is sufficiently manifest by the Ruins of its Walls beyond Lima, where
Franciscus Pizarrus got an invaluable Treasure. Each Peruvian Province had a
Temple, besides which, in the Cities, Villages, and Hamlets, were Chapels of
Ease, into which the Priests went at Night with their Backs toward the Idol,
bended Heads and Bodies; in which posture they requested to know future Events,
and were many times answered (if we may believe their Reports) in a terrible
Voice. The great Temple at Cusco, wherein the Ingas had placed all the Peruvian
Idols, is now turned into a Dominican Cloister. In each Province of Peru was
also a Nunnery (if we may so term it) or Habitation of devoted Virgins, called
Allaguau, ie. A House of the Choicest, Their Nunneries.
over which was placed a Governor named Appopanaca, to whom none durst deny
their Daughters; some of which were styled Wives of the Sun, and others
Servant-Maids to the same: The Wives Clothed in Embroidered Coats, adorned the
Temple, whilst the Maids kept clean the Walls and Floor. When they attained to
fourteen Years of Age, some were chosen out from the rest, and obliged to
perpetual Virginity and solitude of Life in their Chapels; which sacred
Obligation if they broke by suffering any to Lie with them, they were buried
alive after the manner of the Vestal Virgins, the Ceremony whereof is related
by Plutarch: Others were obliged to make daily Offerings; others to make
peculiar Sacrifices for the Inga's Health, and happy Events in War; many also
were employed in the Court-Service to wait upon the Inga's Wife or Concubines;
and those being absolved from their Vow, were ofttimes Married to Courtiers.
These Nunneries were Endowed with great Revenues from the Chacaras, Their
Offerings.
or Church Lands. Their Offerings were (for sometimes they Offered to their
Idols the highly esteemed Herb Cocoa, Maiz, several colored Plumes,
Sea Monsters, Gold and Silver Images of Beasts, fine Clothes called Cumbi,
Sweetwood, and Tallow to burn) either to have success in their Journeys,
Trades, or for the preservation of Health, or to obtain a plentiful Harvest.
But their usual Offerings were Cuces, a sort of Toads, which were eaten by the
Peruvians. When they were to do any Business of consequence, then Persons of
Quality killed their Sheep Pacos, not without strange observation of the color
and number of them, as also of the time; all which things well considered, they
took the Sheep and laid it cross their right Arm, turned the Face thereof
toward the Sun, and muttered several words to themselves according to the
color; for if it was spotted gray, they spoke to Chuquilla, or Thunder; if
white and short Fleeced, to the Sun; if well Fleeced, to Viracocha. In Cusco
they Offered daily a short-fleec'd Sheep to the Sun in this manner: Making a
great Fire called Vibbacaronca, the Priests threw the Sheep and four Baskets of
Cocoa into it. Their Sacrifices Cozocovicca and Sapovicca, to obtain Conquests,
were also very strange: for they gathered out of Puna (which is a desolate
place) several sorts of Brambles and Bushes named Ganilli, which being all set
on fire, they went about the Fire with round Stones in their Hands, on which
were painted Serpents, Lions, Toads, and Tigers, crying, Usachum, grant us
Conquest, together with this Prayer, Destroy, O Creator, the power of our
Enemies Gods; which said, several starved Sheep were brought out, which for
that reason they called Urca; whose Hearts having torn out they began their
Prayers afresh, saying, Mighty Viracocha, thus do thou pull out the Hearts of
our Enemies. For the prosperity of the Ingas they killed in an open Field black
Dogs, by them called Appurucos, whose Flesh was eaten with many Ceremonies by
People appointed for that purpose. They made Offerings also to the Fountains,
Rivers, Brooks, and Sea-shells, under pretense that those Shells were Daughters
of the Ocean, and the Ocean the Father of Streams and Springs; when they had
Sow'n their Fields, their Priests, chose to that Office, went from House to
House to gather such Offerings as every one was pleased to give; which they
laid at the Banks of several Sluices, at the time when the Water began to rise
there, thinking by that Oblation to keep them from overflowing their Lands,
and washing away their Seed. In all places where two Rivers joined together
they washed themselves, having first bedaub'd themselves all over with stamped
Maiz; and afterward looked upon themselves as well purged from Sin; which
power they ascribed to their Baths. To strangle Children between four and ten
years of Age was never used, unless upon the Inga's being sick, or when he
received the Royal Tassel, that from the death of the Children he might receive
Health, or Reign prosperously. The forementioned Nuns that were chose to
attend on the King's, were also strangled when the Inga was sick; nay,
sometimes a Father would Offer his Son to Viracocha, on the Sun-Priest's
suggestion, That by his Son's death he would recover from his Sickness, Praying
to the forementioned Deity, that they would be pleased to save the sick Father,
because the Son had with his Death paid for his Fathers.

This kind of Cruelty the Devil seemed to prompt the Heathens to, by making use
of Abraham's Example, who prepared his Son Isaac for a Sacrifice on Mount
Moria; and that it was a Practice amongst the ancient Ammonites and Moabites,
and other Heathens (by which even the Children of Israel were apt to be
seduced) appears from the Scripture it self: the Ceremonies of which brutish
Customs, with the seven Brazen Chambers of Moloch, may be seen described by
Rabbi Solomon.

Their High Feasts.
The high Feast Capacrayne, which the Peruvians kept in the first Month Rayme,
agreeing with our December, deserves serious observation: for as long as the
Feast lasted, no Stranger was suffered to Lodge in Cusco, whither they all
flocked again after the Feast was over, to receive Cakes made by the Mamaconas
(an Order of Nuns) of Maiz and the warm Blood of a white Ram, and were
distributed by certain Priests (Extracted from the Royal Family Iluqui
Yupangui) who carrying them up and down in Golden Dishes, gave every one of a
Company one, saying at the delivery of it, If you do not Reverence the Sun and
Inga, this Food will witness against you to your Ruin; but if you worship
them, then their Bodies will by this Pledge be united to yours: after which
those that had eaten of the Cakes promised Obedience, and thanked the Sun and
Inga for their Food.

At the forementioned Chasquis a course was taken to carry all that desired,
to every Temple through the whole Kingdom of Peru, where the Inhabitants
received them with great Reverence, having before confessed all their sins to
their Yahuries, or Father-Confessors, Their manner of Confessions.
who being chosen to that Office with a great deal of Ceremony, imposed greater
or lesser Penances, according to the sins of the Penitent: those that were
suspected to have concealed any of their sins, were put to cast Lots, or had
the Entrails of the Beasts which they had killed to that purpose consulted
about them, and thereby were discovered if they had concealed any of their
sins; which whenever it happened, the Priests falling upon the false Penitents,
thump'd them with a Stone on their Backs so long, till they had confessed all
their Faults, which the Priest was not to reveal on pain of Death, but to make
Expiatory Offerings. The sins about which they were Examined, were chiefly
Theft, Murder, Adultery, preparing of Poison, or sleighting their Inga or Gods;
for each of which Transgressions they had several kinds of Punishments. When
the Inga fell sick, all People in general were forced to come and make
Confession of their sins; also every one went to his Confessor when he was in
trouble, or expected some Misfortune to befall him: The Inga himself Confessed
his sins to none but the Sun, which he desired to relate to Viracocha, and to
beg pardon of him for the same, which done, he bathed himself in a running
Stream, and cried, I have made my sins known to thee, O Sun; do thou, O River,
wash away mine Iniquities, and discharge them into the Sea, that they may never
be more laid to my charge: which custom of Bathing, called Opacuna; wa^ also
used by all other Penitents. Their Penances.
A Father losing his Son by Death, was censured for a great Sinner, wherefore
he could not be permitted to be Confessed before he had been whipped with
Nettles by a cetain ill-look'd Officer appointed for that end; after which
their Fathers Ychuris enjoined such Penances as they thought fit; some were
ordered to fast several days; others to pay rich Garments, Silver, Gold, or the
like; others received a certain number of Blows; some were condemned to live on
the Mountains, excluded from the society of all Men. If their Sorcerers at any
time foretold a Fathers Death, then he immediately Sacrifis'd his Son, that
with his Death he might buy his own Life. The Esteem of their Soothsayers.
No People were more respected than their Soothsayers, as Men that could
discover private Thefts, Accidents that happened in remote Countries, and also
future Events, and so far their Credit amongst the Vulgar carried them, that
they undertook to tell the Spaniards when their Contrymen should be
Conquerors, and when defeated in the War they maintained against the
Netherlanders. There were also cunning Women, who making themselves dead Drunk
with Chica, with which they mixed the Herb Viloa, and afterward coming to
themselves again, answered all the Questions that were proposed to them.

Their monthly Feasts.
The Peruvians kept two sorts of Feasts, the first at certain times, the others
on special occasions; the set-Feasts were kept Monthly; on the first Month
Rayme, agreeing with our last Month December, as aforesaid, they kept the
great Feast Capacrayme, on which they brought Multitudes of Sheep and Lambs for
Burnt-offerings, besides Silver and Gold. Not far from the Fire stood three
Carved Images of the Sun, and three others representing Thunder; and this was
generally the Day of the Installation of the young Inga's, which was after this
manner: The chief Priest boring a Hole through his Ear, covered the upper part
of his Body with the holy Cloth Guaras, whilst the inferior Priests whipped him
with knotted Cords, and painted his Face with the Blood. During these
Ceremonies no Stranger was suffered to remain in Cusco, but after the Feast was
ended they all returned, and as before, received Cakes baked of Maiz and Blood,
as a testimony that they loved and honored the Inga.

The three Images of the Sun beforementioned they called Apointi, Churiunti,
and Intiquaoqui, that is, Father-Sun, Son-Sun, and Brother-Sun. In like manner
they named the three Images of Thunder, Chuquilla, Catuilla, and Intillapa;
from which Acosta judges that the Devil had obscurely taught the Peruvians the
Mysteries of the holy Sacrament and Trinity, (that their glory might be
eclipsed by Idolatrous Errors) especially the last, which seems plainly to be
signified by the Peruvian Deity Tangatanga, whom they affirmed to be One in
Three, and Three in One. And that other Nations also had a glimpse of the same
may be collected from Philip Cluverius, who endeavors to demonstrate, that the
ancient Germans and Gauls obscurely adored the Trinity in the midst of their
Heathenism, under the notion of Sun, Moon, and Fire, the Sun signifying the
Father, the Moon the Son, and the Fire the Holy Ghost; to confirm which he
makes use of Caesar's Testimony, viz. They only esteem those Gods whom they
see, and those that assist them, viz. the Sun, Vulcan, and the Moon; for they
have never heard any thing concerning any other Gods. Diodorus Siculus seems
also to ascribe a glimpse of this Mystery to the Egyptians, when he says, That
the antientest People in Egypt, when they viewed the World, and were amazed at
all things on the Earth, they judged that two Gods Governed them all, viz. the
Sun and Moon, by whom all things flourished and increased; to whom they added a
third, namely Fire, to which they attributed a Divinity, as conducing much to
the increase and growth of all things. The Moon, which was also called Juno,
they judged to be the Offspring of God, (for Son and Daughter were
promiscuously taken) who, according to Homer, Marrying with Jupiter, brought
forth Vulcan, which might happily be to them a Type or Figure of the Holy Ghost,
proceeding from the Father and Son: Vulcan was by her placed a President over
the Fire, by which the Heathens seemed to imitate the fiery Power of the
Holy Ghost, purifying and cleansing all things: and this cleansing Power was
aimed at by Romulus, when, according to Dionysius Halicarnassensis, he
commanded his Soldiers to leap through a Fire made before his Tent, that so
they might be purified from all their Crimes. But it may be thought strange,
that the Peruvians, Germans, or Egyptians, lost in a Wood of gross Idolatry,
could have any apprehension, though never so obscure, of the holy Trinity, when
as the most nice and curious Greek and Roman Wits have made such gross mistakes
concerning God. But to return again to the Peruvians: They kept their second
Feast in the second Month Camay, on which they threw the Ashes of their
Offerings into the River, and followed them on the Shore for the space of five
Leagues, praying the River to carry the Ashes to the Sea, where Viracocha would
receive them. In the third and fourth Months they killed a hundred and ten
black spotted and gray Sheep. Their Harvest Ceremonies.
In the beginning of May (by the Peruvians called Hatuncuzqui) they gathered in
their Maiz, and kept the Feast Aymorai; after which they returned home Singing
from their Fields, called Chacra, and carried a great heap of Maiz with them,
named Perua, wrapping it up in rich Garments; three Nights they continued their
Ceremonies, imploring the Perua to preserve their Harvest of Maiz from any
damage that might chance to come to it, and also to let that grow prosperously
which they should Plant next. Lastly, their Sorcerers consulted whether the
Perua could last till the next year? to which if they were answered No, they
carried it into the Fields, and burning it, made a new Perua, which when they
knew to be sufficient to last good a year, they carried it to the Granary in
great triumph. In the seventh Month Ancayacuzqui, they kept the Feast called
Intraymi, with a hundred Sheep, in honor of the Sun. They also made several
Images of the Wood Quimia, which they put in rich Habits, strewn the Ways with
Flowers, Danced a strange Dance named Cayo, Singing several Songs. Persons of
Quality put Golden Plates about their Knees, as the common People painted them
with diverse Colors. In the eighth Month Chahua they kept the high Feast
Huarqui, on which they Offered a hundred gray Sheep; the like number, but of a
Chestnut color, they Offered the following Month Yupaquis, besides a thousand
Cuies, that the Air, Water, or Sun, might not spoil their Plants. Their Feast
Situa they kept on the tenth Month Coyaraymi after this manner: They gathered
all together on the first day before the Moon rose, which no sooner appeared,
but they made a terrible noise, beat one another with lighted Torches, then
washed the Dirt from their Bodies, and made themselves Drunk for four Days
together. The eleventh Month Armaraimi, was named Punchaiquis, from the Feast
they kept therein, on which (besides the usual Offerings of eight hundred
Sheep) they tied a black Sheep to a Post without Meat, till such time as there
fell store of Dew. Their Feast called Raymicantara Raiquis, was kept in the
last Month Ayamara, on which their Youth were bored through the Ears. Amongst
the high Feasts which were kept on great occasions, Their Feast Ytri.
the chiefest was Ytri, against which they all made new Clothes after a
peculiar fashion, wearing their Cloaks muffled about their Heads; in which
manner they walked leisurely a whole Day and a Night; during which time none
durst either Eat or Drink, or open his Eyes: But after this serious
Processioning followed four days of extravagancy, as Drinking, Dancing, and the
like. In their Dances, which were to the sound of Drums, Pipes, and Horns, they
imitated all manner of Trades by strange motions of their Bodies, besides
diverse other Frolicks and May-games which they used at such times of Mirth and
Festivity: But since the Spaniards conquered Peru, all these Heathenish Customs
have been laid aside.

The Destruction of the old Empire of Peru foretold.
As to the Prognostications and Forerunners of the destruction of the old
Empire of Peru, it is reported, that Guaynacava, Father of the last King
Attabaliba, lying on his Deathbed in Quito, said to his Princes, This Realm,
at present raised to the highest top of Eminency, is hastening toward its
Ruin; and though our Kingdom remain as yet freee from foreign Invasion, the
Countries round about are already conquered and in Slavery: The Gods have
called strange People from unknown Regions, who by degrees will reach us also.
With me, who am the twelfth Inga, dies the Dominion of the mighty Peru. A
People of other Fashions and Religion will subvert our Religion, Laws and
Government, and bring us under subjection to them. There were also Signs and
Prodigies that portended the Dissolution of this Empire; amongst the rest a
great Eruption in the Province of Tacinga, which rending the Earth asunder
vomited up Flames of Fire; nor was it long e're they were fulfilled, for
whilst the Peruvians were making of Offerings to Viracocha for the delivery of
their imprisoned King Huascar, News was brought to Cusco of Attabaliba's being
taken; the Particulars whereof, with other Matters touching the Conquest of
this Kingdom by the Spaniards, and how they pillaged the Country, murdered the
Inhabitants, and enriched themselves with their inestimable Treasures, shall in
order be related.

By whom Peru was first discovered to the Spaniards
The first that gave the Spaniards notice of Peru, was an Indian Prince called
Panguinaco, who having been taken Prisoner, informed Vasquez Nunnez of the
abundance of Gold and Silver which was to be had there, who resolved to venture
through a thousand Dangers into the South Sea. After which Francisco Pizarro,
Ferdinand de Lugue, and Diego de Almagro, consulted upon this great Design,
Anno 1525. Pizarrus being ordered to Sail before with a Ship carrying a hundred
and fourteen Men, and Almagro to follow with a Vessel carrying seventy Men,
whilst De Lugue staid to manage the Affairs at home. Fifty Leagues Southward
from Panama, Pizarrus found a portrait of Francisco Pizarro FRANCISCO PISARRO
small Neck of Land named Peru, from which it is most probable that great
Kingdom afterward received its Denomination, though many deduce it from the
River Beru, as before mentioned: Thence Sailing to the main Continent of Peru,
Great Difficulties in the Discovery of Peru.
and Landing, he lost several of his Men, and being himself desperately
wounded, returned with ill success, whilst Almagro missing of him, Landed
afterward in the same place, and also lost several of his Men, and one of his
own Eyes: yet not long after they renewed their Design, carrying with them in
two Ships and three Boats, three hundred stout Men, which all suffered extreme
Hunger, and had they not happily gotten some Sea-Crabs, they had without doubt
all of them perished: at last Landing on the Coast of Catamez, they were
Encountered by a People whose Faces were hung full of Golden Nails, and daily
lost more and more of their Men; upon which ill Successes the new American
Viceroy forbad the farther discovery of Peru, and called home the remaining
part from the Island Gallo, so that Pizarro kept with him but twelve Men, with
whom he went to the desolate Isle Gorgona, where he lived on Sea-Snails, till
he received Provisions from Panama; after which they spent two years in making
farther Discoveries upon the Coasts of Peru: During which time he visited the
Queen Capullana, and discovered a mighty Palace, where three of the twelve Men
were killed, whose Memory deserves to live for ever, because the World owes to
their unheard of Valor the Discovery of the mighty Kingdom of Peru; but there
are only left Recorded the Names of those nine Worthies who survived that
Exploit, which were these following, Nicholas de Rivera, Peter de Candia, Juan
Torre, Alonzo Briseni, Christophero Peralca, Alonzo de Truxillo, Francisco
Cuellar, Alonzo Molina, and the Pilot Bartholomeo Ruyz: With these nine Pizarro
Landed on the Isle Puna, inhabited by a valiant People, who used Bows, Darts,
Silver Knives, and Pikes-tipt with Gold: From thence he steered his Course unto
the Haven Tumbez, where Peter de Candia Landing, was met by forty thousand of
the Inhabitants, who conducted him to the Temple of the Sun, built by the Inga
Guaynacava, and adorned in the inside with Golden Plates. Pizarro made
Governor of Peru.
Not long after which Pizarro was by an Order from the Spanish Court made
Governor of Peru, to the great discontent of Almagro; which Difference being
decided, Pizarro set out again with two hundred and fifty Foot, besides Horse,
with which he Landed a hundred Leagues lower than before, where he got a great
Mass of Gold and some Emeraulds of the Casique, all which he sent to Panama,
thereby to stir up the People to come to Peru to his assistance; where those
that were at present on the Place, besides other great Hardships which they
suffered, were miserably plagued with Ulcers in their Faces; yet they
prosecuted their Conquest as well as they could with what small Power was left
them, and had newly taken Puerto, Viejo when Captain Bevalcazar and Juan Florez
brought fresh Supplies of Men and Horse; with which Recruit Pizarro conquered
the Valley of Tumbez; from whence they Sailed over to the Island Punas, where
the friendly Entertainment they met with at first, turned soon after into a
bloody Battle: for the Spaniards not forbearing to pry into every House, and
committing many Outrages, were set upon by the Natives, whom having at last
subdued and being again supplied with new Forces by Ferdinando Sotto from
Nicaragua, they returned to Tumbez, where the Country was all in Arms upon the
Report of the Spaniards Cruelties committed on the Island Puna, insomuch that
they Offered all those whom they took alive to their Gods, and slew as many as
they could conveniently meet with. Pizarro having stayed about twenty days,
went with his Brothers Juan and Gonsalves, the Captains Sotto and Bevalcazar,
and fifty Horse over the River Ambato about Midnight, through a thorny Way
betwixt Mountains, and about Break-of-day fell upon the Tumbezan Army, and
having settled things pretty well in those Parts, he built the City St. Michael
in the Country Tangazara, along the River De la Chira, where he was
Complemented by two Agents from Cusco, who desiring Aid in Huascar's Name
against his Brother Attabaliba, received for Answer, That he was going to
Caxamalca, as indeed he was, to find Attabaliba there; whose Commands that he
should not approach proved all in vain: for Pizarro, under pretense of
Complementing him in his Catholic Majesty's Name, was no sooner admitted to
his Presence, Pizarro taking Attabaliba Prisoner, puts a vast Ransom upon him.
but he took him, Prisoner, and set for a Ransom upon him as much Gold as a
Room of fifty four Foot long and nine Foot broad was able to contain, as high
as he could just reach with his Hand held up: But the Gold coming slower than
was expected, Pizarro was much incensed thereat, whom Attabaliba endeavoring to
pacify, alleged, That it could not possibly come sooner, because the Way
between Caxamalca and Cusco, from whence the Gold was to be fetched, was at a
great distance: The truth whereof Pizarro resolving to try, sent Sotto and
Peter del Bara to Cusco in Chairs, carried by Peruvians exceeding swift of
Foot, and who if they tired were successively relieved by others that attended,
without so much as setting down the Chair; being got about half way, they met
with Attabaliba's Captain Cilucuchuma, he having taken Huascar Prisoner, who
requested Sotto and Baro that they would be pleased to deliver him out of the
Hands of his blood-thirsty Brother, for which kindness he would pay three times
as much Gold as Attabaliba had promised, who was not able to give any thing
else but the Golden Plates which were in the Temple of the Sun in Cusco;
whereas Huascar had all the Treasure that was left by Guaynacava; which indeed
was true, for Huascar had caused it privately to be buried, and put to death
those that did it, that so he might keep the place concealed where it lay;
insomuch that none could ever find it out to this day, though the Spaniards
have tortured the Indians with all imaginable cruelty, to make them discover
the place. But Attabaliba informed by Pizarro of Huascar's Imprisonment, seemed
to be exceeding sorry, and said, I am much troubled at the News of my Captain's
laying violent Hands on my Brother Huascar, whom I acknowledge my eldest
Brother, and both of the same Father and Mother; but I suppose he has no design
to kill him, but only keeps him Prisoner, to bring him to grant me peaceably
to enjoy the Kingdom of Quito, of late brought under subjection of the Peruvian
Crown. Pizarro not observing Attabaliba's subtilty (who designed nothing but
Huascar's Death, out of fear that the Spaniards upon his liberal promises to
them, might promote him to the Throne) comforted him as well as he could:
whereupon Attabaliba supposing that Pizarro would be little concerned at the
killing of his Brother Huascar, gave speedy Order that he should be burnt
alive, Huascar burnt by Order of his Brother Attabaliba.
which accordingly was put into execution; but before he was brought to the
Fire, he foretold his Brother Attabaliba's cruel Death. During which time
Almagro came with fresh Supplies from Panama, eager to have a share of the
forementioned Ransom, which at last was paid with overplus; for by daily
bringing in of Baskets of Gold, the Chamber was filled up to the very top; but
though Attabaliba had more than performed his Promise, yet Sentence of Death
was pronounced against him presently after he had been Baptized: Attabaliba put
to death by the Spaniards.
the Reasons of which wicked and rash Condemnation were two; first the false
Accusation of a Peruvian Interpreter called Philippillo, who desired his Death,
that then he might with the more freedom enjoy one of his Wives; for Attabaliba
mistrusting the same, bad complained thereof to Pizarro, saying, That his
Imprisonment was not so grievous to him, as the thoughts of the Adultery, acted
against the strict Laws of his Country; the Defiler of an Inga's Bed being not
only to be burnt with the Adulterers, but also the whole Families of them, to
the least Infant, their Houses to be rac'd to the Ground, and their Land sow'n
with Salt, as for ever cursed. The second cause of Attabaliba's Death is laid
on Almagro, who came to Peru^ with new Forces, and who fearing that none of the
Gold which Attabaliba had the delivery of, would fall to his share, as not
having been in the Battle where Attabaliba was taken, therefore ordered him to
be suddenly Strangled, that so the Booty might be equally divided. Attabaliba
strangled by Almagro's Order.
Not long after Pizarro conquering Cusco, got no less Treasure than at
Caxamalca. Here the Reign of the Peruvian Inga's ceased, with which before no
Kings that ever Governed in the World were able to compare in Riches and Glory.
The ancient Splendour of the Peruvian Ingas.
Their Palaces were round about adorned with Golden Images; and they never ate
but out of Golden Vessels, spitting in the Hands of beautiful young Women of
Noble Extract, were worshipped like Gods both whilst living and when dead, all
their Subjects being their Slaves, and they the sole Lords of the whole Realm.
In the interim Bevalcazar marched from the new City St. Michael, with a hundred
and twenty Foot and eighty Horse, to assist the Cannares against one of
Attabaliba's Generals, who having spoiled the Ways by digging Pits, and
covering them over with Bushes, resisted them in several places: then marching
to Quito he burnt the City, after having killed a hundred of the Natives,
because they laughed at the Spaniards Arrival. Afterward joining with Almagro,
he went back to Cusco, whither on the Way he had News of Quisquis, Attabaliba's
General, and of his Brother Guaypalcon, who making use of a Rock, threw down
great Stones, by the Peruvians called Galgas, which in their Fall hitting
others, brought down a great number with them, by which means he not only
defended the Place for the present, but killed fourteen Spaniards; nevertheless
distrusting his ability to keep it, he retreated to a steep Mountain about
Midnight, at the Foot whereof a Passage led over a deep River, where he burnt
all his Luggage that he could not carry with him; also above fifteen thousand
Sheep and four thousand Prisoners, became wholly at the Discretion of Almagro,
who leaving there Captain Martin Astete, ordered him to build the Town
Truxillo: In the mean time Quisquis was put to flight by Pizarro, and went to
Quito, where he lost many People, that were killed by Bevalcazar's Guard; yet
those that were remaining chose rather to Fight to the last, than fly through
Wildernesses, and there be starved to death; which Quisquis contradicting,
Quisquis, Attabaliba's General, stabbed and cut in pieces.
was Stabbed by his Captain Guappalau, and immediately after cut to pieces. As
soon as these Stirs were quieted, Pizarro began to build the City Los Reyos,
near a convenient Haven of the Southern Ocean, whilst Almagro marching to
Chili with two Troops of Horse, and five hundred Foot, returned without doing
any thing remarkable, except his taking the Interpreter Philippillo, (whom he
caused to be cut into four pieces) and his maintaining several Battles against
the Chileses, clad in Sea-Wolves Skins. In this Journey he lost several of his
Men on the Snowy Mountains. About this time a Ship fitted out by Gabriel
Carvajal, Bishop of Placentia, Sailing through the Straights of Magellan, ran
into the Haven Los Reyos, out of which the first Rats swam ashore that ever
were in Peru, by which the Country since suffering much damage, the
Inhabitants called them Ococha, that is, Sinful Creatures. Now all things on
the Spaniards side were tending to a quiet possession, when a new Accident
arose, which had like to have spoiled all, for Mango Inga, Attabaliba's
Brother, Mango Inga released out of Prison, sets upon the Spaniards, and is at
last put to fl ght.
being released out of Prison by Juan Pizarro, obtained leave to go to Yucaya,
to fetch the famous Golden Image Machys, representing his Father Guaynacava:
but he having now gotten his Liberty slew all the Spaniards which worked in the
Gold-Mines, took the Castle of Cusco by Storm, as also the City, after a Siege
of eight Months; which nevertheless was by Francisco Pizarro soon re-taken,
and Mango forced to fly into the Mountains Andes, after he had killed several
of Almagro's Men; soon after Almagro about Midnight getting over the Walls, and
taking Ferdinando and Gonsalvo Pizarro, and Alphonso Alvarado Prisoners,
condemned them all three to die, caused himself to be proclaimed Governor, and
gave the Royal Tassel to Paulo Inga, whilst Gonsalvo and Alvarado breaking
Prison, informed Francisco Pizarro thereof (who then had obtained the Title of
Marquess, and for an Inheritance, the Province Attabillos;) he was exceedingly
troubled for his Brother Ferdinand, whose Enlargement he thought would be best
procured by making Peace with Almagro, and the sooner, because the Peruvians
began to rebel against the Spaniards in most places, Several Parties of the
Peruvians set upon the Spaniards and overthrow them.
slew diverse Companies of them; amongst whom Diego Pizarro was set upon in a
narrow Path called Laucesta Parcos, and amongst the Mountains lost seventy
Horsemen; and Gonsalvo de Tapico saved not one of eighty Horse. Also the
Peruvians set upon three hundred Troopers, Commanded by the Generals of the
Horse, Morgoveio and Gaeti, in a narrow Path, and rolled down great Stones from
the tops of the Mountains both before and behind them, so killing both Horse
and Man before they could put themselves into a posture of Defense, insomuch
that none escaped with Life but two Troopers. Francisco de Godoy, sent out of
Los Reyos with forty five Horse, upon Discoveries, returned also with great
loss, being pursued twenty Leagues by the Peruvians; against whom Peter de
Lerma being sent out with sixty Horse, fought a whole day with them, and though
few of his Men were killed, yet many were wounded, and several taken: The
victorious Peruvians retreating to the top of a sandy Mountain in the Night,
Offered the Spaniards they had taken Prisoners, as a testimony of thanks, to
Viracocha, and afterward stood drawn up near the City Los Reyos by the General
Tyzopangui. The Marquess thus beset round, sent for Aid from New Spain and
Truxillo, and also for Alphonso Alvarado to come back, who had been sent to
discover the Country Chachepoyos, and being gotten into a Desert, would
without doubt have perished for want of Water, had not some Horsemen riding
somewhat out of the Way, found Pits with fresh Water: notwithstanding which,
five hundred Inacona's (for so the Spaniards called the Peruvian Slaves) died
for Thirst. He was afterward supplied by Gomez Tordoya with two hundred Men,
by the help of whom, They are beaten by Alvarado.
though encompassed by the Inhabitants near the Bridge Lamucacha, where began a
fierce Battle, Alvarado was in the end Conqueror.

Whilst the Spaniards found so much to do with the Peruvians, yet they could
not forbear more and more Clashing amongst themselves, Civil War between
Pizarro and Almagro.
the Marquess commanding that Almagro should surrender and leave the City
Cusco; but he refusing to obey, fortified himself on the top of the Mountain
Gaytara, stopped the Ways by cutting down the Trees: but Ferdinando Pizarro
getting up to the top along a private Way, made such a confusion amongst them
with Bolt-shot, that Almagro, who was sick at that time, was forced to fly;
which being told Pizarro, he pursued him, and had doubtless utterly defeated
him at that bout, had not his Men, benumbed with marching in the deep Snow,
been taken with a Distemper which made them as if they had been all Sea-sick,
(for such is the property of the Mountain Guaytara) insomuch that they could
scarce carry their Arms: Whereupon Almagro was advised (...) oppose his
Pursuers, and that he need not doubt of the Victory; but he either following
his own Dictates, or being counter-advis'd, fortified himself in Cusco, whither
Ferdinand and Gonsalvo Pizarro marched against him. Rodrigo de Orgonnes
Commanded Almagro's Army, who being sick, lay on the Walls of the City to see
the Battle fought. The Peruvians, who on each side were in the Spanish Service,
marched in the Front: on the twenty sixth of April, Anno 1538. the Fight began,
in which the Almagrians did much mischief with Cross-bar shot amongst the
Pizarrians; yet Almagro's Horse retreated first, being under the Command of
Peter Valdivia; soon after which the rest of his Army, their Courage also
failing, fled to the City; into which, as soon as Orgones being shot in the
Head and slain, the Conqueror rushed after them, and took Almagro Prisoner: yet
notwistanding this prosperous beginning, he soon found himself in a great
strait, since those which remaih'd alive of Almagro's Party refused to serve
Pizarro, and murmured against him in all places, resolving to take Almagro from
him by force, besides that Pizarro's Soldiers grumbled that they were not paid
sufficiently for the many hazards which they had run: wherefore to compose
these Troubles as well as possibly he could, he banished all whom he thought to
be of the opposite Party, sent away the chief of his own mutinous Soldiers with
Captain Peter de Candia, to discover new Countries, put Almagro to death, and
marched to Callao; where being straightened for want of Provision, he made no
stay, but got his Army with much ado to Cusco. Gonsalves Pizarro was likewise
so set upon by the Natives, that he lost a considerable number of Men: In
short, the Pizarrans were defeated in all places, and at length the Marquess,
The Marquess Francisco Pizarro murdered.
though forewarned by his Secretary Antonio Picado, was murdered in his own
House in the City of Lima, otherwise called De los Reyos, by a Bastard-Son of
Almagro, named Diego, in the Year 1541; his Body dragged to the Churchyard,
lay there to every ones view and derision, till John de Barbara buried the
same. His Original and the manner of his Rising.
His Father Gonsalvo Pizarro, sir-nam'd The tall Citizen of Truxillo,
Commanding a Company of Foot in Navarre, had two lawful Sons, viz. Ferdinand,
who was murdered in the Spanish Castle Motta, and John that was slain in Cusco,
when Mango Inga conquered the City, the other two, Gonsalvo and Francisco,
being both Bastards; the last of which is said to have been exposed by his
Mother in the Church Porch, and kept alive for several days by sucking of a
Sow, till his Father afore-mentioned finding him, and acknowledging him for his
Son, put him out to Nurse, and when he was grown up set him to keep Swine;
which course of Life he soon left, and following Alphonsus de Ojeda, Balboa,
and Pedro de Avita in their Expeditions, he quickly grew rich, and at last came
to that height of Honor and Command we have heard. Franciso Martino de
Alcantara was also his Brother by the Mothers side only. He was a Man who
despised all Dangers and Hardships, was so well experienced in Martial Affairs,
that he might well stand in competition with many of the ancient Heroes. In Los
Reyos he built two very artificial Water-Mills, a Dominican Cloister, and
another for the Monks De la Merced, and likewise a stately Palace for himself:
He was both meek and affable; and though he bore the greatest Command in the
Emperor's Name over the mighty Kingdom of Peru, and got more Riches than ever
any of the Roman, Persian, Grecian, or Assyrian Monarchs possessed, yet he went
in the same plain kind of Apparel in the height of his Grandeur, as when he
was but in a low Condition; about his Neck he commonly tied a Linen
Hankerchiff, with which he used to wipe the Sweat from his Face: in peaceable
Intervals he spent whole days in playing at Bowls, without any distinction of
Persons, choosing often to play rather with a Seaman or common Soldier, than a
fantastic Gallant: He visited the meanest Citizens, and many times used to
eat with poor People, to whom he was upon all occasions very noble and liberal;
All his Designs he carried on by the strength of mere natural Parts: for he was
so very illiterate, that he could neither Write nor Read; his Edicts were
Signed with his two Marks, betwixt which his Secretary writ Francisco Pizarro;
he is said to have had a Son which died young by Attabaliba's Sister, who came
afterward to be called Donna Angelina; he died in a very unfortunate time, for
upon his good success the Spanish Power had grounded their whole Designs,
thinking with the Peruvian Treasures, as the Sinews of War, to have erected a
fifth Monarchy to succeed the fourth of the Romans,

Pizarro's Murderer, though aiming at the Supreme Power, he had a considerable
Party to countenance and aid him, yet he found resistance in many places, not
without the loss of many Men on both sides. Alm^gro utterly defeated by Vacca
de Castro.
In which Juncture the Learned Vacca de Castro Landed in Peru, with a
Commission from the Emperor to settle the divided Kingdom of Peru in Peace and
Quiet; but the young Almagro mad to see his Ambition thus crossed, gave Battle
to Castro in the Plain of Chupas; the Dispute was long and resolute on both
sides, and the Night coming on made the Fight the more terrible, in which the
Victory inclined to Castro; however the Almagrians stood to it stoutly for a
great while, and that chiefly through the valor of the Captains Balboa and
Christopher Losa, who breaking in amongst the Castreans, hacked and hewed down
all they came near, till at last they were forced to betake themselves to
flight, and had not many of them exchanged their white Scarfs with the red of
the slain Castreans, scarce any of them had escaped from being killed in the
pursuit, and most of them that did escape were slain the next Morning by the
Peruvians. Delivered up Pris^ner by Salazar, and Beheaded.
Rodrigo Salazar, Almagro's Deputy; delivered up his Lord to Castro, who
condemned him to death, whereupon he was immediately Beheaded with a Sword.
This Battle happened on the twenty sixth of September Anno 1542. when it Froze so
hard the following Night, that most of those that were left wounded upon the
place, were frozen to death. Thus Castro began his Government with Blood, and
made it his first Business to make a Discovery by several of his Captains, whom
he sent for that purpose, of the Countries lying Eastward from Peru, lying upon
the great River De la Plata, and the River Marannon, where in most places they
met only with salvage People, and for the most part Man-eaters; and in one
place where they Landed, a great Fish resembling a Dog came ashore and killed
several Armed Soldiers. A year and a half Castro had lived in Cusco, when at
the arrival of the Viceroy Blascus Nunnez Vela, all things were turned
topsie-turvy, he being sent thither by the Emperor Charles the Fifth,
accompanied by four Counselors, Diego Sepada, Lison Tejada, Juan Alvarez, and
Peter Ortiz, to curb the Spaniards Villainies and Outrages committed against the
Peruvians, entered Tumbez Anno 1544. where he immediately published the
Emperor's Edicts, which were to this effect:

The Emperor's Proclamation in behalf of the Indians.
All Peruvians are to be released from Slavery; no Spaniard shall in the least
oppress them, nor make use of their Service without rewarding them for the
same, nor take any Provisions of them without paying for it.

This Proclamation was like to put the Spaniards into an uproar: for at that
time a Peruvian Lord was forced to allow every Foot-Soldier three Slaves, Ill
resented by the Spaniards.
and a Horseman five, besides Hens, Rabbets, Eggs, the Wine Azun, and other
Provisions, for nothing. The general Complaints were, Is this the Reward for
our Service which we have shown to the Emperor? Is not this mighty Kingdom of
Peru by our Blood and Labor joined to the Imperial Crown? Our Shoulders are
grown sore under our Arms, our Bodies made useless with Wounds, and our Limbs
lame'd with Bruises. Who shall maintain our Wives and Children, if the
Peruvians, who according to the Law of Arms are become our Slaves, should not
be forced to fish for Pearls in the Sea, and dig us Silver out of the Mines,
and do us other Service for to maintain us? But Vela being deaf to these
Complaints, resolved that the Emperor's Commands should be fulfilled, and that
those that spoke against them should lose their Lives: and that he might
terrify the generality with the punishment of a few, he caused Friar Peter of
the Order of the Virgin Mary to be Executed in Truxillo, Castro to be committed
to Prison at Lima, because he had put Almagro to death without Examination, and
shut the Gates of Cusco when his Agent came before the same. But do what he
could, the Spaniards generally making Head, utterly refused to obey the
Emperor's Edicts, and chose Gonsalvo Pizarro for their General, who raised five
hundred Men in complete Arms in Cusco, from whence he marched directly with
them to Los Reyos, Pizarro marches against the Viceroy Vela.
under pretense to deliver a Petition there to the Viceroy's Council, about
deferring to put the new Edicts in force till the Emperor was better informed
of the present Condition of the Peruvian State; twenty great Fieldpieces being
also ordered to follow Pizarro's Army, were carried by the Peruvians over
craggy Mountains; to each Gun without the Carriage were ordered three hundred
Men, of whom twelve at a time, carried it in their turns a hundred Paces a
piece; though several eminent Persons considering the weightiness of the
Affair, forsook Pizarro's Party, and went privately to the Viceroy, as on the
other side, many deserting the Viceroy joined with Pizarro, who being not a
little supplied by Peter Puelles Governor of Guanaca, took several of those
that had deserted him Prisoners, and put them all to death, whilst the
Viceroy made what Preparations possibly he could, Hanging many innocent
Persons only on suspicion of holding Correspondency with Pizarro, insomuch
that there was no end of Murdering on both sides. But Vela clashing with his
Counselors, Vela clashing with the Commissioners, is seized upon.
because they would not consent that he should ruin Los Reyos, resolved to do
it without them; and to that end to remove the Emperor's Seal, Staple of Trade,
and Courts of Judicature to Truxillo, and to spoil the Country all about;
which as he was about to put in Execution, they privately got Captain Martin
Robles, and Vela's Lifeguard, consisting of a hundred Men, on their side,
whilst the common People mutinying broke into the Palace, took Vela and
carried him to the chief Church in Los Reyos, where the four Counselors were
assembled, who ordered that the Prisoner should be Shipped and sent away to
Spain, when Alvares Cueto lying in the Harbor with ten Sail, threatened to fall
upon the Inhabitants if they would not release the Viceroy: whereupon the
Counselors well provided with Guns, raised several Batteries against his
Ships, so that Cueto finding himself too weak, set four of his Vessels on fire,
and Sailed with the rest to the Haven Guavara; where being set upon by Diego
Garzias, he was forced to deliver the remaining part of his Fleet up to the
Counselors, who sent Vela away with the same, under the Command of Didaco
Alvaradez. But Pizarro, who till this time had pretended that he sought nothing
else but Vela's Departure, marched close to the Walls of Los Reyos with twelve
hundred Men, Hanged three Citizens upon a Tree, required the Counselors to
grant him Letters Patents, by which he might be acknowledged for the Supreme
Governor of Peru, which if they refused, he threatened to put all that were in
the City to the Sword; and upon Consultation it was judged convenient to grant
his Demands, the rather, because they had not above fifty fighting Men in the
City. Mean while Didaco Alvaradez making an Agreement with the Viceroy, Being
Shipped for Spain, is brought back by Alvaradez.
they returned back with their Ships, and Landed in the Haven Mouth of the
River Tumbez, raised what Forces they could possibly thereabouts, but were
forced to retire from thence to Quito, (at the same time that the Councellor
Tejada, being sent by Pizarro to the Emperor, came to an Anchor there) where
they were courteously Entertained; as also in St. Michael, where they got daily
more and more Assistants; of which Pizarro being informed, went thither with
five hundred Men, and forcing the Viceroy to fly from thence, pursued him
above thirty Leagues, Is put to flight and pursued by Pizarro.
Hanging up all those whom he could take of his Party. After many Rencounters
and Hardships suffered by both Parties, Pizarro exceedingly wearied, returned
to Quito, where he minded nothing but all manner of Debaucheries, not in the
least regarding the Viceroy's Designs, which it concerned him to have narrowly
looked into, for he having got five hundred Men on his side, resolved to
venture a Battle. It was toward Evening when the two Parties had sight of one
another: Pizarro having not only more Men, but also better Exercised in Arms
than the Viceroy, who being sensible thereof, went silently about Midnight
from his Station along a narrow by Path, so to fall behind upon the Rere of the
Enemy, who mistrusted nothing, by reason the Viceroy's Dogs kept a continual
Barking in his old Station, and the Peruvian Sentinels were heard calling to
one another, and making great Fires all the Night long; but because the Way was
overgrown, and farther about than it was supposed, the Viceroy finding the
Night too far spent, went back to Quito, out of which he Sallied as soon as he
had sight of Pizarro's Forces; against whom, being clad in a white Riding Coat,
through the Slits of which appeared a Cloth of Tissue Doublet, he came Riding
on a Bay Gelding in the Head of his Party; with which breaking in amongst the
Enemies Ranks, he made a considerable slaughter amongst them, till Hernand
Tores coming near him, gave him a Blow on the Had with a Battel-Ax, The
Viceroy slain by Carvayales.
that felled him to the Ground, which the Lawyer Carvayales seeing, ran
immediately, out of desire to revenge his Brother's Death, whom the Viceroy
had murdered, and chopp'd off his Head. Thus Pizarro being absolute Master of
the Field, began to show his tyranny upon the Prisoners, some he took away by
Poison, others he Executed with the Sword and Halter, others he banished to the
remote Country Chili, Pizarro's Luxury, and Tyranny.
and spent his time in all manner of Vice in Quito; where, amongst other lewd
Actions, making Love to another Man's Wife, he hired one Vincent Paul to murder
her Husband, which said Vincent was afterward Hanged at Valladolid in Spain.
The Adulteress also was afterward Got with Child by her own Father, and both
of them put to death for Incest and murdering of their Child. Pizarro being
received as King in Los Reyos, grew every day more proud than other, insomuch
that his Friends themselves began to hate and envy him, and wanted only a
convenient opportunity to rid themselves of this high-minded Tyrant. A strange
Accident, among others, had done him great hurt, had it not been timely
discovered, viz. Joan de la Torre, a Soldier formerly belonging to the
Viceroy, found accidentally a Grave in the Valley Hica (which by the Peruvians
had been worshipped above two Ages before) and in it so much Offered Gold and
Silver as amounted to above eighty thousand Crowns in Gold, besides many
Emeraulds and Turcoises, all which Treasure he was puzzled how to carry away and
possess securely, partly fearing the Emperor's Displeasure, if he should arrive
thus rich in Spain, the rather because he had sided with Pizarro, and also
knowing it was impossible to convey it on Shipboard without one or others
knowledge; at last, after many Contrivances, he judged it convenient to put the
Money in a small Vessel, and Sail with the same to Nicaragua, there to raise
Men to oppose Pizarro in those Parts, that so he might re-gain the Emperor's
Favor. This Undertaking seemed to be threatened by many Dangers, he not having a
sufficient Spirit to Command, or at least Experience to officiate the Place of
a Captain. Vela Nunnez and La Torre Plotting against Pizarro, are taken and
Executed
In the mean time Vela Nunnez, Brother to the slain Viceroy, taken in the
Battle at Quito, had so much privilege allowed him from Pizarro, that he went
a Hunting, and other such Exercises, distant from the Camp, who meeting with La
Torre, took him in his arms, and embraced him with great joy, which so wrought
upon La Torre, that he discovered the Secret of his discovered Treasure, took
an Oath of him that he would be faithful to him, and take Revenge of Pizarro
for all the Injuries received from him; but before, according to their
Agreement, they could set Sail from thence, their Plot being discovered, both
Nunnez and Torre were Executed, and their Riches fell into the Hands of Pizarro.

Peter Gasca sent to settle Affairs in Peru.
Whilst the Peruvian Affairs were in this confusion and disorder, Peter Gasca,
empowered by the Emperor Charles the Fifth, arriving there, endeavored to
settle all things in Peace and Quiet, and sent by Peter Hernandes, besides the
Emperor's Letter, another which he writ himself to Pizarro, the Contents of
which were to this purpose:

Gasca's Letter to Pizzaro.
THe Peruvian Soil has drunk up the Spanish Blood long enough, and the ruined
Realm gapes for Rest: The Emperor proffers Pardon for all past Crimes, Repeals
the new Laws which the Viceroy Vela, during his Government, enjoyed the
Spaniards to observe. If Pizarro aims at the general Welfare, he may easily see
that Arms must first be laid aside, which he now depends on in vain, all his
Associates being ready to forsake him, because no Soldier can take up Arms
against the Emperor, without being guilty of high Treason.

Pizarro's Designs against him.
Pizarro confounded with this Letter, called a Council of War, who differed
very much from one another in their Votes, some judging that it would be best
privately to destroy Gasca, others were for an open Engagement, but most
thought of another way, viz. to get his Person into their custody, and keep him
under a strong Guard on the Island Puna, under pretense that the Peruvian
Princes were sent for to come and acknowledge him as supreme Governor, which
because the Cities lay so remote one from another, could not be done in less
than two years. Mean while an Embassy was to be sent to the Court at Madrid,
which should enjoin Gasca to remain in Panama, and not offer to come to Peru
till such time as the Emperor commanded the same a second time at the return of
the Agents. His Party generally fall off to Gasca.
But Hieronimus Loaisa, chief Bishop of Los Reyos, Thomas Martin, Provincial of
the Dominicans, Gomes Solis, Pizarro's Steward, Laurence Aldana, who were
designed for this Embassy to the Emperor Charles, never went their Journey, but
staid in Panama with Gasca, who had also gained to his Party Peter Alphonso
Alnoiosa, who Commanded Pizarro's Fleet: Aldana likewise informed him of all
Pizarro's private Councels; whereupon Gasca sent privately for Aid to Mexico,
Guatimala, Nicaragua, and St. Domingo, and dispatched four Ships with three
hundred Men, Commanded by Aldana, from the Haven Panama, with Order to Land
about Midnight against the City Los Reyos, and so fall unawares on Pizarro.
Aldana accordingly falling into the Bay of Malabrige, was relieved and supplied
with Provisions by Diego Mora, Governor of Truxillo: On the other side, the
Field-Marshal Carvayales being sent for by Pizarro, made a pompous Entrance,
with the firing of Guns and Bonfires, into Los Reyos, where all Persons that
seemed to have the least inclination for Gasca, were either stabbed or
poisoned. In the room of Mora, Pizarro sent the Lawyer Garcias Leon to be
Governor of Truxillo, but he being taken by Aldana's Fleet, joined with Gasca;
and thus all things began to conspire the ruin of Pizarro, yet he despaired
not, but being informed of the approach of the Ships, caused the Drums to be
beaten in Los Reyos, forced every one that was able to bear Arms, on pain of
death to serve him, made several experienced Soldiers, Commanders over his
Horse and Foot, to whom he gave as much Money as they required, to maintain
those whom they had raised, and who were to be raised, by which means he got a
thousand Men in Arms; to which number, according to an Order sent to Cusco,
Plata, Arequipa, Lima, Guanuco, and other neighboring Places, new Forces were
expected to join; but Savedra, Governor of Guanuco, deserting the City, left
Pizarro and joined with Mora, who secured the Province of Caxamalca for Gasca.
Thus Pizarro began to be daily more and more forsaken. Since the destruction of
the Viceroy Vela, Captain Diego Centeni had hid himself out of fear of Pizarro
a whole year, in a Cave under Ground, but now informed of Gasca's Arrival, came
forth, and getting forty Men and some Horses together, which also belonged
formerly to the Viceroy, resolved, though meanly Armed, to go upon a bold
Design, viz. to take the City Cusco; of which Antonio de Robles, a Man hated
and despised for his mean Extract and little Wit, had the chief Command, there
being therein a Garrison of five hundred Soldiers, besides the Citizens, who
were likewise in Arms: Being informed of Centeno's approach, he sent out
Francisco Aguierre as a Spy to discover the Enemy; but he joining with
Centeno, advised him to march along a By-way, and toward Night to draw up
about Cusco, which accordingly he did, and forcing open the Gates, rushed in
with his Horse against the Enemy, who were drawn up in the Marketplace, and
breaking through their Ranks trampled whole Companies under foot; Cusco taken
by Centeno.
after which he fell in upon Robles, who having forgotten to give his Men the
Word, caused a great distraction; for the Men blinded by the darkness of the
Night, knew not Friend from Foe, insomuch that Robles's Party did one another
more mischief than Centeno did; who being thus become Master of the City,
caused Robles to be Beheaded the next day, and distributed a hundred thousand
Ducats amongst his Soldiers, and then marched with a hundred Men to the City
Plata, to bring Mendoza, Governor of the same, under the Emperor's subjection;
in which his Design he likewise proved successful, being supplied with a
hundred and thirty Foot, which Lucas Martin, had fetched from Arequipa for the
Service of Pizarro, whom since he had deserted and joined with Gasca's Party.
Mean while the Fleet under the Command of Aldana arrived in the Haven before
Los Reyos, to the great terror and amazement of the whole City; from whence
Pizarro marching, Encamped himself with five hundred and fifty Men, so to
prevent their Landing, swearing that he would spare none whoever fell into his
Hands, and sent Order to Peter Martin, whom he had left in the City,
immediately to Hang up those which would not follow the Army, or who returned
from thence home; to which purpose Martin went from place to place with an
Executioner, and thinking him not quick enough in his Work, stabbed many
Citizens himself: And strict Order was given by Pizarro, that all Runaways
should be punished with Death; notwithstanding all which many of his nearest
Friends daily forsook him, taking advantage of the darkness of the Night; nay,
the Soldiers themselves would at Noonday ride away from him, crying aloud,
Long live the Emperor, and let the Tyrant Pizarro die: Wherefore he judged it
most convenient to remove to the Country Nasca: During his Journey thither,
whole Troops left him, insomuch that he scarce kept a hundred and fifty Men,
and those he feared every Minute would fall upon him and Murder him.

Los Reyos declares for the Emperor.
With Pizarro's departure, the whole Scene of Affairs was changed in Los Reyos;
for there the Imperial Standard was erected, the City Crier read the Letters of
Pardon which Gasca had brought with him from Spain in the corner of every
Street. Juan Palimino Landing with fifty Men, received all those that had
deserted Pizarro, whilst Gasca set Sail from Panama with five hundred Men,
with whom Landing at Truxillo, he Encamped himself in the Valley Xauxa, whither
great multitudes flocked from all places out of malice to Pizarro, who in a
short time had destroyed above five hundred Gentlemen. But Pizarro having
quitted Los Reyos, he possessed the City Arequipa, which he found quite
desolate, but meeting afterward with the Forces Commanded by Juan Acosta, of
which one half were also run away, joined with them, and marched against
Centeno, who lay along the Lake Titicaca, with whom he Engaged in the Plain
Guarina: Ludovico Ribera Landing, Centeno's Party fired their Guns before the
Pizarrians were within shot of him, of which Carvayales making speedy use, drew
up his Pieces close before the Enemy, and made an exceeding slaughter amongst
them, killing above a hundred and fifty Men in the first Onset; the Horse
amazed at the sudden destruction of the Foot, fled, leaving the remaining
Foot-Soldiers open to the Enemy, who was gotten behind them with his
Musquetteers, and with his Horse before, whilst six Peruvians carried away
Centeno out of the Fight, he lying sick on a Chair. Pizarro thus become Victor,
killed all he met with; of which Gasca being informed, resolving upon a private
and sudden Revenge, caused all Necessaries for War to be made ready, and
marched with a thousand and nine hundred Men out of the Valley of Xauxa to
Cusco, where by the Way he was supplied with the Forces, which the experienced
Colonel Peter Valdivia had brought from Chili; with which coming to Andagua, he
took up his Quarters there for some time, because the mild Winter had with
continual Rains made the Ways so dirty, that there was no traveling, and had
rotted their Tents and Maiz, and also occasioned the Bloody Flux amongst the
Soldiers. In March, Gasca broke up with his Camp to cross the River Apurima,
which he found very troublesome, because Pizarro had broke down all the Bridges:
But Gasca caused Wood and other Materials to be carried to several places, that
the Enemy should not certainly know his Intentions, and at last marched over
deep snowy Mountains to Cotabamba, where suddenly he made a Bridge, over which
marched four hundred Foot, but the Horse suffered most damage; for sixty Horses
laden with Arms going to wade over, were carried down by the Stream against
sharp Rocks, by which they were desperately gored in their sides, and many of
them killed outright. Pizarro informed of the Enemies whole Proceedings by his
Spies, sent Acosta thither with two hundred Musquetteers, to fall upon those
that were come over, whom he finding too many, durst not venture to Engage with
them. Mean while Gasca's whole Army getting over on the other side of the River
Apurima, marched up a high Hill, whilst Pizarro Encamped himself five Leagues
from Cusco, in a Plain called Saguisagrana, the Entrance into his Camp being
fortified with six Fieldpieces, each side by a River and several Mountains,
and the Rere by a deep dry Moat: Gasca stood upon a Hill and viewed the Enemy's
whole Forces lying in the Valley, and being oppressed with excesssive Heat,
whilst his Men were so exceedingly pinched with Cold in the Night, that they
were scarce able to hold their Arms, according to the strange property of the
Peruvian Climate; for the tops of Hills generally Freeze, whilst the Valleys
about a League from thence are parched with Heat: At Break-of-day Gasca
descended the Hill; his Horse being divided into two Wings, were Commanded, the
left by Juan Savedra, and the right by Balthazar Castro; Mendoza led some
Dragoons, Valdivia guarded the Guns, and Gasca himself marched in the Front of
the Musquetteers. On the other side, Pizarro placed the Peruvians on his right
Wing, Cepeda and Acosta Commanded the Horse, Carvayales and La Torre the Foot,
Sebastian Vergara and Peter Soria guarded the Fieldpieces: But the Battle was
scarce begun, when Cepedo and a great part of the Horse deserting Pizarro went
to join with Gasca, and immediately after the right Wing of the Musquetteers;
at the same time Centeno and Mendoza fired amongst Pizarro's main Body, Pizarro
utterly defeated, surrenders himself into Gasca's Power.
of which some ran away to Cusco, others with their Colors to Gasca's Army.
Pizarro seeing himself thus forsaken, cried out, Since all are fled to the
Imperial Standard, I will also betake my self thither, where perhaps I may find
Mercy: Whereupon Acosta answered, Let us rather fall in amongst the thickest of
the Enemy, and die valiantly: To which Pizarro replied, No, now I have lost
Honor and Goods, I must take care for my Soul, that that may not be lost also;
which said, he lighted from his Horse, Caparison'd in Silver, and delivered
himself and his Sword into the Hands of the Sergeant Villavicenzo, who found
him Habited in curious Armor, a Golden Helmet with a stately Plume of Feathers,
and a Corslet incircl'd with Emeraulds about his Neck: Gasca seeing him brought
before him in this manner, said thus unto him, Have you not ordered your
Business well, to waste so much of the Emperor's Treasure, and shed so much
Blood, and all to confirm your self in your unlawful Usurpation of Peru? To
which Pizarro answered, saying, I have spent my own Estate in the Service of
the Spanish Crown, and might lawfully take upon me the Government of Peru,
having with the loss of my Brother's Life, and the hazard of my own, discovered
the same. Carvayales escaping out of the Fight, had hid himself in a Thicket of
Canes, but being discovered by his own People, was by them brought before
Gasca, who the next day after the Battle caused him to be Quartered alive,
Carvayales and Pizarro both put to death by Gasca.
and Pizarro's Head to be cut off in Prison; the other Prisoners were most of
them killed in cold Blood. Gasca thus become absolute Master of Peru, found an
incredible Treasure left by Pizarro, of which he gave to every common Soldier
above six thousand Ducats; and with this his victorious Army marched to Cusco,
where he employed his Executioners afresh, in Hanging, Drawing, and the like;
some that were stigmatized and condemned to the Galleys, accounted themselves
happy that they had escaped so. Gasca, though Victor, perceived no small
Troubles to threaten him, having twenty five hundred Men in Arms, of which
every one for their faithful Service judged that they deserved some Office or
other, there being then above a hundred and fifty to dispose of, Pizarro having
Executed the chiefest Officers, and those that bore any Command under him being
either fled or killed in the last Fight: but the small number of Officers that
were wanting, was not to be compared to all those that gaped for Commissions.
The Revenues, which yearly amounted to eleven hundred thousand Ducats, went
most of it away amongst the Officers, the common Soldiers getting only a small
Snip out of it; wherefore many began to murmur, and were upon the point of
Mutinying, if Cianca, the Judge of criminal Causes, taking the chief of them,
had not punished them in such a manner, that all the rest being terrified, gave
over their Complaints. After Gasca had spent above nine hundred thousand Ducats
in the War against Pizarro; all which Money he took up upon Interest, which,
after having settled the Kingdom in Quietness, he paid for the most part with
the Goods taken from the Rebels. Next he made a Law concerning the Peruvians
paying of Tribute, which before the Spaniards forced from them whensoe're and
howsoever they pleased, with the greatest Tortures imaginable.

Peru Governed by Viceroys.
Gasca having again erected in Los Reyos the high Court of Judicature, in which
sat the Imperial Judges, returned home with an unvaluable Mass of Treasure for
Charles the Fifth, and left the Peruvian Government to the Judge Cianca; since
which time Peru has been Governed by Viceroys, the first whereof, who
succeeded Cianca, was Antonio Mendoza, and after him successively Andreas
Hurtado Mendoza, Diego Valasco, Lopez Garcias de Castro, Francisco de Toledo,
Martin Enriques, Garcias Mendoza, Ludovico Velasco, and Juan Pacheco, under
whom the Peruvian Kingdom has enjoyed Peace and Quiet, to the considerable
enriching of the Spanish Inhabitants.

Thus much of the ancient Transactions in Peru, it will now be requisite to
give you a brief Account of the several Provinces in this mighty Kingdom.

Division of Peru.
The Country is generally divided into three Juridicial Resorts, as they call
them, or Courts of Appeal, which are Quito, Lima, and Charcas; but the
particular Provinces, as they are commonly observed by Geographers, are said to
be six, viz. 1. Quito. 2. Los Quixos. 3. Lima. 4. Cusco. 5. Charcas. and 6.
Collao.

SECT. II. Quito.
Situation and Description of Quito.
THe first Province of Peru toward the North is Quito, or the new Kingdom of
Granada, with which on that side it is bounded, having on the West, Mare del
Zur; on the South, Lima; and on the East, Los Quixos. It lies in a manner
right under the Line, and is said to be seventy two Leagues in length, and in
some places about twenty five in breadth.

The Winter begins here in October, and continues till March, in which fall
mighty Showers, and on the Mountains abundance of Snow, but all the Summer long
the Sun is seldom darkened with a Cloud. Many of the Inhabitants die of a
Giddiness in the Head about the beginning and end of Summer. The POX also
destroys many of the Natives; with which Disease they are often born, and give
it to the Spaniards, who are not able to abstain from the Indian Women; they
use Sassaparilla and the Wood Guaiacum to cure themselves with.

Here grow also many poisonous Herbs, which the Peruvians make use of to poison
one another.

The Fruit Quaba.
In the farthest parts of Quito grows the salt and cooling Fruit Quaba, two
Handfuls long, covered with a gray Rind, and within full of white Pulp and hard
Kernels.

The Tree Guaiaba.
The Tree Guaiaba has a pale smooth Bark, thick Boughs, hard and glittering
Leaves, Flowers consisting of five Leaves, not unlike a Peacock's Plume, long
Apples, woolly without, and within full of a pale red Pulp and eatable Stones;
the Root, which spreads it self very much, is sweet, and when boiled cures the
Bloody Flux. This Tree grows in most places, especially in low Grounds, the
more because the Kernels which the Birds picking out let fall on the Ground,
spring up in new Trees.

The Spanish Fruits, as Peaches, Cittrons, Figs, Pomegranates, Pears, Quinces,
and Oranges, grow also here in great abundance, but when ripe are subject to
rot.

Moreover, the Fields abound with Wheat, Barley, and Maiz; the Pastures afford
plenty of Grass for Oxen, Horses and Sheep, which bring forth Lambs twice in
fourteen Months.

The Ocean and Rivers store of Fish; the Stream Barbara used formerly to
produce Gold also.

In moist Grounds the Inhabitants find abundance of Saltpeter, the best that
is for the making of Gunpowder.

The Inns Tambos.
For the Accommodation of Travelers, Inns called Tambos, are built near the
Highways, exactly five Leagues distant one from another, where all sorts of
Provisions are sold at a set Price.

The Nature of the People.
The Natives anciently went Clothed in a Frock without Sleeves, as wide on the
top as at the bottom, and pleited their long Hair. They are strong, well
proportioned in Body, and subtle enough to learn any Art, but treacherous,
inconstant, and inclined to Drunkenness: They were very hard also to be brought
to receive the Roman Religion, so that most of them would not suffer themselves
to be Baptized till they lay a dying: They also drove a great Trade in Cotton,
Wool, and Cloth.

Between Pasto and Quito are several Villages, and the famous Highway, by the
Ingas cut through the Wildernesses and Mountains, the Wall of an old Castle,
and the wonderful Stone Bridge Lumichaca, which Nature has made over the swift
River Guaca; it consists of a hard Cliff, at the Foot whereof is a great Arch,
through which the Water runs with exceeding force.

This Tract of Land produces Maiz, and abundance of Mortuanos, a Fruit
resembling Damask Prunes, which eaten in excess cause Drunkenness and Faintness.

The Lake Yaguarcocha, signifying Bloody-Water, because the Inga Guayanacava
killed and drowned twenty thousand there.

Towns and Places of chief note.
The chief Towns and Places of Note are, 1. Caranguez, anciently a Royal City,
where stood a sumptuous and stately Palace of the Kings of Peru, now almost
deserted. The Palace, built of Stone in a little Plain, without either Mortar
or Ironwork, manifests its former glory by its Ruins.

2. The Royal Castle of Atabalo, or Ottavallis, in the building of which the
Ingas spared no Cost nor Charges; and indeed it is a Structure no way inferior
to any of the ancient Roman Edifices. Between this Castle and Cochequi, a
stately House, lies a cold snowy Mountain. Moreover, the Spaniards have several
Habitations along the Way to Quito, and especially in the Valley Annaquito,
where the Viceroy Vela lost the Battle fought against Gonsalvo Pizarro.

3. Quito, commonly called St. Francisco de Quito. There stood formerly here
certain Palaces, built by the Ingas, but the City was rebuilt by the Spaniards
at the Foot of a certain Ridge of Mountains, which it has on the North and
North-West side of it, and are said by Laet, to cross the whole Country of
Peru quite over from the South to the North Sea: It was soon after the Building
inhabited by five hundred Families of Spaniards at least, besides Natives, and
well fortified, and might be thought a Town very well seated in all respects,
but for the neighborhood of a Vulcan, which at times annoyeth it very much, as
namely in the Year 1560. when it vomited out such abundance of flaming Cinders
and other sulphurous Matter, that had it not been for a Shower of Rain
unexpectedly falling, would have much damnifi'd, if not destroyed the Place.
The Natives about Quito are more Moraliz'd than other Peruvians. The Valleys
which are warmed by the Sun produce all manner of Fruit Trees and large
Vineyards; and the Root Papas, not unlike Apples. The Quintla, which is of
(...) height, has little Seeds, of which a pleasant Liquor is boiled. From
Quito the Highway leads to Cusco, along which at every four Leagues distance
stands a brave Palace; and from Cusco to Chili, being in all above a thousand
Leagues long. The City, built on a sandy Soil, is divided in the middle by a
Moat, over which lead several Bridges: the Streets are large and ^^eight, and
full of handsome Houses, and at the ends of the four chief Streets four
Marketplaces. Besides the Cathedral, are two other Churches, ^^dicated to the
(...) Sebastian and Blas^^^. The Cloisters of Franciscan and (...) are (...)
small Ornament to the City. Besides other stately Structures are the Resid^^^
(...) the Receivers of the Kings Revenues, to which the Peruvians that live
a^^^^^ (...) being computed no less than fifty thousand in number; ^ay Tri^^^
and to keep them in subjection, the City Quito is always well stor^d with a^^
(...) of Ammunition and Instruments of War. The chiefest Trade h^^^ (...)
Goats, and other Cattle, Cotton-Clothes, Cloth, Flax, Ha^s, (...) ^^gar and
Salt; which Salt, being gray and bitter, springs out of a Fountain in (...)
Coun^^y Mira. The Oil, Wine, and Drugs which are used here, are fetch^d from
the South Sea up the River Ambato, and from thence with Carts into the City.

4. Thomebamba, famous for a Royal Palace, built there by some of the Ingas; It
lies Southward from Quito in the Province of Canares, where two Rivers commix
their Waters, near a Plain abounding with Venison. There yet remain
considerable Ruins of this Palace, in which one may discern the vast
Dimensions of diverse Rooms, in some of which Arms were kept, and in others
Provisions and Clothes; of which kind of Buildings or Magazines the Ingas had
erected above a thousand in Peru, especially along the Highway, that they
might have their Ammunition ready in all places if need should require. On the
left side of Thomebamba appealed the famous Temple of the Sun, whose Gates were
not only curiously Painted, but also Inlay'd with Emeraulds. Both the Palace
and Temple, adorned with Gold and costly Images of great Touchstone and
Jasper, contained within their Walls an unvaluable Treasure. These magnificent
Structures are at this day fallen quite to decay. The People of this Country,
who wear long Hair, pleited on the top of their Heads like a Coronet, go
Clothed in Cotton Coats and Buskins of Hair-cloth. The Women, indifferent fair,
and great admirers of the Spaniards, Plough, Sow, and gather in the Harvest,
whilst the Men stay at home, Spinning, Weaving, and doing of other
Female-Offices. Anno 1544. they discovered Mines here, which produced as much
Gold as Earth.

5. Tacunga, where was formerly another stately Palace, about fifteen Leagues
from Cusco, not far from the Mountain which some years since vomited Ashes and
Stones into the adjacent Fields. Hereabouts was formerly a Cloister, inhabited
by the Nuns called Namaconas, the Ruins whereof are yet to be seen, with
several Houses of Stone, but covered with Thatch. The Natives in this Place are
of a brown Complexion, and of a very affable Nature.

5. Mulambato; 7. Mocha; 8. Rhiobamba, three small Villages, but each of them
credited with a stately Palace. Opposite to Rhiobamba lies the Province Chumbo,
from which a troublesome Way leads to Guaynacapa over the River Chongo.

9. St. Jago de Puerto Viejo, giving Denomination to the Territory about it,
which produces abundance of Potatoe Roots, Maiz, Juca, three sorts of Guayavas,
Cerezillas, and the Tree Tunas, which bears wild Figs. The Spanish Fruits grow
here likewise in great plenty. The forementioned Beasts like Hogs, whose
Navels grow on their Backs, are also very common here. The Woods abound with
Deer and all sorts of Fowls, amongst which one resembling a Goose, and called
Xuta; and another named Maca, somewhat lesser than a Cock, and which feeding
about the House, may be reckoned amongst the Poultrey of this Country. The Sea
along the Coast affords them abundance of Bonito's, which eaten in some Seasons
cause Agues. The People along the Seacoast are generally troubled with Pimples
and Sores in their Faces, especially on their Foreheads and Noses, few of them
living long, by reason of the unhealthfulness of the Place through excessive
Moisture, for the Rain continues eight Months together.

10. Manta, lying upon the Southern Ocean, the chief of the Villages, formerly
possessed by the Caranes, betwixt the Promontory Passao and the River Dable.
These People are said to this day to carve and cut their Faces from their Ears
to their Chins; about their Necks and Arms they wear Chains of Gold and little
red Corals, called Chaquina, highly esteemed by the Peruvians. This Town was
formerly famous for a great Emerauld, which was religiously worshipped there.

11. Guayaquil, otherwise called Culata, built at a deep Inlet of the Sea, near
the River Anebato, which with great swiftness falls down from the Mountains
Quito, is surrounded with a fertile Soil, and in the hollow Trees is found
plenty of Honey. The Water of the forementioned River, being of great virtue
in curing the Morbus Gallicus, has great resort of People from all places; who
likewise gather the Sarsaparilla that grows along the Banks. The Bridge which
the Inga Guaynacava began to lay cross this River, is also very remarkable, but
he dying, it was left unfinished. The Guancabilcas were heretofore under the
Jurisdiction of this City Guayaquil.

12. Castro, so called from a strong Fort built there by a Spanish Captain, and
situate in the Valley Vili, not far from Guayaquil.

13. The City Loxa, built in the Country of the Paltas, a People that, went
naked, between two Arms of the River Catamayo under a wholesome Climate, ^ar the
Highway that leads to Cusco in the Valley Curibamba, where no poisonous Beast
was ever found. The Soil bears abundance of Oaks, Hazles, Ash, Willow, and
Cedar-Trees; Maiz, Barley, and Wheat. Not far from the City springs a hot and
sulphurous Fountain, which cures all sorts of Sores and Wounds. The Country
hereabouts is likewise stored with Fowls, Venison, Cattle, and Fish. Moreover,
the City receives no small luster from two Dominican, and one Franciscan
Cloister. Eastward from which lie desolate Mountains, whose tops are
continually covered with Snow. Not far from hence were formerly two noble
Palaces, Piedras and Tamboblanco, besides several Villages.

14. Cuenca, wherein are also large Structures for the Monks and Priests: The
Country about the same has rich Mines of Gold, Silver, Quicksilver, Copper,
Iron, and Sulphur.

15. Zamora, Eastward from the cold Mountains Andes, built in a Marshy Soil,
where the Inhabitants are never visited with Pestilential Distempers, and use
no other Physic for such Sicknesses as they are troubled with, than Tobacco,
and the Herb Aquacolla. But there is a certain Nut that grows hereabouts, which
occasions sudden death, if eaten raw, but being boiled, is a wholesome Food. The
Mines afford great pieces of Gold, of which one weiging eighteen Pound, was
presented to Philip the Second, King of Spain. The briny Springs produce good
Salt. Three Rivers falling from the Mountains, are noted for their Golden
Sands, and also afford delicious Fish. The Bees being here void of Stings,
furnish the Inhabitants with plenty of Honey. The Tigers and little Lions
devour many of the Sheep Pacos, Goats, Hogs, and other Cattle, and sometimes
the Natives themselves. The City it self is neatly built with Wooden and Stone
Houses, and adorned with a Church and Dominican Cloister, besides a stately
Palace, the Residence for the King's Receiver. The Natives about this Place are
a stupid and barbarous People, which before the Spaniards coming thither, would
for a small trifle kill one another.

16. The City Yaen, situate in the Country Chuiquimayo; it is so called from a
swift River, cross which the Peruvian Women and Children swim, to the great
amazement of the Spaniards. They paint their Bodies black with the Juice of the
Root Yaguas, and feed for the most part on the stamped Plant Yaca. On the other
side of the Mountain, which rises on the Banks of Chuquimayo, lies the Country
Perico, fruitful and well inhabited, against which juts the Golden Country
Cherinos. Peru has also several delightful Valleys, amongst which on the North
the chiefest are the Tumbez, Solana, Poechos, and Piura, all of them very
fertile, full of stately Buildings, and watered by several Rivers.

17. San Miguel, the first City that was built by the Spaniards in Peru,
situate in a sandy and dry Soil, being extraordinary dusty in Summer, and very
slabby in the Winter, because the hard Ground cannot soak up the Rain. The
Ingas made a Way through this Valley fifteen Foot broad, between two Walls, and
Planted Trees on each side.

18. Westward from Miguel appears Payta, near a convenient Haven in the
South Sea, which Anno 1547. was burnt by Thomas Candish; since which it had
been rebuilt twenty eight years, when Joris Spilbergen, Spilbergen's Attempt
upon Payta.
after a hard Engagement with the Spanish Admiral Rodrigo Mendoza, arriving in
the large Haven before Payta, sent eight Sail with three hundred Armed Men up
to the City, where finding the Enemy Encamped along the Shore, he returned
without any effect; but two of his Frigates, the Eolus and the Morning Star,
running close to Payta, fired whole Broad-sides at the same, whilst Captain De
Wit took a Peruvian Fisherman, who had been two Months out at Sea, and taken
abundance of Fish. The Guns which the Ships fired upon the Town struck such a
terror into the Citizens, that they fled with Bag and Baggage into the
Mountains, and left the City for a Prize to Spilbergen, who setting fire on the
same, in few hours burnt down two Churches, a Dominican Cloister, and several
Almshouses: But had not the Citizens been cowardly, they might easily have
kept off the Hollander; for the Viceroy Ludovico Velasco informed of
Spilbergen's Arrival, had stored the Place with Ammunition and Men, whose
Courage failing, proved successful for the Hollanders, who whilst they Rid
here at an Anchor, took a very strange Bird on the Island Lobos, lying before
Payta, being two Yards high and three thick, in its Bill, Wings, and Claws
resembling an Eagle, and having a large Crest on its Head. Not long after Donna
Paula being Governess of Payta, a Lady famous in Peru for her Beauty and
obliging Nature, sent Cabbages, Oranges, Cittrons, and other Provisions to the
Hollanders, and requested the Releasement of some of the Spaniards taken in the
Engagement against Mendoza, but could not obtain her Request from the uncourtly
Dutchmen.

SECT. III. Los Quixos.
Description of Los Quixos
THe Province of Los Quixos lies South, and to the South-East of Quito, being
bordered more directly Eastward with a part of the Province of Guiana, called
by some El Dorada, or The Golden Country; on the South it has Lima and Cusco.

The Canela-^ruit.
This Province is subdivided into several lesser Territories, viz. Canela,
Pacomores, and St. Juan de Salinas. Canela is so called, because it has many
great Woods, which produce the Fruit Canela in great abundance, the Owners
whereof were most inhumanely dealt with by the Spaniards; for Gonsalvo Pizarro
supposing to get store of Gold there, found nothing but Trees, bearing a Fruit
like Olives, by the Natives called Canela, with which they used to drive a
great Trade, being otherwise poor and simple People, living in Huts, which
Pizarro pulling down, caused the Inhabitants to be torn in pieces by his Dogs,
because they could not furnish him with Gold, nor direct him where it was to be
had.

The Granadilla-Apple.
Besides the Canela-Tree, this Country also produces in great plenty the Tree
which bears the Apples Granadilla, exceeding good against burning Fevers;
the Leaves are like Ivy, the Blossom resembling the Sun, and the long Leaves
speckled with Red and White, open three hours after Sunrising, and close again
before the Evening, just as if Nature took care to preserve the beauty of the
Flower.

Towns and Places of chief note.
In this part of the Province the chief are, 1. Baeza, otherwise called Quixos,
built in the Year 1559. by Ramires de Avila, eighteen Leagues from Cusco.

2. Archidona, twenty Leagues to the South-East of Baeza. 3. Avila. 4. Sevilla
del Oro, all of them Spanish Colonies.

The Territories Pacomores and Yguansongo, otherwise called The Country of
Juan de Salinas, are said both to extend above a hundred Leagues in length, and
little less in breadth. The Fields afford store of Pasture for Cattle, the
Plough'd Lands produce Wheat and all sorts of wholesome Herbs; and in some places
are also rich Gold-Mines.

The Governor Layola built four Towns here, viz. 1. Valladolid; 2. Loyola; 3.
San Jago de los Montanas; and 4. Caruma.

The Jesuit Acosta relates, That not far from Caruma he found great Stones,
some of which were full of Golden Veins, but were hard to be cut from the Rock.
Most of the Gold is found in the Sand of several Rivers, the chiefest whereof
flow through Quito, New Granada, Valdivita in Chili, and Caravaya in Peru.

On the Point of Quito, the River San Jago falls into the Southern Ocean; the
Ground in the Mouth of the River being very uneven, for oftentimes the Ships
are fast aground at the Stern, and on Head they have above eighty Fathom Water;
yet nevertheless the Shoals are no ways dangerous.

South-West from St. Jago lies the spacious Inlet Mattheo, and the Promontory
Francisco, known by its Banks and high Grounds, which show red and white at a
great distance.

Not far from hence, exactly under the Equinox, appears Cape Passao, flat and
low; between which and Mattheo, the great Rivers Los Quiximes fall into the Sea.

Behind Passao rises the high Mountain Quaque; and more Westerly the Bay
Caraques affords a secure Harbor for all manner of Vessels.

Next you come to the Town Puerto Viejo before mentioned, lying behind the
Island Laurenso.

Five Leagues off at Sea, before Laurenoz, lies the Island Plata, formerly
famous for a Peruvian Temple, in which the Natives Sacrifis'd Sheep, and
sometimes Children, and painted the Figures of diverse Persons with the Blood;
to which they also Offered Jewels, Gold, Silver, Wool, Cotton Shirts, and
Cloaks. Francisco Pizarro arriving here, got an invaluable Mass of Treasure;
but at present it lying desolate, affords nothing but Brambles and wild Trees.

The next which come in view are the Havens Callo and Zalango, where there are
safe Harbors, good Wood and Water.

The Cape of St. Helena makes also a secure Road on the North, and on its Shore
has a Spring, on the top of whose Waters swims a certain Gum, by the Natives
called Copey, exceeding good to make Ships tight.

The River Tumbez falls into a large Bay, which on its North-East Point near
the Main Land, has the Island Puna, ten Leagues in circumference: The Soil
whereof produces abundance of Maiz, Juca, and other good Roots, besides great
Woods full of fruitful Trees, and Sarsaparilla. The Inhabitants of a brown
Complexion, and middle Stature, wear Cotton Cloaks, and Chains of Chaquira and
Precious Stones: They drive a great Trade, and formerly maintained Wars with
the People inhabiting upon the River Tumbez; their great want is fresh Water in
the Summer. Thomas Candish Landing here Anno 1587. found a Ship haled ashore,
and three Villages, in one of which stood a Palace belonging to a Casique,
surrounded with Stone Galleries; and near it a large Storehouse full of
Tar-pots and Hemp to make Cables of: The Village consisted of two hundred
Houses, and a fair Church with a Steeple, in which hung several Bells. The
Casique Married to a Spanish Woman being fled with the Villagers, Candish took
many Oxen, fat Sheep, Pigeons and Ducks, the Bells, and what else was not
conveyed aboard, with him, and afterward burnt the whole Town; but whilst he
was busy in making havoc, a thousand Spaniards, and a considerable number of
Peruvians fell upon the English on such a sudden, that they killed some, and
took others Prisoners.

Somewhat farther off at Sea appears the Isle Clara, where those of Puna
formerly buried their Dead.

The Inlet into which falls the River Tumbez, whose Shores are well inhabited,
ends Westward at the Promontory Blanco; Southward from which lies the Isle
Lobos, where there are several Springs full of the same Gum, or Bitumen, a
little above mentioned.

Beyond the Point Agua lie the two Isles Lobos Marinos, opposite to a low
Coast; they are desolate, and barren of Grass, Trees, and all kind of Herbs,
and destitute of fresh Water; but many Pelicans, Penguins, and other strange
Birds.

The discovering of these Coasts belonging to the Jurisdiction of Quito,
deserves a short Relation:

Bevalcazar overcoming Ruminagua, takes Quito.
Whilst Pizarro kept the Inga Attabaliba Prisoner, he sent Captain Bevalcazar
to the new Fort St. Miguel, where eighty Horse and a hundred Foot being arrived
from Panama and Nicaragua, and he being informed that there lay a great
Treasure in Quito, and that the Canares, the Spaniards Friends, were
exceedingly oppressed by Ruminagua, Attabaliba's General, immediately marched
thither with the new arrived Forces before mentioned, to fetch the Booty, and
to assist the Canares; but several things opposed him in his Design: for
Ruminagua guarded the Way with twelve hundred Indians, dug Pits in the same,
and filling them with sharp Poles, covered them slightly over with Canes and
Earth; all which Bevalcazar shunning, went about, fell in upon the Rere of the
Enemy, and after a small Resistance conquered the City Quito. Mean while
Ferdinand Cortesio sent Petro Alvarado from New Spain, who taking Guatimala,
received a Commission from the Spanish Court, to subdue the Northern parts of
Peru. Soon after which Garcias Holgua being sent with two Ships to enquire
concerning the State of Peru, brought News back, That Francisco Pizarro had
gotten an unvaluable Treasure at Caxamalca; which so stirred up Alvarado, that
he Landed five hundred Men at Puerto Viejo, marched in great want of Provisions
over the Mountains Acabucos, and had he not accidentally found a Pond of sweet
Water in a Thicket of Canes, both Men and Horses had all perished; at last upon
his approaching Quito, the Governor thereof, being Bevalcazar, not enduing to
suffer an Equal, drew up all his Men in Battle array; but some Persons
interceding between them, He comes to an Agreement with Alvarado.
they were soon reconciled, and Alvarado being bought out with a great sum of
Money, deserted Quito; where after Gonsalvo Pizarro, had remaind'd a
considerable time he marched Eastward of the Province, which produces abundance
of Cinnamon; whither he was accompanied by two hundred Spaniards and four
thousand Peruvians; against whom the Natives dwelling on the Borders of Los
Quixos fought very valiantly, till Night approaching, when they all ran away;
after which resting a while, there arose a mighty Tempest of Thunder and
Lightning, accompanied with a dreadful Earthquake, which swallowed above five
hundred Houses, whole Woods and Fields, whilst an unknown River burst out of
the Earth, and overflowed all the Country, insomuch that Pizarro expected
nothing but a speedy Ruin, Pizarro and his Army driven to great Straights.
in regard no Provisions were to be found in all the Country: at last getting
on the top of the nearest Mountain he lost many of his Men, who were frozen to
death with excessive Cold. From thence marching to the County Zumaque, he got
plenty of Provision and Cinnamon, which grows on great Trees in the Woods; the
Leaves thereof resemble the Laurel; the Fruit grows in little Berries; the Root
and Bark have a strong odoriferous smell. Thence traveling to the Town Coca,
he found a mighty Cataract of Water, falling from a Rock above fifteen hundred
Else high; insomuch that the noise in calm Weather was heard six Leagues off.
Pizarro leaving his sick People in Zumaque, went only with a few Eastward from
Coca to the Plain Country Guema, full of Moorish Grounds, the Inhabitants
whereof went naked: at last he came to the great River Maranon, which falls
from the Mountains near Quito, and extends with several windings above eight
hundred Leagues in length, and at the Mouth thereof is fifteen Leagues broad,
which at that time overflowing all the Country, he judged it convenient to
build a Brigantine, making the Shoes of the dead Horses serve for Iron-work,
his Men's Shirts for Sails, and a Gum, which was to be had there, for Tar, and
having Lanch'd their Vessel, and put all their Baggage and sick People into the
same, they Sailed close along the Shore, on which Pizarro made his Way through
Brambles and Canes, or went over in the Brigantine whensoe're he espied a
better Path on the other side; in which manner they were gone two hundred
Leagues down the River, with no other Food but wild Fruit and Roots; when
Captain Franciscus Orellana, was ordered to Sail away before with five Men, and
seek out for Provisions, and at every Stream which fell cross-ways out of the
Country into the great River, Orellana corss'd in his Designs, dies for grief.
he was to leave a Manned Boat: but Orellana in few days drove down so far with
the swift River, that he saw no likelihood or getting up again in a whole year,
neither could he find any Provisions, but fought daily with the Indians, who
came stoutly to Board him in little Boats: amongst whom he was informed also,
that thereabouts lived the Amazon Women, that Warred continually against their
Neighbors; and at last he came into the Northern Ocean. But Orellana Sailing to
Spain, obtained a Commission to be Governor of the Amazons Country, whither he
steered his Course with five hundred Men in three Ships; but Landing at the
Canaries they all ran away from him, which so incensed Orelland, that he soon
after died with Grief. Mean while Pizarro informed by a Spaniard whom Orellana
had put ashore, that the Brigantine was by the strong Current carried into the
Ocean, knew not what to do, his People since their departure from Quito having
traveled above four hundred Leagues, had eaten most of their Horses: Many died
by feeding on unwholsom Herbs; others fell down dead for Hunger, or tired out
with toilsom Travel; their Clothes, rotted by the Rain, hung upon them like
Rags, their Shoes were worn out, their Feet full of Blisters, their Bodies
sadly mangled with Brambles and Thorns, for no place afforded them a Boat.
Pizarro leaving the River Maranon, The miserable Condition of Pizarro's Men.
went another Way, no less troublesome for steep Rocks and inaccessible
Mountains. The Valleys through which they went, began now to be strewn with
dead and sick Bodies, who were not able to follow the Army, which marched very
fast, every one judging to be so much nearer his preservation the farther he
could get: Those that fainted called continually on their Friends for help, but
the Horses were grown too weak to carry them: Every one saw nothing but Death
before his Eyes; wherefore, though called by their dearest and most intimate
Friends that lay a dying, they never looked back, their compassion toward
others being turned into fear and care of themselves. The Forsaken implored
their Saints,.and besought Pizarro for aid, but finding their Complaints to be
in vain, and raging through despair, they wished all the rest the same success,
and the like Friends, whenever they should be in the like Condition. Pizarro
extremely grieved and troubled, that he had brought the People into this
Misery, sent a few Horsemen before to Quito, to carry the sad News of his
deplorable Condition, that they might immediately send Provisions to him; which
he receiving when he was within fifty Leagues from the said City Quito,
distributed amongst those that were left alive, who being also almost starved,
eat so greedily, that several of them were chok'd; the remainder were kept a
considerable time in Garrison under the Command of Pizarro in Quito. Which
City, built in a pleasant place, grew very populous in the Year 1544. there
being several Gold-Mines found about the same in that time. But this lasted not
long, for Quito siding with the Viceroy Blasco Nunnez Vela against Gonsalvo
Pizarro, Quito very much defaced by siding with Vela against Gonsalvo Pizarro.
most of the Citizens were destroyed by him, and their Houses burnt to Ashes.
The like Destruction, and upon the same occasion, befell the three Villages in
the Province Bracomoros, discovered by Juan Parzel and Captain Vergara,
together with the Country Chichiapoios, where Alphonso Alvarado built the Town
Levanto, surrounded with deep Caverns, through which, to the great strengthening
of the City, flow several Rivers.

Round about Puerto Viejo the Natives dwelt in Trees, whom the Spaniards had
much ado to bring under their subjection; for their Country being barren and
mountainous, was not only wanting in Provisions to feed an Army, but the
Peruvians also threw great Stones out of their Huts built in Trees, and
likewise Javelins and Pots full of boiling Water, with which they did much
mischief to their Enemies that Stormed them, who at last covering themselves
with Boards, cut down the Trees, with which they falling, were torn in pieces
by the Spanish Dogs.

SECT. IV. Lima.
Situation and Description of the Province of Lima.
LIma, called also Los Reyos, has on the East, Collao, and some part of Cusco;
on the North, Los Quixos; and on the South, Charcas. The Country extends it
self in length upon the Coasts of the South Sea two hundred and fifty, some
say, full three hundred Leagues in length, viz. from Cape del Aguia Northward,
on the Borders of Quito as far as Arequipa toward the South, and runs Eastward
to Brasile and Rio de la Palma.

The several Valleys of this Province
In this Province are several very pleasant Valleys, the first whereof is
Motupe, to which a sandy Way leads from St. Miguel de Valverde, between barren
Wilds, from whence several Streams falling are immediately drunk up by the
Sand; wherefore all Travelers that go that way carry Water and Wine with them
in Calabashes for twenty Leagues together, which they Walk or Ride by Night,
because of the excessive heat of the Sun.

In the Valley Motupe grow abundance of Trees, which receive nourishment from a
River that springs up near the same. Here is also much Cotton.

Not far from hence are the Valleys Xayanca, formerly very populous and full of
Palaces: The River which flows through the middle is led in Trenches amongst
the neighboring Fields.

The Valley Tuqueme is also very pleasant, and the decayed Palaces,
sufficiently testify its former splendour.

The next being Cinto, is no way inferior to Tuqueme; and between both lie
sandy Hills and barren Rocks, on which grow neither Trees nor Herbs, nor is any
living Creature to be found upon them: the Way through which being a whole days
Journey, cannot be traveled without sure Guides.

The Valley Collique, watered by a River of the same Denomination, and very
thick set with Trees, was formerly very populous, but since the Spanish Wars it
is become quite desolate; for not only a considerable number of them were
slain by the Spaniards, but also many destroyed themselves, Wives and Children;
of which Peter Martyr, Councellor to the Emperor Charles the Fifth, sets down
several terrible Examples, of which two were remarkable above the rest; the
first was after this manner:

The Spanish Captain Olandus Lying with the Daughter of an Indian Casique,
questioned when she grew big with Child, Whether she was with Child by him? and
that he might know the real truth by Torture, he caused her to be tied naked to
a wooden Spit, and laid to roast against a Fire made of green Wood, so that
she died in a most miserable manner; upon which her Father ran in a rage with
thirty of his Companions to Olandus's House, where he killed his whole Family,
and locking all the Doors about the House, set fire on the same, into which
when it was at its greatest height, he and his Associates leaped into the
middle thereof.

Two tragical Passages.
The second Accident is also very terrible, viz. An Indian Maid being Got with
Child by a Spanish Ass driver, acquainted her Father and Mother with it, withal
telling them that she was ready to suffer Death for her Offense; and
notwithstanding they freely pardoning, and persuading her to the contrary, she
eat raw Juca, which when boiled is a wholesome Food, but if eaten raw, certain
though languishing Death; which she perceiving, ran to the next River, where
after having washed her self, she broke off from a large Tree a Bough of five
Foot long, and making the end thereof very sharp, fell upon the same, and so
killed her self. Several other Ravished Maids taking example hereby, hanged
themselves upon the Boughs of the same Tree.

But to proceed in our Description, next to Collique lies the Valley Zana, of
the like bigness, and famous for the City Miraflores.

The next is Pascayamo, which exceeds all the former in fruitfulness, and
populousness of Inhabitants, who before they were destroyed by the Ingas were
much feared by their Neighbors. This Valley also was adorned with several fair
Temples, which are now turned into Cloisters. Cattle, Hogs, and Goats breed
here in very great numbers. The chief Trade of this Place consists in Cotton
and Linen.

The Valley Chacama, in which the Dominican Monks inhabit a brave Cloister,
produces abundance of Sugar.

Four Leagues farther lies the spacious Valley Chimo, so called from an old
Peruvian Hero, which affords a pleasant Prospect, by reason of the many
Banquetting-houses built there by the Ingas. No place in Peru is able to stand
in competition with this for plenty of Provisions, the Ocean and Rivers
producing store of Fish, the Country affording Cattle and all manner of Fruit.
The Cotton which grows here is Shipped to the South Sea.

Chanca is a Valley chiefly considerable for the Town Arnedo, which is situate
therein, of which more hereafter.

But the Valley Guanape, not far from Chanca, yields the best Peruvian Liquor
Chica, and has a convenient Harbor for Ships.

The Plain Santa being overflowed in the Winter, is all overgrown for want of
Inhabitants, who were all destroyed by the Spaniards. The Woods hereabouts
swarm with a sort of venomous Bug, which exceedingly torments the Traveller.

Next follow in order the Valleys Guambaico, very fruitful, and Guarney,
abounding with Horses, Hogs, and other Cattle. Spilbergen's Attempt.
Joris Spilbergen Landing here Anno 1615. found the Haven secure against all
Winds, and between the Shore and the Village Guarmey a Creek, and somewhat
farther a Fresh Water Pool; on one side of which stood a decayed Castle built
of square Stone, whereon the Hollanders set the States Flag, and Garrisoned the
same to secure those that fetched Water out of the forementioned Pool. In the
aforesaid Village stood a Church with a spiry Steeple; behind which rose high
Mountains, and at the Foot thereof a great Wood, into which the Inhabitants
fled with all their Goods, so that Spilbergen found nothing but a little Meal,
a few Hens, Hogs, and Oranges in their Houses, which whilst he was sending
Aboard, a small Body of Horse appeared, but immediately fled into the Woods.
The Hollanders staying here seven days, were informed, that the Galley Jesu
Maria, Commanded by the Admiral Rodrigo Mendoza, and the Santa Anna, by the
Vice Admiral Peter Alvares Piger, were both lost, not one Man being saved.

Not far from thence lies the Valley Parmonga, which though it be fruitful and
pleasant, yet it is quite desolate; the Walls of a large Castle still appear,
as testimonies of its being formerly inhabited; and within the said Walls also
are still to be seen the Ruins of spacious Halls and fair Chambers, whose
Walls are painted with wild Beasts and Birds: The Spaniards have dug all
about, and undermined the same, in hopes to find, together with the several
dead Bodies, a Treasure buried. Two Leagues Southward from this Valley Parmonga
flows the River, Guayman, by the Spaniards called Rio del Falcon, from a Hawk
which was seen there. When any store of Rain falls here, a great part of the
Dale Barrana lies under Water.

Not far from hence lie the Valleys Gaura and Lima; which last exceeds all
others in bigness, and was formerly exceeding populous; but since the Marquess
Pizarro built the City Los Reyos here, the Citizens have taken the Lands from
the Peruvians. The Mines hereabouts produce Gold and Silver. Amongst other
things time Inhabitants highly esteem an Herb bearing yellow Flowers, which in
a short time cures a putrifi'd Wound, whereas if laid on sound Flesh it eats
the same to the Bone. The Natives heretofore used to spend their time in
Hunting, Strange manner of Hunting.
and caught their Game after this manner, viz. three or four thousand of them
would meet together, and by taking Hands make a Ring of three or four Miles in
circumference, and at a certain Note or Tune Sung, or loudly Exclaimed, they
drew nearer and nearer, till at last they were within Shot of the enclosed
Game, whatsoever it were.

The Country of Collao has a low Point, from which a long Cliff runs into the
Sea, toward the small Island called Isla de Collao: On each side of the Point
the Coast runs sloaping in, the one side extending North-West from Collao, to
the Cliffs Piscadores; the other South-East to the second Promontory; behind
which is a large Bay, where the Valley Pachacama appears, famous for its
exceeding fruitfulness, and a stately Temple built by the Ingas, A vast
Treasure found by Ferdinando Pizarro.
where Ferdinando Pizarro found above nine hundred thousand Ducats, besides
what the Soldiers and Commanders took, and what the Priests had hid, which
none, though miserably tortured, would confess.

Opposite to Pachacama lies the Valley Chilca, where it never Rains, nor any
Brook or Spring moistens the dry Soil, which nevertheless produces Maiz and
Fruit Trees. The Natives used to dig large and deep Pits, in which they Sowed
and Planted, and at every Root laid the Head of a Fish called a Sardin, which
they caught in Nets on the Seashore; wherein nevertheless nothing would have
grown, but for the Morning Dews which fell. The Ingas also had curious
Banquetting-houses here. In these Parts there grows a sort Tree called Mala, of
which Acosta relates a strange Wonder of Nature, very remarkable, viz. That it
flourishes and bears Fruit on that side which beholds the South, in that Season
when it is Summer on the Mountains; the other which views the Sea; Blossoming
and bearing Fruit when it is Summer on the Plains.

The Valley Guarco, spacious and full of Trees, produces especially the
pleasant Fruit Guayaves and Guavas, as also the best Wheat in Peru; wherefore
it is vended all over the Country. Here are also the Ruins of another stately
Castle, built by the Ingas, the former luster whereof is testified by its
remaining Walls, which consist of exceeding great Stones, so neatly joined
together without Mortar, that it appears like one entire Stone; and by the
decayed Structures of several Halls, much of the curious Painting whereof is
yet to be soch, from the Castle a large pair of Stairs led down to the
Seashore. Two Leagues farther the River Lunagun runs through the fertile
Valley of the same Denomination. The fatness of this Soil is chiefly ascribed
to the Dung of a Fowl called Guana, which the Natives fetch in great abundance
from the Isles near the Main.

Next follows the Valley Chinca, one of the biggest in all Peru, and before the
Spaniards Arrival very populous. In the time of the Ingas it also showed a
magnificent Temple Dedicated to the Sun, built by Tepaja Jupangue; yet the
Inhabitants still remained constant in the worshipping of their old Idol
Cinciapema. Hither the Ingas sent their conquered Princes, who on a certain
time were to appear in Cusco. The Dominicans at present possess here a neat
Cloister, from whence leads a plain Road to the Dale Ica, watered by the River
Pisco, which is dry in Summer; wherefore the Natives brought a Ditch from the
Mountains, which since the Spaniards destroying the Inhabitants, is choked up
with Sand.

Next the Valley Nasca comes in view, famous for the Castle Caxamalca, where
the Ingas kept all manner of Ammunition for War, besides several Tombs, out of
which the Spaniards took great Riches. This Valley is divided into several
others, which for the most part produce Sugarcanes; and through them all runs
the Royal Highway, which is Walled in on both sides.

Beyond Nasca lie one behind another the Valleys Hacari, Oconna, Camana, and
Quilca, all of them affording good Pasture for Cattle, and Fruit, yet are most
of them desolate.

The County Los Motilonos, thinly inhabited for want of Provisions, and divided
by two Rivers, separates Moyobamba from the Country Charasmal.

Southward beyond Caxamalca appear the Countries Guamachuco, and a little
farther Conchucos and Piscobamba, all fruitful and pleasant, and adorned with
several Structures built by the Ingas.

On the side of Piscobamba the County Guaraz extends it self over barren
Mountains, through which the Ingas cut a Royal Highway, and built a strong
Castle at the Entrance into the Country; the Inhabitants whereof being very
laborious, work very diligently in the Gold-Mines.

The Territory Pincos, watered by a River, and famous for one of the stateliest
of the Peruvian Structures, is surrounded by the Countries Guayalcas, Turama,
Bomba, and Conchucos. The Mountains, though dangerous to Travelers by Lions,
great Bears, and other ravenous Beasts, afford abundance of Silver; and the
fruitful Soil produces Wheat, Maiz, Grapes, Figs, Oranges, Quinces, Cittrons,
Cedars; and likewise feeds Goats, Horses, and other Cattle.

The Country Viticos, being within the Jurisdiction of Guanuco, lies amongst
the Mountains Andes, whether Inga Mango fled, when the Spaniards made
themselves Masters of Peru.

Chief Towns and Places of note.
Towns and Places most observable and important in it belonging to the
Spaniards, are 1. Miraflores, as the Spaniards call it, a well seated and
wealthy Town in the Valley of Zanu, as above mentioned, five Leagues distant
from the Sea, where it has likewise a good Haven or Port.

2. Truxillo, two or three Leagues distant from the Sea; the Haven whereof is
said to be large, but not safe. The Town it self is seated in the Valley
Chinco, upon the Banks of a pleasant River, whose Water does not only run
through several Channels to moisten the Fields, but also to accommodate every
House in the City: It has broad Streets, a great Marketplace, four Cloisters,
two for the Dominicans, one for the Augustines, and the other for the
Franciscans; one great Church, five hundred Houses, and a Palace, inhabited by
the King's Collectors, and many Banquetting-houses about it. The good situation
and fruitfulness of the Soil, moved the Marquess Francisco Pizarro to build
this City here Anno 1533. but the Haven belonging to the same lies open to all
manner of Winds, so that the Ships Ride here in great danger.

3. La Parilla, otherwise called Santa, fourteen Leagues beyond Truxillo
Southward, washed by the Southern Ocean, and one side by a fresh water Stream,
which being enclosed between stony Cliffs, makes a secure Harbor.

4. Arnedo, seated ten Leagues Northward from Lima, amongst the Vineyards of
the Valley Chancas; otherwise having no great matter in it remarkable, but a
fair Dominican Cloister.

5. Lima, by the Spaniards commonly called La Cividad de los Reyes, or The City
of Kings, so named because Pizarro, who built it, laid the first Stone on
Twelfth-day, Anno 1553. which they call The Feast of the Kings: It is seated in
the Valley of Lima, (from whence the City is also so denominated) one of the
fruitfullest Parts of all Peru, and so neatly built, that all the chief Streets
of the City open upon a fair Marketplace, or Piazza, of such a large Square,
that upon the sides thereof are built, in a stately and convenient manner, the
Cathedral, the Palace of the Archbishop, the Viceroy's Palace and Courts of
Justice, with the Exchequer or Public Treasury, the Townhouse or place where
the City Magistrates meet and hold their Courts, the Public Armory or
Magazine, and a Free School, wherein are taught by the Jesuits all Arts and
Sciences, and also the Indian Language, and diverse other fair Buildings of the
Nobility and better sort of Citizens. No Country under the Heavens affords a
more fruitful or pleasanter Place than this; the temperate Climate neither
troubling the Inhabitants with excessive Heats or great Colds, nor terrifying
them with Thunder or Lightning, but having almost perpetual Sunshine and fair
Weather; only the three Winter Months, wherein there falls a sweet smelling
Dew, which cures the Headache; and there die but very few of pestilential
Distempers. The Country about the City is pleasant without exception. The
Pigeons which are kept here in curious Houses built on purpose, fly a thousand
in a Flight. The Fields abound also with Cattle. The Orchards and Gardens
flourish with all sorts of Trees and Plants, whereof those that are brought
hither from Spain grow better than in their natural Country. The West side of
the City is washed by a pure and clear Stream, which stores the Market with
great plenty of good Fish, it being distant but a Musket shot, especially when
the Water rises. This River is of great consequence, for it not only waters
the whole Valley of Lima with its several Branches, but also runs under every
House in the City, being built on Stone Arches; they are only one Story high,
because there is no Wood to be had in the Valley of Lima but what in three
years becomes all Woorm-eaten; nevertheless the Houses are very beautiful both
within and without; the Walls being very thick and strong, have curious Arbors
of green Boughs on the top, in which the Owners shade themselves from the Sun.
Most of the Houses built in the high Streets have pleasant Turrets, which face
the Marketplace, where all sorts of Provisions are brought to Sale, as Oxen,
Sheep, Venison, Sugar, Oranges, Cittrons, Grapes, and Wheat, which is ground in
Water-Mills built near the River. This City is inhabited by many able
Merchants, which often load Ships to Panama, that are valued at above two
hundred thousand Ducats. To the Archbishop's See of this Place belongs the
Bishoprics of Chili, Charcas, Quito, Cusco, Truxillo, Guanuco, Popaian, San
Francisco, Panama, Nicaragua, and Rio de la Plata. The City is also adorned
with two fair Churches, besides the Cathedral, and also other lesser Churches,
four stately Cloisters, two Nunneries, and the Jesuits Palace, which is very
magnificent. The Haven two Leagues distant from it, and called Callao de Lima,
is large and secure for Ships. Anno 1579. Sir Francis Drake took twelve Ships
from hence, Prizes taken here by Sir Fran. Drake.
one whereof was laden with Linen and Silk, besides a great Chest full of
Silver: Which Inconvenience to prevent for the future, the Spaniards have built
two strong Forts, and fortified them with Brass Guns. Thirty years after Sir
Francis Drake's Exploit, Joris Spilbergen coming to Anchor here, found the
Place all inhabited, Spilbergen attempts the Place in vain.
a Fort well stored with Guns, and a strong Castle before the Mouth of the
Harbor, from whence they shot Bullets of thirty six Pound weight at the
Hollanders, and so shattered their Frigate, called The Hunter, that she could
scarce-keep above Water: Fourteen Spanish Merchantmen lying near the Shore,
received little damage, Spilbergen not being able for Shelves to get to them,
neither did he judge it convenient to Land, the Viceroy having at that time
above four thousand Men in Arms, besides several Troops of Horse; wherefore
after having fired several Guns on the Fort, and against the Church, he set
Sail to Guarmey.

6. Cannete, otherwise called Guarco, from the Valley wherein it is situate: It
was built by the Spaniards out of the Treasure which they found in the Castle
before spoken of in the same Valley.

7. Valverde, situate in a Valley of the same Name, where excellent Fruit may
be had for a small Price; it is a well Traded and rich Town, about sixteen
Leagues distant from the Sea.

8. Pachacama, situate in a Territory of the same Name, four Leagues Southward
of Lima, memorable chiefly for Pizarro's good fortune here, who is reported to
have found in one only old Temple of the Natives, the quantity of nine hundred
thousand Ducats of Gold and Silver, besides what his Soldiers are supposed to
have seized on, and conveyed away before he came.

9. Castro Verreina, threescore Leagues distant from Lima to the South-East: It
lies in the Valley of Chocolocha, and is a rich Place, by reason of the good
Mines of Silver which are about it, and abundance of the best sort of Tobacco.

10. Miguel de la Ribera, in the Valley of Camana. The Inhabitants whereof
drive a great Trade in Wine, Figs, and Raisins.

11. The City Arequipa, which extends up toward the Mountains, is built in the
Dale Quilca, which runs eleven Leagues from the Sea, under a healthful Climate;
but in the Year 1582. it was wholly ruined by an Earthquake; the reason whereof
is ascribed to the wet sulphurous Mountains, which burns continually, and
sometimes vomits out Flames and Ashes. The Marquess Pizarro built this City
forty six years before the forementioned Earthquake, since which being
rebuilt again, soon attained to three hundred Houses, besides a Church and
Cloister; and though it be but a small Town, yet it is of a great resort,
because the Gold and Silver is brought hither from the Mines Chancos, Porco,
and Potosi, and from thence sent down the River Quilca, which washing the City
Walls runs into the South Sea to Los Reyos, and from thence to Panama, Nombre
de Dios, and New Spain. The Jurisdiction of this City Arequipa extends it self
a vast way, viz. over the spacious Valleys between Hacari and Tampaca, and up
in the Country beyond the County Condesuyo, full of Hamlets and Villages; the
Inhabitants whereof heretofore worshipped the Sun. By the Way from Arequipa to
Collao lie two great Lakes, but of one of which the River Aparima takes its
original.

12. Caxamalca, rather a Fort than a Town, in a Territory of the same
Denomination, built at the Foot of a Mountain washed with two Rivulets, over
which lead several Bridges; near which also were formerly a stately Temple
Consecrated to the Sun, wonderful Palaces and Baths for the Ingas, besides
other magnificent Structures of Noblemen, which were the more famous for
Attabaliba's Imprisonment and Death. The Soil round about may compare with any
part of the World for fertility. The Inhabitants are a peaceable ingenious
People, and make curious woollen Hangings.

13. St. Juan de la Frontera, built by the Spaniards North-East and by East
from Caxamalca in the County Chiachinpoyas, full of Gold-Mines and Cattle; to
which belongs not only Chiachinpoyas, but also the Countries Guiancas and
Cascainga, out of which above twenty thousand Peruvians pay Tribute to the
Spanish King. These People especially the Women, are very comely and beautiful;
for which reason the Ingas fetched their Wives and Concubines from thence.
Eastward from Frontera rise the high Mountains Andes, behind which flows the
great River Mayobamba by several poor Villages inhabited by a sottish kind of
People.

14. San Jago de las Valles, built in an ill place amongst the Shrubs and
overflowing Rivers. In this Country grows a Tree which bears a juicy Fruit,
not unlike an Almond in prickly Rinds, but resembling those which cover a
Chestnut, concerning which Physicians have delivered their Opinions, That there
is not a wholsomer Fruit in the whole World.

15. Leon de Guanuco, which received that Denomination from its Builder Vacca
de Castro, who called it Leon, because he was born in the Spanish City Leon,
and Guanuco from the stately Palace of the Ingas which was built here: The
Houses are built of Freestone, and covered with Thatch. The Citizens of Los
Reyos were much against the building of this Town, because several Lands
belonging to them were taken away and given to Guanuco, where the temperate Air
grants long Life and Health to the Inhabitants. The Highway, in which stand
several Storehouses, formerly full of Ammunition, runs through the middle of
this Country, where in the time of the Ingas dwelt Astronomers, who by looking
on the Stars pretended to tell future Events. Here the Women also used to be
burnt alive with their Husbands.

SECT. V. Cusco.
Situation and Description of Cusco.
CUsco is the far greater part of the Province of Peru, containing generally
all the Sierra, or Hill-Countreys, and those parts of the Andes likewise which
lie Southward of the little Province or Cantred of Guanuco, being Coasted
Westward and to the North-West with Lima; Eastward, with Los Quixos, and some
view of Cuzco CUSCO
part of Guiana; and on the South, with Charcas; enjoying for the most part a
temperate and good Air, neither overheated with the scorching Sun in the day,
nor damped with any cold Mists or Dews in the Evening, as some parts of the
Plains of Peru are, but well watered with many fresh Rivers, which make the
Valleys and lower Grounds of it good Pasturage, able to maintain great Herds of
Cattle. The Woods are especially stored with the Coca, whose Leaf is accounted
restorative, and with much excellent Venison.

The several Valleys, and other Territories belonging to Collao.
In this Province also there are some lesser Divisions of Countries necessary to
be described, viz. the cold and barren Country Bambon, jutting against
Guanuco, inhabited anciently by a valiant People, especially near the Lake
Chincacocha, which is ten Leagues in circumference; in the middle of it are
several Cliffs and little Isles: And out of this Lake also the famous River De
la Plata has its original, and runs through the Valley Xauxa, receiving by the
way the Streams Parcos, Bilcas, Abancay, Apurima, Yucay, and others.

The next Countries in order toward the South are Tarana, abounding with
Wheat, and the eminent Valley Xauxa, surrounded with snowy Mountains. The
Inhabitants by a general Name called Guancas, were anciently divided into three
sorts, viz. the Maracabilca, Laxapalanga, and Xauxa. Here were also several
stately Houses built by the Ingas.

Upon this Valley borders the Village Acos near a Moorish place full of Canes;
but before you approach the Village you come near a high Plain, where the
Ruins of an ancient Structure appear; and somewhat farther the Palace Pico:
from whence the Highway directs to the Bridge Angoyaca, which leads cross the
River Xauxa; near which the Ingas had several magnificent Structures, and Baths
of warm Springs. Not far from hence is the Village Picoy; between which and
Angoyaca the Arm of the River Xauxa is cut with a Bridge, because in the Winter
it glides so swift that they cannot Ferry over it.

From Picoy you go to the Wild, in whole Center stands the ancient Castle
Pucara, (which in the Peruvian Tongue signifies Invincible Fort) where the
Ingas received their Tribute from the neighboring People that live amongst the
snowy Mountains.

The Banks of the great River Vinaque are crowned with the Ruins of ancient
Structures, which (as the Natives relate) were built by foreign People; which
Assertion of theirs seems to be confirmed by the form and manner of Building,
differing from the Ingas Structures, which used to be long and narrow.
Moreover, several sweet Streams, abounding with Fish, especially Crabs, glide
through the Plain-Countrey out of the Mountains Andes.

Not far from hence appears the Plain Chapas, and the Palaces Pilcas, of which
now nothing remains but a heap of Rubbish, which lies in the Center of Peru. A
fresh water River, which gives the forementioned Palaces their Denomination,
glides out of Soras, and washes the Highway and stately Temple of the Sun.

The Country Soras, exceeding fertile, and stocked with Gold and Silver Mines,
is inhabited by a People which go Clothed in woollen Cloth, and for their Valor
formerly much esteemed by the Ingas.

Those that inhabit the Country Uramar are called Chancas, whose Neighbors
possess a long Tract of Land abounding with Cattle and Fruit, but of late are
most of them destroyed by the Spaniards.

The River Abanca, which takes its original in the Mountainous County
Parinacocha, washes several Royal Buildings, and at last discharges its Waters
into the River Xauxa.

On each side of the great River Apurima are erected two wonderful Stone
Pillars, over which lies a most artificial Bridge built by the Ingas; from
whence the Highway, being cut through hard Rocks, leads up into the Country;
where the stately Buildings of Limatambo show themselves; and beyond the
Mountain Bilcaconga the Valley Xaquixaguana, enclosed between high Rocks, comes
in view, where the Ingas used to recreate themselves in their
Banquetting-houses; from whence the Highway, which is Walled in on both sides,
runs directly through deep Moorish Grounds to Cusco.

Eastward from Cusco, behind the Andes, are many large Countries, which to
discover the Spaniards spared neither trouble, danger, nor charge: between both
they found vast Wildernesses, inaccessible Mountains, and overgrown Countries;
yet at last they opened four ways thither: the first whereof runs through the
Valley Paquil to Tono, a Village in the middle of the Mountains; from thence to
the River Opotazi, along which it is very troublesome traveling, because of the
thick Woods and steep Rocks: lastly to the hot and fruitful Valley Abisca, and
so to vast Wildernesses, overgrown with Brambles and Bushes, which prevented
any farther Discovery. The second Way runs thirty Leagues farther to the
Southward, through the Countries Sandia, Camata and Caravaya, to Zama. Through
this Way, Anno 1538. Peter Anzurez traveled; Peter Anzurez his Journey.
setting out from Zama, he found many desolate Mountains, barren Wilds, and
close Woods, through which he entered into the County Tacana, and from thence to
the River Omapalchas, inhabited on both sides by the Cheriabones and Marquires,
who opposed him in his crossing over the River; but meeting with nothing but
barren Commons, he traveled up along the River, and viewed the Countries
Moios, Cochabamba, and Chuguiabo, from whence he returned to Collao, having
lost most of his People by Hunger and Hardship. But not long after others went
over the Andes to the Countries which extend themselves East and West, some
whereof traveled through Camata, and others through Cochabamba.

Towns and Places of note.
The principal Towns and Places of Trade in it are, 1. Bombon, situate upon the
Lake Chinchacocha, said to be ten Leagues in compass, begirt round about almost
with Hills, and having neighborhood with many other lesser, but pleasant
Villages.

2. Parcos, once a Palace Royal of the Ingas, seated on the top of a little
Hill, encompassed with other Rocky and higher Mountains on all sides.

3. San Juan de Vittoria, which the Marquess Pizarro built Anno 1539. to secure
the Way between Lima and Cusco, from the Assaults of the Peruvians, before he
absolutely conquered this Kingdom: the Walls are washed by a sweet Stream, to
the great convenience of the Citizens.

4. Guamanga, a City lying in a pleasant Plain under a healthful Climate, built
with Stone-houses covered with Tyles; the Owners whereof have great store of
Land, which they Sow with Wheat, and also breed plenty of Cattle. To this
City, which is adorned with three Churches, five Cloisters, and a large
Almshouse, above thirty thousand Peruvians bring annual Tribute. The Mines
produce Gold, Silver, Copper, Iron, Lead, Sulphur, and Load-stones; near which
grows the poisonous Herb Mio, which kills the Cattle that chance to eat
thereof. In the Woods also hereabouts feeds a Beast, whose Piss stinks at a
Miles distance. This City is by some delivered to be the same with San Juan de
la Vittoria above mentioned.

5. Bilcas, another Palace of the Ingas, now a good Town of the Natives, and
situate, as is supposed, in the very midst of the Country of Peru.

6. Guancavelica, a new Town, raised from the condition of a very poor Village,
to a Place of very great Importance and Traffic, only by the Mines of
Quicksilver, which were first discovered there in the Year 1566. by Amador
Cabrera, through the assistance of a Peruvian named Mavincopa: This Cabrera
selling his Interest for a hundred and fifty thousand Ducats, Su'd the Buyer,
upon pretense that he had sold it above one half under the value: whilst this
was depending, Peter Ferdinando de Valasco came from Mexico to Guamanga, to
make trial of the cleansing of Silver by Quicksilver, and finding it to succeed
according to his expectation, he sent great quantities of it to Arica, and from
thence by Land to Potosi. The King of Spain is said to receive from this Mine
of Guancavelica, all his Charges defrayed, above a thousand Pound per Annum for
his usual fifth part: But the ancient Natives regarded not these Mines so much
for the Quicksilver as for the Vermilion which is found mixed with it,
wherewith they delighted very much to paint their Bodies: There is great Art
now used in the separating of the Quicksilver from the Vermilion.

This Town was long since inhabited by two thousand Spaniards at least, and
twice as many Natives.

7. Cusco, which is the Metropolis of the Kingdom of Peru, built on a hard
Ground, surrounded with Mountains, under a cold, yet wholesome Climate, and
washed by two Rivers, which on the East side of Cusco parting, one runs direct
West, and the other Southward. The original of the City Cusco,
One part of the City anciently bore the Denomination of Haran-Cusco, and the
second, Oren-Cusco, where the chief Nobility and most ancient Families dwelt.
Concerning the original of this Place, the Peruvians say, That several Ages
past there appeared three Men, called Ayrache, Aranca, and Ajarmango, and with
them three Women, named Mamacola, Mamacona, and Mamaragua, all of them very
richly Clothed; that Ayrache had a Precious Stone at the end of a Truncheon,
which by holding up he raised the Mountains to the Skies, and when he let it
fall, levelled them with the lowest Valleys: Aranca and Ajarmango concluded to
build a stately City, and sent for People from remote Countries to inhabit it;
with which Design the Natives thereabouts seemed to be well pleased: but before
they went to work they judged it convenient to destroy Ayrache, whose great
Power they envied: This being resolved upon, they invited him to a deep
narrow-mouthed Cave, that there they might worship the Sun his Father (for so
Descended he took upon him to be), he was no sooner entered but the rest shut
the Mouth of the Cave with great Stones, hoping so to starve him to death;
which Ayrache observing, stood amazed a while, till at last he threw off all
the Stones, and flew with great and diverse colored Wings up into the Air,
crying aloud, Fear not, Aranca and Ajarmango, though you have design'nd to take
away my Life, but build a City in this place, and call it Cusco; for in it
shall stand the Seat of the Ingas, under whose Jurisdiction on extending far
and near, many great Nations shall bow. The Temple which the Gods have there
designed shall not only exceed all other Structures in the World, in Art and
Costliness, but be famous for strange Offerings to the Sun. If the Citizens
build Altars for me, burn Myrrh, and make Offerings to me, they may certainly
expect to vanquish all their Enemies, and increase their Power. According to my
Example bore Holes through your Ears, as a sign of Obedience. All which Aranca,
Ajarmango, and the forementioned Women promised to perform. Whereupon Ayrache
gave them a rich Diadem with a Tassel, which was to be the Head-Ornament of the
succeeding Ingas; which they had no sooner received, but Ayrache and Aranca
were turned into Stones, yet retaining their former shape; which Ajarmango
observing, fell straight, together with the three Women, upon building the City
Cusco. After the Deluge breaking out of the Hole Tambo, he changed his Name of
Ajarmango for Mangocapa, that is, Mighty Lord, and made himself, as they say,
the first Peruvian King. The City Cusco was divided into four Wards, the East
called Andosayo, the South Callasayo the North, Chinchasuyo, and the West
Condesayo, every one one so called from the Countries, to which the Gates of
the four Wards are opposed.

If any one coming out of another Country, settled himself in Cusco, as it
happened daily, he was permitted to dwell no where but in that Ward which fronted
his native Country. The four high Streets, which through, these Wards one way
fall into the Marketplace, being in the middle of the City, are the other way
answerable to the four principal Highways, viz. that which leads to Quito and
Pasto, through Chinchasuyo; to Arehuipa, through Condesuyo; to the Mountains
Andes, through Andesuyo; and to Chili, through Collasuyo. The two Rivers before
mentioned, which part at the East end of the City, are passed over with diverse
Bridges. The narrow Streets are full of Stone Houses, built in good Order. In
several places are Vaulted Cellars under Ground, in some of which are buried
great Treasures: they had been formerly the Habitations for Necromancers and
Soothsayers; for this sort of People were once in great esteem amongst the
Inhabitants, who coming from Chili, Pasto, Bocamores, Topona, Bombon, Charcas,
Collao, Chiachiapoias, Conchucos, and other Peruvian Countries, receive great
benefit from the fresh Water, and from the Corn-Mills built on the Streets
through the City.

The ancient Places and other stately Structures in Cusco*
The stately Palaces which the Peruvian Nobility have at several times built in
Oren-Cusco, being one part of the City, are very wonderful, the Owners whereof
were forced by the Ingas to appear at Court at Set-times, that so he might
prevent all Insurrections: Also he caused the Children of the prime Lords to be
brought up in Cusco, under pretense that they might learn the Cuscoan Tongue
perfectly, in which the Ingas would always be spoken to; whenas their Design
was to keep them as Hostages in their own Jurisdictions, that their Fathers
might not rebel; by which means it happened, that in most places of Peru, which
amongst the several Tribes and Principalities had several Languages, the
Cuscoan Tongue was understood and spoken. But the Spaniards, who are the
present Possessors thereof, have altered and repaired most of the ordinary
Houses, which are now neatly built of Stone. Above all the old Structures, the
Palace of the Ingas, and the Temple of the Sun, are the most magnificent; the
Palace lies enclosed within a square quadruple Wall, each corner whereof is
adorned and strengthened with a Tower: The Palace it self is built round, and
with Arches; but that which chiefly amazes the Beholder, is to see how the
Stones, which are so big that forty Horses are notable to stir one of them out
of its place, were brought thither by the Labor of the Builders from the
neighboring Mountains; for the Peruvians never made use of any laboring Beast,
except their Sheep Pacos, not knowing the use of Horses, Camels, Oxen,
Elephants, or the like, before the Spaniards coming thither. The Halls within
the Palace were Wainscoted with Golden Plates: yet the Inga's Apparel was not
answerable to the rest of his Pomp; for in stead of a Crown they bound their
Heads about with a red woollen Sash, with which they almost covered their Eyes;
at the end of the Sash hung certain Ribbands, which they gave the Governor as
occasion offered, that by this Sign, as by a Commission, they might exercise
their Offices; the sight of which String caused such Obedience, that if the
Inga had commanded the Inhabitants of a Town or Country to murder themselves,
none durst deny. The Inga was generally carried by a hundred of his Noblemen,
of whom if any one had accidentally chanced to stumble, he was immediately put
to death. No man durst presume to look him in the Face, or speak to him without
a Present.

The Temple Curicanche.
The Temple Curicanche, Dedicated to the Sun, was certainly the most rich and
sumptuous that ever the World boasted, it being Governed by the Chief Priest
Villanoa. The Inga Guainacava spent an invaluable Treasure in the building of
this Structure, for he covered the Roof and Walls with thick Plates of massy
Gold and Silver. At his return home from the Conquest of the Province of Quito,
from whence the Inhabitants, according to an ancient Custom of the Ingas, were
carried to one of the remotest Countries in Peru. But Guainacava enamored of a
Quitoan Maid, staid a considerable time in the City Quito, and kept a splendid
Wedding at the Marriage of his Bride, who bare unto him the famous Attabaliba,
whom he loved beyond all his other Children, and a little before his death made
him King of Quito. But Huascar after Guainacava's Decease would not suffer his
Brother to live in the late conquered Kingdom of Quito, A cruel Battle between
two Brothers.
but gave him Battle in the Plain of Tomebamba, which lasted three days and
three Nights, and after much Bloodshed, Attabaliba being defeated was taken
Prisoner, and not long after making his Escape by the help of an ancient Woman
(whilst Huascar's Commanders and Soldiers rejoiced with Cups full of Chica for
their gotten Victory) he made his Subjects in Quito believe, that he being
transformed into a Serpent, crept through a little Hole out of the Prison; and
that he had a Promise from Heaven to obtain Conquest over Huascar; which being
believed, stirred up all his Subjects to take up Arms, and valiantly to go and
meet the Enemy, whom they not only defeated, but took Huascar Prisoner.

Huscar being destroyed by Attabaliba, and Attabaliba by Pizarro, Mango Inga
their youngest Brother took the Government upon him, made continual Sallies
upon the Spaniards from inaccessible Mountains, and at his Decease left the
remaining part of Peru to his Son Zaires Topa; Zaires the Son of Mango Inga
submit^ to the Spaniards.
who seeing no good to be done by force of Arms, submitted himself freely to
the King of Spain's Jurisdiction in the Year 1557. since which the Spaniards
have been sole Masters.

There are at this day four great Churches in Cusco: Also the Dominicans,
Franciscans, Augustines, and the Monks De la Merced, have each of them stately
Cloisters here: but the Jesuits Structure exceeds all the other.

Above forty thousand Peruvians pay annual Tribute to this City. In the Valley
about the City feed abundance of Cattle; also Wheat, and all manner of Herbs
grow here in great plenty. The Gold and Silver-Mines have not that resort which
they had formerly, most of the Workmen being removed to Potosi.

Concerning the Service which they performed in the forementioned Temple of
the Sun, and their superstitious Opinions about their Idol Con, they are much
of the same ridiculous nature with what has been already Discoursed of in
other places. Five Leagues Southwardly from Cusco lies the Valley Yucay between
high snowy Mountains, under a temperate Climate and pleasant Soil. Not far from
hence the Ingas built a most invincible Castle on a Rock, which was surrounded
with many cliffy Walls one above another; these Walls were also Carved with
Images of Lions, Tigers, and other wild Beasts, which held Lances in their
Paws; the ^op of the Rock was crowned with a Royal Structure built of Stone,
through which ran Golden Veins, joined together with a certain Gum, by some
called Jews-Lime. To the Province of Condesuyo belong the valiant People
Chumbibalcas and Ubinas. In the County Pomatambo they make Carpets of fine
Wool, curiously Painted.

8. The City Francisco de Vittoria, which lies in the rough Valley Vilcabamba,
and is enclosed by the Mountains Andes, belonging to the Jurisdiction of the
Province Andesuyo.

9. The Village Juan del Oro, which is the chief Place of the Country
Caravaya, and so called by the Spaniards from the fine Gold which is found
there in great abundance.

Havens, Isles, and Points in Peru.
Along the Seacoast of Peru belonging to the Jurisdiction of Los Reyos, lie the
following Havens, Isles and Points.

South-East from the Promontory Aguya, rises the Isle St. Roque out of the
South Sea, Sea, surrounded with Rocks, and abounds with Birds of prey; through
the midst of it runs a River which divides the Island.

The Haven Malabrigo, ill defended against the Winds, cannot be entered by great
Vessels, unless in calm Weather.

Next follow the Harbors Guanape and Santa, where the Ships used to furnish
themselves with Water out of a fresh River; Casuya and Guarmay, both inhabited
by Peruvians.

Near the Mouth of the Road Guara stands a large Salt-pan, the Salt about which
is found in great hard Pieces. The Island Collao secures the Haven before Lima.

Behind Cape Guarco lies the Lobos; and not far from hence the Harbor
Sangallan, being so commodious that the Spaniards considered a long time
whether they should build the City Los Reyos here.

The Promontory Nasca affords also good shelter for Ships; and the Haven Hacari
yields store of Refreshments. Moreover, the Streams Oconna, Camana, and Quilca
discharge their Waters into the Sea.

The Haven Arequipa appears at its Mouth like a little Pool, surrounded with
Mountains.

Between Quilca and the River Tamboyalla lies the Isle Nuli; and a little more
Southward the Haven Paracca and Pisca; and up in the Country the Village Yca,
where the most and best Peruvian Wine is to be had.

SECT. VI. Los Charcas.
Situation and Description of Los Charcas.
LOs Charcas is the farthest Country Southward of the Kingdom of Peru,
reaching up as far as Chile, with which on the South it is bordered, having on
the North, Lima and Collao; on the West, Mare del Zur; and on the East, some
Countries not yet well discovered, which lie betwixt it and the Province of
Paraguay, or De la Plata. The Country is said to be in length about a hundred
and fifty Leagues, measuring it directly, or in a right Line from North to
South; but measuring it about along the Seacoast, much about two hundred: It
is not very rich either in Corn or Cattle, although in some parts it wants
not good Pasturage; but of unparalleled Wealth, in respect of the Mines of Gold
and Silver which are here dug, the principal whereof are those of Potosi and
Parco.

The Mountains hereabouts are inhabited by the Cavinas, who dwell in Stone
Houses. Their Neighbors the Canches are a subtle, good natured, and painful
People, breed many Sheep, sow Corn, and catch plenty of Fish out of the
Rivers. Next comes in view the cold Country Conas. On the right side toward
the Southern Ocean, the great Wilderness Parinacocha extends it self a vast
way; the Mountains round about are continually covered with Snow, and the Dales
have many deep Moors.

Principal Towns and Places of note.
Chief Towns and Places of note in this part of Peru are, 1. Plata, otherwise
called Chuquisaca, from the Country whose Metropolis it is, situate under a
temperate Climate, in a fruitful Soil for the production of all manner of
Plants, and especially Wheat, Barley, and Grapes. In this City the High Court
of Judicature of Los Charcas is kept, being a principal part of Peru, and
inhabited by the richest Spaniards in the whole Kingdom, having gotten an
incredible deal of Treasure out of the neighboring Silver-Mines, which from the
time of the Ingas, or Kings of Peru, to its Discovery by the Spaniards, held
out and continued so rich, that it is view of Potosi POTOSI.
thought Pizarro, if Reason could have ruled him, might here only have raised
himself a Rent of two hundred thousand Ducats per Annum; but his desire and
hopes, first to find more at Potosi, and afterward his ambition and greediness
to have and command all, carried him to violent Courses, which proved his
Ruin, as has been said. The Town is conveniently seated in a fruitful Soil,
honored with the Residence of the Governor of the Province, and with a Bishops
See, said to be the richest of Peru, viz. of fourscore thousand Ducats per
Annum. The Cathedral and diverse Cloisters give also a great luster to the City.
The ancient Inhabitants of this Country, especially about those parts where
now this City stands, were the Charcas and Charanques, both valiant People, who
by Command of the Ingas fetched invaluable Treasures out of the neighboring
Mines of Porco, where a thousand Men were continually kept at work. In La Plata
were reckoned long since, besides Spaniards, above sixty thousand Peruvians
which pay annual Tribute.

2. Oropesa, a place of good Metal, as a man may perceive by the Name; It lies
in the rich and pleasant Valley Cochobamba, twenty Leagues distant from La
Plata.

3. Potosi, eighteen Leagues Westward from La Plata, by the Spaniards called
The Imperial City, built at the Foot of a Mountain bearing the same
Denomination, on a barren Soil under a cold Climate, though but twenty one
Degrees to the Southward of the Equinoctial Line: the Cold proceeds from the
high Lands, which lie bare to the bleak and sharp Winds called Tomohavi, which
blow every year very fiercely from May till September. But though the barren
Country produces no Fruit, yet no place in Peru has greater plenty of all
Provisions and Dainties than this, the Markets being always full of Fruit,
Salt-Meat, Maiz, Papas, Wheat, Sugar, Sweetmeats, and all things that are
requisite for the subsistence of Mankind, which are brought thither from all
parts for the Silver, which is there in such plenty. As to what concerns the
famous Mountain Potosi in the Country of Charcas, it is of an Ash color, and
rises above the adjacent Mountains in the form of a Sugar Loaf; on the top of
it stands a Chapel, to which leads a craggy Path, which with a little care may
be rid up with a Horse; the height thereof is a thousand six hundred and
twenty four Rods, or a quarter of a League: at the Foot thereof appears the
Mine called Guaina Potosi, that is, The young Potosi; near which the City
Potosi stands, being two Leagues in circumference, and is adorned with a Church
and Cloister for the Dominicans, and exceedingly resorted to by Traders.

In the time when the Ingas Governed Peru, the Silver-Mines at Porco were very
famous; but it was not till after the arrival of the Spaniards that Silver was
found in Guaina Potosi, and by degrees the Silver Veins which lay hid in the
great Potosi; the manner of which Discovery was as follows:

The occasion of the first Discovery of the Mines in Potosi.
A Peruvian called Gualpa, who worked in the Mines at Porco, going a Hunting, it
chanced that the Game ran up the steep Mountain of Potosi, which prevented his
pursuing of it any farther; but the Mountain being overgrown with Trees, he got
hold from one Bough to another to help himself up, and at last taking hold of
the Bramble called Quinua, he pulled the same out of the Ground, and finding it
heavy, looked upon it, and espied a great lump of Silver hanging at the Root of
it; whereupon viewing the Hole, he discovered a rich Silver Vein; of which
taking some pieces home, and melting them, he found that it was the best Silver
that ever he had known; wherefore he privately got a greater quantity, and by
degrees grew extraordinary rich: but though he carried his Design never so
close, yet he was at last suspected, and especially by his Neighbor Guanca,
born in the Valley Xauxa, who was the more jealous of him, because he sold
greater Bars of Silver than any were cast at Porco; whereupon he resolved to
speak to him, and getting out the Secret, it came to this Agreement between
them, That they should both be Partners and share the Booty; Gualpa was to keep
the Vein, since called The Rich Vein, and Guanca was to have another, at
present named Diego Centeno: but they agreed not long; for Guanca finding much
labor upon his Vein, by reason of the hardness, and that he could get no share
in what Gualpa got, acquainted his Spanish Master Vilaroel with it, who rested
not till he had found out the truth thereof; for which Vilaroel obtained
(according to the Custom of Porco) several Rods to work for himself, only
paying the King one fifth part of what he got, and so remained Owner of the
Mine Centeno.

The Mine Potesi, when discovered.
This Discovery of the rich Mine Potosi is said to have happened on the twenty
fourth of April, Anno 1545. Soon after which they found the Silver Vein Del
Estanno, which though it was very rich, was difficult to be dug, because of
its hardness. The first Vein which Gualpa searched after stood upright from the
bottom of the Mine, and contained above three hundred Foot in length, and
thirteen in breadth, and continuing good for two hundred Foot in depth, after
which the Silver begins to lessen.

The Peruvians relate, That the Ingas first began to dig in Potosi, but gave it
over because the Workmen heard a terrible Voice, saying, Leave off doing what
you are about; the Treasures which lie hid here, are reserved for a People out
of foreign Countries.

These Mines produce yearly for the King's fifth part, forty thousand Pieces of
Silver, each valued at thirteen Ryals, each Ryal being four Shillings, besides
what he is defrauded of, which is perhaps half as much more.

The Mines of Potosi exceed all other, because the Diggers never meet with any
Water, notwithstanding they work above two hundred Fathom under Ground, whereas
the other Silver Mines suffer great damage by the Water; which was also the
reason why the Spaniards left off digging of Silver in Porco, because they were
not only forced to cut through hard Rocks, but ran greater danger, or at least
bestowed extraordinary labor to get out the Water which broke in upon them.

Four Silver Veins, with their several Divisions.
The four Silver Veins of Potosi, viz. The Rich, Centeno, Del Estanno, and
Mendieta, lie on the East Side of the Mountain, and extend North and South. The
great Veins produce lesser, not unlike the Body of a Tree, from which shoot
forth several degrees of Boughs. Each Vein is divided into several parts,
possessed by several Owners; the least part is opened four Rods, and the
biggest eighty; for none are permitted by the Law to open a bigger Hole. In the
time of the Jesuit Joseph de Acosta, an Eyewitness, who Anno 1587. went from
Peru to Spain, the Rich Vein was reckoned to contain eighty seven Mines, of
which some were dug two hundred Fathom deep. The Spaniards judge that at the
Root of the Rich Vein is an incredible Treasure, though Experience has
hitherto taught us, that the Silver lessens in price and quantity the deeper
they dig in the Ground.

The Socabonos or Tren^hes, with the manner of Mining.
For the more easy working in the Mines, the Spaniards have dug Trenches
(which they call Socabonos) at the Foot of the Mountain toward the West, cross
through the Mountain to the Mine, each of them being eight Foot broad and a
Fathom deep, and locked up with Gates, through which the Silver is carried out,
whereof the Owner of the Socahon receives a fifth part. The Socabon which leads
to the Rich Vein, was begun Anno 1556. and finished in twenty nine years,
extends it self two hundred and fifty Rods in length. The Miners work by
Candlelight both Day and Night by turns. those that work in the Day, sleep in
the Night, and those that work in the Night, sleep in the Day. The Oar, which
is as hard as a Stone, is cut out with Pick-axes, beaten in pieces with an Iron
Crow, and carried upon their Backs on Ladders made of Leather: Each Ladder has
three Fastnings about the thickness of a Cable, stretched out by Sticks, so
that one goes up on one side, whilst another comes down on the other. Each
Ladder being ten Fathom long is pitched upon its several Floor on which the
Laborers rest before they go up higher, for they make diverse Floors according
to the depth of the Mine. The Laborers carry the Oar in Bags fastened before oh
their Breasts, and falling back over their Shoulders three and three together,
the foremost whereof ties a lighted Candle to his Thumb, and thus they help
themselves with both Hands. It is a wonderful thing to consider, how the
Peruvians are able to scramble up and down continually a hundred and fifty
Fathom: But besides many other Inconveniences, the Mines often fall in, or at
least great pieces, which bury all the Diggers. The Mines also, being excessive
cold, occasion to those that are not used to them, a Vertigo in the Head, and
Vomiting. The Silver runs for the most part between two Rocks, as it were, in a
long Channel, of which one side is as hard as Flint, and the other much softer.
This Silver is of different value; the belt, called Cacilla or Tacana,
resembles Amber in color; the worser sort is blackish, and sometimes of an
Ash Color. The pieces of Oar are carried on the Backs of the Sheep Pacos to
the Mill, where being ground to Powder, they are put into Furnaces to melt; of
which there were once above six thousand on the top of Potosi; but since the
Quicksilver was found to cleanse the same, not a third part remains pure.

In former times the Mines at Porco, two Leagues from the little Lake Aulagas,
produced those vast Treasures gathered by the Ingas, which afterward for the
most part fell into the Spaniards Hands.

Port-Towns, Rivers, and Havens of Los Charcas.
As concerning the Seacoast of Los Charcas, it lies as follows: Southerly
from the River Tambopalla puts forth a three-pointed Rock into the Ocean, and
makes the Haven De Ylo, into which falls a fresh River. Next follow the round
Hill Morro de los Diabolos, and the Inlet before the Town Arica, secured from
all except a Westerly Wind, where the Silver that comes from Potosi is Shipped
for Lima. Since the English Admiral Sir Francis Drake took three Barks out of
this Inlet it is fortified with a Castle, which is stored with Brass Guns.

Nine Leagues Southward the Pissaqua falls into the Ocean; and next you come to
the little Village Hicahic, situate on a high and barren Tract of Land; as also
the Haven Terrapaca, which by an Inland is made very secure.

Not far from hence appears the Foot of Piqua, where the Coast begins to rise
very high; the Head of Tacama, the Stream Lottoya, otherwise called De Loa,
whose Banks are inhabited by poor People; the River Montelo, the Promontory
Morro Moreno, beyond whose utmost Point opens a Bay, secured from all Winds by
an Island. The Inhabitants here feed on raw Fish.

Next the River Claru comes in view, which is taken for a Boundary between Peru
and Chili.

Eastward up into the Country you come to Santa Cruiz, built at the Foot of a
Mountain in a Plain near a Brook, which rushing forth from a Rock glides
through the City to a Lake full of delicious Fish. The Houses of Stone, are
covered with Palm Tree Leaves. and besides the Church there is also a Cloister,
inhabited by the Monks De la Merced, In former times the Peruvian Houses were
built of Clay, and were often destroyed by their Neighbors the Cheriguanacs and
Titanes, who made Feasts with as many as they took of them. The People about
this Place are meek and poor spirited, and speak besides four Languages, the
Diagnitan Tongue, common amongst all of them. Before the Arrival of the
Spaniards they went Clothed in Ostritch'es Feathers, but since taught to weave
Cotton, they now make their Apparel of the same, and upon the account of
Barter, drive a great Trade in it: They Dye their Cotton with the boiled Roots
and Leaves of a little Tree.

Eastward beyond Santa Cruiz lies the Country Paicanos, eminent for the great
Calabashes which grow there, exceeding good to keep both wet and dry Meats in.

The Country receives a vicissitude of excessive Cold and intolerable Heat;
the hard Winters taking beginning in May, and continuing till the beginning of
August. In the middle of our Summer a South Wind blows seven Weeks together
here, to the great prejudice of all Plants, which are during that time often
washed away by continual Rains. About Christmas they Sow, and gather in their
Harvest in March. During the rainy Season the Ways cannot be traveled, being
all overflowed by the Rivers; neither does the Palm-Wood, which is four days
Journey in length, permit any access to the said City Santa Cruiz, because the
conflux of Waters makes it a Moor all over; besides which, the Tigers Bears,
and Serpents, make the Ways dangerous, especially at that time.

Through this Country the Spanish Captain Nusco de Chavas traveled, when he
discovered the Taguamacis, a numerous People, which dwell along the great River
De la Plata.

The Country about Santa Cruiz produces all manner of Fruit, but few Trees,
because of the want of Rain; but Corn, Maiz, Wine, Granadillas, Luiumas, and
Tucumay, as also the Plant Hachalindi, in the Latin Tongue called Mirabile
Peruanum, grow here in great abundance; which (...) shoots up to the bigness of
a pretty large Body, full of Juice, and of a yellowish color, out of which
shoot knotty Boughs, and about each Knot two Leaves resembling the Herb
Nightshade; the Flowers which hang at the ends of the Boughs are long, and
pleasant to the Eye, by reason of their mixture of Purple, White, and Yellow,
and also of a sweet smell. It is a strange Secret in Nature, that this Flower
opens at Midnight, if any Light come near the same: The Root also is accounted
an effectual Medicine against the Dropsy.

SECT. VII. Collao.
Situation and Description of Collao.
COllao lies Southward of those Countries, which go under the general Name of
the Province of Cusco, having on the West, Lima; on the South, Charcas; but
Eastward, and to the North-East, it is shut up by a Ridge of Mountains, running
in one Body or continued Tract from the Confines of Collao, as far as the City
of Cusco, where they divide. The Country is generally plain, commodiously
watered in all Parts with fresh Rivers, and consequently affording rich
Pasturage and good Herds of Cattle.

Chief Towns and Places of note.
The Chief Towns and Places of note are, 1. Chuquinga, a great Town, and held to
be naturally almost impregnable, as being environed round about either with
deep unfordable Waters, or with Mountains unpassable, and having one only
Cawsey leading to it, reported to be for two or three Leagues together no
broader than to permit one single Person to march conveniently upon it.

2. The City Pucara, which was formerly well inhabited, but at present nothing
remains of it, except the ruined Walls of great Houses, and large Images of
Stone.

3. Ayavire, by the Spaniards called Las Sepulturas, being a Place especially
enobled by the stately Monuments of the Peruvian Nobility which were found
there.

4. Hatuncolla, the Metropolis or chief Town of this Province, seated upon the
Banks of the River Caravaya, whose Streams are very much famed for Gold.

view of Lima CALLAO de LIMA


The River Caravaya, which glides from the Andes Eastward to the City Juan del
Oro, produces much fine Gold, but not without the loss of many People, which
are killed by the unwholsom Air and Damps that arise here.

The Lake Titicaca.
The Lake Titicaca, which washes the Country Collao on the North, the Province
of Omasuy on the East, Chaquito on the West, and Chuquiabo on the South, is one
of the greatest Lakes of America, being eighty Leagues in circumference, and in
several places as many Fathom deep; wherefore it is exceeding rough in windy
Weather. Into this Lake ten great Rivers discharge their Waters, which run away
again through a narrow, but very deep Channel, in which the Stream runs so
strong, that no Boats are able to abide in it.

5. Chinquita, a Colony of Spaniards upon the Banks of Titiaca, having many
small Islands in it of a good and fruitful Soil, abounding in Fish and variety
of Sea-Fowl; it is supposed to be fourscore Leagues distant likewise from the
South Sea, haying only one Estuary or Mouth, which is something strait, but of
such a deep Water and violent Stream, that (as Acosta testifies of it) it is
not possible to build a Bridge of Stone or Timber over it; but the Natives in
stead thereof have laid a Bridge of Straw upon it, which serves as well, viz.
so many great Bundles of Straw, Sedge, or such like matter, well and surely
made up and fastened together, as will reach from one side or Bank of the
Estuary to another; at which likewise having made them sure, they cast some
good quantity of more Straw and Sedge upon them, and have a Bridge very
convenient, upon which they both securely pass themselves, and also drive
Cattle, and do other necessary Business. The Water is neither bitter nor
brackish, yet is not drinkable because of its muddiness. Several Islands that
lie in the Lake served formerly for Storehouses of the chiefest Goods, which
the People thereabouts living near the Highway would not trust in their
Villages.

The Plant Totara.
Here grows a certain Broom-Plant called Totara, good for many uses, and is also
wholesome Food both for Man and Beast; moreover, they cover their Houses with the
same, burn it on their Hearths, and make Boats. The Uros, a salvage People,
made Floats of Totara, which they tied together, and built Villages on the
same, which drove to and again, according as the Wind blew.

The Lake also breeds abundance of Fish, and especially two sorts, viz. Suches,
which are very pleasing to the Palate, but unwholsom; and the Bogas, which
though less, and full of Bones, are a much better Food. There likewise breed
plenty of Fowls about the same, especially wild Geese and Ducks.

When the Peruvians intend to Entertain any Person, they go to catching of
Fowls (by them called Chaco) after this manner: They make a Circle with the
Floats named Balsas, and Rowing close to one another, take up the enclosed Fowl
with their Hands.

Moreover, the forementioned Channel, through which the Lake Titicaca
discharges its Water, ends in a little Lake called Aulagas, likewise full of
desolate Isles, but has no visible place into which to empty its Water,
therefore it must needs, according to the course of Nature, fall under Ground,
where it commixes with a Stream whose original is unknown, though it be seen to
fall into the South Sea.

The Town is a Place of extraordinary Wealth and Trading, and so considerable,
that the Governor thereof is always named by the King of Spain himself, and his
Place estimated at fifty thousand Ducats per Annum.

6. Tiaguanaco, at the Estuary, or Mouth of the Lake, memorable only for the
Ruins of certain great and stupendous Buildings which anciently have stood
there, some of the Stones whereof are said to have been of thirty Foot length
apiece, fifteen Foot broad, and six or seven Foot thick. There were likewise
found the Statues of certain Men excellently Carved and Wrought, of a Gigantick
stature or bigness, and likewise vested in foreign and strange Habits, not at
all used, nor ever known to have been used by the Peruvians themselves, or by
any other of the Natives of America.

7. Nuestra Sennora de la Paz, or Our Lady of Peace, otherwise called Pueblo
Nuevo: It is but a small Town, yet pleasantly seated upon the Banks of a River
in a fair and fruitful Plain, full of Springs, Fruit Trees, Savanas, and Fields
of Maiz, having Mountains on either side: It lies almost in the middle of the
Province Chuquinabo, fourteen Leagues distant from Cusco, and as many from
Potosi. The Province Chuquinabo it self (which in the Peruvian Tongue signifies
Inheritance of Gold) has many rich Gold-Mines, good Salt Pits, and a temperate
Climate, except from the beginning of December till March, in which time the
continual Rains cause Fevers and Agues. The Inhabitants being very poor
People, used to go naked in the Summer Season.

8. Copavana, two and twenty Leagues beyond Lopoz: It is only inhabited by
Peruvians; amongst whom an Image of the Virgin Mary, long since erected there,
has been ever in great veneration, especially by reason of a Tradition of a
great Miracle there performed: for the Spaniards affirm, That Johannes
Anachoreta going a Journey of several Weeks from home, placed a lighted Candle
before the Image, which during the time of his absence did not at all diminish.

A strange Earthquake at Angoanga.
An Accident which fell out in this Country is very remarkable, viz. The Ground
of an old Village called Angoanga, then inhabited by eminent Necromancers,
began on a sudden to swell, and the Earth to run like a broken Wave two
Leagues, overwhelming the Houses in Sand, and filling up a neighboring Lake.

The like in Herefordshire in England.
Eight years before this terrible Earthquake here, there happened in the County of
Hereford in England almost the same kind of prodigious Motion: for not far from
the Town Ledborough, arose Marcely Hill to an exceeding height, and moving
along buried all whatever it met with, after which manner it continued for the
space of three days, to the great terror of all that beheld it.

9. Chilane; 10. Acos; 11. Pomata, and some others, all of them good Towns, but
not so considerable as those other.

Roads and Highways made by the Ingas.
Concerning the Roads or Highways, it may well be said, That none of the seven
Wonders of the World can compare with any one of them; neither was the Way that
Appius Claudius made from Rome to Brundusium, upon the repairing of which the
Emperors Julius and Augustus spent great sums of Money, fit to stand in
competition with the Roads made by the Ingas in Peru: for who cannot but admire
at the consideration of so many Valleys filled with Mountains, the hardest
Rocks cut asunder, Moors damm'd up, great Stone Bridges laid over swift gliding
Streams, and through vast Wildernesses a Way made of twenty Foot broad,
enclosed in high Walls, extending from Quito to Chilo, a thousand Leagues, and
at the end of every ten Leagues brave Houses or Magazines, stored with Bows,
Arrows, Halberds, Axes, Clubs, Clothes, and Provision for twenty or thirty
thousand Men. Some relate, that Guainacava, when he returned Victor from the
conquered Country Quito, suffered great Inconveniences on the pathless
Mountains, and thereupon commanded his Subjects to make the forementioned Way.
But it is more probable, that this Masterpiece was not the work of one Inga,
especially since besides the Way from Chili to Quito there leads another
through the Mountains over the Plains from Cusco to Quito, forty Foot broad,
and five hundred Leagues long, enclosed within two Walls.

The manner of the Peruvian Registers.
The Peruvians relate from the testimony of the Quipos, much more concerning
these Highways, and other Buildings on them, made by Guainacava. These Quipos
are Rowls of diverse colored Strings, full of all manner of Knots, which serve
in stead of Characters to keep their Chronicles; in which were employed the
Quipo-Camayos, who being in the nature of our Secretaries, Registered all
Transactions, performing the same with the several Strings and Buttons, with
which they gave Obligations, Discharges, and the like: but besides the Quipos
they also used Rings full of little Stones for the same purpose; and knew with
Maiz-Seed how to cast up an Account as well as the best Arithmetician with
Figures.

Their Account of Time hung on the twelve Pillars Succanga, erected on a
Mountain beyond Cusco by the Inga Pachacuma, that is, The Regulator of the
Year, to show the Course of the Sun, and according to that their appointed
Feast-days, times of Sowing and Harvest: Their Year begins in December.

The present State of Peru under the Spanish Government.
The Spanish Government in the Kingdom of Peru is settled at present in great
tranquillity and splendour. The Viceroy, who keeps a splendid Court in Lima,
otherwise called Los Reyos, Commands over Chili and Terra Firma, and never
comes abroad without a Guard of forty Halberdeers: when he travels by Land he
is accompanied by the Archbishop, and guarded by his forty Halberdeers, a
hundred Pike-men, and fifty Musquetteers. His Reign is generally not above six
or eight years, during which time he receives forty thousand Ducats per Annum
out of the King's Exchequer.

The present flourishing Condition of the City Los Reyos.
The City Los Reyos has been of late years very much enlarged and brought to a
most flourishing Condition, being exceeding populous, and extending four Miles
in length, and half as much in breadth? In the biggest Marketplace is the City
Hall and the Exchange, where all things are brought to be sold. Of the other
three Markets, two have their Denominations from St. Anne and St. Jacob; the
fourth is called El Santo de los Cavallos, because nothing but Mules, Asses,
and Horses are sold there. The chief Church is Consecrated to St. John the
Evangelist; the other Three to Marcellus, Sebastian, and Anna. The Franciscans
inhabit three Cloisters; the Dominicans, Augustines, and Monks De la Merced,
each of them two, besides two costly Structures for the Jesuits. Other Orders
have also five Cloisters here, viz. the Creation, Conception, the Holy Trinity,
St. Joseph, and St. Clara; the three first have each of them a Church built
hard by the several Cloisters, Dedicated to the Santas Virgins del
Montserratto, Del Prado, and De Loretto. Each Cloister contains above two
hundred and fifty either Monks or Nuns. Here are also four large Hospitals, the
chiefest whereof called Andrias, has seldom less than four hundred Sick, which
are kept and cured on Charity. The second is for Peruvians only, called The
Hospital of St. Anna. The third, built in honor of the Apostle St. Peter, is
for poor old Clergymen. The fourth, named The House of Love, is for sick
Women. Besides these there stands another Structure near the Walls of the City,
Consecrated to Lazarus, where those that have the Leprosy are cured. The House
called The Holy Ghost, receives all sick and wounded Seamen. The King
maintains twenty four Students at his own Charge in the Royal College, and the
Archbishop as many in the College called St. Toronius; but in the College of
St. Martin reside above six hundred, which are brought up in all manner of Arts
and Sciences. Two hundred Students are also taught in the high School, where
they choose a new Governor every year. Here also is kept the King's Treasure,
and the Court of Inquisition. The River which washes the City Walls runs so
exceeding swift, that not long since it carried away a new Stone Bridge with
nine great Arches.

The Dominican Monks were the first that Landed on Peru, the first which came
thither with Francisco Pizarro being Vincent de Valle Verde, who was followed
by Sancio Martino, Martino de Esquivele, Dominico de Sancto Thoma, Pedro Ulloa,
Alphonso de Montenegro, Reynaldo Pedraza, and many others, who were stirred up
by the report of the Peruvian Riches; amongst whom were four Franciscans, viz.
Pedro Portuguese, Jodoco de los Angelos, De la Cruiz, and De Sant Anna, who
were soon after followed by twelve Monks of the Augustine Order. Anno 1552.
Landed also at Los Reyos, Colonel Andreas Salazar, accompanied with Antonio
Lozano, Juan de Sancto Petro, Hieronymo Melendez, Didaco Palamino, Pedro de
Espeda, Andreas Ortega, Juan Canto, Juan Chamorro, Miracles reported to have
been done by Ramirez.
Francisco de Treyas, Juan Ramirez, and Balthazar Melgarego. Salazar soon after
his Arrival sent the Priest Juan Ramirez, and Balthazar Melganego to
Guamachuco, where he Baptized and Instructed the Inhabitants in great numbers.
Afterward traveling to Moyabamba, he got a great esteem amongst those
Idolaters, and (as it goes for current amongst them) wrought many Miracles,
amongst which this is reported for one: He being informed by an old Peruvian,
that his Daughter named Curi had hid several Idols; enquiring after it, he
taxed her with what her Father had told him; which she denying, and being
rebuked by Ramirez, is said to have become immediately dumb, to have foamed at
the Mouth, at last falling down dead like a second Saphira in the presence of
many, which caused many to forsake their Idolatry. But the Necromancers
endeavored by all means possible to raise a disesteem on Ramirez, and with the
assistance of their Master the Devil, so wrought their Enchantments, that the
Tigers came in great Herds out of the Wildernesses to Moyabamba, and devoured
not only Men, Women and Children in the Highways, but also tore them out of
their Houses, yet did not the least hurt to any Spaniard; whereupon Ramirez
valiantly went with a Company of his Proselytes to a Herd of Tigers, which when
he approached held the Cross to them, which it seems so affrighted the
Devil-Tygers, that they climbed up the Trees. They farther relate (if you will
believe them) to make the Miracle the greater, That Ramirez called to the
Multitude, saying, Go and revenge the Deaths of your devoured Parents, Children
and Relations; whereupon he throwing a Stone, and all the rest following his
Example, the Tigers leaped out of the Trees, stood still, and suffered
themselves to be killed like Lambs. Six years after the forementioned twelve
Augustine Monks followed eleven others, who set Sail out of the Spanish Haven
St. Lucar, and arriving at Peru went to the Village Tauca, where they broke the
Image of the Goddess Huarella, being as it were the Peruvian Venus, or
Patroness of amorous Delights, reported to have given Responses from the Wood
in which she was worshipped. They also destroyed the Idol Chanca in the
Country Conchucos, which being worshipped by the Indians in the shape of a
Man, had yearly a fair Maid, aged fourteen years, given to him in Marriage, a
solemn Wedding being kept, and several Sheep killed.

The Miracle of an Augustine Monk.
The Augustine Monks are believed to have wrought also another Miracle in the
Province Conchucos, upon this occasion: A Conjurer called Chaumango, boasted
himself to be God, denied our Savior, in testimony whereof he gave out that he
would kick a Mountain to pieces, with his Foot; which Report spreading all over
the Country, all the adjacent People flocked to see this strange Wonder on an
appointed Day, on which Charimango being, it seems, as good as his word, and
kicking the Mountain, caused it to rent from the top to the bottom, and the
pieces to fly all about the People, who were exceedingly amazed; but the
Sorcerer upon the Augustine Monk's rebuking him was (as they affirm)
immediately eaten up with Worms.

Many other Stories of Miracles go current amongst them, as of Marco Garcia and
Didaco Ortez driving the Devil from a white Stone which hung over a Fountain
map of Chile CHILI
1. P.^ de Talcaguana. 2. I. Quiriquina 3. R. Biobio 4. R. Ilandalien 5. R. de
la Laxa


in Chiquipalpa, and several others, but it would be very impertinent to dwell
too long upon Discourses of this nature, especially since we are not obliged to
make them a part of our Creed.

To conclude our Description of this famous Kingdom of Peru, the People thereof
at the Spaniards first Arrival viewing their Shipping, their Guns, and other
Accoutrements, unknown to them before, had them in great admiration, as Men
descended from Heaven; but when they began to be oppressed by their Tyranny,
and to be tortured by them, they looked upon them as the Spawn of Hell, and
cursed the Sea that had brought so wicked a People to them.

CHAP. V. Chile.
Situation and Description of Chile.
FOllowing the Coast of Mare del Zur, or the South Sea, the next great Province
pertaining formerly to the Kingdom of Peru, is that of Chile. This is the most
Southerly Province of the whole Country of America, reaching up as far as the
Magellane Straights, with which to the Southward it is bounded; Northward it
has a Desert, and an undiscovered Country lying betwixt it and the Confines
of Peru, called Atacama; on the West it has Mare del Zur; and on the East, up
to Rio de la Plata, the Atlantic, or North Sea, with some Countries
undiscovered, which interpose betwixt it and Paraguay to the North-East: It
lies all of it beyond the Tropic of Capricorn, in a temperate Zone, and
extends it self in length from the Borders of Peru, to the Mouth of the
Straights five hundred Leagues or more; but the breadth of it neither equal nor
certain: They say it is called Chile from the word Chil, which signifies Cold it
seems in their Language as well as ours, it being generally a cold and bleak
Country, the Air in many parts of it so extremely sharp and piercing, that
both Horse and Rider sometimes in traveling are frozen to death, as the
Spaniards found by experience in their first Search and Discovery of the
Country, under the Conduct of Diego Almagro, who is said to have left the
greatest part of his Men dead behind him: But this is chiefly toward the
Andes, and on the Seacoast, the more Inland parts of it, though mountainous
also in some parts, yet are more temperate, and being also well watered with
Rivers, are much more fruitful than the other, affording both Wheat and Maiz,
and likewise other Grain, excellent Pasturage in many places, and great store
of Cattle, Wine, Honey, and not without many and rich Mines both of Gold and
Silver.

The Natives of this Country were found to be the most stout and warlike of
all the Americans that the Spaniards had hitherto met withal, fighting with
them, and oftentimes defeating them in the open Field, surprising and sacking
their Towns, and last of all taking their Captain and Commander in Chief
Prisoner: This was Pedro Baldivia, one of those good Men that consented to the
death of Attabaliba, the last King of Peru, after a greater Ransom accepted and
paid, then perhaps the King of Spain could well raise on a sudden, if he had
occasion to use it for himself. Pedro Baldivia taken Prisoner and put to death
by the Arucans.
The Arucans (for so are the People called that had him Prisoner) are said to
have Entertained him for a while with great Jollity and Feasting, but for his
last Draught gave him a Cup of melted Gold, which the poor Man was forced to
take down, and so died a cruel, though costly Death.

The whole Province generally is divided first into Chile, specially so called,
and secondly Magellanica, or that part which lies more Southward down to the
Straights of Magellan.

SECT. II. Chile, properly so called.
The Bounds of Chile specially so called.
CHile, specially so called, is bordered Northward with the Desert and barren
Country of Acatama above mentioned; on the South, with Magellanica; on the
West, with Mare del Zur; Eastward, and to the North-East, with some parts of
Paraguay, or rather with some undiscovered Countries lying betwixt them both:
The length of it from North to South is reckoned to be little less than three
hundred Leagues, and generally of a fruitful Soil, affording besides abundance
of Gold and Silver, both Corn, Cattle, Vineyards, and diverse sorts of Fruits,
equal both for kind and plenty to Spain it self, and sundry other parts of
Europe. The Air likewise temperate, and the People in their Manners and
Conditions come much nearer to the Civility, and likewise subtilty of the
Europeans, than other Americans did; which doubtless may be attributed to the
conformity of the Climates under which they lie, agreeable to those of Europe;
though otherwise in respect of the Sphere and Seasons of the Year, there be a
diametrical difference betwixt us; As for Example, their Spring beginning in
September, which is our Autumn, and their Autumn in March, which is our Spring;
their longest Day being that of St. Lucy, on the eleventh of December, which is
our shortest; and their shortest being St. Barnabas, viz. the eleventh of June,
which is our longest, etc.

Towns and Places of Importance.
The Towns of chiefest note and importance in this Province, are 1. Gopiapo, an
old Town in the most Northerly parts of this Province toward the Sea, where it
has a very commodious Haven belonging to it.

2. La Serena, a Town situate on the Banks of Coquimbo, a pleasant River a
little above its Influx into the Sea, built by Baldivia in the Year 1544. the
Country about very rich in Mines of Gold, and the Town it self so well
Garrisoned for fear of the Natives, that when the English under Sir Francis
Drake, about fourscore years since, attempted the gaining of the Place, they
found hot Service of it, being stoutly resisted and beaten back again to their
Ships, by a Sally of no less than three hundred good Horse and two hundred Foot.

3. St. Jago, the principal Town of the Province, a Bishop's See, and the
ordinary Residence of the Governor, lying on the Banks of the River Tapocalma,
in the thirty fourth Degree of Southern Latitude, fifteen Leagues distant from
the South Sea, at which it has a very commodious and much frequented Haven,
which they call Valparayso, and where the English met with better fortune, as
has been said already in the report of Sir Francis Drake's Voyage.

4. La Conception, a strong Town, seated on the Bay called Penco, sixty or
seventy Leagues distant from St. Jago toward the South, a Place not a little
fortified both by Nature and Art, having the Bay and a certain Ridge of high
Mountains begirting it almost round about; and where it is otherwise
accessible, a Castle, and certain Bulwarks with Ordnance, besides a Garrison of
five hundred Soldiers at least continually in it, and all little enough to
defend it against the Araucanes, their deadly Enemies, who live thereabouts,
and are ever and anon making Incursions almost up to the Walls of it. Over
against this Place in Mare del Zur, but very near the Shore, there lies a
certain Island called St. Mary's, exceeding plentiful in Swine map of Cape Horn
TABULE MEGELLANICA, QUA TIERRAE DEL FUEGO, (...)
and all sorts of Poultrey, which the Garrison of La Conception make good use
of.

5. Los Confines, a Fronteer Town, built by the aforesaid Baldivia, for defense
of the rich Mines of Gold at Angol, a Place near adjoining.

6. La Imperiale, another strong Garrison of this Place on the Banks of the
River Cauten, near to which that great Battle was fought, where Baldivia, with
diverse other Soldiers, were taken Prisoners, who were no otherwise overcome,
but by being over-wearied with killing of their Enemies, and by that means not
able to make their Retreat.

7. Villarica, another Colony of the Spaniards in these Parts, sixteen Leagues
distant from Imperiale, and twenty five from the Sea.

8. Baldivia, so named from the Commander Pedro Baldivia, who built it in the
Valley of Guadallanquen, two or three Leagues distant from the Sea, where it
has a good and capacious Port; but nearer to it the best Mines of Peru, so
rich, that it is said they yielded Baldivia every day so long as he could enjoy
them, twenty five thousand Crowns.

9. Osorno, a Town lying in the Bay of Chilue in a barren Soil, but otherwise
neither less rich, nor less populous than Baldivia it self.

These three last mentioned Towns, viz. Baldivia, Imperiale, and Osorno, were
in the Years 1596, 1699, and 1604, surpised by the Araucanes, and other
Salvages confederate with them, sacked and burnt; and though the Spaniards be
said to have recovered and Garrisoned some of them with fresh Soldiers, yet how
long they were able to hold them, or whether they be Masters of them at this
day, we cannot say.

10. Castro, the most Southerly Town of the whole Province, built on a certain
Island within the Bay of Chilue.

11. Mondoza, and 12. St. Juan de la Frontera, both which lie toward Paraguay
and Rio de la Plata, but on the other side of the Andes, forty Leagues distant
from any of those we have spoken of, and perhaps more, not above a hundred from
Buenos Airs, and the Atlantic Ocean.

SECT. III. Magellanica.
Situation and Description of Magellanica.
MAgellanica, the other part of this Province, is bounded Northward, with Chile
abovesaid, and some parts of the Country De la Plata; on the South, with the
narrow Sea called Magellans Straights; having Mare del Zur on the West, and on
the East the Atlantic Ocean. It contains in length from the Borders of Chile
to the Mouth of the Straights, a hundred Leagues, and in breadth from the North
to the South Sea, somewhat more, viz. toward Chile and the North-West parts of
it, for toward the South and South-West it straitens still more and more,
insomuch that they who resemble the Southern part of America to the form of a
Pyramid reversed, make this part of the Country to be the Spire or top
thereof. It bears the Name from Ferdinand Magellan, a Portuguese, who first
discovered that narrow Sea, so famously known by the Name of Magellans
Straights. It is a large Country, and supposed not to be altogether barren of
Metals; but as yet no great Discovery has been made of it, partly by reason of
the excessive Cold to which it is thought to be subject, and partly perhaps by
reason of the difficulty of the Enterprise, it being so far remote, and very
hardly passable in many places, by reason of the huge Mountains the Andes,
which bar it as it were against all Adventurers; but chiefly by reason of the
stoutness and untameableness of the Araucanes and other Natives of Chile,
through whose Country the March lies, and who must first be conquered, so
that very little can be said more of this Country, than only to name the
Ports and Places upon the Seacoasts, (...) and ^^^^ghts
at which the Spaniards, and likewise some other Nations at several times have
touched, the chief whereof upon the South Sea are, 1. Cabo de las Islas, a
Promontory or Foreland, twenty six Leagues distant from that of St. Felix on
the Confines of Chile.

2. Puerto de San Stephano, fifty Leagues from that, toward the South.

3. La Villa de Nuestra Sennora, or Our Ladies Dale, a large and secure Bay,
eighteen Leagues Southward of St. Stephens.

4. La Punta Deglada; 5. Puerto de los Reyos; and 6. Ancona Sin Salida, all of
them opening toward the Straights. There is also at the opening of the
Straights, Cabo de la Vittoria, Cabo Desseado, and some others.

Upon the North Sea, and up toward Rio de la Plata, the chief Places
observable, are 1. Rio de la Crux, and the Cape which they call De las Rameras,
about thirty Leagues distant from the Straights Mouth.

2. The Bay of St. Julian, forty Leagues Northward of the former.

3. El Puerto Desseado; 4. Puerto de los Leones; 5. The Bay of Anegada, all of
them good and capacious Havens for the security of Shipping upon these Coasts,
and lying at a distance of thirty or forty Leagues one from another, up toward
Rio de la Plata, and the Country of Paraguay, of which we are next to speak.

Description or the Magellan Straights.
As for the Straights themselves, so much spoken of, and likewise so necessary
to be known by those who frequent these parts of the World, they are a narrow
Sea or Frith, by which the Atlantic Ocean, or rather some parts of it, does
fall into Mare del Zur, or the South Sea: the Passage is long, running, as it is
commonly supposed, well nigh a hundred Leagues together, almost in a parallel
Line, or in the same Degree of Latitude from one end to the other; and likewise
extremely difficult by reason of the many windings and turnings of the Sea,
which force them to be ever and anon altering of their Course, and a
mountainous high Country on both sides of it, from whence it is almost
continually beaten with Storms, both dangerous and terrible: They were first
discovered by Ferdinand Magellan, by Nation a Portuguese, but in the Service of
the King of Spain, and by him named Magellan's Straights; who although himself
lived not to return into Spain, being slain in the Conquest of the Molucca
Islands, yet his Companions did, in the Ship called Vittoria, from whence the
Cape De la Vittoria abovesaid took its Name. The Mouth or Entrance of them, by
the Atlantic Ocean, lies in fifty two Degrees of Southern Latitude, and has
not above fifty three and some Minutes at the Exit, or opening into the South
Sea.

The Straights of Le Maire.
There is likewise since this, and but of late times, viz. about the Year 1615.
another Straight discovered by the Dutch, and called from the Discoverer Fretum
Mairi, or The Straights of le Maire, four or five Degrees more to the Southward
than those of Magellan, and supposed to be a much easier and safer Passage.

The Intention by the discovery of these Straights, was to have found a shorter
Way to the East Indies, and the Kingdoms of Cathay and China, than that which
was then only used, viz. by the Cape de Buena Speranza, and the Coast of
Africa, but by reason of the great difficulty, as it is to be supposed, and
uncertainty of the Passage, neither the one nor the other is much frequented,
the Spaniards for the most part serving themselves of their American Ports upon
the South Sea, from whence they make their Voyages and Returns to and from the
other Indies, and from thence home to Spain; and the English, with other
Nations of Europe, Trading still by the Coast of Africa and Cape of Good Hope,
or else by the way of Alexandria and the Persian Gulf, as heretofore.

map of Paraguay PARAQVARIA Vulgo PARAGVAY. Cum adjacentibus.


CHAP. VI. Paraguay, or Rio de la Plata.
WE have seen in Magellanica the farthest, that is, the most Southerly part of
the New World, and before it in order all the Western Coasts of America that
lie either upon or toward Mare del Zur, viz. from Panama, the first Province
of this Southern part down as far as the Straights. We are now to return and
take a view of the Eastern Coasts, and those Countries which lie upon the
Atlantic Ocean, steering our Course henceforth Northward, not directly, but as
the Coast leads us for a while Eastward and by North, forasmuch as the Land of
America, from the Straights of Magellan up as far as Brasile, and almost to the
Equator, runs out with a long Point, little less than three thousand
Leagues together.

Situation and Description of Paraguay, or Rio de la Plata.
The first Province we meet with on this side next to Magellanica, is the
Country of Paraguay, oftentimes called Rio de la Plata, from the Name of an
huge River, which runs for the most part through the midst of it: It is
bordered, as we said, to the South and toward the Straights with Magellanica;
on the East, with the Atlantic Ocean; more Northward, or to the North-East, it
has Brasile; and on the West those undiscovered Countries of the Province of
Chile, of which we have spoken.

The Country on both sides the River is reported to be a very lusty and
fruitful Soil, bearing besides those which are proper and native, all sorts of
European Fruits and Grain in great abundance, with Sugarcanes, both large and
good, as any other Province of the New World. Nor is it excelled by any other
for good Pasturage and great Herds of Cattle, Sheep, and Swine; in particular,
Horses are said to have multiplied so here, that of thirty Mares, and about six
or seven Stallions, which the Spaniards left there, in forty years the whole
Country thereabouts was filled with the Breed of them, running wild in great
Companies together, through all the Woods and Forests of the Country, and
being of excellent Mettle and Service if they could be tamed. It affords
likewise great store of wild Deer and Stags, some Lions, Tigers, etc. nor is it
without good Mines, some both of Gold and Silver; but chiefly, as to what is
yet discovered, of Brass, and Iron; and the People altogether salvage.

The River De la Plata.
The River De la Plata, which (as we said before) divides this Country, is one
of the largest of the whole World, rising, as it is supposed, out of the Lake
called De los Xarayes, three hundred Leagues or more within Land, and falling
into the Atlantic Ocean, or North Sea, in thirty four Degrees of Southern
Latitude, with an Estuary or Mouth of thirty, or two and thirty Leagues over.

The whole Country is usually subdivided into three inferior Provinces, which
1. Rio de la Plata properly so called. 2. Tucuman. 3. La Crux de Sierra.

SECT. II. Rio de la Plata, properly so called.
Situation of Rio de la Plata, properly so called
RIo de la Plata, properly so called, is that part of the Country which
extends it self on both sides the River, in length many Leagues together, but
not answerable in breadth.

Towns and Places of note.
The chiefest Towns of note in this Province, are 1. Buenos Airs, by some
called La Trinidad, on the Southern Banks of the River De la Plata, sixty four
Leagues, as they say, from the Mouth of it: It is seated commodiously at the
foot of a little Mountain, and fortified with a Mud-Wall, a little Castle, and
some Pieces of Ordnance.

2. San Fe, in English St. Faiths, fifty Leagues above Buenos Airs, upon the
same River, and a richer Place, chiefly by reason of their Cloth, of which
there is here one of the greatest Manufactures of all these parts of Peru.

3. Nuestra Sennora de la Assumption, commonly called Assumption only, lying
yet higher up the River almost a hundred Leagues, a well built and well
frequented Town, long since inhabited by two hundred Families at least of
natural Spaniards, besides Mestizos, as they call them, which are the Breed of
Spaniards by the American People, Men or Women, and Mulattos, which are
likewise their Race, but begotten upon Negro's, of both which there are
reckoned to be here some thousands.

4. La Cividad Real, or more commonly called Ontiveros, fourscore Leagues
Northward from Assumption, seated on the Banks of the River Parana in a
fruitful Soil, as the Country generally is about all these Places; but the Air
hereabouts is not so healthful.

5. St. Anne, upon the same River; and 6. St. Salvador.

SECT. III. Tucuman.
Situation of Tucuman.
VVEstward of La Plata lies the Country of Tucuman, extending it self as far
as the Borders of Chile, a Country not yet well discovered either to the North
or the South. That part of it which lies toward Chile is well Manured and
Husbanded, and likewise very fruitful; but that toward Magellanica, neither
the one, nor the other, remaining altogether untilled and barren.

The chief Towns and Places of note, are 1. St. Jago de Esteco, the principal
Town of the Province, and a Bishop's See, seated upon the River Esteco, a
hundred and fourscore Leagues distant from Buenos Airs.

Towns and Places of note.
2. St. Michael de Tucuman, seated at the foot of a huge rocky Mountain, but
otherwise in a Soil the fruitfullest and best, both for Corn and Pasturage, in
all this Country, twenty eight Leagues distant from St. Jago.

3. Talavera, or Neustra Sennora de Talavera, as the Spaniards call it, situate
upon the Banks of Salado, in a good Soil, and inhabited by an industrious
People, grown exceeding rich and wealthy, chiefly by their Manufactures of
Cotton-Wooll, whereof they have great plenty, and by which they drive a Trade
as far as the Mines at Potosi, and other parts of Peru.

4. Corduba, another rich Town of this Province, and of great Trade, as lying
map of Brazil BRASILIA.
at an equal distance, viz. of fifty Leagues, both from San Fe, as they call
it, or St. Faiths in the Province of La Plata abovesaid, and from St. Juan de
la Frontera in the Country of Chile, and almost in the Road-way from Potosi and
those parts of Peru, to Buenos Airs and the North Sea.

5. Chocinoca; 6. Sococha; 7. Calebinda; 8. Morata, and others, but belonging
for the most part to the reduced Natives.

SECT. IV. La Crux de Sierra.
Situation of La Crux de Sierra.
LA Crux de Sierra is a little Territory (at least in comparison to some
others) lying toward Peru, and reckoned by some for one of the Provinces of
Peru: It lies betwixt the two great Rivers Paraguay and Guapay, a hundred
Leagues distant, as it is said, from Charcas, to which yet in some Causes it is
subordinate.

The Soil of this Country is abundantly fertile in all sorts of American
Fruits, besides good plenty both of Wheat and Maiz, and scarsity of nothing
useful for Man's Life, unless it be fresh Water in some places.

Chief Towns of this Province.
The chief Towns of this Province, are 1. San Crux, situate at the foot of a
great Mountain or Hill, but opeing upon a large Plain, whose thirsty dryness is
well refreshed by a certain Brook or Torrent, which issues out of a
neighboring Mountain, and a few Leagues distant from the Town makes a pretty
Lake, which supplieth the Country thereabouts, both with fresh Water and Fish
in good plenty.

2. Barranea, a Town supposed to be not above threescore Leagues distant from
Potosi.

3. Nova Rioia, once a Colony of Spaniards, bu^^sack'd and spoiled by the
Salvages of these Parts about the Year 1548. and the first Discoveror of the
Country, namely Nunno de Chaves, treacherously murdered by a Native, since
which time it is said to have been deserted.

CHAP. VII. Brasile.
Situation and Description of Brasile.
Brasile by Capralis called San Cruz, because it was discovered on the Day
dedicated to the holy Cross, but generally Brasile, from the red Wood, which it
produces in great abundance, extends, according to the Account of the
Portuguese, between the Rivers Maranon and De la Plata: But according to the
Division which Pope Alexander the Sixth made upon the Approbation of the Kings
of Castile and Portuguese, Brasile extends not so far; for it begins in the
North along the Stream Para, and ends at the River Capybora, two Leagues beyond
the Town St. Vincent: Eastward it is washed by the Northern Ocean, and on the
West separated from Peru by desolate Mountains: It lies between 4 and 22
Degrees of Southern Latitude. Historiographers differ much concerning the first
Discoverer; but without contradiction the first honor belongs justly to
Americus Vesputius, who being sent out by Ferdiaand, King of Castile, in the
Year 1497. arrived first with four Sail at Brasile; whither he was followed two
years after by Vincent Aynez Pinzon, Associate to Christopher Columbus; but
with ill success, for two of the Ships were cast away in a Storm, and the other
two returned sadly weather-beaten into the Spanish Haven Palos, yet not before
he had made a farther Discovery of Brasile than Americus Vesputius; which so
stirred up Emanuel, Pedro Alvarez Capralis his Expedition to Brasile.
King of Portugal, that he sent Pedro Alvarez Capralis thither with five
hundred Men in thirteen Ships, that so he might get sure footing on Brasile;
where Landing he erect^d a Stone Cross, and informed the King of his whole
Proceedings by Gasper Lemnius, with whom he sent over two Brasilians, a Man and
a Woman, the strangeness of whose Garb caused great admiration in Portugal
amongst the Spectators: the Man, having a flat Nose, went stark naked, and in
his nether Lip hung a Stone called Matara; through each Cheek there was stuck a
piece of Brasile Wood, on his Shoulders he carried three long Darts, and on his
Head he wore diverse colored Feathers; the Hair about his Privities was all
plucked out, and his Membrum Virile tied about with a String called Tacoaynhaa,
which he untied when he Urin'd; his Body was strong and well proportioned, and
painted with several Colors. The Woman wore a Lappet girt about her Middle, in
which Girdle stuck a Cane Tobacco-pipe; the Lappet reached just to the top of
her Knees, the rest of her Body was also naked; on her Head she wore a broad
Hat made of Feathers, on the top of which stuck two Plumes; in her Ears hung
Bells, and about her Neck three Strings of Pearl; and her Body was also painted
with red and yellow Colors. Lemnius also gave so much Information concerning
the fruitfulness of Brasile, that several Portuguese Families went thither,
accompanied with some Italian Friars, which scattering up and down, began to
build several Villages, but were soon after most of them killed and eaten up by
the Indians.

Anno 1549. King John the Third fitted out a great Fleet, which set Sail from
Lisbon under the Command of Thomas de Sosa.

Jesuits ^^^t to Brasi^^ by Pope Paulus the Third and Ignatius.
Also the Jesuits Aspilcueta, Antonio Pireo, Leonardo Nonno, Didaco Jacobo,
Vincent Roderico, and Emanuel Robrega, were sent thither by Pope Paulus the
Third, and Ignatius Loyola, whose Fleet came to an Anchor in the Bay afterward
called Bahia de Todos Sanctos, where Sosa built the City Salvador; since which
the Portuguese have spread themselves farther and farther over Brasile.

The United Netherlands also sent Colonies thither with good success, for they
took several vast Countries from the Portuguese, by force of Arms, and built
new Forts and Towns in several places. But we will first give you a general
Description of it, Temperature of Climate.
that so we may the better render a Relation in particular of every Province
thereof, it being a considerable part of the New World, and both pleasant and
fruitful, and the Seacoasts refreshed by Easterly Winds, which begin before
Daybreak, when the North Sea ebbs or flows, for then the Wind rises with the
Sun, and continues till Midnight: Toward the West, where the Mountains divide
Brasile from Peru, it is made temperate by Westerly Winds, which though judged
unwholsom, because they seem to arise out of the Moorish Grounds, yet they hurt
not the Inhabitants along that Coast, because they either break against the
high Mountains, or are driven by the strong Wind which blows from the Sea.

The difference between Summer and Winter, shorter and longer Days, in the main
part of Brasile, is scarce discernable, warm Weather lasting all the year
round; and for the length of the Day and Night, the Sun being hid under the
Horizon twelve hours, shines for the most part just as long, the greatest
difference never being above an hour. Three hours before Daybreak the Dew
makes it exceeding cold till Sunrising; wherefore the Brasilians make Fires in
the Night near their Hammocks, not only to keep wild Beasts from them, but
also against the Cold. After the coldest Nights follow the fairest Days, and
the contrary after sultry Nights; nevertheless (except in the rainy Season,
which begins with March and ends about August) the Sky is generally clear, yet
it Lightens much toward the Evening. Rainbowes often appear in the Sky, and
bout the Mooon Halos. The Rain generally falls in great Drops, and with a
mighty noise; before which it is generally very sultry hot, or else soon after.
The Dew, which is fruitfuller than in Europe, is saltish, which makes it often to
rot things that lie in the open Air. During the rainy Months, a South-East
Winds blows from a cloudy Sky, much stronger than the Northern in Summer, The
South-East Wind drives the Stream to the North, as the North Wind drives it to
the South: And more than this, there is little to be discerned of the Seas
ebbing and flowing hereabouts: At the highest Tides the Brasilians go several
Leagues from the Shore to Fish, upon Planks made of the spungy Wood called
Jangada fastened together. The Sea, which seems to burn in the Night, is so
clear in the Day, that the Fish may be seen to swim above twenty Fathom deep. A
calm Ocean when the Days and Nights are of an exact length, and especially when
dark Clouds appear, is a certain sign of a dreadful Storm. At Full or New Mood
the Sea rises twelve Foot, and continues either a longer or shorter time,
according as it is more or less turbulent, and the Rivers fall stronger or more
gently into the same.

Before most part of the Coast of Brasile lies a Stone Cliff of above twenty or
thirty Paces broad, which is never covered with Water, though in the time of
Spring-floods. In this Cliff Nature in several places has made a Gap, through
which the Ships sail near the Shore, and ride safe at an Anchor.

The whole Country of Brasile is divided into thirteen Praefectures, or
Lordships, and has about as many Rivers, which more or less empty themselves
into every one of these Countries. The Eastern part has several Brooks and
Fountains, which afford good Water both for Man and Beast. In some parts the
Water is so strong, that the wild Beasts making themselves Drunk therewith, are
easily taken. During the Winter Season the Rivers glide with great force, and
swell on a sudden, overflowing all the neighboring Country, only the River
San Francisco runs strongest and rises highest in the Summer Season, whenas in
the Winter it flows low, and poures but little Water into the Ocean. The
original of this River is as yet unknown, yet is by most believed to come out
of a great Lake lying near the Peruvian Mountains: The Hollanders, who sailed
forty Leagues up the same, found it every where broad and deep, and scattered
full of Isles and Rocks. The Portuguese sailing ten Leagues farther, discovered
the great Rocks Cocoeras, from which the said River falls down with great
violence, and extends it self North-West. In the other Brasilian Streams,
though wide at the Mouths, which generally are not above two or three hours
walking from their Fountains or Springs, no Barque is able to Row up, they
being exceeding shallow, although much Rain falls into them; the reason whereof
is because the barren Mountains lying between Brasile and Peru, discharge
abundance of Water through the Rivers of Amazones, Maranon, Francisco, La
Plata, and the Juaeiro, with such force into the Ocean, that they keep their
sweetness for thirty Leagues. Near the Sea side are several Lakes and Pits
which are drinkable, and others up in the Country that are brackish.

The Nature of the Soil.
The Country differs exceedingly, for where it extends in Plains the Soil is
fat and clayie, and produces all sorts of Fruit, but especially Sugarcanes.
During the rainy Seasons the Trees flourish most; after which the heat of the
Sun, and fertility of the Soil speedily ripen the Fruit: wherefore they Dung
not their Land, but on the contrary endeavor to make it lean with Sand, that
the Plants might not have too many Leaves, and wither before the Fruit can be
ripened. They Sow in the beginning of the rainy Months, and especially take
care that the Seed lie not too deep in the Ground, because then the Sunbeams
being not able to come at it, suffer it to perish in the cold Ground.

The high Cocoa and Palmito-Trees, are transplanted all the year round, the
Roots being only covered with a little Earth, because they can endure no cold.

Several Trees here bear a cooling Fruit, as if kind Nature took care to
provide against excessive heat.

All manner of Plants and Herbs brought hither from Angola, Portugal, the
Netherlands, and the East Indies, grow here very plentifully. But the Country
generally would be much better, if some way could be found out to destroy the
innumerable company of Pismires, which though three times bigger than the
European, resemble them very much, and cover the Paths in Woods and Fields for
three or four Miles together; and raising Hillocks, make them hollow, and fill
them with Corn: in the Full of the Moon they gather an incredible quantity of
Grain, which they bite at each end, because it should not sprout: against the
rainy Months they stop up their Holes, Description of the Tamanda.
that the Water may not damnifie their Store. But these Animals have a mortal
Enemy of the Tamanda, of which there are two sorts, the bigger called Guaca,
the lesser Miri; the Guaca, notwithstanding it is no bigger than an ordinary
Dog, yet it destroys Tigers, and other wild Beasts, with such a raging fury,
that it never lets go what once it has got hold of, but holds it fast so long
till sometimes it dies of Hunger. The Guaca differing from the Miri only in
bigness, has a broad Tail full of gray and black Bristles, which sticks up
when he is vexed, but when he goes to sleep, covers himself with the same. The
Miri winds his long smooth Tail about the Boughs, by which hanging he searches
the Holes in the Trees with his Tongue, which being thin and round, has a
Gutter in the middle, in which when it feels any Pismires, it suddenly swallows
them down: If he perceives them to have their Nests under Ground, then he
scratches up the Earth, and puts his Tongue in at the Holes. Both the Guacu and
Miri have a thick Skin, and a broad black Streak from their Breasts on each
side up half way their Bodies, and through the black runs also a white Streak.
No Beast in the World is hardier than this, for though it fasts twelve days,
and is afterward flayed alive, yet it will live several hours after.

The Lakes in Brasile are for the most part overgrown with Weeds just like a
Field, yet are exceeding full of Fish and Fowl. Where the Sea runs into the
Lakes, great multitudes of Crabs are seen crawling along the Ground, and the
Oysters hang in Clusters on the Boughs of a Plant called Manyle or Mangues, The
Plant Manyle.
which grow with their Roots either near or in the Water, in such a manner,
that new Bodies still shoot from the old Roots, which prevents easy access to
the chief Plant, on whose uppermost Leaves after Sunrising sticks very white
Salt, which in the Night, or in a cloudy Day turns to a brackish Dew. Moreover,
those places where Brasile rises with Hills and Mountains, are likewise very
fruitful, except the barren tops of some, which seem to kiss the Skies; and
though the fruitful Mountains flourish in the time of the rainy Months, yet
many of the Trees which grow on them die in Summer, and their Ashes being burnt
by the Inhabitants, are used in stead of Dung. Some Woods extend themselves
three hundred Leagues in length, and are full of Trees, so tall, that an Arrow
shot upwards falls short of the top of them, and a Boat may be made out of the
Body, which can carry a hundred and fifty Men. On the great Boughs of these
mighty Trees grow other excrescent Shrubs after the manner of Misseltoe, which
proceed from the Kernels swallowed and muted upon them by the Birds that light
there. In some places also grow also Sweet-wood Trees, which afford either
excellent Gums or Wood to Dye with; amongst which the chief is the
Ibiripitanga, which yields the Brasile Wood, that gives Denomination of Brasile
to this vast Tract of Land. Description of the Tree Ibripitanga.
The Tree Ibripitanga is tall and spreading, has sad colored Bark full of
short Thorns; the Leaves are green, and differ in form but little from the
Box-Tree Leaf; the Boughs shoot forth other lesser, full of yellow and
sweet smelling Flowers, which falling off are succeeded by a flat long Cod, of
a dark gray color, full of little red Pulse; the upper part of the Tree is not
good to Dye with, but only the lower part of the Body, which because the Tree
grows far up in the Country, is not transportable without much trouble. But
the Tatai-iba grows in the Woods along the Shore; The Tree Tatai-iba.
the Bark being of an Ash Color, invests a yellow Wood; the Leaves are sharp
and notch'd, the Fruit not unlike Mulberries, pale, juicy, and full of white
Seed; the Wood boiled Dies a pure Yellow. It is observable not only of this
Tree, but generally of the Trees of this Country, that they neither flourish,
nor shed their Leaves all over at once, nor do several Trees of the same kind,
and growing here germinate or fade together; for whilst one is fullest of
Blossoms, the other is without Leaves; and whilst the same Tree sheds its
Leaves on one side, the other side is newly Budded.

The European Plants and Herbs with soft Roots, being once Planted in Brasile,
come to be hard and lignifi'd. There is also great difference, according to the
Ground in which they are Planted; for such Plants and Trees as in the Plains
are but small and tender, grow ten times higher if Planted in the Woods.

All sorts of Indian Pulse grow higher than the tallest Trees, like high
Arbors, under which both Men and Beasts may shelter themselves from the Sun or
Rain.

We find not upon Record or Tradition, that Brasile was ever troubled with an
Earthquake, which is the reason that it has neither Silver nor Gold-Mines,
because sulphurous Fires are found under Ground, which are a cause of the
production of Gold and Silver, so likewise they occasion Earthquakes: yet in
that part of Brasile called Ceara, there are some Mines of Silver, out of which
the Hollanders would have got greater Riches, had not they been employed in the
Wars against the Portuguese.

Far up into the Country amongst the Mountains, inhabit Canibals, or
Man-eaters. The Europeans that first traveled that way, found the Country
very fertile and full of People, especially in the Valleys, but somewhat
incommoded by the want of Water, and the excessiveness of the Heat in the Day,
and of the Cold in the Night. In some places the Country is so overgrown with
Brambles, that they are forced to cut their way through the same. But there are
a sort of Thistles, which having concave Leaves, receive the Dew and Rain for
the accommodation of the Natives.

Besides Serpents and Dragons, the Tigers are most of all to be feared when
hungry, but once satisfied are easily taken.

Dogs, Oxen, Sheep, and Horses thrive also exceedingly in most parts of Brasile.

The Nature of the Brasilians.
The Brasilians live to be very old without being Bald or Gray: There are seldom
or never to be seen squint-eyed, lame, decrepid, or any deformed People,
notwithstanding the Children are never Swathed but thrown into cold Water as
soon as born. The Men generally have a very near resemblance one with another,
as also the Women, so that there is not such a difference betwixt Man and Man
there, as amongst other People. There is scarce any Sickness heard of in these
Parts; for besides a long Life, they enjoy the benefit of Health so long as
they live. They trouble not themselves with much Business; and in one Hut,
whose Covering consists of Palm-Leaves, dwell several Families together.

Their manner of Living.
The general Bread of the Brasilians is the stamped Root Mandihoka; besides
which they also eat all manner of Fruit and Plants, and many times Flesh, which
they either eat boiled, broyl'd, or stewed; their Boiling is after this manner:
First they kindle their Fire with two Sticks, the one of hard, and the other of
soft Wood; the hard they make sharp at the end, and fix the same into the soft,
which setting on fire they immediately lay Cotton thereupon, or else dry
Leaves, and so boil the Flesh in round Earthen Pots called Camu: but they
account that better which is stewed in a Pot, the bottom whereof is covered
with Leaves, on which they lay the Flesh, then stopping the same close on the
top with Earth and Leaves, they make Fire over it so long till they think the
Flesh to be sufficiently stewed. Their Broyling they perform by fixing forked
Stick into the Ground, over which they lay several others like a Gridiron, and
upon them the raw Flesh, cut in long Slices, and Peppered and Salted, then make
a Fire under the same till it is enough; and their Meat so dressed keeps good
fourteen days. Their Fish either boiled or broyl'd is eaten with the Sauce
Juquitinga. The little Fish Piaba and Piquitinga they make up in Rolls, and lay
them under hot Ashes. Both with their Flesh and Fish they eat for Bread, as
has been said, the Meal of the Root Mandihoka, which they taking up with three
Fingers throw into their Mouths so dexterously, that not the least scrap falls
besides. They never observe any set hours to eat, for they make several Meals
in the Day and sometimes in the middle of the Night, if their Appetite serves,
and neither drink nor speak whilst they are at their Meat. They sleep in
spread Hammocks made fast between two Poles, near which burns a constant Fire
with which in the Daytime they dress their Meat, and at Night keep themselves
warm, the Nights being there somewhat cold, because of their equal length with
the Days. Their usual Liquor is cold Water, taken out of the Fountains, Rivers,
or Brooks; Their several sorts of Drinks.
but to Carouse they make the Drink Caoi, of the Fruit of the Ocaiiba-Tree,
which being stamped in a wooden Mortar, is strained, and at first looks like
Milk, but after a few days standing turns to a darker color, and is strong
enough to make Astronomers of those that drink largely of it, but if long kept,
it turns to be excellent Vinegar.

They have another Drink called Aipu, which is made two several ways; the first
is thus: An old Toothless Woman chews the little cut Root Aipimacaxera to a a
Pap called Caracu, which spitting in a Pot they pour Water on the same, and
afterward boiling it leisurely, stirring it all the time it stands over the
Fire. The other way of making this Aipu, which is much the more cleanly, is to
boil the said Root so long, till it comes to be like Butter-milk, and then
letting it stand till it has done working, it will be no unpleasant Drink.

Another sort of Drink amongst them is their Pacobi, made of the Fruit of the
Tree Pacobebe and Pacobucu; besides others made of the Tree Abatu, of Indian
Barley and Maiz. Also their Liquor called Jetici is pressed out of Potato-Roots.

In like manner the Plant Nana, by the Portuguese called Ananas, makes the
Drink Nanai, which is exceeding strong and heady, but good against Faintness,
Vomiting, Gravel, and stoppage of Urine, as also against Poison.

Their Deboches.
The Tapuiyans, sur-named Cariri, meet at a certain time to make the Liquor
Aipu, whereof each takes as much to his Hut as falls to his share, and when it
has done working, they begin in the Morning very early at the first House in
the Village, and drink out every drop which they find there, and so from House
to House till they have drunk one another dry; and he is looked upon to be the
best Man that has drunk and evacuated most.

Their manner of Taking Tobacco.
The Brasilians take generally very strong Tobacco, which they first dry in the
Sun, and afterward before the Fire, the better to rub it in pieces: Their
Tobacco-pipe is a Cane and a hollow Nut cut off at the top, and a round Hole
bored in the middle, into which they put the Cane. They forbear not to take
Tobacco even in the midst of their religious Ceremonies, which are performed
with Singing and Dancing in this manner:

Their religious Ceremonies.
The Tapuaiyans making a round Ring at an equal distance one from another, all
of them being stark naked, tie diverse colored Plumes of Feathers on their
back-sides with a String made fast on their left Shoulders and about their
Wastes; about their Legs they have Cotton Garters; each in his turn bowing to
the Left, stretches down his left Hand to the Ground, and puts his right Hand
in between the Strings which tie the Plume of Feathers, and stamps continually
with his right Foot, whilst all the rest begin to Sing a doleful Song, which
by degrees they change into a merry one, not without some appearance of
understanding the Art of Music. Their Songs contain first a mournful Relation
of a general Deluge, which drowned their Predecessors, all but some few, who
escaped by climbing up high Trees and Mountains; next the Acts of those old
Heroes from whom they boast themselves Extracted, who lost their Lives, or
valiantly fought for the public good, and were rewarded with the enjoyment of
all pleasures and Delights, of Singing, Playing, Dancing, and the like, in a
remote Country, whither after their Deaths they hope to be translated: Whilst
they thus Sing over all their Songs, three Priests stand in the middle of the
Ring, each holding the Idol Maraka (in their left Hand) resembling an old
Ostritch's Egg stuck full of Feathers on the top: about their Wastes they wear
a Girdle of rich Plumes, on their Heads also a Crown of Feathers; the middle
Priest looks with a stern Countenance, and holds up his left Leg from the
Ground, whilst the other two standing on each side of him, hold in their right
Hands a Pipe, out of which blowing Tobacco-smoak in one another Faces, they
utter these words, Receive the Spirit of heroic Strength: The Dance ended,
they Entertain their Priests with Meat and Drink eight days together, and also
put Meat before their Idol Maraka, who is the chief Deity they adore.

Their Arms.
Their Arms consist of Bows made of hard Wood, Strung with twisted Cotton
Thread; their Arrows they make of the Cane Tacaara, made very sharp at the end,
or headed with some Beasts sharp Tooth, or pointed with the Bones of the Fish
Iperu. Some of the Tapuiyans use great Darts, and long Clubs of black Wood,
broad before, and full of sharp Spikes; the Handles being wound about with
Cotton Strings called Jatirana, under which hangs a Tuft of the Bird Arara's
Feathers, as also about the middle. Their Trumpets, called Canguenca, are the
Shin-bones of Men, though they have others also made of great Shells and Canes.
They used to be continually at War one with another, which they waged neither
for Lands nor Riches, but either to make themselves eminent, and to be
accounted valiant Soldiers, or most especially for the sake of Man's-flesh to
feed upon, which they love beyond all things in the World, wherefore they
fatten all their Prisoners for the slaughter. Their Battles are always cruel,
for they fight very desperately. Emanuel de Moraes relates, That he saw a
Brasilian fight with three Armed Portugueses, who slew him not till after he
had wounded them all three.

The Languages of the Brasilians.
The Languages of the Brasilians are several, each Country speaking a peculiar
Tongue, but so different that they cannot understand one another. The Tabuyans
are divided into above eighty. Tribes, each speaking a peculiar Language, which
have no resemblance one with another; nevertheless they have a general Language
which is understood by most of them. The Jesuit Joseph Anchieta publishing a
Brasilian Dictionary in Conimbrica, Anno 1595. showed that the forementioned
Language wants the Letters f, l, s, z, r, and has no double Consonants in any
word, except mb, nd, ng, so that the sound of the word falls generally on the
last Vowel. The forementioned Moraes well experienced in the Brasilian Tongue,
writ an Alphabet of all the most familiar words thereof used in common
Discourse, of which it will not be unnecessary to give this following Extract:

A.
ABa, a Man, also Hair. Acu, the Left Hand. Acuabeimae, Sweet. Amaberaba,
Lightning. Amacuminga, Thunder. Amandiba, Hail. Anama, a near Relation. Anga,
the Soul. Angabara, Lean. Angaipata, Angry, or Wicked. Angaturama, Thankful, or
Acceptable. Apara, a Crown. Apecum, the Tongue. Apicaba, a Stool. Ara, the
Time, Sky, or Day. Ara-ibi coquime, Noon. Araya, Grandmother. Atapuana, Light.
Atapuatia, Swift. Atucupe, the Back. Atyba, the Shoulder. Ay cig, a Mother.
Ayura, the Neck.
B.
Boya, a Slave.
C.
Cama, a Sucking-Breast. Canga, a Leg. Caraibebe, apiabebe, an Angle. Caruca,
the Evening. Capii, Grass. Capii goacu, Straw. Catu, Dainty. Cay, an Ape. Ceba,
a Loaf. Cibera, the Buttocks. Cemiracoaobae, a Widower. Ceo, a Breast.
Ceteeimibae, a Ghost. Cig cygra, an Aunt. Coaraci, a Son. Cobra, a Serpent.
Coemitanga, the Dawn. Coriba, Rejoice. Coya, Twins. Cunha, a Wife. Cunhaiba, a
Bride. Cunumigoacu, a Youth. Cunumi, a Boy.
E.
Ecatuaba, the right Hand. Eyruba, a Be.
G.
Giba, an Arm. Guaibino, an old Woman. Guirarupia, an Egg.
I.
Jaci, the Moon, or Month. Jacitata, a Star. Iba, a Tree. Ibiaia, the Heavens.
Ibatinga and Ibitinga, a Witch. Ibateba, High. Ibi, the Earth. Ibitira, a
Mountain. Ibitu, the Wind. Icapi, the Dew. Ig, Water. Iguaba, a Cap. Ipeca, a
Goose. Igue, the Side. Ita, Iron, or a Stone. Itacira, a Spade. Itapigua, a
Nail. Juba, Yellow.
M.
Maupiara, the Gall. Mbabeaubora, Sick. Mbiu, Meat. Mbo, a Hand. Membeca,
Softly. Menearaa, a Wedding. Micu, a Toe. Mita, the Heel. Mocu, an Eel.
Mormotara, Angry. Muapendaba, a Joint.
N.
Nbia, the Heart.
O.
Opacatumha, the World.
P.
Potia, the Breast. Paranga, Fair. Porerobiara, Faithful. Porucuicobora, Poor.
Potivi, a Duck. Poxi, Ugly. Pi, a Foot. Pia, the Liver. Pira, Fish, or a Skin.
Piquiira, Younger in years. Pitanga, a Child. Pua, a Finger. Pua-guacu, a
Thumb. Purva, the Navel. Puou, Long. Putuma, the Night.
R.
Roig, Cold.
T.
Tagica, a Vein. Tagui, Blood. Tagira, or Membira, a Daughter. The first of
these words is used by the Fathers, and the other by the Mothers. Taira,
Children, or a Son. Tamua, a Grandfather. Tata, Fire. Tecoacu, Luck.
Tecoateima, Covetousness. Temerico, Man or Woman. Tendiba, a Chin. Tendi,
Spittle. Tendipia, a Knee. Tecobecatu, Wholesome. Tema, a Shin-bone. Tete, a
Body. Tiaya, Sweet. Tibira, Younger: for so the Brothers call one another, but
the Sisters name their younger Brothers Quibira, and Brothers their younger
Sisters Teindira. Tigue, the Belly. Tique perg, the Guts. Tinga, White. Tipiba,
Melancholy. Tiquera, eldest Sister. Tiquiera, eldest Brother. Tuba, Parents.
Tutira, Father's Brother. Tubei-ima, an Hospital Boy. Tuibaem, an old Man.
Tupana, God. Ty, Piss. Tyuris, the Bladder.
U.
Uba, the Hip. Unhapuapem, a Nail.
Y.
Yja, a Fountain. Ymeneoba, a Widow. Yyaobuamba, Naked.
The Words for Action, are these following:

A.
ABi, Erring. Abiqui, Coming. Acanhem, I die. Acoy, Covering. Aei, Missing.
Ami, Squeezing. Amotareima, Hating. Anduba, Opinion. Anguipaba, Sinning. Abba
mandeba, To put on. Apina, Shaving. Apition, Binding. Aroca, a Lesson. Ayaima,
Feigning.
B.
Beraba, Shining.
C
Coanga, Measuring, Proving, or Speaking. Cacaba, Passing by. Cae, Curing.
Capucaya, Calling, or To be vexed. Carom, Hoping. Caruca, Pissing. Cauccuba,
Loving. Cecaraya, Forgetting. Cema, Going out. Cenduba, Hearing. Cenoya,
Naming. Cepiaca, Seeing, Punishment. Cerura, Carrying. Cetuna, Smelling.
Ceyara, Relating. Cica, Ploughing. Cipya, Making wet. Ciquye, Fearing. Co,
Going. Cobaitim, Meeting. Coquendaboya, Opening. Cuaba, Knowing. Cupira,
Performing. Cuu, Defending.
E.
Ecatu, To be able.
G.
Genonheca, Praying. Goameenga, Biting. Guapua, Sitting. Guata, Walking.
Gueena, Vomiting.
I.
Jababa, To run away. Jecoacuba, To remember. Jenumuna, Spitting. Jerure,
Demanding. Igtaba, Swimming. Igu, Drinking.
M.
Maenduara, Thinking. Mano, Dying. Maramonhanga, Warring. Mayaoca, Dividing.
Mba-eraca, Buying. Mubacu, Eating. Meenga, Delivering. Menbirara, Barring.
Moaibaba, Bewitching, or Preventing. Mongueba, Putting out. Moanga, Thinking.
Moaquima, Making wet. Mobibua, Sowing. Moete, Praising, or Honoring. Moendi,
Setting on fire. Mogiba, Boiling. Mogyco, Polishing. Momiya, Moving. Momita,
Lodging. Monberaba, Bruising. Monbeu, Delivering of a Message. Monbuca, To bore
through. Monbuja, Boring. Mondoca, To cut, take away, or cleave asunder.
Mondoroca, Breaking. Monguy, Grinding. Monguya, Making loose. Monhanga, Doing.
Moperua, Being cold. Mopotaya, Buttoning. Moriba, Consenting. Moropiana,
Changing. Moeyeceara, Mixing.
N.
Nheangeru, Sighing. Nheenga, Speaking. Nhemboe, Learning. Nhengara, Singing.
P.
Paepua, Answering. Paraboca, Choosing. Paronduba, Enquiring. Pea, Abstaining.
Pitu, Remaining. Pitanga rempi, To cast off. Pitera, Kissing. Pitibo, Helping.
Aittiba, Anointing. Poacema, Mourning. Pobana, Spinning. Pocuaba, To use.
Pocaucuba, Dreaming. Porabiqui, Working. Potara, Lying. Potareima, Refusing.
Potara, Desiring. Puama, Rising. Puaya, Commanding. Puca, Laughing. Pura,
Using.
Q.
Quera, Sleeping. Querara, Waking.
R.
Raba, Untying. Qereco, Having. Rura, Coming.
T.
Tara, Catching. Tecobe, Living. Tiguioca, Bleeding. Tiu, Disgracing. Tima,
Ploughing, Warring, or Burying.
Y.
Yaceo, Crying. Yeaoboca, Pulling off. Yeupira, Climbing. Yuca, Killing.
These are of the most usual words of the general Language in Brasile, besides
which every distinct Tribe or Division of People has its peculiar Tongue, as
has been said, of which the chiefest and most eminent are the Tupinambu,
Tabaiaras, Potigi-iguaras, Marhuites, Waimoores, Tomonimenos, Waitaquazes,
Wainasses, Topinaques, Pories, Molopaques, Motaias, Biheros, Wainawasons,
Tamoies, Tocomans, and the Cariogs; of all which the Tupinambu are the most
comely, especially their Women, which (according to the testimony of the
aforesaid Emanuel Moraes, an Eyewitness) may stand in competition with the
European Beauties. These Women accompany their Husbands when they go into the
Wars, and carry their Provisions, especially store of Tobacco. In the Lips both
of the Men and Women hang little Stones. The Men take as many Wives as they
please; and amongst the generality of the forementioned Nations, there is
scarce any sign of Religion to be discerned.

The Tobaras and Potigi-iguaras.
The Tobaras arc accounted the best Horsemen; but in Singing and Discourse, the
Potigi-iguaras exceed all the other Brasilians: They place twenty or thirty
Singers in a Row, which observing Time, Sing the Transactions of their
Predecessors with good Voices.

The Waimoores.
The Waimoores are a strong People that inhabit the large Tract of Land between
Bahia and Isleos, and having well timber'd Bodies, can keep pace with a Horse
running full speed. Five or six of them often set upon a Sugar-Mill, though a
hundred Men be at work in the same: They are all over bedaub'd with Dirt,
because they lie like Beasts on the Ground: They wear long Hair, and have no
certain Abodes.

The Tomonimenos.
The Tomonimenos, living about Spirito Santo, are more civilis'd; they make
Walls of Stone about their Huts; and these Walls are full of Holes, through
which they shoot Arrows at those that Invade them; their Bodies are Painted red
and black, and covered with Feathers. The Portuguese taking sixteen thousand of
them Prisoners at once, killed most of them, and destroyed the Country all
along the River Paraiva.

The Waitaquazes.
At the South and North Point of Cape Frio dwell the Waitaquazes, bigger and
stronger than the Waimoores; and they also sleep like Hogs on the Ground about
a Fire, hold all People for their Enemies, and their Flesh for the greatest
Dainty. The Women Armed with Bows and Arrows stand by their Husbands in Battle.

The Wainasses.
On Isla Grande reside the Wainasses, a little People, which have very long
Bellies, go stark naked, shave the Crown of their Heads, and let the other part
of their Hair hang down long on their Shoulders. The Women, which are of gross
Bodies, color themselves Red with Vruca, The Description of the Plant Vruca.
which is a wild Plant, but much used amongst them: the Kernels are enclosed in
Husks full of red Fibers. These Kernels are not only mixed with the other
Ingredients of the Chocaletta Drink, but also used to Dye of a red Color: The
Wood of this Plant is very white, and the Bark gray, like the Hazle; the Leaves
being of a deep Green, resemble a Heart; at the end of the Boughs grow several
Blossoms, each as big as a Rose, consisting of five Leaves, parley red and
partly white, in the middle whereof are yellowish Threads with purple Points,
which give little or no smell: after the Flower follows the Fruit, two Fingers
long; when it begins to be ripe it grows still redder and redder, each Cod
containing thirty or forty round Kernels, which being touched leave a red
tincture upon the Fingers; the Cod when ripe opens of it self, and shows the
Kernels speckled white, which dried, pounded, and mixed with Piss, Dye so
strong a Red, that Linen dipped into the same will never receive any other
Color. This Root also boiled in Broth, makes it not only red, but gives it a
pleasant taste.

The Topinaques.
The Topinaques, which dwell about St. Vincent, are a strong and gross People,
go stark naked both Men and Women: when they kill any of their Enemies they
Paint themselves with the Fruit Janipano, put a great Plume of Feathers on
their Head, and two Sticks in their Mouths, Dancing with strange motions of the
Body, inclining sometimes toward the right, and sometimes toward the left
side, for three day together; during which time they drink a filthy kind of
Liquor. The Women, who have well proportioned Bodies, only covering their
Heads with a Cap, about which they tie a bread of Hair, to which a square
Basket being fastened, hangs below their Backs when they travel.

The Pories.
The Mountains along the Ocean, which enclose much Gold, are inhabited by the
Pories, a peaceable People, molesting none of their Neighbors; they sleep in
Nets of Flags, and have no other Houses than three Poles placed triangular, and
covered with Palm-Leaves; they feed on Pine-Nuts and Eyrires, Apples that have
Shells like a Walnut, and have also the precious Balsam-Oyl in great abundance.

The Molopaques.
Along the River Paradiva inhabit the Molopaques; the Men strong and well
timber'd, have Beards long enough to cover their Privities. The Women also
fair, modest, prudent, and never laughing, tie their Hair, painted with several
colors, round about their Middle with a Cord, so that it serves in stead of an
Apron. They observe a set-hour for Dinner and Supper, which is not used by any
other Brasilians. The Mountains in these Parts consisting of a black Mold, have
plenty of Gold, but it is of no esteem or regard amongst them, only that which
is washed down by the Rain they gather up, but put to no other use than to make
Hooks to hang their Nets on.



The Motayas
The Motayas, being of a low Stature and brown Complexion, shave off the Hair of
their Heads, or else pluck it up by the Roots; they are eaters of Man's-flesh.

Not far from whose Dominions appear the Mountains Pinos up in the Country,
which abounding with Gold and Precious Stones, are inhabited by the Biheros,
otherwise called Lopos, which live under the Trees like Beasts.

The Waianawasons.
The Waianawasons have little Villages, built along a nameless River; they are a
Gigantick People, but very ignorant. Thirteen Portuguese undertaking some years
ago to travel through this Country to the South Sea, found on some Mountains
abundance of Gold and Precious Stones; and amongst many strange things they saw
a Crystal Mountain ten days before they came near it, over which they could not
travel because of its steepness; at the foot thereof sprung a broad Stream,
making a great noise. From thence traveling forward, The Tamoyes.
they came to the Tamoyes Country, the Men whereof, being well proportioned,
wore great Bunches of Feathers on their Heads: The Women, exceeding fair, had
carved Breasts. The said Portuguese being taken here, were put into Prison, and
all slain and eaten, excepting one, who escaped after this manner: Thirty
thousand Tamoyes falling into the Country of the Amazons, by the Americans
called Mandiocuysyams, made a great Feast with three hundred of them, whilst
the rest fled to the River La Plata, where they got help from the Portuguese,
who killed ten thousand of the Tamoyes, made the rest Slaves, and released
their imprisoned Countreyman.

The Tocomans Caryogs, and Maraquites.
The Tocomans, a little People, dwell between La Plata and St. Vincent.

The Caryogs possess much Gold and Precious Stones.

The Maraquites, by the Western Indians sur-named Tapuiyers, that is, Wild
People are divided into seventy six sorts, all differing in their Languages;
amongst which the chiefest are the Arodera, Cajau, Maquaru, and Poyme, which
all live without Law, Religion, settled Abodes, or Friendship with any
Neighbors; and the Women Fight as well as the Men. Jacob Rabbi, who dwelt a
considerable time, and conversed amongst these People, describes their Customs
thus:

Their Customs described.
Their King Jandui, sir-named Otshicayayna, from the River which flows through
the Country of the Tapuyans, causes (if he thinks fit) to be published through
the the whole Camp of the Enemy, whither he will go the next Morning, and what
he will do ill the Day following, having first consulted with his Council of
Sorcerers. Before they march they wash their Bodies in the River; rub
themselves all over with Sand, and afterward wash it off again, then stretch
themselves till all their Joints crack, run to the Fire, and when thoroughly
warm, scratch their Bodies with certain Fish-Teeth, insomuch that the Blood
gushes out of several places, all which they judge to be good against
wearisomness. About a Stones-cast from the King's Tent lie two thick Logs, a
large Stride one from the other, against which the whole Multitude stand
divided into two Parties, each of whom choose the strongest Man accounted
amongst them to carry the Log for a Wager, and when these two are tired, they
are released by others, and he that comes last to the appointed place with the
Log, is laughed at by the Party to which he belonged that was there first,
where they all stay for the Youths that bring their Arms, which when they have
delivered, they all fall to work, cutting down Trees, breaking off the Boughs,
sticking them in the Ground, and tying them together on the top for Tents,
which are built in rows one against another, leaving a broad Path between. Mean
while the Women and Children coming with their Baggage, the Men run to Fish and
Hunt, or to seek Honey. The old Women dig up Roots, which stamped serve them
for Bread, whilst the young Women help one another to prepare the Meat in the
Huts. Moreover the Men spend their time in several Exercises, as Wrestling and
Running, of which two Women, appointed for that purpose, are the Judges. When
the Evening draws on upon them, then the Youths dividing themselves into
Companies, go Singing from one Tent to another, and are followed by the Maids
Dancing and Leaping, every one standing behind him whom she loves best; and
this is looked upon as a singular sign of affection. When a young Man is
inclined to Marry, he carries Honey and Venison to his Mistresses Father, who
if he has more than one Daughter acquaints the Soothsayers with it, who inform
the King concerning it; he then causes all the young Men and Maids to be called
together out of the Camp, sends them into the Woods to Hunt out a wild Beast,
which they no sooner see, but they return and acquaint the Multitude therewith,
who immediately surrounding the Place, soon catch the Beast, whose Entrails
they pull out and throw to the Dogs; and give the Flesh to the Women to roast,
which when ready they make merry with, Singing and Dancing after they have
eaten; then if the Youth has behaved himself well in pursuing of the wild
Beast, the King grants him the Maid which he desires for his Wife: Four days
before the Wedding they bore a Hole through each of the Bridegrooms Cheeks with
a sharp piece of Wood, which done they solemnize the Marriage; at which the
King himself distributes the Meat to every Guest as he thinks fit; after Dinner
they extol the Mothers Care, in preserving her Daughters Virginity for the
Bridegroom in strange Songs. If a Maid be Marriageable, and no Suitor comes to
her, then the Mother draws red Strokes under her Eyes, and conducts her to the
King, who sets the Maid down by him on a Mat, warms his Hands against the Fire,
then strokes himself and the Maid, and also blows Tobacco-Smoak on her and
himself, which done, he performs the part of a Husband with her. But their
making Holes through their Ears and Lips is done whilst they are Children,
after this manner: The Boys who undergo this Ceremony, come to the Place
appointed, where the whole Multitude Dance and Sing, and the Conjurers (who are
the only Priests they have) sit in two rows opposite to one another; one of
them starting up, takes a Boy by the Head, ties him Hand and Foot that he
cannot stir at all; which done, a second Sorcerer comes to his assistance, and
with a sharp-pointed Stick bores Holes through his Ears and Lips, whilst the
Mother of the Boy makes a sad Lamentation. Women refuse to have any familiarity
with their Husbands as soon as they perceive themselves to be with Child; and
as soon as any Woman is Delivered, she runs into a neighboring Wood, where with
a Shell she cuts off the Child's Navel, which boiling she eats with the
Afterbirth; then washes her self and the Child every Morning and Evening in
cold Water; as long as she gives Suck her Husband lies not with her, unless it
be a Man that has but one Wife. If a Woman commit Adultery, her Husband beats
her out of his House, but if he takes her in the Act, it is lawful for him to
kill both. In the middle of the King's Tent stands a great Calabash full of
Stones called Kehnturah, covered with the corner of a Mat, which none dares
approach without the King's leave, unless it be to smoke the same with Tobacco,
or to lay Venison or Honey before it.

Strangemanner of curing the Sick amongst the Tapuyans,
It is also remarkable how the Sorcerers deal with their Sick; the aforesaid
Jacob Rabbi, an Eyewitness relates, That the King Drarugh being extremely
troubled with pains in his Sides and Legs, and finding no help amongst his
Sorcerers, who pretended to be Physicians, went to the neighboring King of the
Tapuyans, where three undertook to cure him, which they did after this manner:
One of them blew Tobacco-smoak on his Body, sucked his Knees, roared like a
Lion, and after much ado vomited a little Eel into his Hand, which he pretended
had put the King to so much pain; whilst the second sucked his Belly, and also
roared exceedingly, and vomited forth at last a Stone, on which appeared a
Rose; the third sucked his left Side, till he vomited something like a Root;
after which the King is said immediately to have recovered.

Their Feasting in honor of the Stars.
There is but little Ceremony of Religion to be found amongst the Tapuyans,
only they show Reverence to the Seven-stars when the Fruits of the Field are
ripe, after this manner: First they spend three days in Dancing and Singing,
then the Youths prepare themselves to Fight with Lances and Clubs, tie tough
Twigs about their Legs, pour Honey on their Heads, tie their Hair behind in
Knots after it is powdered with red Powder, Paint their Faces and Bodies with
several Colors, stick a long Feather in their Necks betwixt their Hair, and on
their Heads set Garlands of red Feathers pleited, down their Backs hang Bundles
of Branches like Tails, and have their Arms adorned with the Wings of the Bird
Kosetug; thus dressed they fight three days, at the end whereof the Conquerors
show great joy.

It deserves special observation what the Learned Gerard Vossius relates of
them from the Mouth of Christopher Arcisseusky, a Polish Nobleman, famous for
his hetoick Exploits for the United Netherlands in Brasile.

Arcisseusky's Relation of the Manners of the new Married.
The Tapuyans (says he) are a People that range up and down, never staying
long in one place, between Siara and Meranthon, a vast Tract of Land, and go
almost naked, having only a slight Covering about their Middle. When the
Hollanders gave them Clothes, they admired the strange Fashion thereof, and
after two days returned them again: In their Lips, Nostrils, Ears and Cheeks
they hung Ornamentals of Wood, Bones, Feathers, or Stones; a great Club, and a
strong Bow made of hard Wood serve them for Arms; Gold and Silver they
esteemed not, wherefore they bartered whole Chests full (buried there by the
Portuguese and discovered by them) with the Hollanders for Greyhounds: They
judge themselves to be better than other Man-eaters, because they eat not the
Flesh of their Enemies, but of their own Relations, and those neither killed in
the Wars, nor dying a natural Death; by which they pretend to express their
exceeding love to the Deceased, who else would, say they, be eaten by the Worms
and rot, wherefore they rather choose to eat them, that they may receive the
nourishment themselves.

The same Author relates also, That he saw a Tapuyan yield up the Ghost not far
from the Castle Rio Grande, after which his nearest Relations taking the Body,
washed the same, together with the Entrails, and cutting the Corpse into several
pieces, roasted the same on a Spit, preserving the Fat that dropped from it in
Pans, and eat the Flesh with a greedy Appetite. None were admitted to this
Feast but his chief Relations; and that which they could not eat, as the Hair,
Teeth, Nails, and Bones, they burnt to Ashes, which gathering up they mixed
with their Liquor till it was all drunk up.

The Religion of the Tapuyans.
The Tapuyans acknowledge two Deities, the one good and the other bad; to the
good they show no Reverence, because, say they, he is bountiful of himself, and
does them no hurt; whereas on the contrary they zealously call upon their
Devil-Deity, because they think he destroys all those who worship him not.

Their foretelling of things to come.
They never Travel nor go to War before they have consulted with their angry
God, and that not without great Ceremonies; whereupon they ascribe to
themselves the knowledge of future things; and indeed they often foretell future
things which are beyond humane apprehension; as a testimony whereof that may
serve which Sapo Amama, a Friezland Gentleman, found by experience: for he
keeping Guard before Conjahu with a Troop of Horse against the Portuguese, had
several Tapuyans in his Service, who foretold, That the following day the
Lieutenant Amama and a Trooper should be killed by a Shot from a great Gun;
which, though slighted, was confirmed by the exact fulfilling of the
Prediction. The like Passages happened daily, and amongst many Arcisseusky
relates one very remarkable Accident, viz. He removed a considerable number of
Men out of the Garrison Rio Grande, to surprise the Spanish Fort Barra-Canium,
and nothing could more promote the Design than secrecy; but fifty Tapuyans
having joined with the Hollanders, Arcisseusky feared they might discover his
Plot, wherefore he charged them that they should not stir a foot from his
Company, which they accordingly promised, and having marched three days through
By-ways, they daily performed their Devotion in open view, and Arcisseusky
desired that they would call him when their Devil appeared, which they granted,
on promise that he should not do him any hurt: On the third day the Army being
sufficiently refreshed, he being called, found the Tapuyans sitting in a
Semicircle, with their Feet spread asunder; opposite to them sat their Priest
on the Ground, whom they asked concerning all manner of Affairs, and he
questioned them again, on which they gave their several Answers, but could not
be understood for want of Interpreters; for those whom the Hollanders used
spoke only two Languages, one of which is used commonly by the Brasilians along
the Seacoast, and the other by the Portuguese, in which they Interpreted to
the Hollanders as much as possibly they could understand of what the Tapuyans
said, whose Language differs very much from the vulgar Brasile Tongue, because
they live up in the Inland, and are divided into diverse Tribes, so that the
Interpreters could not understand the Tapuyans, but judged their meaning more
by nodding of the Head, and the like signs: after the Assembly had done
speaking, the Priest rose up and went out of their sights into the Wood, where
with a loud voice he called three times upon the Devil; but he not answering,
the Priest returned to his Company, who began their Questions and Answers
afresh, which could not be understood by the Interpreters; and soon after the
Priest (seeming to be commanded by the rest) went again to the Wood, but
calling still in vain, returned; then going a third time, and calling as
before, was by a small, but shrill Voice, answered from the middle of the Wood,
from which the Tapuyans concluded that their Business would come to perfection,
and that the Devil would soon appear to them: The Priest hereupon going
backwards and forwards three times one after another to his Company, they began
to talk as before; at last going into the Wood again, they all spoke louder,
and with more vehemence than before, whilst the forementioned shrill Voice
approached nearer and nearer, and at last the supposed Demon came forth with
the Priest, who commanded him to sit opposite to the Congregation, which had a
great deal of Discourse, and sometimes the Priest speaking was answered by the
Devil in his shrill Voice; but some of the People calling aloud, caught up
their Arms, and threatened to beat the Devil, as they often used to do upon the
like occasions. At the departure of the Demon, the Multitude conducted by the
Priest into the Wood, cried out in so terrible a manner, that they affrighted
the Hollanders, who judged it rather to be Lions and Tigers that roared than
Men. During these Transactions, a German Soldier in the Rere quitted his Arms
and fled, but being missed was pursued, found in a Hedge, and laid Hold on as a
Person suspected to carry Advice to the Spaniards, and being brought before
Arcisseusky and Examined, gave such ridiculous Answers as increased the
suspicion, insomuch that he was led to a Tree to be tortured; where as he stood
tied he solemnly declared, That the reason of his running away, was because he
had not Prayed in ten years, so that he was exceedingly afraid, lest when he
saw the Devil amongst the Tapuyans, he would have known him, and carried him
away to the Place prepared for all such Wretches.

The Imposture.
The Learned Gerard Vossius made a particular Enquiry after this Story, whether
the Spirit's appearance were a Reality, or an Imposture; and the truth is it
was no better than a subtle Cheat, and so it was apprehended by Arcisseusky,
who not long after, on a convenient time, asked the Tapuyans why they feigned
him to be a Devil that was a Man, whom he had often seen before? which they
denying, affirmed that it was a real Devil; but Arcisseusky knew their
pretended Friend, who spoke so shrill by reason of a Grass-blade which he held
in his Mouth. However, though the main of the Fable was acted by Man, yet the
Devil without doubt played his part with them, as appeared by those
Predictions, which no Man could possibly know, viz. That the Portuguese Fort
should with the loss but of three Men fall into the Hollanders hands; for so
accordingly it happened. But because the Devil cannot foresee all things,
therefore they often err: for they said that the Hollanders should cross the
Moat on Boards nailed together in stead of a Bridge, and that the Enemy should
not perceive it; and indeed Arcisseusky had resolved so to do, but was
discovered by the Portuguese, who defended themselves with great Guns, which so
affrighted the Tapuyans, not used to such a noise, that they ran away and never
returned, so that by Morning the Fort was conquered, and all things quieted.

After this Arcisseusky burnt several Portuguese Ships in the River Monguoape,
and kept one, carrying ten Demi-Cuiverins, laden with Sugar and Spanish Wine;
which to carry to a safe Harbor a short Way, he required the Tapuyans
assistance; but they refused to enter, pretending the Ship would perish by some
or other unfortunate Accident, which accordingly happened as they had said; for
the Ship was split against a Rock in the Mouth of a narrow Haven, insomuch that
nothing of it was saved; all which the Tapuyans knew beforehand by the Devil's
information, for they never go upon any Business of consequence before they
have consulted with him, and done him worship. Yet, it seems, they cannot
secure this Devil of theirs from the Stripes of a Mortal, A pleasant Story
between Arcisseusky and a Tapuyan Priest.
as appears by this pleasant Story: A Tapuyan Priest was promised a Shirt from
Arcisseusky, upon condition the Devil should pull the same out of his Hand and
carry it up in the Air: The Tapuyan liking the Proposal, promised immediately
to call the Devil; but when Arcisseusky desired leave to Drub him with a Stick
which he had in his Hand, he could by no means persuade the Priest to call for
his Demon; at which every one began to laugh: and to carry on the Mirth
farther, Arcisseusky Joking with the Priest, said, I will show you that I am a
greater Artist than you, for to Morrow I will bring it about by my Art, that
great Horns shall grow on your Head, so big, that you shall not be able to pass
these Doors; which so affrighted the Tapuyans, that all of them fled, only the
Priest returned the next day with an Interpreter to Arcisseusky, desiring him
that he would use him mercifully, and not cause any Horns to grow on his Head.

At the time when Jacob Rabbi conversed amongst the Tapuyans, they were
Governed by Janduy, a Man of above a hundred years old, whose chief Seat was on
each side of the River Otschunogh, and round about the Lake Igtug, in which
none durst Swim, because of the many biting Fishes in the same.

The King Pritigaba having entered into a strict League with Janduy, Warred
continually against the Kings Arygpoygh, Wanasewasug, Tshering, and Dremenige;
and had not the Portuguese taken the four last into their Service to aid them
against the Hollanders, they could never have held out long against the Forces
sent by Janduy, who destroyed Man, Beast, and Houses, sparing nothing they met
with; for they murder and destroy all things where e're they come.

Brasile by whom possessed at present.
The several Nations that now possess Brasile, besides its native Inhabitants,
are Portuguese, English, Hollanders, Germans, and French, which the Brasilians
by a general Name call Ajuru-juba; otherwise they call all Strangers Caraiba or
Pero. But from the commixing of several Nations proceeds a fifth sort, for one
that is born of European Parents in Brasile is called Mozombo; of an European
Father and Brasilian Mother, Mameluc; of an European Father and a Moor,
Mulatto; of a Brasilian and Moor, Curiboca, or Cabocles; of two Negro's,
Criolo. But above all others the Portuguese are the strongest along the
Seacoast, who when first they began to settle on Brasile, found great
resistance; and had not the Natives been at Wars amongst themselves, they could
never have got so much footing, but now they are sufficiently Masters; for they
have either slain all the old Inhabitants, or driven them up into the Inland:
however, the Brasilians are so valiant, that they will Encounter a great Army,
being brought up in the Wars from their Cradle. When they Engage one with
another they shoot their Arrows exceeding thick, Hooting, Hollowing, and
Leaping from one side to the other to shun the Arrows with a wonderful
dexterity: The Conquerors spare none, but kill all, and Feast on the slain
Bodies; but some they hale away Prisoners with a Rope about their Necks, to
each of whom they allot a young Maid, who cherishes and fattens them up for
five Months, at the end of which they make a great Feast, and drink to a pitch
beyond Sense or Reason, having first filled their Bellies with the Flesh of the
slain Prisoners roasted. If the Woman be got with Child by the Slain, they
imagine that they can take no greater revenge of their Enemy, than to devour
the Child as soon as it comes into the World; but it often happens, that the
Woman really loving her Husband the Prisoner, runs away with him, and so
bereaves her Friends of a Banquet.

SECT. II. St. Vincent.
THe continual Wars which the Portuguese have maintained against the
Brasilians, have hindered them from Settling any where but along the Seaside,
where their Residences are divided into thirteen Praefectures or Lordships, by
them called Capitanias; the Southermost whereof being 1. St. Vincent, Places of
note in the Praefecture of St. Vincent.
has a City of the same Denomination, which lies near a River that coming out
of the Ocean runs round in the Country, and so returns into the Sea.

2. Sanctos los Leyes, which reckons four hundred Houses and three Sugar-Mills.
Here great Ships take in their Lading in the middle of the City.

3. Hitauhacin, the most Southern, is inhabited by the Portuguese. Twelve
Leagues from thence up into the Country the Jesuits have built the Village St.
Paulo, near the Gold-Mines that lie in the Mountains, extending from East to
West thirty Leagues. This Village, long since containing eighty Houses, is
inhabited by Brasilians and a mixed People; the Way thither is troublesome, over
rough Mountains, and Ways overgrown with Brambles.

On the Island Britioga, at a sandy Inlet which makes a good Harbor, lies a
Fort for defense of the Haven St. Vincent: and since the English, Anno 1582.
sunk a Ship there, a second Fort has been built to prevent the coming in up
the River; yet notwithstanding Captain Thomas Candish ran by both the Forts,
and burnt St. Vincent, but spared Sanctos.

Before the River which washes St. Vincent, appears the Island Sebastian,
pretty large, woody, and well stored with Venison; It has wholesome Water, good
Herbage, and a secure Road for Ships against all Winds.

Farther into the Sea appears the high and rocky Isles Alcatraces, as also
Victorio des Busires, Porto des Castellanos, Monte de Frigo, Muella, and
Queimadas.

The Nature of the Tupinikinsi, Natives of St. Vincent.
The Natives of St. Vincent, which are in League with the Portuguese, are called
Tupinikinsi, inhabiting the Mountains which extend above twenty eight Leagues
up into the Country: They maintain continual Wars against the Carioes, a
civilized People, and white of Complexion, as also against the Cupin-Imbas on
the North, and a nameless People bordering on Peru. Moreover, the Miramumins, a
very wild People, range all the Country over, but are much lessened since the
Portugueses Arrival.

SECT. III. Rio de Janeiro.
First. Discovery and Possesion of Rio de Janeiro.
THe second Lordship Rio de Janeiro, formerly by the French called Ganabara, was
discovered Anno 1515. by Juan Dias de Solis; but the French first Settled
themselves here forty years after Dias de Solis: for setting Sail from Havre de
Grace with three well Manned Ships, Commanded by Nicholas Durandus Villegagnon,
they arrived at Rio Janeiro in November, and at the Entrance into the River,
which is about half a League broad, built a wooden Fort of a hundred Foot
long, and sixty broad, and giving it the Name of the French Admiral Coligni,
put several Guns into the same to secure the Entrance, enclosed on each side by
two steep Mountains. In the River, which is very broad, lie several woody
Isles, on one of which, near the Fort Coligni, Villegagnon Settling himself,
suffered great Inconveniences for want of Water, because he durst not Land on
the Main, for fear of being surprised by the Natives. Here he stayed a year and
a half in a deplorable Condition, when Philip Corguileray and Du Pont set Sail
with three Ships from the Haven Honfleurs; but they also though they had many
Men, yet were ill stored with Provisions, insomuch that Hunger increased
amongst them daily: wherefore Villegagnon returned home without any farther
Exploits.

Jean Leri, who went with Corguileray, describes Rio Janeiro after this manner:

Jean Leri his Description thereof.
The River (says he) lies twenty three Degrees Southward of the Equinoctial
Line; the Inlet of the Sea, twenty fourthousand Paces broad, and in some places
broader, is hemmed in by hills; the Mouth of the Inlet is somewhat dangerous,
by reason of three rocky Isles; beyond the large Bay is a narrow Channel, on
the left hand whereof there rises a high Mountain, which the French called Le
Pot de Beure, because it resembles a Butter-pot. Somewhat farther lies the Rock
Ratier, where Villegagnon thought to build a Fort, but the Water in stormy
Weather washing over the Rock, he was forced to give over his Design. Half a
League farther is an Island a thousand Paces in length, and a hundred and fifty
in breadth, surrounded with Rocks, on which the French resided: at each end of
the Isle rises a Hill, and from the middle a Rock sixty Foot high; on the Hill
Villegagnon pitched his Tent till he had built him a handsome House on a Rock;
the other Houses were built in the Valley. Three Leagues and a half farther
lies a fruitful Isle nine Miles in circumference, inhabited by a salvage People
called Touoebinambauti: there are several other Isles, on which breed good
Oysters with little Pearls, which stick so fast to great Stones, that they can
scarce be plucked off. The River Janeiro abounds with Fish.

Towns and Places of chief note.
The French once possessed this Island, but were dispossessed by Emanuel de Sa,
Governor of Brasile, for the Portuguese.

The City Sebastian, which contains three hundred Houses, is built on the
Southern Point of Janeiro; opposite to which, on the Northern Point, lies the
Fort; a large Church, the Jesuits Cloister, and two Sugar-Mills, give no small
luster to the City, where the chief Trade consists in Brasile Wood and Cotton.
The French Stormed this Town Anno 1581. but marched off without any success.
Dirk Ruiters, an Eyewitness, gives us this Description of Sebastian:

The Town (says he) lies two Leagues up the River Janeiro, in a Bay, about
which it is built like a Semicircle in a sandy Soil along the Water, and is
about a Mile long; at each end rise steep Mountains, besides which it has
neither Walls nor Gates; but its strength consists of four Forts, the chiefest
whereof stands toward the East on a Rock in the Mouth of the River; the second
toward the West, an Isle which on the South-East rises with a Mountain
resembling a Sugar Loaf: the third crowns a Rock South-East from the Town; and
the fourth, in the North-West, a high Mountain. The Natives, called
Tououpinambauti, are very serviceable to the Portuguese.

Besides the forementioned Towns Coligni and St. Sebastian, some make mention
of another in this Praefecture, called Angra de los Reyes, twelve Leagues
distant from St. Sebastian Westward.

The Buroughs of the Natives are populous, but neither strong by Nature, nor
fortified, and so not by any one thought worthy the naming.

SECT. IV. De Spirito Sancto.
Description of the Lordship De Spirito Santo.
NExt to Rio Janeiro lies the Lordship or County De Spirito Sancto, exceeding
fruitful, having diverse Woods abounding with Venison. The Rivers Parayva,
Manangea, Itapemeri, Iritibi, and Guarapari, Several strange sorts of Fish.
are stored with all sorts of Fish, and amongst others the Fish Piratiapua,
which in the Winter Months lives in the Rivers, and against the Summer returns
to the Rocks washed by the Ocean. This Fish has a wide Mouth full of Teeth, a
reddish Tongue, little Fins, except those on their Backs, diverse colored
Scales, yet most of a dark Red, and generally weighs fifty Pound.

Here is also the Fish Paru, full of yellow Scales like Half-Moons over a black
Skin; it has long Fins near the Tail, and a little Head.

No less remarkable is the Guebucu, which has a long Body, a sharp bonie
Snout, the upper Jaw reaching over the other, no Teeth, a Tail divided in the
middle, sharp Fins on the Back, and a Skin full of Silver-colour'd Prickles.
This Monster not only devours great Fishes, but also Men; when it is hungry it
often runs its Snout through the side of a Ship.

But there is no Fish more deformed than the Abacatuaja, which being oval and
flat, has two long Fins underneath, and one on the top, a divided Tail, green
Fins, a smooth Skin, and fiery Eyes; as soon as it is taken it cries like a Hog.

In this County stands a Town of the same Denomination, which contains two
hundred Houses, a Sugar-Mill, and a Cloister of Jesuits, and drives a great
Trade in Cotton and Brasile Wood. Before the City lies an Inlet full of Isles,
the Mouth of which is guarded by a Castle. The Natives, called Maigaias, are in
League with the Portuguese, but the Tapuyans and Apiapetangas do them all the
mischief they can possibly; so that the Portuguese travel in great danger of
their lives, when any Business calls them, through the Country of these
salvage People. But besides these People, the Way is pestered with strange wild
Beasts, especially on the Mountain Mestre Alvaro, which is seen at a great
distance off at Sea; on which, amongst other Creatures, breeds the terrible
Serpent Boiguacu, The Serpent Boiguacu.
whose length is generally twenty four Foot; it is of an Ash color, with great
and small black Spots, with a little white Speck in the middle; when hungry, it
leaps out of the Hedges, or from the tops of Trees, raises it self upright on
its Tail, and winding about either Man, Beast, or whatever it be, squeezes it
to death, or puts its Tail, which ends in a sharp Point or Sting, in at the
Fundament in such a manner, that it kills the Creature on which it seizes in a
moment, and then swallows it up. This Serpent has strong Ribs inwardly, and
more than seventy bonie Joints; wherefore it turns it self with great ease; the
Joynt-bones near the Head are the biggest, and grow smaller and smaller toward
the Tail: It also feeds on Pismires.

The Bird Jabicu-guacu.
This County also breeds the Bird Jabicu-guacu, which exceeds the Crane in
bigness, and has a long thick Bill, but no Tongue; on his Head appears a white
grifly Crest or Mitre; the Wings and Tail are short, and the Feathers most of
them white, except the Pinions, which shine like Rubies; their Flesh is of a
good relish, but somewhat dry.

Near the River which washes the City Spirito Sancto, the Paraibes dwell in
Huts, not unlike Ovens.

SECT. V. Porto Seguro.
Description of Porto Seguro.
NExt to the forementioned County borders Porto Seguro, discovered by Pedro
Alvares Capralis, who gave this Country the Name of Terra de Santa Cruiz, but
afterward changed it to Porto Seguro, because he found a secure Harbor there.
The Town, built on the top of a white Rock, gives its Denomination to the whole
Country, and harbor'd long since two hundred and twenty Families, and has
five Sugar-Mills. The Land on the North side of the Rock rises high, but South
wardly a smooth Coast runs along the Ocean, from which two Leagues off at Sea
lie several Cliffs, against which the Waves break with a great force.

The Towns Santa Cruiz and Amaro are left desolate, because the Portuguese were
continually Invaded by the salvage Aymures, whom they were not able by any
means to repress.

Southward from Porto Seguro appear the Shoals Abrolhos, twenty six Leagues
from the Coast; they are of one breadth, but one is longer than the other.

Remakable Wreck of the Ship Batavia
On this Coast the Ship Batavia was cast away Anno 1629. which Accident is the
more remakable for the Murders committed by the Factor, Hieronymus
Corneliszoon, who with some Confederates resolved to run away with the Ship,
and to Sail to some Spanish Haven, or Dunkirk, and so to pillage the Netherland
Vessels; but their Design was frustrated by the Ships running against the
Abrolhos: Francis Pelsaert, chief Commander, first caused the Sick, with the
Women and Children, to be put on an Island, or else on two Rocks about three
Leagues distant from the place where the Ship lay, in which remained seventy
Men, whom Pelsaert in vain endeavored to carry away; for the Sea was so rough
that a Boat was not able to abide in the same, and also the Storm beginning to
increase, beat the Ship more and more against the Sands, and the Seamen
venturing toward the Isle on pieces of Timber, were some drowned, others by
the Waves, were driven ashore, amongst whom was Hieronymus Cornelszoon, who
preserved his Life twenty four hours on the Bolt sprit after the Ship was
stav'd; but not terrified with such an Accident, he continued in his
forementioned Resolution. On one of the Cliffs were forty Persons with eighty
Cans of Water, but on the Island a hundred and eighty with much less; upon
which Pelsaert, who when the Storm ceased, thought to save somewhat more out of
his Wrack, was necessitated to seek for fresh Water on one of the said Cliffs,
but not finding enough, trimmed up his Boat and set Sail homeward, from thence
to fetch a new supply of People: Corneliszoon his villainous Attempt.
During which time Cornelisszoon performed his Vilany; for he chose David of
Zeevang, Gysbrecht Welderen, Coenraed Huissen, Cornelis Pieterszoon, Rutger
Frederickszoon, and Hans Heilwerk, for his Assistants, besides several others,
and destroyed all the People on the Island, except five, who escaped on pieces
of Timber to the Rock where Weyber Hays resided with forty Men, who being
informed what the aforesaid Villains had done, prepared for resistance with
sharppointed Sticks, those People on the second Rock being also slain by
Zeevang, who spared only some Women and seven Boys; after which Hieronymus
Corneliszoon took Lucretia Jans for his Wife; in like manner Huissen took
Judith Sebastiaens; the remaining Women served the rest for Concubines. Not
long after twenty of them going in Sloops, fell upon Weiber Hays, who valiantly
resisted them: but because Hays's Life was of great consequence, by reason he
might give notice of their Actions to to the Ship which was expected from
Holland, and which they designed to run away with, therefore they renewed their
Assault with fifteen Men more, and were again beat off; wherefore they resolved
to make a Peace, which Heronymus Corneliszoon promised to ratify the next day;
nevertheless this Peace was but feigned, for under pretense thereof they
delivered Letters to several French Soldiers that were under Hays's Command,
promising each six thousand Guilders if they would join with them; but they
showed the Letters to Hays, who keeping it secret, that he might draw on
Hieronymus Corneliszoon, not mistrusting the Discovery, to come thither at the
appointed time, took him Prisoner, and caused Zeevang, Huissen, Welderen, and
Cornelis Pieterszoon to be put to death; but Wouter Loos making his escape, was
chosen chief of the Rebels, who ventured a fourth Assault, but returning
without any effect left off making any farther Attempt. Mean while Pelsaert
arriving with the Sardam Frigate from Holland, sent a Boat ashore, which by a
little Skiff dispatched by Hays, was informed of all the Passages; whereupon the
Boat returning, Pelsaert as he was putting himself into a posture of Defense,
espied a Sloop coming about the Southern Point of the Island, in which were
eleven of the Rebels clad in Scarlet with Silver Lace, which making directly
toward the Ship, as soon as they came up, were commanded to throw away their
Arms overboard; which having done, and coming aboard the Frigate, they were all
put in Irons, as also their remaining Party, and condemned to die.

Opposite to the Abrolhos on the Main Coast, a plain Country extends it self
thirty Leagues in length, inhabited by the Ouetacates, a cruel People, who
continually either destroy one another, or else make sad slaughters amongst
their Neighbors.

The County Porto Seguro belongs to the Spanish Duke of Avero, but is very much
decayed.

The Beast Capybara.
The Rivers Moucuripe, Caruvelas, and Lucura, breed abundance of Water-Hogs
called Capybara, which have short Feet, Bristles and Ears, a thick Body and
Head, with a bearded Snout, besides two Tusks, and twenty four lesser Teeth in
each Jaw, but no Tail; they feed on Grass and Bushes in whole Herds on the
Shore, and make a terrible noise; and though they cannot run fast, yet they
dive and swim extraordinary quick.

The Tapiirete.
The Tapiirete also resembles a Hog, especially in its Head and Feet, but is as
big as a Heifer of six Months old, has a Snout hanging over its under Lip, a
Mouth full of Teeth, and on its Skin short and dark colored Hair. This Beast
is very libidinous, and in the Nights spoils the Fruit Trees, especially the
Sugarcanes, but in the Daytime it sleeps in Thickets. The Flesh of a young
Tapiierete tastes like Beef.

Lastly, the Inhabitants of Porto Seguro are plentifully supplied with Rabbets,
and the more, because there being diverse sorts of them, (some say five) they
are taken in great abundance, either in Traps, Snairs, or Gins, or by
discovering their Holes; for the Hunters stopping the entrance of them, dig a
Hole directly over the place where the Coneys lodge, and so kill them with long
Pike-staves in the Ground.

Five sorts of Rabbets in Brasile.
Of these five sorts of Rabbets in Brasile, the chiefest, called Paca, has a
thick Head, little Ears, their fore-Feet bigger than their hind-Feet, short,
hard, and brown Hair, speckled gray on the Sides, but no Tail: The Flesh of
this sort of Rabbets is very delicate.

The second sort is the Tupesi, which being like a Hare amongst us, may as well
be accounted of that kind.

The Aguti resembles our Rabbets, only it has harsh brown Hair, round Ears,
bald Feet, gruntles like a Hog, has two Toes more on their hind-Legs than on
the foremost.

The Cavia Cobaya, though less than the European Rabbets, excel them in soft
and divers-colour'd Hair, distinguished by white, red, and black Spots; their
Head and Teeth resemble those of a Rat, but it has no Tail: No Rabbets can be
made tamer than these, and if carried to any remote Country, breed as well
there as in Brasile.

The last of all is the Aparea, which differs little in running from a Hare, as
also in respect of the Head and Beard, harbors more in rent Cliffs than in
sandy Ground.

The Tree Tucum.
The Soil of Porto Seguro bears two sorts of Palm Trees, viz. the Tucum and
Airi; the Tucum has small Boughs full of prickly Leaves, and a fruit not
unlike the Damask Prune, hanging in Clusters of three or four hundred together;
and being excellent Food to fatten Hogs and Apes; also when pressed yielding a
clear Oil, which is highly esteemed: the Fruit when ripe grows black without,
and within has a white Kernel: of the Leaves the Brasilians spin fine and
strong Thread.



The Airi grows much higher than the Tucum, and has also longer Leaves, a Body
full of sharp Thorns, and a round Fruit full of white and oily Pulp, but not
eatable; the Wood hard, heavy and black, sinks in the Water, and the Brafilians
make their Clubs of the same.

The Bird Cocoi.
Along the Rivers fly the Birds Cocoi, resembling Herons, though in beauty they
far exceed them; they have but little Flesh, long sharp Bills, of a yellowish
green color, and curious Crests of Feathers on their Heads, which fall back
over their Necks; their Flesh when young is delicate.

SECT. VI. Los Isleos.
Situation and Description of Los Isleos.
NExt Porto Seguro borders the Country Los Isleos, so called from its chief
Town, which consists of a hundred and fifty Houses, (or perhaps by this time
many more) eight Sugar-Mills, a Cloister for the Jesuits, and a Church. The
Inhabitants live by Tillage, and Transporting of Provisions in little Barks to
Pernambuco.

Seven Leagues farther in the Country, beyond the Town of Isleos, lies a
nameless Lake three Leagues long, as many broad, and above ten Fathom deep, and
full of the Fish Manati, which are very large and well tasted, besides
abundance of Crocodiles; and in windy Weather the Water is as rough as if it
were in the Ocean. Out of this Lake flows a River by a Passage so narrow, that
a Boat can scarce pass through the same.

Round about this River live the Guaymures, the most salvage People of all
America; they are of a Gigantick size, have white Skins, carry exceeding great
Bows and Arrows, live without Houses like Beasts, devour Mans-flesh like
Tigers, never Fight in Companies or Armies, but watch to surprise a single Man
or Beast; they also eat their own Children, and possessed formerly all the Land
from the River St. Francisco to the Promontory Frio; but beaten from thence by
the Tupinambas and Tupinachias, they went to the County Los Isleos, which they
Invaded in such a manner, that the Portuguese were not only forced to leave
several Sugar-Mills, but also the whole Country.

SECT. VII. Bahia de Todos los Sanctos.
Situation and Description of Tedos los Sanctos.
NExt to Isleos borders Bahia de Todos los Sanctos, belonging to the Portuguese.
The Inlet which borrows its Denomination from all the Saints, gives Name to
this eminent County. The Bay great and wide, and in the middle from twelve to
eighteen Fathom deep, lies in thirteen Degrees Southward of the Equinoctial
Line. The Coast rises white along the Sea side. The Current according to the
course of the Sun runs six Months toward the South, and as many toward the
North. The opening of the Inlet is on the South, but it flows up Northerly, and
contains two Leagues and a half in breadth; several fresh Rivers discharge
their Waters into the same: The utmost and biggest Island Taperica breaks off
the Waves which come rolling in from the Ocean. Those that Sail into the same
must have the Island on their left Hand, and the Main Coast on their right,
which is known by a Promontory, on which the Fort Antonio, and the old City
Villa Veja are built, near a little Bay with a Foreland on the North, from
which the Main Coast circling like a Half Moon ends near the Point Tapagipe,
which juts out from Bahia Todos los Sanctos. The Castle Tapesiepe stands on the
utmost Point, where the Country winding toward the East makes the Inlet
larger, from whence a narrow Channel runs up into the Country, and there makes
a Lake which extends North and South: from the Mouth of the Lake the Coast
reaches Northward to the River Pitanga, which comes gliding out of the East,
and in its Passage receives several Streams, on whose Banks stand diverse
Sugar-Mills. From Pitanga the Coast extends a League Northward, then Westerly
with a crooked. Elbow, in whose circumference lie two nameless Isles close
under the Shore; this Elbow ends in a blunt Point, about half a League from
which lies the Island Mare, a League long, in the Mouth of the River Pitanga.
To the Northward from hence a River disembogues in the said Inlet. More
Southerly appears Monks-Isle, from whence the Coast extends it self Northerly,
where several Islands appear at an exact distance from the Coast; the first
beyond the forementioned blunt Point, is Birapebiara; the next, which lies
closer to the Shore, Porto Madero; next comes in view a long Island in the
Mouth of a River, from whence the Country extends Westward, and fronts the
Island De Fuentes, as does also the River Tambaria, which comes out of the
North, but empties it self with a crooked Arm near the rest; from hence the
Coast with two little Bays runs North-West to the Stream Geresipe, in whose
Mouth, which is pretty large, appear three Isles on a row, the utmost whereof
is called Caraibe, the middlemost Pycca, the innermost has no Name, but
divides the River into two Channels; from hence the Coast bends with several
Inlets, into which fall diverse Rivulets toward the South, from the River
Cachoera, full of little Isles, opposite to which stand several Sugar-Mills.
Against Cachoera appears the Island Meve, and more Southerly Taperica, between
the sharp Point Tapagipe and the Castle Antonio. Near the forementioned the
City St. Salvador was built by Thomas de Sosa, who weighing Anchor from Lisbon,
Anno 1549. Landed safely near Villa Veja, and about half a League from thence
pitched upon a Hill, and took order forthwith for the erecting of his new City
there, giving to each of his Followers a place to build on: the Jesuits chose
the large Plain where at present stands the Church Consecrated to the Virgin
Mary; the Names of the said Jesuits were Juan Azpilcueta, Antonio Pireo,
Leonardo Nonnio, Didaco Jacobeo, Vincentio Roderigo, and Emanuel Nobrega;
whilst the common People set themselves to the building of Dwelling-houses:
But when John the Third, King of Portugal, sent a Priest thither to Teach in
the new Church of Maria, the forementioned Jesuits removed from thence to a
high Hill, which they called The Mountain Calvarien, whither diverse Brasilians
came flocking, and pitched their Tents about the Cloister, admiring their
strange Neighbors.

When Sosa Landed on the forementioned Shore, the Portuguese had but little
footing on America; for their Plantations at Isleos, St. Vincent, Pernambuco,
Villa Veja, Itamaraca, and Porto Seguro, discovered by Pedro Alvares Capralis,
Anno 1500. were run all to ruin.

Beside the City St. Salvador and the decayed Town Villa Veja, the City Paripe
lies three Leagues farther into the Country, consisting of three thousand
Families, and eighteen Sugar-Mills: The Country about the same produces plenty
of Cotton.

The Island Taperica, which is pretty large, has a fertile Soil for the
production of Tobacco, and Grass to fatten Cattle: The Inhabitants boil much
Train-Oyl of the Whales, which come ashore there in considerable numbers.

Twelve Leagues Southward from St. Salvador appears the Village Cacocheira,
formerly belonging to a rich Portuguese, who took great pains in reforming the
salvage People Guaymures to a civil Life; but seeing he profited but little, he
caused great Companies of them to be removed to Taperica, that they might do
less mischief, where the unusual and unwholsom Air killed them all in a short
time.

The Lordship Bahia has abundance of Sugar-Mills, which are either turned by
the Water, or drawn by Oxen.

The manner of Planting Sugarcanes
The Sugarcanes, by the Brasilians called Viba or Tacomaree, grow better in a
clayie and fat Soil, over which the Rivers flowing leave their Mud, than on
High-lands, Hills, or Mountains; they are Planted after this manner: They first
plough their Fields, weed them, and make Holes at an exact distance one from
the other, into which they plant their Canes in such a manner, that the tops
touch one another. The Holes before mentioned require more Earth to fill them
in Summer than in Winter, that the violent Heat of the Sun may not dry up the
Root, and that the Rain may the freelier come at them to moisten them, for the
more moisture they have, the better they grow; they attain to their full
ripeness in ten, or at most in twelve Months; February and March being the two
last Winter Months, are accounted the best to Plant in, because the Earth
softened by Rains, suffers the Root to shoot forth the better. The ripe Canes
being cut off, are left in the Field till the following Year; during which time
new Canes growing, are often ground in the Mill with the old ones; but if they
stand two years, then the sweet Liquor dries up, and the Cane withers. The
young Plants carefully planted in good Ground may last forty, nay fifty years;
but in a barren Soil they set new every five years. Sometimes in great Droughts
and extraordinary hot Seasons, the Canes are scorcht to nothing, which being
burnt in the Winter, the Ashes serve to Dung the Ground; and so in like manner
when the Water, overflowing the Fields, drowns the young Plants. In moist
Grounds the black-wing'd Worm, called Guirapeacopa, The Worm Guirapeacopa
(by the Portuguese named Pao de Galeuba) gnaws the Roots in such a manner,
that the Canes die; and sometimes it happens also that the Weeds choke the
young Plants; wherefore the Ground is to be weeded four times a year, The
manner of making Sugar in the Sugar-Mills.
till such time as the Canes are strong enough to bear against the Weeds: they
cut off the ripe Canes at the lowermost Joint, and, all the Leaves being first
pulled off, tie them up in Bundles, and bring them to the Mills, which consist
of three great Iron Bars, between which the Canes are squeezed. The Water-Mills
are turned by the force of the Water, which in great Gutters led from high
Mountains falls with exceeding force into Pools made for that purpose; after
which manner, though they wind the Canes much faster, yet they get not so much
Sugar as when they grind them in the Mills turned by Cattle: The places through
which the Juice runs must be cleans'd twice in twenty four hours; the Canes put
in behind between the first Bar, are turned into the second, and thence into
the third, which successively squeezes out all the remaining Juice: The Canes
thus pressed, serve for Fuel to burn; but they constantly keep such a great
Fire both Night and Day, that besides those pressed Canes, they burn forty
Fathom of Wood in twenty four hours, insomuch that whole Woods are consumed in
a short time: The Liquor, named Caldo, runs along wooden Gutters into great
Kettles, in which it is boiled, but if it happen to be overboyl'd they put
Water amongst it, whereby it becomes excellent Food for Horses; then they put
the Liquor into a second Kettle, where it is boiled afresh, and also scumm'd;
and for the better cleansing of it, Lime-Juyce and other things are put amongst
it; then they strein it through Clothes, and give the Dross which remains in
the same to the Slaves, which work for half a year together Night and Day like
Horses. The Dross mixed with Water makes also good Wine. Out of the great
Kettles, by the Portuguese called Caldero de Mellar, the Caldo runs into the
lesser named Tachas, where it is boiled a third time, and continually stirred
till it comes to be thick like a Syrrup, and at last to the consistence of
Sugar: It may be accounted amongst the Mysteries of Nature, that while the
Sugar boyls in the Tachas, which are the little Kettles, they must drop Oil
amongst the Liquor, which if they should do whilst it is in the great Kettel,
the Liquor would not turn to the consistence of Sugar; as on the contrary, if
they should put their Lie into the little Kettles as they OLINDA DE PHERNAMBUCO
A. Narale. B. Nonasterium in Insula Antonic vace. C. Hospitium domini
Presiotu^ H. C. Lonck. D. Ecclesia Pagi Povo. E. Promptuaria Sac^aro, A^
Hispanen ique delec^^. F. Vallum ferrestre cum nonnu^^is fortulitus. G.
Monasterium Sancti Benedicti dictum Bento. H. Sancti Antoni. I. S^i. Francisci.
K. Ecclesia Maga^. L. Ecclesia Jesuitarum. N. Promontorium ex virgultis.
^^^stium.


do into the great, the Liquor would be quite spoiled. In their Boyling-houses
stand several hundreds of Earthen Pots one by another on Planks full of Holes;
which Pots they cover with moist clay, and after fourteen days knocking it out
of the Pots, they separate the brown Sugar from the white, both which are laid
to dry in the Sun, and put into Chests.

SECT. VIII. Pernambuco.
Description of Pernambuco.
NOrthward from Bahia de Todos los Sanctos lies Pernambuco, which extends along
the Coast above seventy Leagues, between the River St. Francisco and the
Country of Hamaraca.

Pernambuco, which signifies Hells-Mouth, is on the East washed by the Northern
Ocean; in which grows a Weed much like an Oaken Leaf, and so thick, that unless
it be cut to make their Way, impedes the Sailing of Ships.

Several sorts of Fish.
The Sea is also very full of Fish, which in calm Weather are visible sixty
Fathom deep, and are taken in greater abundance than they are able to spend;
for they no sooner let down a Bait, covered with Feathers and Tallow, but the
Fish immediately swallowing the same, are taken.

Here are in the first place abundance of Hays, a Fish so rank and oily, that
they are not eatable, but their Brains are accounted good against the Stone.

There are also hereabouts a sort of flying Fish like Herrings, but not so big;
they have Wings like Bats, which carry them above Water whilst they are wet;
they swim in shoals, and are chased by all other Fishes, which endeavoring to
escape by flight out of the Water, they become a prey to the Sea-pies.

The Sea-Breams are as well tasted as the flying Fish; the Mariners cover them
in Salt, or stuff them within full of Salt and Pepper, and so hang them to dry
in the Sun.

Pernambuco it self lying in five Degrees Southward from the Equinox, produces
abundance of Brasile Wood and Sugarcanes, which last is no proper Brasilian
Plant, for the first Plants thereof were by the Portuguese first transplanted
thither from the Canary Islands.

First Discovery.
This Country was first discovered by Americus Vesputius, who being sent
thither by Emanuel, King of Portugal, to discover the Coast between the
Promontory before Olinda and the Island Itamaraca, and finding a split Rock and
some Brasilian Huts, Landed, and asked the Denomination of the Coast, which he
was informed was called Pernambuco, which he found full of steep Mountains,
inaccessible Woods, and in some places Plains and pleasant Valleys; but the
chiefest thing he could find to lade his Ship with, was Brasile Wood; but being
informed that the Soil would bear Sugarcanes, he caused Canary Sugar-Plants to
be Set there.

Chief Towns and Places of note.
Olinda, formerly the chief City of Pernambuco, had (according to Lopez) above
three thousand Houses and seventy Sugar-Mills: It is built on several Hills,
which on the North-side are steep and overgrown with Brambles, betwixt which in
many places grow Orange Trees. John Newhof, who arrived at Olinda Anno 1642.
found a few Netherlanders and Spaniards there, who dwelt in the ruined Houses.
The Land-side of the City is strengthened by Hills overgrown with Brambles and
Thorns, and toward the Seaside with Earthen Walls, fortified by fourteen
Bulwarks and a Stone Castle, able to withstand a considerable force: The
Outworks toward the South were maintained by Jews, who from the
forementioned Hills could see not only a great way into the Ocean, but also
the River Biberibi, which has a Stone Bridge leading to the City, and
Northerly and Westward the Way lies through great Woods and Forests. Olinda it
self is divided into twenty seven large Streets, besides lesser Lanes and
several Avenues, and five chief Churches, viz. Misericordia, Nostra Sennora del
Emparo, and Nostra Sennora de Guadalupe, San Salvador, and San Pedro, besides
two others of lesser note. On the highest Hill stands the Jesuits Cloister,
built square and high, and surrounded with Walls, on which Sebastian King of
Portugal, by the persuasion of his Uncle Cardinal Henry, spent a great sum of
Money, and endowed it with annual Revenues, Anno 1571. The Capuchins also built
a stately Cloister toward the East. The Franciscans moreover inhabited a
magnificent Building, near which stood the Governors Palace. The Carmelites had
also a stately Edifice, whose former luster still appears by the Ruins, where
now Cattle graze; from the Hills about which may be exactly discerned Reciffa,
the Promontory of St. Augustine, and the Castle before the Road of Reciffa:
Along the Shore stood the Dominican Cloister, and in the upper part of the City
the Minster, Consecrated to St. Bento, exceeding strong both by Nature and Art;
near which stood Conceptio de nostra Sennora. The Fort Juan de Albuquerque
stood on the Southside, from whence a Way leads you along the Shore to Reciffa,
where hard by the Potter's House stood a Beacon. But since Olinda fell into the
hands of the Netherland East India Company, they built a strong Fortress on the
North near the Seaside, where formerly a great Trade was driven with Sugar,
insomuch that forty Ships have been fraighted in a day therewith from Olinda,
and still as much more remained in the Storehouses. The Sugar cannot be made
without the help of African Slaves, and that in great numbers; for Angola alone
provided fifteen thousand four hundred and thirty Moors for the Sugar-Mills
about Olinda.

In the Years 1601, 1602, and 1623. there was sent to surprise this City
Henrick Loncque, who a little before with Peter Peterszoon Hein took the
Spanish Plate-Fleet, and brought it away from Matanca. The Expedition of
Loncque.
In the middle of June, Anno 1629. Loncque weighed Anchor from the Goerean
Road, and between great Canary and Teneriff he was Engaged (having but eight
Sail) with forty Spanish Ships, Commanded by Frederick de Toledo, fought his
way through the midst of them, and near St. Vincent (the rest of his Fleet
being come up to him, which in all made up twenty seven) he stayed for a
farther promised Supply of Ships to assist him, and the longer, because the Men
raised by the Netherland West India Company were taken into the States Service,
to oppose the Spanish and Imperial Forces, who at that time had gained some
advantage upon them: But not long after Hartogen-bosch being taken by the
Hollanders, the rest of the expected Fleet, with the promised Aid, arrived at
St. Vincent; from whence Loncque, after four Months stay, set Sail with these
additional Forces, his Fleet then consisting of fifty Sail of Ships, which
carried above seven thousand Soldiers, befides Seamen; but he was forced to lie
a considerable time under the Line, being either becalmed or beaten back by
contrary Winds, insomuch that many of his Men perished, or were disabled with
the Scurvey: At last his Fleet being come to an Anchor upon the Coast of
Pernambuco, the first that Landed about two Leagues Northward of Olinda, was
Colonel Diederik van Waerdenberg, who by Daybreak divided his Men into three
Divisions, the Forlorn-Hope consisting of nine hundred and thirty four Men,
marched toward Olinda along the Shore, led by Adolf van der Eltz; the second
being a thousand and forty nine, by Stein Callenfels; the third, consisting of
nine hundred and sixty five, was led by Fouke Honx: thus drawn out, and
marching on, they met with no resistance till they came to the River Dolce,
where eight hundred Portuguese Charged on them from behind a new Sconce; but
Waerdenberg wading up to the Middle through the River with two Fieldpieces,
the Enemy left his Works and ran into the Wood; the Forlorn-Hope approaching
the City, marched up toward the right side, up a Way through the Woods, Scaled
the Walls, near which the Jesuits Cloister stood, over which he got after some
resistance. The second Party marched in a narrow Path along the Shore, Olinda
taken by the Hollanders.
and broke into the City between the Franciscans and Jesuits Cloister, toward
the Cathedral Salvador, from whence they discharged several Guns, as also from
the Castle, which they had taken, whilst Fouke Honx Stormed the Battlements
toward the South; but Stein Callenfels and Eltz being already Masters of
Olinda, the Defendants surrendered all. Mean while the Colonel's Skiff brought
five hundred Men more ashore, with which he marched without any hinderance into
the City, where the Conquerors, faint with excessive Heat and want of Water,
found but little Booty, because the Inhabitants having notice of the Hollanders
coming, had conveyed all their Goods and Wealth to Reciffa, which the Governor
Matthias Albuquerque (Brother to the Lord Duarte Albuquerque, to whom
Pernambuco properly belonged) burnt with all the Storehouses, partly out of
revenge to the Inhabitants, who fled contrary to his Commands, and partly
because he would not enrich the Hollanders. The Portuguese Captain, Correa de
Castle Blanco, in his Letter to the King of Spain, values the loss at twenty
hundred thousand Ducats. But still the Portuguese had possession of several
Forts about the Country, whereof the most considerable was St. George, whither
Stein Callenfels marched in the Night with six hundred Men, but his Ladders
being too short, and the Hand-Granado's not easily taking fire, he was for'd to
Retreat; whereupon judging it most convenient to besiege the Castle, he dug
Trenches about the same; nor was it long ere the Besieged desired Quarter, The
Fort St. George taken.
which being granted, they marched from thence with ninety Men. The Water
Castle surrendering in like manner, they found fifteen Brass Guns therein; and
in that of St. George four thousand pound of Gunpowder, and twenty four Iron
Guns.

When the Netherland Forces Landed on Pernambuco, the Portuguese inhabited
eleven Towns, the chiefest whereof being Olinda, was generally Garrisoned by
four Companies of Armed Citizens, each containing a hundred Men and three
Companies of Soldiers: Amongst the Citizens were two hundred Merchants, some of
whom were judged to be worth fifty thousand Crusados.

Southward from Olinda, between the River Biberibe and the Ocean, was a narrow
Cawsey, at the end of which lay the populous Village Reciffa, where the Ships
lade and unlade. About the middle of the Cliff, being a League long, is the
Anchoring place for great Ships, called Pozo. At the end of the forementioned
Cawsey against Pozo, appeared a round Tower of Fre-stone.

The memorable Exploits of the English under Captain James Lancaster.
The Journal kept by the English Fleet that came hither under the Command of
Captain James Lancaster, Anno 1595. makes mention of a Fort which lay at the
Mouth of the Haven before Reciffa, which the English valiantly Stormed,
notwithstanding six hundred Men and seven Brass Guns might easily have made it
invincible: But they conquering the same, marched up to Olinda, took the
Suburb, consisting of a hundred Houses, without any resistance, as also a great
Booty, and the greater, because the Goods of a rich Carak which had some few
days before suffered Shipwreck, were kept there; they also took fifteen laden
Ships, and for thirty days kept the whole Country about Olinda restless with
continual Alarms. Since this Invasion the Portuguese built a third Fort on
Reciffa, so that the Ships must pass in in between two Forts, where the Channel
is also full of Rocks, and consequently the more dangerous.

From Reciffa the Goods are sent in Barques or Lighters to Olinda, between
which and St. Salvador run the two great Rivers Francisco and Real, the first
whereof retains its freshness twenty Leagues into the Ocean.

Along the River Popitinga stand many Sugar-Mills; and five Leagues farther
Northward beyond Olinda the Portuguese inhabit these Villages, viz. Garasu,
Reciffa, Moribeca, Antonio de Cabo, Miguel de Poyuca, Gonsalvo de Una, Povacon
de Porto Calvo, Alagoa del Nort, and Alagoa del Zur, besides other Brasilian
Hamlets, and above seventy Sugar-Mills.

The nature of the Soil in Pernambuco.
The County of Pernambuco has for the most part a good Soil, several Plains,
low Hills, and fruitful Valleys, abounding with fair Canes, which also grow on
the Mountains Masurepe, Zebaatan, Poyuca, and Moribeque.

The Wilds of El Gran Matto, afford the best Wood, with which they drive the
greatest Trade in the Village Laurenzo. Whilst Matthias Albuquerque Entrenched
himself a League and a half Westward from Olinda, by the Sugar-Mills belonging
to Francisco Montero, with a hundred Portuguese, and three times as many Armed
Brasilians, Loncque finding that he could not long keep the City Olinda against
the Enemy, caused the same to be pulled down and burnt.

Sergippo del Rey.
Between the Rivers Francisco and Real, lies the Town Sergippo del Rey, up in
the Country near a small Rivulet, which at Spring-Tydes has fourteen Foot
Water. The Woods round about feed wild Cattle, and the Mountains contain Mines
of Gold and Silver.

The first Plantation in Brasile was in the Island Itamaraca, three Leagues
long and two broad, but extends its Jurisdiction along the Main Coast, from
which it is separated by a narrow River, which runs betwixt both thirty five
Leagues. The Country is eminent for twenty Sugar-Mills, and abundance of
Brasile Wood.

Villa de Conception.
The chief Town of this Island is called Villa de Conception near the Sea, which
round about the Island is full of Rocks. The French settling themselves here at
first, were driven from thence by the Portuguese. The Town it self, built on a
Rock, has a strong Castle on the one side, erected near a shrubby Moor; to the
Northward of which Stein Callenfels found a little Isle, scarce a Musket Shot
long, which at High Water is overflown, and being full of small Trees makes a
Receptacle for Sea-Fowl, which flock thither about six a Clock in the Evening
to Roost on the Boughs, from which, when once settled to take their repose, they
will not stir till six of the Clock the next Morning, though you discharge Guns
at them all Night; but since Stein Callenfels cut down the Wood to make
Pallisado's for the new Fort against the Town Conception, they were never seen
afterward.

SECT. IX. Parayba.
Description of Parayba.
NOrthward from Itamaraca borders the County of Parayba, whence the French Ships
carried yearly several Ladings of Brasile Wood, till Anno 1585. the Portuguese
General Martin Leytam drove them from all places, since when they never
recovered any part thereof.

This Territory of Parayba borrows its Denomination from the chief Town, lying
five Leagues from the North Sea near the River Parayba, which in the Summer
Season has but little Water, but in the Winter Season increases to that
height, that it oftentimes on a sudden overflowing the Country sweeps away
both People, Cattle, and Houses. The City it self, though small, yet has
several fair Buildings, amongst which three Churches and as many Cloisters,
inhabited by OSTIS^^^NES
Franciscans, Carmelites, and Benedictins, are none of the meanest. The
Country thereabouts indifferently fruitful, has twenty Sugar-Mills. The
Mountain Cupaguao, formerly very populous with Natives, being exceeding
fertile, produces all manner of Fruit; at present it lies desolate, the
Brasilians being all destroyed by the Portuguese. These Mountains produce also
curious green Stones, which the Inhabitants wore in their Lips for an Ornament,
and which also cures the Griping of the Guts, by being laid upon the Belly.

The Silver-Mine Copaoba.
The French under the Command of Captain Dourmigas, discovered ninety years ago
the Silver-Mine Copaoba, and for a considerable time carried Silver and Brasile
Wood from hence, till the Portuguese made themselves absolute Masters.

Moreover, on the North-side of Parayba, the Salvages called Petiguars inhabit
sixteen Villages.

Strange Birds
Amongst the Birds of prey which breed here, are the Ouyaourassou, twice as big
as a Crane, with curious Feathers, and so bold and strong, that it devours not
only Sheep, but Deer and Men.

The Bird Mayton is no way inferior in beauty to the Peacock, his whole Body
being covered with white and black Feathers; on his Head grows a Tuft; the
Flesh is also very pleasant to the taste.

The Toucan, another Bird, resembles a Turtle-Dove in all parts, except the
Bill and Breast; for the Belly is ten Inches long and three broad, the Breast
of an Orange color, mixed with Crimson Spots; the remaining part is white, the
Back red, and the Tail and Wings Coal-black.

The Plant Yarammacarou.
The Plant called Yarammacarou deserves also a peculiar observation, viz. It is
thicker than a Man's Thigh, grows twelve Foot high, with three Branches of
equal length and thickness, which you may easily break; it is green without,
white within, and without Leaves, leaving red Blossoms streaked with blue, from
whence grows a Fruit about the bigness of an Apple, crimson without and white
within, and tasting like a Mulberry.

The Guara-tereba, with other strange Fish.
The River Parayba produces amongst many other Fishes the Guara-tereba, which
has a thick Body, flat Head, crooked Back, split Tail, and triangular Scales,
which laid in the Sun, shine like polished Gold.

The Sea also hereabouts affords a strange Fish with a very long and thin Tail,
the Females whereof Lay every day Eggs like Hens: they are full of poisonous
Prickles, and divided into several sorts, amongst which the chiefest are
accounted the Naainari and Jabebara.

Description of the Sea Coast of Brasile.
THe Seacoast of Brasile from St. Vincent to Spirito Santo appears as
follows: Before the Coast of St. Vincent lie the four little Isles Queimadas,
and on one side the Alcatraces and Busios; East North-East from which bears the
Island Sebastian: Before the Inlet Ubatuba lies the Isle Dos Porcos, close
under a high Shore, where the Haven runs far up in the Country. Fourteen
Leagues farther the Island Grande, stored with fresh Water, with Fish Ponds,
Woods, and two good Havens. Before the Road of Garatuba appear several broken
Isles, the chiefest whereof is Morambaya. The Ships Sailing along the Brasilian
Coast view next the Mouth of the wide River Jenero, without fear of Rocks or
Shoals. Moreover, a sandy Ground ex^ends from the Western Point to Cape Frio,
which rises out of the Sea like a Rock, with white Streaks, and cracked on the
top, between both which the high Island before Frio makes a safe Harbor. Nine
Leagues beyond Frio to the Northward, St. Salvador opens a large Bay, hemmed in
on the South by diverse nameless Isles. Lastly, the several Salt-pans along this
Coast are very remarkable, as also the Promontory St. Thoma and Parayva, the
Inlets Manangea and Itapemeri, and the River Guarapari, famous for the Mountain
Pero Came toward the North, and Guapel to the South. The Island Salvago, round
and mountainous, lies before the Mouth of the River Guarapari, where the Main
Coast grows uneven and Hilly. On the North-East Point of Spirito Santo a long
ridge of Rocks appears above the Sea; and near the Inlet rises three black
Hills on the South, and two Leagues up in the Country the broken Mountain
Mestre Alvaro, which extends along the Seacoast. The River Des Reyos Magos
encompasses three Mountains severally, and makes three Isles. The Coast on each
side of the River Dolce is very plain and even, but Cricare has a mixture of
high and low Lands. In the Mouth of the River Maranipe lies a great company of
white Shelves near together, appearing afar off as if all one. Parairepe is
remarkable by the high Trees growing on it. The Mouth of the River Caruvelas
lies full of Sand-plats. Near the Beacon Tauhaen rises a red Cliff from which a
sandy Point reaches to the River Curubabo. Before Porto Seguro lie several
dangerous Rocks in the Sea, to the Southward of which rises the High-land Cape
Pasqual. Not far from hence Santa Cruiz a good Haven for small Vessels, from
whence the Coast extends North North-East, and South South-West, to Rio Grande,
where the Shoals called Baxos de St. Antonio, making a dangerous Entry, force
the Ships for the most part to keep three Leagues from the Shore. Beyond the
Arm of Rio Grande appear three high Mountains covered with Trees; from whence
to Ilheos is a safe Passage free from Shelves. Eight Leagues farther, the River
Dos Contas runs between two broken Cliffs into the Sea: in the Mouth of it
rises a Rock resembling a high Island. Between Ilheos and Contas the Coast
rises also, but falls low again in a Bay, where white Sugar-Mills, formerly
belonging to Lucas Giraldes, are seen at a great distance. The Country on each
side of the River Camanu is plain; the Stream it self has a wide Mouth, and
respects with its Northern Shore the Isle Cayepa, dangerous for the many
Shelves which are about the same. The River Tinhare is known by the Mountain
Morro de Santo Paulo, which rises like a Galley on the Southern Shore. Twelve
Leagues farther opens the Bay of Todos los Sanctos, on whose Eaststern Point
stands the Castle Antonio, and before the Northern Shore the Island Topoam, to
the East and South-East low and strong. The River Das Pedras falls with a wide
Mouth into the Ocean. Next you pass by the Streams Tapicuru, Real Vasabaris and
Francisco, known by a low Promontory. The Rivers Miguel, Antonio, Camaragili,
Porto Calvo, Formoso, and Serinhaem, disembogue also into the Sea. Next the
Stream Das Pedras rises the Promontory St. Augustine, all overgrown with Bushes
and Brambles. Five Leagues Southward lies the small Isle Alexo. The Coast from
St. Augustine to Pernambuco extends North and by East, and South and by West.
The Island Tamaraca lies in the Mouth of the Stream Gajana; and fifteen Leagues
farther appears Parayba; between which two the Shelf Pedra Furada extends three
Leagues along the Coast, and another from the Shore of the Promontory Blanco,
where the Road Porto de Franeses affords Seamen secure Anchorage for Shipping.
Next to Parayba follow the Havens Treicaon, Pipa, and Busios, the Stream Siara
and Maragnan, which washes the Western part of Brasile, and is taken for the
Boundary between the Spanish Indies and the Portuguese, according to the
Division by Pope Alexander the Sixth, Anno 1502. Lastly, there belongs to
Brasile the Island Fernando de Noronho, in three Degrees of Southern Latitude.
The Capuchin, Claude de Abbeville, going thither, found the same to be six
Leagues in circumference, and extraordinary fruitful; besides good fresh Water,
Pease, Beans, Maiz, Potato's, Melons, Cotton, Cattle, wild Goats, and all sorts
of Poultrey, which this Island affords; but it chiefly abounds with great
variety of a sort of Birds which suffer themselves to be caught with the Hand.
There grows likewise a nameless Tree, Strange Tree.
not unlike the Laurel, being of a strange Nature, for who e're touches the
Leaves, and afterward rubs his Eyes, loses his Sight for four hours, with
exceeding pain; which pain nevertheless another Tree growing in the same Island
cures immediately. The French, who Landed on Noronho Anno 1613. found a
Portuguese there, with eighteen Brasilians, Men, Women, and Children, banished
thither from Pernambuco, whom Baptizing, they carried to Maragnan. Near Noronho
lies the Isle De Feu.

SECT. X. Maragnan.
MAragnan, forty five Leagues in circumference, Situation.
lies in two Degrees of Southern Latitude, and a considerable distance from the
Bay, which appears between the Rivers Aperegha and Comajamu.

The Eastern Entrance into this Bay has before the Promontory Arbres Secs, the
Isle St. Anna, by the Brasilians called Upaonmiri.

Opposite to Maragnan, about half way from the said Inlet, fall three Rivers
into the Sea, the most Easterly called Mounin, has a Mouth a Mile wide, and
discharges its Water into the Sea; the middlemost Taboucourou, is five hundred
Leagues long, and ends with two Mouths, half a League distant one from the
other; the most Westerly, called Miary, is about six Leagues broad, so falling
into the Sea.

The Stream Maracou falls into the Pinare, and thus united they join both with
the Miary, which runs exceeding swift into the Sea.

Between the Capes Arbres Secs and De la Tortue, the Coast lies full of sandy
Banks, some of which extend a League into the Ocean.

On the other side of the Promontory Tapoytapere near Maragnan, toward the
River of Amazones, lie so many Isles along the Seashore, that no Ship is able
to approach the same, because the Spaces between the Isles are overgrown with
Trees called Apparituriers, whose Boughs shooting down and rooting in the Sea,
produce other Trees, which grow so close together, that they seem one entire
Tree with many Branches. Besides this Inconvenience there is abundance of drift
Sand when the Wind sits from the Shore, which oftentimes swallows the Ships
which lie upon the same.

Beyond Maragnan lie two Roads, the first between the Promontory Arbres and the
Isle St. Anna, but dangerous; the other, discovered some years since, reaches
to the Fort of Maragnan, and is as dangerous as the first.

This Island has twenty seven Villages, by the Natives called Oc or Tave, each
Village consisting of four Houses made of great Stakes, and covered with
Palm Tree Leaves against the Rain, each House being thirty Foot broad, and from
two hundred to five hundred Paces long, according to the greater or lesser
number of Inhabitants. The first Village, opposite to St. Anna, is called
Timbohu; the second, well known for two eminent Fishing-places, is Itapara; but
the two biggest are Juniparan and Eussaouap, each having about five or six
hundred Inhabitants.

This Island of Maragnan lies under a temperate Climate, being seldom troubled
with excessive Colds, Droughts, pestilential Vapors, Wind, Hail, or Thunder,
only it Lightens Morning and Evening in serene Weather. When the Sun returns
from the Tropic of Capricorn to the North, then it Rains for six Weeks
together; but when he declines from Cancer toward the Southern Solstice, the
Trade-Wind, or Eastern Breezes rise at seven of the Clock in the Morning, but
grow fainter toward Sunsetting.

Fruitful Soil and rich Coast of Maragnan
The Soil of Maragnan is exceeding fruitful, producing abundance of Brasile
^ood, Sugar, Cotton, the red Color Roucou, Tobacco, Balsam not inferior to
(...) Arabian, Pepper, and all manner of Fruits. On the Coast is often found
excellent Ambergris and Jasper Stones, which the Inhabitants wore in their
Lips. In some places along the Seashore appear Rocks of red and white Stone
Diaphanous, like Crystal, which (some say) are as hard as Diamonds, and called
Allencon. The Woods produce Timber, and the Shore Stones and Shells, of which
they make Mortar. There are also several pleasant Fields and Hills, whose Feet
are washed by delightful Brooks, along which they pass in Canoos from one
Village to another. The Woods consist most of Palm Trees, amongst which breed
all sorts of Fowls and Beasts.

Fruit Trees.
The chiefest of the Fruit Trees which grow here is the Accayou, which being
much bigger than our Pomewaters, has Leaves not unlike those of an Oak: and
also a Nut resembling a Sheeps Kidney, covered with a hard Shell, which
incloses an oily Pith. Out of these the Islanders press a very wholesome and
pleasant Liquor; as also out of the Pacoeira and Bannanas, both excellent
Plants, which will grow in any Ground. This Plant they pluck up by the Roots
wild as soon as it has put forth three Leaves; which Leaves being rolled up
hard together like a Twig, are again Set, and then sprout up each with ten
green Leaves, which when moved by the Wind, rattle like Parchment, and tear
very easily: the Stalk is an Inch thick, from which spread several lesser
Branches; under the Leaves hang yellowish Flowers of a pleasant smell, at whose
Stalks are lesser Leaves resembling little Scoups, full of Juice, in taste like
Honey, and in color like the White of an Egg: after the Flower follows the
Fruit, very like a Cucumber, only they are three square, and have a hardish
Shell, which incloses a well tasted and wholesome Pulp, which commonly grows in
Clusters. This Plant, when the Fruit is ripe, is plucked up, from whence
another springs up immediately, which bears the like Fruit the next year; so
that this Plant lives as it were by propagation continually.

The Bannanas bear Leaves of a Fathom long and two Foot broad; the Fruit is
very like that of the Pacoeira.

The Mangaa is very like the Apricock both in taste and form.

The Tree Jaracaha has a spread Crown, leaves like those of a Fig Tree, yellow
Flowers, and Pears with Shells, and full of Kernels.

The Ouaieroua is an exceeding sweet smelling Tree, bears a Fruit much bigger
than the greatest Melons.

The Junipap, which is much taller, has Apples, which whilst they are green
are best, yielding a Juice which Dies Coal-black, and therefore is used by the
Natives to paint their Bodies with: The Apples when ripe are yellow within and
without, very well tasted, and melting in the Mouth.

Besides these forementioned Fruit Trees there are several others that grow on
this Island, amongst which is the Vua-pirup, eminent for its Blossom, which is
yellow, blue, and red, and bears delicate Apples, which ripen best in the rainy
Season.

Lastly, the Pekey, which three Men cannot Fathom, bears a Fruit of two
handfuls bigness, having a hard thick Shell, and within four Kidney-like
Kernels, each concealing a prickly Stone, which hurts the Mouths of unwary
Eaters.

The Plant Carouata has Leaves an Ell long, and two Inches broad; they are
very thick and thistly from the middle, and about two Foot from the Ground
grows an exceeding pleasant Fruit, yellow without and within, three square, a
Finger long, and hanging oftentimes sixty in a Cluster.

Vua, a sort of Melons, green without, and within full of white Pulp and black
Kernels, and has a pleasant Juice, dissolves to Water, if cut in the middle,
sweeter than Sugar, and very refreshing.

Manioch, a thick Root of the Plant Manicup, Leaved like a Fig Tree; being
ground to Meal, it serves in stead of Bread.

Besides these already mentioned, there are several other Plants, the most
usual are the great flat Beans called Commanda-ouassou, and the long Pease
Commanda-miry.

Strange Birds
Here are variety of Birds of several sorts, especially of Parrots, which fly
in great Companies, most beautiful to the Eye, and very docible to speak, and
also good for Food.

The Partridges Nanbououassou, in bigness no way inferior to a Capon, have blue
Feathers, and also Lay blue Eggs.

The Ourou, resembling a Partridge, has a Comb like a Cock, but mixed with
three Colors, viz. red, black, and white.

The Bats, named Andheura, have a mournful Note in the Night, often biting
those they find asleep, and suck their Blood so hard that it can hardly be
stopped.

The Ostriches here called Yandou, being as tall as a middle-siz'd Man, cannot
fly, but run as swift as a Greyhound.

Their Fowl called Falian, with long Bills and Cranes Legs, flies very low, but
runs so swift that a Horse can scarce overtake them.

Strange sorts of Fish.
The Ocean about Maragnan produces abundance of all sorts of Fish, and amongst
others the Pyraon, six Foot long, thicker than a Barrel, and covered with black
Scales of a hand-breadth.

The Fish Camouroupouy differs not much from the Pyraon, only in having fewer
Scales.

The Ougry, four Foot long, has a broad Head, and two sharp Fins on the Back,
which wound terribly. This Fish also swimming in the River, smells of Musk
whilst it stays therein.

The like length has also the Camboury Ouassou, whose Hog-like Head, and
yellow scaled Tail, makes it seem like a Monster.

The Yauebouyre is a Foot in thickness, in length two Fathom, and a Fathom in
breadth, and has a Tail of half a Fathom long, out of the middle of which
sticks a sharp and great Bone, which makes such dangerous Wounds, that if any
part of a Man's Body be touched therewith, it must be cut off.

The Narinnary, which is much lesser, wounds with its Sting very dangerously.

The flat Fish Acaraiou has the length of a Foot, a green Head, thick Scales,
a yellow Back, and white Belly.

The Araououa has a hard Skin, is eight times bigger than the Acaraiou, and
has a three-pointed Sword, with which it kills other Fish.

Another sort of Sword-fish is the Panapans, whose Sword is a Foot less than
that of the Araououa.

The Picamo and Caramourou resemble the Pilchard, and are taken in great
abundance near the Rocks.

The Rivers and Brooks on Maragnan are also very full of Fish, amongst which
the Pourake, four Foot long, full of green, blue, red and white Specks and
Streaks, the Skin so hard that no Sword can penetrate it; wherefore it regards
not a blow, but if it moves, it causes such a pain on the Arm of him that
strikes, that he falls down on the Ground.

The Caurimata, which is very like a Carp, is the most delicious Fish that ever
was tasted.

The Pyrain, without Scales, colored red and yellow, has sharp Teeth, which
cut sloapingly; as also the Opean, Tarehure, Paraty, and Jerou.

The red Crabs Oussa, with hairy Legs, breed about the Roots of the
forementioned Trees that grow in the Water.

The white Crabs Aouara-oussa carry the Ambergris, cast on the Shores to
their Holes.

They have also good Mussles, and well rellish'd Oysters sticking on the Boughs
of the said Trees.

During the rainy Season there are generally standing Pools, in which yearly
breed many Fishes, which are taken up by the Inhabitants when the Pools begin
to dry.

Diverse kinds of strange Beasts.
Moreover, this Island feeds abundance of four-footed Beasts, amongst which
their wild Deer, Rabbets and Hares, differ little from the European. They have
also wild Swine called Taiassou, who seem to have Navels on their Backs, which
cast a sweet Musky smell; besides another sort of Swine, not inferior to the
former, but of a stranger shape, being Mouthed like a Hare, with two long Tusks
in their upper Jaws, and two beneath; their Ears like a Man's; the foremost Feet
white, and hoof'd like an Ass; the hindermost part of their Body like a Bear,
and full of Bristles, half white and half black, three handfuls long: when they
creep in their Holes their staring Bristles fall; they keep much amongst
Brambles, feed on Apples and Roots; In the Winter Season they Stye themselves
up in their Holes.

Here are also Pismire-eaters, called Tamandua, with a Boars Head, Dogs Ears,
sharp Snout, Horses Hair, and Ox Feet.

The Tapiyre-ete differ little from wild Cows, only they have shorter Legs and
Tails, and wanting Horns, are Armed in stead thereof with Teeth; in their Heads
are often found a Stone like the Bezoar Stone.

Several sorts of Armadillo's here differ much in form each from the other.

The wild Cats Margaia are caught for their curious Skin.

The Foxes Janovare, and Leopards Sovassovaran, both curiously marked, are very
ravenous.

Here is also a deformed slow creeping Beast called Ai, whose Head is like a
Man's, and covered with rough and gray Hair, on each Foot three Claws close
together, and at least a Finger long, sharp Teeth, a smooth high black Nose,
little drowsy Eyes, no Ears, a Tail small above and broad at the bottom, long
Ash-colored Hair over all the Body; and being about the bigness of a Fox, it
climbs slowly up the Trees, and comes not down before it has eaten off all the
Leaves; it feeds also on Earth, and sometimes sits on a high Bough without Meat
twenty days together; it goes so softly, that it will hardly clear fifty Paces
in twenty four hours.

On this Island are likewise all sorts of Apes and Monkies, amongst which is
one most remarkable, called The Zimme Cayon, hairy all over, with a long white
Beard, an old Man's Face, bald Ears, black Eyes and long Tail, which they wind
about a Bough, and so hanging, swing themselves from one Tree to another; they
are very fierce as well as subtle, for being wounded with an Arrow, they set
upon their Enemy without the least fear; when they climb up the Trees, they
carry their Mouths and Hands full of Stones to throw at Travelers; and if any
one of them chance to be wounded, all the rest that are near come to help him,
and stop the Wound with Leaves, and the like; the young ones hang upon the
Backs of their Dams, who run very swift with them, and leap from one Tree to
another.



Juan Ardenois relates, That the Coyons play at certain Games with the Natives
for Money, and spend what they win in public Houses.

Joseph de Acosta tells us, That one of these kind of Creatures being sent to a
Tavern for Wine, would not part with his Money before his Pot was filled, which
he defended from the Boys that offered to take it from him, by throwing Stones
at them; and though it loved Wine very well, yet brought it always home without
tasting.

It is no less wonderful what Peter Martyr relates of one of these Creatures,
viz. That observing one ready to fire a Gun at him, before he could discharge,
it leaped from the Tree and snatched up a Child, which he held as a Buckler
before him.

The Sagovin.
The Sagovin resembles a Lion in the forepart of the Body, with shaggy Hair;
they are exceeding dainty and tender, yet so stubborn and sullen, that they
take pet at the least affront, and often pine themselves away and die with
hunger.

The Boyete, and other sorts of Serpents.
The Serpent Boy-ete, two Fathoms long, without Legs, having a bright speckled
Skin and four sharp Teeth, wounds also mortally with its Tail; but is the less
dangerous, because at the end of the Tail grows a Bladder, which moving rattles
as if there were Pease in it, which gives notice to the Traveller, though
unwary, by which means he makes his escape.

The other Serpents called Jouboy, Tara-gouyboy, and Tarehuboy, serve the
Natives for a great Delicacy; as also the great Toads or Frogs, called
Tourourou.

They have also a sort of Flies called Ton, which exceedingly molest them,
against which their chiefest Medicine is Palm Tree Oil, and the Roucou, with
which they color their Skins.

The Natives of this Island of Maragnan, driven out of the pleasant Country
Cayete by the Portuguese, are a sort of the Toupinambas, who Settled here about
a hundred and fifty years ago. The time of their first coming hither used
formerly to be solemnized with the great Feast called Caoven; but because a
Woman boldly set upon a Commander in his Cups, there arose a great Tumult
amongst them, and ever since the Island has been divided, one Party calling
the other Tobaiares, that is, We are Enemies: They are so inveterate against
one another, that who e're they take Prisoners they unmercifully devour: Both
are of a middle Stature, have flat Noses, which the Midwive make at the Birth
of the Child; they are generally a strong People, and many of them living a
hundred years, without being gray, bald, or sick; they live temperate, and
under a wholesome Climate: Some of their Women bear Children (as they say) till
they are eighty years of age, which being born white, turn to be of a Tawny
color, by being anointed with Suet called Roucou, and Oil; otherwise they are
well proportioned. The Men pluck out all the Hair of their Foreheads, but
suffer it to hang pretty long over their Ears, and behind. The Women let their
Hair hang down to their Middle, and wear wooden Earrings; but the Men hang
green Beads in their Lips, and thrust, little Bones through their Noses. They
go all stark naked; their Legs are colored black with the Juice of the Herb
Junipap, and upon the other parts of their Body appear Figures of several
Representations. Those that will manifest their Valor, and be accounted hardy,
gash their Bodies all over with Wounds, which they heal in such a manner, that
the Scars may more plainly appear. They never come to their usual Feasts, but
dressed up in various colored Feathers; upon the Crown of their Heads they
wear Caps stuck with Plumes, which they call Acangoap, or Coronets, called
Acangerar; about their Necks, the Necklaces Aiouacava; over their Shoulders,
the Mantles Assoyave; their Garters they call Tabacoura, at which they hang
hollow Nutshells full of little Stones, which gingle and rattle as they go, and
about their Arms Armlets called Mapouyh-couaychovare; all which are curiously
checkered with various colored Feathers.

The Maragnans live not much up in the Country, but rather on the Seacoast,
because of their Fishing, removing every sixth year, calling the Village where
they Settle, by the former Name.

They take every Man as many Wives as he pleases; but the Women must stick
each to one Man, unless she be Divorced from him, which often happens upon
small occasions.

Their Cotton Hammocks called You, on which they sleep, hang between two Stakes,
in which they lie.

Singular Friends and Relations Feast one another daily; but they are cruel and
revengeful against their neighboring Enemies, whom, when they take any of them,
they fatten, kill, and eat. The least affront done them, or injurious word
spoken to them, or against their Predecessorss, makes them take up Arms, which
consist of Bows and Arrows, which they call Ouyrapar and Oune.

Here the French have built the Fort St. Lovis on an Island, from whence
Westward may be seen the Cape Tapouytapere, which at High Water seems like an
Island, and lies four Leagues from thence; at Low Water they can walk over the
Sands from the same to the Main Land.

This fruitful Country has twenty populous Villages.

Westward lies Comma, which gives Denomination to the chief Village, the River,
and the rest of that Country, wherein are sixteen more handsome Villages,
better built, and more populous than Maragnan or Tapouytapere.

Concerning the building of the forementioned Fort on Maragnan, it happened as
follows:

The occasion of building the Fort Maragnan.
The French Captain Riffaut, upon the Advice of Ouyrapive, who bore a great sway
amongst his Maragnan Subjects, fitted out three Ships; but because of a
Contention between the Seamen, and the loss of his chiefest Vessel, he was
forced to Sail to France, and leave some of his Men on Maragnan, under the
Command of a young I. TAMA^CA
A. Castrum Auriaci. B. Ostium fluminis ad Austru^. C. Castrum in monte. D.
Oppidum Scoppi^. E. Sac^llum. F. Via quibus ascenditur. G. Fluvius qui versus
Garasu abit.


UVIUS GRANDIS.
A. (...). B. (...). C. (...). D. (...).


SIARA.
A. Castrum. B. Fluvius. C. Via lit^us versus. D. Sylva. E. Campestria.


Gentleman called De Vaux, who carried himself so discreetly amongst the
Islanders; that they promised to embrace the Christian Religion, if new
Supplies came from France to assist them against their Enemies; of which De
Vaux advised the French King Henry the Fourth, who approved of it, A Colony of
French sent over into the Island of Maragnan.
and sent Monsieur De la Ravardiere to Maragnan, to make a farther Enquiry into
the whole Matter, where he spent six Months; after which returning he found
the King murdered, wherefore the Business lay dead for a while; but at length
Ravardiere took with him the Lord Rosilly, and the Baron of Sansi, desiring
some Capuchins of the Queen Mother, for the promulgating of the Christian
Religion in Maragnan; which being granted, they set Sail with three Ships Anno
1612. with which arriving safely there, and Landing, he built next the chiefest
Haven the Fort St. Lewis on a Hill, by whose foot two Rivers glide into the
Ocean. After which this new Plantation went on for a considerable time, till
the Portuguese overpowering them, drove them out of this their new Field,
Driven out by the Portuguese.
making themselves absolute Masters of the Fort, and also of the great Mountain
Ibouyapap, four Leagues high, plain on the top, twenty four Leagues long, and
little less in breadth. No Champain under the Sun is more pleasant and fruitful
than this; for in some places it is shaded with Trees, in others has brave
Pastures, lies under a wholesome Climate, and abounds with fresh Springs, from
whence are derived store of Brooks, and Rivulets full of Fish.

SECT. XI. The Lordships Tamarica, Rio Grande, Siara, and Para.
Description of the Lordship of Tamarica.
THe Praefecture of Tamarica, not above three Leagues in length and two in
breadth, so called from a little Island lying before it, and part of its
Precinct, is counted the first, that is, the most ancient Lordship of Brasile,
having otherwise nothing in it that is very considerable, save only a good
Haven or Port, with a Castle for the Security or Command of it, held to be
impregnable, and so found by the Dutch, who under Peter Heyn and Stein
Callenfels in vain attempted the taking of it, as shall be mentioned hereafter
more particularly, but made it useless to the Portuguese, by making a Bulwark
at the Mouth of the Haven, and so blocking it up.

This Capatania yielded formerly a Rent of thirty thousand Ducats to the Earls
of Montesanto, whose Right it was.

Description of the Lordship of Rio Grande.
THe Praefecture of Rio Grande, a small Precinct, so denominated, as lying on
the South Side of that great River which the Portuguese call Rio Grande, and
the Natives Potingi, where it falls into the Sea, was once possessed by the
French about the Year 1597. who were outed by the Portuguese, and the Place
fortified both against them and the Salvages, (of whom they slew and took
Prisoners very great numbers) with a Castle, which the Dutch in the Year 1631.
found an impregnable piece, and too hard for them to take.

Description of the Lordship of Siara.
THe Praefecture of Siara, so denominated from the Haven; it has long been in
the possession of the Portuguese, but they have therein no Towns of note, only
a Castle, and some few Houses for those that attend the gathering of
Cotton-Wool, and Manuring of the Sugarcanes, which are here in great
abundance, also the Country is said to afford some Crystal and other Precious
Stones.

Description of the Lordship of Para.
LAstly, the Praefecture of Para is the most Northerly part of Brasile,
bordering upon Guiana, so called from the River Para, which runs through the
midst of it, upon which, in a convenient place, and upon raised Ground, the
Portuguese have built a very strong Castle, well Walled on all sides, save
only toward the River, where it is planted with Ordnance: It is built in a
quadrangular form, and has at least three hundred Persons of the Portuguese
Nation (besides the Garrison Soldiers) belonging to it, who have all Employment
enough about the Cotton-Wool, Sugarcanes, and Tobacco, which the Country is
said to afford in great plenty.

A Relation of the Proceedings of the Netherland West India Company in Brasile
to the Year 1658.
THe chief Disturbers of the Portuguese in the possession of the Country of
Brasile, were the United Netherlanders; for they having had good success with
their first Fleet, under the Command of John Molenaer, John Dignumszoon, John
Schelinger, Simon Mau, and the Merchants Cornelis Woddman, Gerard Beveningen,
and Heinier van Heb, Anno 1595. in the East Indies, where they got such
footing, that they took whole Kingdoms, to the great enriching of the Eastern
World, where they spread their Trade over the whole Country, were thereupon
emboldned to venture also to the West, that thereby they might cut off the
Sinews of the King of Spain's Wars, he being continually supplied with
Treasures from America.

The grand Promoters of this Design were the Company of Merchants, who hitherto
had Traded to Guinee; and the rather, because Guinee brought them but little
Profit. But to set upon the Spanish Power, was a Business of no small
Consequence; nevertheless they undertaking it, obtained Letters Patents from
the States of the United Netherlands, Anno 1621. for erecting of a West India
Company, in which it was declared, A West India Company erected by the United
States.
That none without the said Companies leave should drive any Trade to Africa
from the Northern Tropic, to the Cape Bonne Esperance; nor to America from
Terre-Neuf to the Straights of Magellan, or Le Maire; nor in the South Sea to
Anian; which if any attempted, they should forfeit Ship and Goods; besides
several other Privileges and Immunities granted toward the promoting and
establishing of the said Company. After a long Consultation which way to steer
their Course, it was concluded upon in the Council for the Affairs of the
Company, to Invade St. Salvador in the Inlet Todos los Sanctos, whether they
sent twenty Men of War and three Ketches, Commanded by Jacob Willekens, and
Peter Peterszoon Hein; the Land Forces being under the Command of Colonel John
van Dorth. In the beginning of the Year 1624. the Fleet set Sail out of the
Texel and the Maes, and in five Months arrived at St. Salvador. As soon as the
Portugueses discovered the Dutch Fleet, they shot without ceasing from the Fort
Philippo with three Brass Guns, as also from the Castle Tapagipe, with four
Demi-Canons, but chiefly from the Battlement raised threesquare out of the
Water before St. Salvador, from whence they played at them with twelve great
Guns, St. Salvador set upon by the Dutch under Peterszoon and Willekens.
whilst the Vice Admiral ran within Musket Shot of the said Battlement with
three Ships, and found fifteen Portuguese Vessels lying near the Shore not far
from the Castle Philippo, where there began a sharp Conflict, to the no small
advantage of Peter Hein; who thereupon ventured with three Boats to Board the
fifteen Ships: which resolute Attempt of the Dutch Seamen so amazed the
Portuguese, that they set their biggest Ships on Fire, and fled ashore: Those
Ships that escaped, being in all ten, the Hollanders took and brought them to
the Fleet. view of Salvador Urbs SALVADOR
A. Coenobium de Carmo. B. Portude Carmo. C. Collegium Jesuitarum. D. Coenobium
S. Francisci. E. Basilica. F. Carcer. G. Aula Marctionis et Vice-regis
Brasiliae. H. Porta S. Benti. I. Suburbium. K. Coenobium S. Benti. L.
Repositorium. M. Castellum maritim^m. N. Aguae mediterranca. O. Castellum S.
Alberti.


This flight of the Portuguese encouraging Peter Hein, he went with fourteen
Boats, each Manned with two hun dred Armed Men upon the very Mouths of the
Cannons to the forementioned Battlement and took the same, notwithstanding the
Stone Wall rose eight Foot out of the Water, and above a hundred Portuguese
defended it, whilst the Admiral Willekens sent twelve hundred Soldiers, and
two hundred and forty Seamen ashore with Fieldpieces. The Forlorn-Hope
consisted of sixty Musquetteers, led by Captain Helmond, who was seconded by
Lieutenant La Main, all the Seamen following with Spades and Pick-axes; the
Reserve was brought up by Captain Kyf, Ysenach, and William Schouten; thus
drawn out, they were led toward the City by the Guides Dirk Colver and Dirk de
Ruiter, along a narrow Way, which the Portuguese might have guarded with a few
Men, had they not been all struck with a pannick fear, and making use of the
dark Night, fled into the Woods. The Dutch found in the City an incredible
Booty, St. Salvador taken by the Dutch.
because the Governor Diego Mendoza de Furtado had forbid the carrying away of
any Goods, that so the Citizens might be the easier persuaded to defend the
City; which they might well have done, had they not been surprised with the
suddenness of the Action; for when Willekens Anchored here, there were above
sixteen hundred Soldiers, besides a considerable number of Armed Citizens in
St. Salvador; besides, in the Forts about the City on the Walls lay twenty
three Brass, and twenty six Iron Guns.

This Victory was scarce obtained, when Colonel Dorth, who had lost the Fleet
at Point Vincent, arrived here after all was done, and caused Edicts to be
published, in which the fled Citizens were promised greater Privileges under
the Netherlanders Protection, than ever they had under the King of Spain.
Whereupon a few Portuguese returned to the City; but the greatest part of them,
and those the most considerable, were partly kept back by Command of the Bishop
Teixera, who laid the fault concerning the loss of the City on the Governor
Furtado, and partly because they judged the Netherlanders unable to defend them
against the Spanish Power.

About the same time several rich laden Vessels arrived there from Lisbon,
Janeiro, Spirito Santo, Angola and other Places, all ignorant of the Conquest
of St. Salvador.

Whilst Dorth and Willekens were ordering all things within the City, the
outstaying Portuguese at last taking courage, Stormed the City from Midnight
till the next day in the Afternoon, but fearing they should be set upon behind
unawares, Retreated; after which Dorth thinking he had been free from all fear
of Enemies, and with a small Guard riding out of the City to take a view of the
adjacent Country, was scarce got a Bowe-shot from the Walls, Col. Dorth killed
by an Ambuscade.
when a great Body of Brasilians rushed forth unexpectedly from an Ambuscade,
and wounded him so mortally, that he fell dead from his Horse, and had his Head
suddenly chopped off, and his Body mangled very terribly.

Allart Schouten being chosen Governor in Dorth's stead, took no care to
fortify the City; and after his Decease his Brother William Schouten
succeeding him, regarded it less, so that all things went to ruin, every one
striving only to enrich themselves. Amongst other Booties, they took the rich
laden Vessel which Francisco de Sarmiento, Governor of Chili, brought to St.
Salvador, with fifty eight thousand Guilders, and a much greater sum of Gold
and Pearls, all which was imbezled away.

Description of St. Salvador.
This City St. Salvador, built by Thomas de Sosa along the Seaside, runs up
broad at the Suburb Carmo, has four Marketplaces, into the biggest whereof,
being of a long square, run nine Streets, the chief of which being very broad,
has many stately Houses. The second Marketplace is of like form, only it
winds a little toward the Right, and at the Entrance stands a strong Prison.
The Cloister St. Francis, inhabited by Jesuits, stands in a Park near the Wall
by which the Moat runs. Toward the Seaside they have a second Structure, much
statelier than the Franciscan Cloister. Near the Prison stands the Armory, and
somewhat farther the great Church, which Anno 1624. was not quite finished. The
Church dedicated to the Virgin Mary appears with a high Spire near the Gate
Bento, without which the great Cloister Bento is built; but the chief Church is
St. Salvador. On the utmost Point toward the South-West of the City lies the
Fort Antonio, between which and the City stands a very neat Pleasure-house,
belonging to the Bishop. Besides Antonio there are four other considerable
Forts, viz. Diego, St. Maria, De Gracia, and Vittoria, About half way between
Vittoria and the Cloister Bento, stands the Castle with four Bulwarks; but on
the North-side the City is guarded by the Forts St. Peter, Philippo, and
Tapecipe.

A great Fleet set out by the King of Spain for the recovery the recovery of
St. Salvador.
The Spanish King seeming exceedingly concerned at the loss of so eminent a
Place, fitted out a great Fleet for the recovery of what had been taken from
him; but the Netherland West India Company having notice of it, put themselves
into a posture of Defense, and in a short time made ready eighteen Men of War
and seven Ketches, Manned with a thousand six hundred and ninety Seamen, and a
thousand three hundred and fifty Land-Soldiers, John Dirkszoon Lam being
Admiral: But news coming day after day of the extraordinary Preparations in
Spain, it was judged convenient to strengthen the Fleet with fourteen Ships and
two Ketches more, carrying a thousand four hundred and thirty Seamen, and five
hundred eighty Soldiers, under the Command of General Boudewyn Henrickszoon,
and Admiral Andries Veron. Moreover, the West India Company fitted out a third
Fleet, consisting of four Frigates and three Ketches, Commanded by Henry Kat,
with Orders to Cruise along the Spanish Coast.

In the beginning of the Year 1625. Frederick de Toledo weighed Anchor from
Cales with one and thirty Gallions, four Pinnaces, three Tartans, and a Carvel,
all carrying seventy five hundred Men. The Soldiers were divided into three
Regiments, Commanded by the Colonels Pedro Osorio, Juan Orellana, and the
Marquess De Torreclusa.

Near St. Jago at the African Cape Verde, Toledo joined with the Portuguese
Fleet, consisting of twenty one Gallions and fourteen Carvels and Barques,
Manned with four thousand Seamen, two Regiments of Soldiers, Commanded by
Antonio Nunnez Barreio, and Francisco de Almeida; but the chief Commander of
this Fleet was Emanuel Meneses. Which great Fleet being arrived at St.
Salvador, Toledo himself Landed at the Fort Antonio, leaving the Command of the
Fleet to Juan Fajardo: The first thing he did, was to set upon the Cloister
Bento; which having gained, he left Sergeant Troppani with two Regiments in the
same, whilst he went and Stormed the Carmelites Minster, and at last took it;
but in the mean time four hundred Hollanders Sallying out, made a furious Onset
upon the two Regiments, who had possession of the Cloister Bento, where the
Spaniards sustained considerable damage; for besides the wounding of three
Captains, and the loss of a great number of Soldiers, there were slain the
Commanders Emanuel Aquitara, Alonso de Gana, Pedro San Stevan, Diego Espinosa,
and Colonel Pedro Osorio. But Toledo no whit dismayed hereat, but taking fresh
courage, brought twenty nine Demi-Culverins ashore, which fired so vehemently
out of the Carmelites and Bento's Cloisters, on the seventeen Dutch Ships that
lay near the Shore, that several of them were sunk, and others shattered beyond
hopes of ever being repaired. After this the Spanish Army was divided into
three several Parties, which continually fired on the City from three new
raised Works; the chiefest Party, which was in the Carmelites Minster, had
twenty three Brass Guns; the secon'd, placed on the great Wall of the Cloister
Bento, fired Night and Day with eight Demy-Cannons on the City, in which all
things were in a confusion, whilst the Governor William Schouten went
unconcerned from one Tavern to another railing at the Soldiers, who thereupon
mutinying and deposing him, chose Sergeant Hans Ernst Kyf in his room, who, as
he was calling a Council of War, received a Summons from Toledo to deliver up
the City; at which Kyf being much surprised, sent a Drummer with a Letter to
Toledo, desiring him to grant the Besieged three Weeks time to repair and make
fit their battered Vessels to carry them back for Holland; and also that they
might, according to Martial Custom, march out with lighted Matches, flying
Colors, Bullets in their Mouths, and with Bag and Baggage. To which Toledo
returned Answer, That he was now in his own Country, and had gotten possession
of four Fortifications about St. Salvador, on which he had planted thirty seven
Cannons, and therefore saw no such necessity to grant the Besieged (who could
not possibly expect any fresh Supplies) such advantageous and bold Demands; and
only promised them their Lives should be at his discretion. Yet at last
William Stoop, Hugh Antoniszoon, St. Salvador re-taken by the Spaniards from
the Hollanders.
and Francis du Chesne being sent to the Carmelites Cloister, agreed with
Toledo on these Conditions: That the Hollanders should surrender St. Salvador
in the Condition it was then in, march out unarmed, but with Baggage, and have
a free Pussage with Provisions and all things necessary allowed them for their
Trasportation for Holland. Whereupon on the first of May the City was delivered
up to the Spaniards in such disorder, that some of them had taken possession of
the Gate Bento, before those on the other side of the City knew of any
Agreement that was made between Toledo and Colonel Kyf. And thus the Place
which had a whole year been under the Jurisdiction of the Netherlanders, fell
again under the possession of the Spanish Crown, only through the indiscreet
management of the Commanders; for otherwise it was sufficiently strong, and
well stored with Ammunition and Men, being able to make out two thousand.
Moreover, the Ketch De Haes, was set out before from the Holland Fleet, and
brought news of the Forces that were sent from the Netherland Havens to their
assistance: But the Ships under Admiral Lam, as also those under Boudewyn
Henriczoon, were stayed a considerable time in their Harbors by contrary Winds,
and at last reaching the Line were becalmed, and through the excessive heat of
the Climate many Men lost by raging and mortal Distempers, insomuch that they
reached not the Bay Todos los Sanctos before the twenty sixth of May, on which
they saw the Spanish Flag streaming from the Walls of St. Salvador, and fifty
great Ships riding at an Anchor near the Shore.

The Netherland Fleet, divided into four Squadrons, consisted of thirty four
Sail, amongst which Lam carried the Flag on the Main-top, the Vice Admiral
Adrian Cheszoon on the Fore-top, the Rere-Admiral Adries Veron on the
Mainmast, and the Commander of the fourth Squadron on the Mizne-top: All of
them seeing the Spaniards absolute Masters, judged it most convenient to put to
Sea; but standing a pretty while to the South, they found that the strong
Current drove them to the Shelves on the West Side of the Inlet; wherefore
Tacking about, they made toward the Enemy, who at first seemed to meet them
with twenty eight great Ships, but returning toward the City, the Hollanders
also stood to Sea again, Steering Southerly, though without making much
advantage in their Way, the Sea going very hollow, and the strong Current
setting them toward the Shore, by which means they were in no small danger
before the River Francisco, where many of the Men died for want of fresh
Provisions, and the number of the Sick increased daily, insomuch that some of
the Ships were like to perish for want of Men to guide them: It was also judged
dangerous to lie longer with such a great Fleet near a Lea-Shore, herefore they
put into the Inlet Trayciaon, which lies a League to the Northward of he River
Monguapigape, from whence a ridge of Rocks extends to Tayciaon, and being
overflowed at High Water, has three Openings or Entrances, two for great
Ships, and one, the most Northern, for small Vessels to pass through: The Sea
also breaking against this Cliff never molests the Ships whatever Winds blow.
The Country is overgrown with Brambles, and has a Lake two Leagues long, and
a quarter broad, on the opposite Shore of which stood a Village, inhabited by
Portugueses and Brasilians; but the Portugueses flying from thence left the
Brasilians in absolute possession: The Hollanders going thither found thirty
Chests of Sugar in one Hut; after which the Admiral Lam caused his sick Men to
be brought ashore, whilst the Captains Boshuisen, Swart, Dyke, Stapels, and
Uzeel, marched up into the Country, where they got plenty of Oranges and
Cattle. In the mean time the Ketch Vosken, Manned with thirty six Seamen,
Cruising along the Seacoast of Brasile, took three Ships, one out of the Inlet
Todos los Sanctos, laden with Sugar and Tobacco, another with the same
Merchandise from Pernambuco, and the third laden with Wines from Madera. On the
first of August the Fleet set Sail again, to the great sorrow of the
Brasilians, who out of hopes of being protected by them against the Portuguese,
had joined their Forces with theirs; but now being forsaken, they expected
nothing but utter Ruin; which to escape, many of them desired to be admitted
to go along with the Fleet, which had been granted them, had not the Hollanders
wanted Provisions for themselves. The Fleet getting off at Sea, the Admiral
Veron ran with twelve Sail to the Coast of Africa; and Boudewyn Henrickszoon
kept eighteen Ships under his Command, the rest returning home with Admiral
Lam: and thus the Fleet left the unfortunate Haven Trayciaon, where above seven
hundred Dutch Seamen were buried. Boudewyn Henrickszoon refreshing at Cape St.
Vincent, steered Westerly, when a Storm (which in twenty four hours blew from
all Points of the Compass) surprising him, broke his Mainmast, separated the
whole Fleet, and sunk the Flushing Frigate; at last getting beyond the Isle
Virgin Gorda, the Fleet meeting again, got to Juan de Porto Rico about the
latter end of September; into whose Haven Henrickszoon Sailed with great
courage, The City Porto Rico surpised by Henrickszoon
notwithstanding the narrow Mouth thereof was guarded by a strong Fort full of
Brass Guns, which fired very fiercely upon him, who on the other side was not
idle in discharging his Guns on the Fort; and had not the shallow Water before
the City prevented his Landing that day, he had gotten a far greater Booty than
afterward he met with; for the Inhabitants had, during the Low Water, removed
all their best Goods: but the next Morning before Sunrising, the Admiral
Landed with eight hundred Men, marched into the City without any resistance,
pitched the States Flag on the Governor's House, guarded all Avenues, unhoop'd
all the Wine-Casks which he found there, for fear his Men should make
themselves Drunk therewith, and so neglect their Duty, fired from the Land-side
toward the Castle with three Brass Guns, gain''d the Redoubt, built for the
security of the Bridge, which unites the small Isle on which Porto Rico is
built with the great, raised a Platform, from whence he fired Day and Night
with six Cannons, guarded by Captain Thyene, whilst the Commander Uzeel kept
Watch near the Fort; but his Men being most of them sick, he could not do any
great Exploits, especially since the Spaniards Sallying out, as they did daily,
killed many of the Hollanders, Capt Vzeel slain.
and amongst them Captain Uzeel, after he had shot down two Turrets from the
Castle; which damage the Enemy repaired by taking several of the Hollanders
Boats; by which means they could not prevent fresh Supplies from going to the
Castle; the Besiegers in the mean time beginning daily to be in greater want
for Ammunition and Provisions: whereupon Henrickszoon judged it convenient to
sound a Retreat, after he had set the Ships belonging to the City Porto Rico on
fire in four places. In which Retreat he received so many farewell Shots from
the Fort, that they were forced to go to the Leeward to stop their Leaks, and
leave one of their Ships to the Enemy, in lieu whereof the West-Capel Frigate
took a Barque with four Brass Guns, in the little Haven Sierra Gorda; from
whence the Fleet ran into the Western Bay of the Island Porto Rico, where
whilst they repaired and took in fresh Provisions, Henrickszoon sent the Ships
Hester and Jonas richly laden for Holland; the remaining part of the Fleet
meeting with strong contrary Tides at Porto Rico, were necessitated to put into
the Inlet Francisco, where they made several Marches up into the Country, to
the loss of many of their Men, which were killed by the Spaniards, lying in
Ambuscade amongst the Brambles that grew along by the Ways.

The For^ of Margarita taken by Henrickszoon.
In the middle of January, Anno 1626. Henrickszoon Sailing about the North of
Porto Rico, steered to Dominico, and from thence along the Isles Martinigo,
Luzia, and the Promontory De tres Puntas, toward the Island Margarita, where
Landing, and Storming the Castle on the Land-side with fifteen Men, he gained
the first Breastworks; but the Spaniards stopping up the Way along which they
were to return, they had without doubt been all slain, had not the Captains
Stapel and Estienne come to their assistance; for the Spaniards seeing them
climbing up the Bulwarks, betook them to their Heels, after they had killed
nine of the forementioned fifteen, amongst whom were the Captains Urk and
Molkman: of those that leaped over into the Ditch most part escaped; those few
that were taken informed the Hollanders, That the Way toward the Village,
inhabited by Spaniards, was every where stopped up with Barricado's, through
which none were able to pass. Hendrickszoon thus become Master of the Fort,
sent the Booty which he had gotten there, together with three Brass, and five
Iron Guns, aboard of his Ship, blew up the Fort, burnt all the Houses, and ran
into the Haven Muchina, to which he gave the Denomination of Port Maurice;
where, besides a great number of dried Fish, he took forty Tun of Salt out of
one Salt-pit. After this he taking in fresh Provisions at St. Fe, discovered
Aves, a low Isle full of high Trees, took above two hundred Sheep, and
abundance of red Wood on Bonaire, and before the Coast a Spanish Frigate richly
laden, made Inspections into the Havens of Hispaniola and Jamaica; from whence
he fell back on the Coast of Porto Rico, about the Island Mona, where
discovering four Spanish Ships, he took three of them, and burnt the fourth; he
also got abundance of Tortoises and Crocodiles on the great Caiman, and took a
new Ship between the little sandy Isles Caios, as also before Cuba a Barque,
which informed him, That the Fleet from the Honduras, as also that from New
Spain, was daily expected at Havana: Thence Sailing into the Haven Cabannas, he
took a new Vessel of a hundred Tun, and abundance of Timber and Carpenters
Tools one the Shore; he Landed also with seven hundred Men on the East Side of
the Haven, from whence he marched along a narrow Path a League up into the
Country, where he found a running Stream, Pastures full of Cattle, and a
Village, the Inhabitants whereof being warned by the Barking of their Dogs,
fled, and left all manner of fresh Provisions to the Hollanders, viz. above two
thousand Oranges, abundance of Lemmons, Bananas, Hogs, Calves, and Bacon; all
which having sent aboard, they burnt the Village: After this they took a
Spanish Barque before Havana, as also a Ship laden with Timber, another Barque
with Poultry, Cochenile, Money, and Haberdashery Ware, one Vessel with live
Tortoises, and another full of Salt, dried Fish, and some Merchandise. While
the Fleet was thus Cruising up and down before Havana, the Admiral Henrickszoon
died; a Man of most approved Valor, and of great Conduct: Herickszoon dying, is
succeeded by Adrian Cheszoon.
After which Adrian Cheszoon carried the Flag; but the Men mutinying about the
dividing of the Provisions, which began to grow very scarce, all things fell
into great disorder; the Seamen rebelled against their Commanders, saying, That
they had been out long enough, and that they would not stay waiting any longer
for the Fleet from New Spain or Honduras: Wherefore steering Home, they all
arrived safe at the Texel and other places in Holland.

In our foregoing Relation we have given you an Account of the Fleet which came
to assist the City of St. Salvador, divided into two Squadrons; eighteen Sail
Boudewyn Henrickszoon kept under his Command, and twelve Sail remained in the
Admiral Veron's Squadron, who Sailed to the Inlet Serre Leona, where he found
the Admiral John Dirkszoon Lam with three Ships, which had lay'n there above
two Months, by reason of the Sickness amongst the Seamen.

Frambore, King of this Place, granted Lam and Veron free liberty to Hunt, and
to gather as many Oranges and Lemmons as they pleased, with which the Seamen
were so refreshed, that they set Sail again, and amongst many other things
carried a Baboon with them from Sierra Leona, A strange kind of Baboon.
which so exactly resembled a Man, that it was wonderful to behold, having a
Body, Hands, Eyes, Ears, Feet, and Actions like a Man, smoked Tobacco amongst
the Seamen, made a noise like a Child when beaten. The Inhabitants of Sierra
Leona, where these Monsters run in great Companies through the Woods, believe
that the Souls of the Deceased reside in them.

John de Laet, in his annual Journal of the Transactions of the West India
Company, affirms, That he saw a Female of these monstrous Creatures, which
usually had her monthly Flowers.

The Fleet, as is before mentioned, Sailing from Sierra Leona, came to an
Anchor at Commany, and Landed twelve hundred Men at Poquena, besides a hundred
and fifty Negro's; which Regiment Andries Veron and Arend Jacobszoon carried to
the Castle Del Mine, The Hollanders ill success before the Castle Del Mine.
whither they before sent a Company, Commanded by Hans Gryf, to prevent the
Sallies of the Enemy. The Hollanders tired and thirsty, Encamped themselves
near the Fort, and whilst some of the Men were seeking for Water, others
smoking Tobacco, and lying without their Arms and in disorder on the Ground,
and the Commanders were taking a view of the Fort from a neighboring Hill, two
hundred Negro's fell upon the scattered Army with great rage and fury, and so
much the greater, in regard the Portuguese had promised them great sums of
Money for every Hollander they killed: never any Army was in such a
distraction, they being dispersed and killed like so many Sheep, the Admiral
Veron and all the Officers slain, and in a short time four hundred and forty
Men cut off; and had not Captain Arend Jacobszoon been in League with the
Inhabitants of Commany, whither the routed Regiments fled, not one Man had
escaped that bloody Slaughter: Nor was it to much purpose to Besiege the Castle
Del Mine, because the Bullets hitting against the Walls of the Castle, built
all of Rock-stones, did no Execution. But the four Ships informed of this
miserable destruction, fell down to Commany, to fetch those that were left
alive, and returned home with the other eleven.

During the unfortunate Expedition of this Fleet, the West India Company fitted
out nine great Ships and five Ketches in the beginning of the Year 1626. under
the Command of Peter Peterszoon Hein, to Cruise for the Spanish Ships that were
expected from New Spain and Honduras.

The Fox Frigate being sent before to inform Henrickszoon of Heyn's coming,
reached about the latter end of May beyond the Isles Dominico, Guadalupa,
Mevis, St. Christophers, and by Santa Crux; there not finding a Harbor on the
South Side, because of the Rocks, she Sailed from Mona over to the Main Coast,
where seven Leagues Westward of Carakess, he discovered a high broken Land,
whose Mountains seemed to reach to the Clouds; from thence she steered to the
Promontory Caldera, the Isles Margareta and Coche, on which last he took
abundance of Goats, not without the loss of forty six Men, killed by the
Spaniards and Indians.

Mean while the Admiral Peter Heyn, in the beginning of June, Sailed to the
Southward of Barbados, Island pretty mountainous, as has been formerly
mentioned, and full of Woods, and by Martinino, whose Hills are very high and
overgrown with Trees. Here Peter Heyn could get nothing else but sweet Water,
and a Fruit resembling a green Grape, which grew on a round Leaved Tree, whose
Juice cured the Scurvey. Sailing from hence, and Landing on Guadalupa, he found
a Canoo seven Fathom long and one broad, and cut out of one Tree. The
Inhabitants, a well timber'd People, went stark naked, and desired to be
excused, that they could not furnish the Hollanders with more Provisions,
because the French and English, Inhabitants of St. Christophers, had pillaged
them.

Near Mona the Fox Frigate joined with the Fleet, with information, that he
could hear no tidings of Henrickszoon; wherefore Peter Heyn judged it
convenient to Sail along the South-Coast of Hispaniola with a separated Fleet,
which was to join again near the great Caiman. Near Cape de Corientes the Dutch
took a Spanish Ship laden with Sarsaparilla; after that another with Salt and
Fish, and on the Shelves before Coche before the Promontory Antonio, a Fly-boat
with Tallow and Hides, and at the same places two Vessels more with Ballast,
the Men whereof informed him, that the Fleet from New Spain had about a Month
before weighed Anchor from the Haven Juan de Ulva, and set Sail to Havana, so
that without doubt they were arrived there; wherefore Peter Heyn steered
toward Tortugos, in hopes, if he could, to overtake some of the heavy Sailers.
Before the Promontory De Florida he discovered seven Sail, and coming up
nearer, above thirty, which, had Henrickszoon been united with Peter Heyn, had
without doubt fallen into the hands of the Netherlanders; but it being judged a
madness to set upon so great a Fleet with so small a number of Ships, they
Sailed away undisturbed. Peter Heyn steered his Course along Florida, where he
met three Canoos with strange Men in them, who came aboard of him, their Bodies
being naked, were painted with several colors, only Mats of Rushes about
their Middle, and on their Backs long Tassels hanging down: their Merchandise
consisted of a sort of Gum of little value. The Netherlanders in this Place
took also a Vessel with Sina Leaves, and some pounds of Ambergreece: but the
Scurvey increasing daily amongst them, they Tacked about, and ran to an Anchor
at Sierra Leona, where they stayed till the latter end of January 1627. and
then set Sail to Brasile, and overtook a Vessel from Madera laden with a
hundred and fifty Pipes of Wine, and other rich Goods, and ran into the Inlet
Todos los Sanctos with undaunted courage, not regarding the Guns that were
fired from the Fort and Battlements of the City St. Salvador, near which lay
thirty Sail of Ships, to which he making up, Success of the Dutch against the
Portuguese Fleet.
steered between the Portuguese Admiral and Rere-Admiral, whom sinking, he
forced the Admiral to surrender, whilst the Hollandia and Geldria Frigates fell
upon the rest, which were forsaken by the Seamen, who leaped overboard; then
several Manned Boats of the Hollanders (notwithstanding the Enemy's continual
firing) went and fetched off twenty two Sail of the Portuguese Vessels; all
which they did in three hours time, only with the loss of fifty Men, besides
some that were wounded, amongst whom was the Admiral, being shot with a Bullet
through the Arm, and wounded in the Legs with a Splinter; his Ship also was,
with the Gelria Frigate, driven with the Springtide on a Bank, whence, after
the Gelria had received above sixty Shot from the Enemy, they both got off at
last; but the Admiral's, Frigate being shot in a manner to a Wreck, was set on
fire; which Misfortune ended not there, for the Orange-tree Frigate blew up,
with sixty Men, fourteen whereof, though miserably scorched, had their Lives
saved. Soon after which the Admiral sent into Holland the Ship St. Peter, the
Hoop, Nostra Sennora de la Vittoria, and the Black-Lyon, which besides their
Lading of Hides, Silver, Gold, and Precious Stones, were most of them full of
Sugar; which safely arriving, did not a little encourage the West India
Company. After this Heyn took two Ships with Slaves from Angola, which because
the Governor of St. Salvador would not redeem, were put ashore on Taperica. On
the last of March he set Sail from the Inlet Todos los Sanctos, passed by Mono
Pablo, and on Easter Eve with a strong Gale by the Abrolhos: before the
Highland between Cape Frio and the River De Jenero, he discovered two Sail, one
whereof being laden with Sugar was taken, but the other escaped in the Night;
then Sailing on to the meandring Stream Spirito Sancto, he dug Pits on some
of the River-Isles to get fresh Water, because it was not safe to Land on the
Continent on each side, because the Inhabitants shot frequent showers of Arrows
from the Thickets, in which they lay ambuscaded. Moreover the Town Spirito
Sancto sent off several Fireships at the time of Flood, but they being easily
quenched did no harm. Here also a Vessel laden at Lisbon with Wines and
Piece-Goods, was taken by Heyn, who setting Sail again divided the Fleet into
three Squadrons, the Vice Admiral Cornelis Oole keeping three Ships to Cruise
withal before the River La Plata, Henrick Best had one Frigate, a Ketch, and a
Carvel, to guard the Mouth of the Stream Jenero, whilst the Admiral himself
Sailed with four Frigates, three Ketches, and a Barque, toward the Inlet Todos
los Sanctos, where two Ships riding near the Shore by the Fort Tapecipe, were
by him set on fire. Also taking a Barque he was informed, that six laden
Vessels lay in the River Tapecipe, whither he sending some Boats to explore the
truth, they found a great Ship without Men in the Mouth of the Stream, and half
a League farther six Portuguese Vessels lying near the Shore; bringing back
news thereof to the Admiral, he went aboard of the Fox Ketch the next Morning,
and taking two Ketches and several Boats with him, Sailed up the River, and
perceived that the forementioned six Ships were gotten up higher, and were
Manned with a hundred and fifty Soldiers, Commanded by Captain Padilha; the
Portuguese Admiral lying in Ambuscade, no sooner perceived the Netherlanders
Boats, but he let fly a whole Volley of small Shot at them, insomuch that it
made them Retreat, and their whole Design had been fruitless, had not Heyn
animated his Men to board the Vice Admiral; which encouragement proved so
successful that they mastered the same, killing all those that fell into their
hands; which so amazed the two Vessels that lay by, that all the Men swam
ashore, and left their rich Lading to the disposal of the Hollanders, besides
which the vanquished Party lost above a hundred and fifty Men, and the
Conquerors but fifteen. Somewhat farther up lay three Ships more, but the River
being dry there at Low Water, and so narrow that the Trees on each Shore could
touch one another, Heyn judged it convenient to prosecute the Design no
farther, but to return with the three for-mention'd Prizes, which he did not
without great difficulty; for the Portuguese had raised Battlements on each
side of the Mouth of the River Tapecipe, and stopped the same with a sunk Vessel,
which Heyn himself set on fire at Low Water, and returned untouched through
thick Volleys of Shot, which flew about his Ears to the Fleet, leaving the
three Ships to be fetched off afterward; to which end he commanded that they
should hang some of the taken Hides about the Fox Ketch's Pinnace, the Carvel
and Boats, that so the Men which were in them might stand secure from the small
Shot, and the rather, because the Ships could not be got out of the shallow and
narrow River but by Toeing. Mean while the Governor of St. Salvador lay with a
considerable number of Citizens and Soldiers behind the forementioned
Battlements, not doubting but to take revenge for the Losses sustained by Heyn;
who nevertheless coming down thither Toed out the three Prize-ships with Boats
hung about with Hides, firing into the Enemies Battlements with his great Guns,
which he had put aboard of the Fox Ketch. About the middle of June he took in
the Prize-goods in view of the City St. Salvador, where seven Netherland Ships
from several places lay at an Anchor. Setting Sail from hence on the fourteenth
of July, and reaching Noronho, known by a Mountain which appears like a
Steeple, he met with Cornelis Oole's Fleet, (who had been Cruising before La
Plata) with whom he arrived safe in the Texel, having in their Way thither from
Noronho taken a Prize, laden with Sugar, Tobacco, and Brasile Wood.

Thomas Sickes his Expedition.
During Peter Heyn's Expedition Thomas Sickes, fitted out by the West India
Company, weighed Anchor out of the Texel with two Sail, and coming to St.
Vincent he found a Spanish Vessel burnt down to the Hulk, took a Portuguese
Pink with Slaves from Angola: Near the Inlet Todos los Sanctos he sunk a
Barque, having first taken several Pots of Oil and Packs of Linen out of the
same: Before Pernambuco he took a Carvel with a hundred and eighty Pipes of
Wine, and a Vessel with Sugar and Hides, and drove another ashore against the
Promontory St. Augustine. But Sickes being supplied and strengthened by three
Ships from the Texel, and four taken Vessels, ran with four to Todos los
Sanctos, sent two to Cruise about Cape St. Augustine, and two more to the North
of Pernambuco: At the Isle Noronho they were ordered to stay a Month one for
another, from whence, after much hardship, they returned home with so many rich
Prizes, that they paid their Charges ten times double; which so encouraged the
Adventurers, that the Chamber of the West India Company in Zealand fitted out
three Sail under the Command of Henrick Lucifer, Henrick Lucifer set out by the
West India Company.
who weighing Anchor from Flushing Anno 1627. steered along the Coast of Africa
to the Amazone River, and from thence North North-West to the Stream Wiapoco,
to settle a Colony there; to which purpose Rowing up the River with Sloops,
they came in the Night to two empty Houses, built at a place called Wacogenive,
which they judged fit for their purpose; wherefore they carried all things
ashore which they had brought out of Zealand with them for the new Planters,
who while they were all busy building of Huts, a Negro was taken Prisoner, who
being asked why the Inhabitants fled? replied, That it was occasioned from a
guilty Conscience; for two years before a Barque and two Sloops with Christians
coming thither from the Amazone River, had stayed thirty days on Wacogenive,
when unawares they were set upon by the Natives, and all killed except three,
who were yet living. Upon which Lucifer, having four Indians, three Men and one
Woman, aboard of his Vessel, threatened to put them all to the Sword, unless
they would produce the three forementioned Christians: Whereupon the next day a
German came to the Water side, of whom they could get little Information, he
having in a manner forgot his native Tongue; but at length the other two coming
thither, the eldest of them, named John Hendricszoon, related to him, That the
Portuguese in great numbers fell upon the Plantations near the Amazone River,
Governed by Captain Oudaen, who after he had fought valiantly a whole day,
being overpowered by number, retreated to his Barque, and Sailed into the Creek
inhabited by the English, whither the Portuguese following in Canoos, cut off
not only Oudaen, but the English also, forty six Men only escaping in a
Barque under the Command of Lieutenant Peter de Bruine to the River Wiapoco;
where they had stayed about three days, when Sergeant Matruit treacherously
shot Lieutenant Bruine: after which the forty six divided themselves into four
Parties; but the Inhabitants to rid themselves of these Strangers, under the
show of great friendship, made them Drunk with the Liquor called Pernau, and
then murdered them all, except himself and two Germans. Which villainous act
Lucifer judged worthy of punishment; but his Orders being to show Kindness and
Civility to the Inhabitants, he suffered the Murder to go unpunished, but built
a triangular Fort near the River Wiapoco, on a Hill eight Fathom above the
Shore, to prevent the passing by of Sloops; which done, he went to visit the
Island Blanco, where he caught three hundred Goats. From thence he went to the
Bay of Honda, the Inhabitants whereof are a valiant People, tall of Stature,
having long Beards, and wearing Copper Rings through their Ears. Near the
Seaside is a Salt-pan, of which the Inhabitants make great benefit. Lucifer
setting Sail again from hence, met with three Ketches sent out by the
West India Company at Amsterdam, before Corientes. The Commander Dirk
Simonszoon van Uitgeest, steering his Course toward the Promontory St. Anton,
took a Frigate laden with Meal, Silk, and other rich Goods, and within view of
Cuba near the River Poros, descrying two brave Gallions from Honduras, bore up
to them with his three Ketches; one of which, called The Lion, being got
betwixt both the Gallions, was in no small danger, the Netherlanders not being
able to get up out of their little Vessel into the high Gallions, in which the
Spaniards stood pushing them down with their Pikes; but no sooner did the
Netherlanders throw their Hand-Granado's amongst them, but Uitgeest got aboard
of the Gallion, and carried her off, whilst the other by nimble Sailing got
away. With this Prize Uitgeest thinking himself sufficiently enriched, steered
homewards.

Joost Johnson and Claes Henrickszoon, Commanding each of them a Ketch, took a
a Ship coming from Lisbon before Pernambuco, laden with Meal, Salt, Wine, and
thirty Monks; and not long after a Pink with six hundred Negro's, a Barque with
Salt and Iron, a Ketch with Wine, and a Frigate with Brasile Wood, Sugar and
Tobacco: Before Itamerica they took two Prizes more; with all which they
returned to the Texel.

Peter Adrianszoon 's Expedition.
The West India Company thus enriched by the Spoil taken from their Enemies,
fitted out twelve Ships again under the Command of Peter Adrianszoon Ita, which
set Sail in the beginning of the Year 1628. and anchored first before Blanca,
an Isle abounding with Goats, the Ground stony, and in some places Rocky, and
having a small, but very convenient Haven, from whence Ita ran beyond Porto
Rico, where he took a Vessel with seven thousand weight of Ginger, and Landed
opposite to Hispaniola on the stony Isle Catalina, where he took in fresh
Water, and then Cruis'd to and again before Cuba, took six Barques, the
Prisoners whereof informed him, That the Honduras Traders were on their Way
coming thither, and that they had two small Men of War for their Convoy: Not
long after Ita discovered them Sailing along the Shore toward the Haven of
Havana, but before they could get in, Captain John Peter's, whose Ketch carried
two Brass, and fourteen Iron Guns, boarded the Vice Admiral, but having no
Graplings to take hold with, the Spanish Ship ran aground, as likewise John
Peterszoon in the pursuit of him; which the Admiral seeing, came to assist his
Vice Admiral, and ran aground on one side of John Peter's, which drove the
Netherlanders Ketch in great danger, she not being able to do Execution with
her small Guns, whilst the Spaniards with their Demy-Cannon played vehemently
upon her; neither was Ita, by reason of calmness and contrary Tide, able to
come up with them, but was forced to stand Northerly, that so he might get an
Easterly Wind, which about Noon always blows fresh here, and so by degrees got
near the Spanish Fleet, till at last coming up with the Vice Admiral, called
St. Jago, he threw Fire-pots into her, and presently after boarding her,
entered with that Valor, that of three hundred Spaniards above a hundred and
fifty were slain; for those that leapt overboard were killed in the Water,
whilst Joachim Guyszoon, John Braems, and Anthony Gonde fell upon the Admiral
Sennora de los Remedios, and took her. In both these Ships Ita took Two
thousand five hundred Chests of Indigo, above Six thousand Hides, Two thousand
five hundred Packs of Sarsaparilla, several Pots of Balsam Oil, Seventy
thousand Pound of Ginger, One and twenty Bars of Silver, Twelve Brass, and
Twenty eight I^^^ Guns; all which having taken out, he set fire in both the
Ships.

A little before this Victory, the Fortune Frigate weighed Anchor from Flushing,
with sixty three Men of War, to be Landed on the Island Tabago. At St. Vincent
they found two Men that were left of seven, who having settled along the River
Wiapow, under Captain John Van Ryen, were forced by the salvage Natives to
remove, two whereof dyed by the way, the remaining five landing on the Isle
Trinidad, had three of their Companions killed by the Indians of Granada, they
being Frenchmen, to whom the Natives bore an inveterate Hatred, so that they
left only the two Hollanders alive. The Fortune assisted by the South-star
Ketch, took a rich Barque near the Isles des Virgins.

Vitgeest's Exploits.
Not long after the West India Company set out twelve Ships more, under the
Command of Derick Simonszon Uitgeest, (who had the year before brought home the
two forementioned great Prizes,) who setting Sail and getting into the large
Bay of the Rocky Island Vincent, caught several Goats and Tortels. Before the
Coast of Brasile he took two rich Carvels, one from Pernambuco, and another
from the Inlet Todos los Sanctos; which Prizes having sent home with three
Ketches, he sailed toward Sierre Leona, known by high and thick Woods, which
grow on a high Coast; from whence returning again to Pernambuco, he took six
rich laden Vessels, amongst which was one Gallioon from Goa, with a great
Treasure of Diamonds.

Peter Hein's Expedition.
These successful Expeditions of the Fleets set out from time to time by the
West India Company, enabled and encouraged them to undertake Matters of greater
consequence, viz. They fitted out one and thirty Sail, which carried four
thousand Men, one hundred and thirty Brass Guns, and five hundred fifty eight
Iron Guns; of which Peter Peterszoon Hein being Admiral, took near the
Soundings of Tortuga, two Barques from Havana, the Men whereof informed him,
that the Plate-Fleet was not yet arrived there, nor that from Terra Firma, but
were both expected every day. The strong Current drove Peter Hein farther
Eastward beyond Havana than he expected, insomuch that he got sight of Matanca,
where he overtook a Barque sent out by Landronce de Cabrera, Governor of
Havana, to give notice to the Plate Fleet of the Hollanders Ships, which he had
seen from the Castle Morro before Havana: He gives chase to the Spanish
Plate-Fleet, and takes several of them.
Mean while John Van Hoorn took a Vessel which was sent out before by the Plate
Fleet, the Men whereof informed him that the Fleet it self was near at hand;
which Peter Hein found to be true, when the next Morning before Sunrising he
descried ten Sail, of which some had ignorantly sailed to Leeward, and others
to Windward of the Dutch Fleet; nine of them which were Laden with Hides, Meal,
Campeche-Wood, Cochinele, Indigo, and other rich Goods, were taken by several
Manned Sloops, because the Ships were not able to come up to them by reason of
the Calm. About Noon Peter Hein discovering nine Gallions more, made sudden
Chase after them; which they perceiving, made toward the Shore, and about
Twilight in the Evening they ran aground in the Bay of Matanca, where the
Commanders Landing saved themselves, each carrying with him what Jewels they
could. About Break of Day Peter Hein made all the Sail he could possible to
come up with them, and seeing them fast aground, leapt into a Boat and Rowed up
to the Admiral, who fired eight Guns, whilst his Men got ashore: Hein
approaching the Gallioon, saw no way to get up, till at last one of his Men
spying a Rope, climbed up the same, and made fast other Ropes for his
Companions to get up by, the Spaniards standing still gaping upon him, as if
their feet and hands had been tied, which made Peter Hein grant them their
Lives; which the other Gallions seeing, surrendered themselves upon promise of
Quarter; by which the Spanish Crown lost, besides the Musk, Bezoar,
Ambergreece, and the Cargo of two Gallioons and a rich Prize, above One hundred
and fifty Tun of Gold.

The Night succeeding this great Victory being somewhat Tempestuous, drove the
Gallioons from the Bank on which they stuck the Day before, into deeper Water:
Five Days they spent in unlading of the taken Vessels, after which Peter Hein
set Sail with four Gallioons, a new Spanish Merchant-Man, and his own Fleet,
out of the Bay of Matanca, on the Seventh of September, Anno 1628. for Holland,
where in a short time he safely arrived.

The Expedition of Lucas Pol.
The Tiger Frigate sent from Zealand, and Commanded by Lucas Pol, Anchored before
Blanca, where he brought away above five hundred Goats: This Island which is
six Leagues in circumference, has on the West a Sandy Inlet, sit for great
Ships to Ride at Anchor; Moreover, it is steep and Rocky, in the Valleys the
Grass grows above half a Man's length. The Woods are overgrown with Thorns; the
Soil also would produce much more fruit, did not the Rats, Leguanes,
Hedge-hogs; and other Animals, devour and spoil the Plants.

Pol leaving this Island ran to Tortuga, a low Isle, except on the West side;
it produces Guaiacum, or Pock-wood, in great abundance, and nourishes great
Flocks of Goats, and has an eminent Salt-Pan; in all which things it is
paralleled with the Island Orchilla, known by its high Mountains on the East
and West; the other part thereof not being above six Foot above the Water: Pol
Landing here, carried off above two hundred Goats near the Western Shore, whose
bryny Soil produces neither Grain, nor Grass. The Trees which are on the same
are so dry and weak, that they may be pusht down with one hand; Neither are
there any Birds to be found here, except Owls; nor Beasts, except Goats and
great Hedge-hogs. Pol sailing from hence, steered by the nine Woody Isles
called Roccas, and the three called Aves, to Bonaire, a pretty large rising
Isle, which on the North-West has a convenient Road, a fresh Water-spring,
store of Sheep, on which the Spaniards live; Pock-wood, and Cotton Trees: Then
steering to the Isle Mona, he found the same to be surrounded with Rocks, and
full of Horned Cattle difficult to be caught because of the thick Woods, in
which grow exceeding good Oranges. Pol leaving this Isle, set sail and steered
for Flushing, where he safely arrived without having performed any remarkable
Exploits.

Adrian Pater his Expedition.
Mean while the West India Company fitted out twelve Sail more, under the
Command of Adrian Johnzon Pater, who set sail in the middle of August, and
Cruised in vain about the Flemmish Isles for Spanish Ships: About the beginning
of the Year 1629. he sent away three Ships under the Command of Martin
Landrode, from the Island of St. Vincent, whilst he himself ran with the rest
of the Fleet into the Inlet Todos los Sanctos, within a League from the City
Salvador, where there lay only seven Barques near the Shore, which he judging
not worth the while to hazard his Ships and Men for, steered to Pernambuco,
took a rich Laden Barque in his Voyage, and was informed by a Brasilian that
came aboard of him on floating Pieces of Timber, that three Sail of Ships full
of Goods were returned to Reciffa, so soon as they heard of the Dutch Fleet:
But Pater judging no good to be done there, returned back to the Caribbee
Islands, where near Granada he found three Dutch Vessels, which had likewise
Cruis'd in vain before the Coast of Brasile. Moreover, the Pegasus, Raven, and
Heart Frigates, parted from the Fleet to Cruise about Monges, touching at Blanca,
they took above a thousand Goats, and between the Cliffs of the little Isles
Monges, abundance of Fish; but descrying no Spanish Ships, they Sailed to the
Island De Vacca, which has a brave Harbor, delightful Woods, pleasant
Pastures, fresh water Brooks, and abundance of wild Horses, Hogs, and Lions, of
which the Seamen took an infinite number. Before the low Promontory Corientes,
overgrown with Trees, they got two Prizes laden with Campeche Wood.

These three forementioned Frigates, as also the Walcheren and South-star from
Zealand, joined with Pater's Fleet, when he received Information, that a
considerable number of Spanish Ships were suddenly expected from Campeche:
Whereupon Paters divided his Fleet into three Squadrons, whereof the Forlorn
consisted of three Sail, the Reserve of the like number, and the Admiral kept
five under his own Command: Thus divided, they stood to and again before Cape
Corientes, when Captain John Stapel brought three, and John van Hoorn four
Netherland Ships to their assistance.

Hoorn's Expedition.
Hoorn having set Sail from the Texel about the latter end of April, was beaten
off from Granada with poisoned Arrows, and took a Prize before the Promontory
St. Anthony, the Men whereof informed him, that the Governor Gabriel de Chaves
Osorio, an old Soldier, had great trouble in repairing the Walls, Forts and
Houses in the City, which two years before had been blown down by a great
Storm, and that six great Ships were lading to go for Carthagena with the
Gallions for Spain, because they durst not Steer by Porto Rico for fear of the
Netherlanders; moreover, that abundance of Ginger was spoiled for want of
Vessels to carry it away; and that the Citizens were in great want for Stuffs,
none having come in along time from Spain; in like manner there went none but
Copper Coin, so that nothing was to be got there. The Silver and Gold-Mines
were not looked after, the Spaniards not caring to work, and the old Natives
were long since cut off, insomuch that if the Imperial Court was not kept in
St. Domingo, to which belonged Cumana and Coro; that City and Island, and
Hispaniola it self, would soon be left desolate. Hoorn therefore Sailed by the
Promontory St. Cruiz, being a low Point overgrown with Trees, into the Bay,
twenty Leagues from the Mouth whereof lie the Isles Jardin de la Reyna. Before
Corientes he took a Barque with three hundred and six Guns, sent from Havana,
the Men whereof informed him, That the Governor of Havana, called Laurence de
Cabrera, having Intelligence of the Dutch Fleets approach, raised many Men, and
gave notice to the Ships in all the Harbors thereabouts; after which he took
another rich Prize, and joined at last with Paters Fleet, which now consisted
of twenty Sail, with which he Steered for the Soundings of Tortugas, where the
Fleet met with a dreadful Tempest, wherein a Thunderbolt splitting the
Main-Yard of the Hunter Frigate, fell down by the Mast, and rolled out at one of
the Port-holes, killed the Purser, and wounded two more in the Head: great
showers of Rain fell daily, when Samuel Lucas and Captain Outger Minne brought
seven Sail of Ships more to the Fleet, with which Paters put in for fresh
Provisions into the spacious and secure Haven De Cabannas, where several Isles
lie, formerly inhabited by Shepherds and Carpenters.

From hence Paters Sailed by Havana, mended the Port-holes of his lower Deck,
and took off the Top-gallant Masts, because in September the usual Storms begin
here; and seeing that he could not do any Exploit with so great a Fleet, he
sent nine Ships home, and with the rest went to Barbados, where at that time
there were about fifteen hundred English that Planted Tobacco.

Paters Sailing from hence, ran to the Main Continent of America, inspected the
River Oronoque, where he quenched the Town St. Thomas, that had been set on
fire by the fled Inhabitants, and brought aboard all what they had left.

Henrick Lonque 's Expedition.
During his fruitless Expedition, the West India Company Rigged out twenty seven
Sail under the Command of Henrick Lonque, Peter Ita, and Joost Bankart; the
Land-Soldiers being Commanded by Diederick van Waerdenberg. Lonque coming to
St. Vincent, stayed a long time at Anchor there; for in regard the Spaniard in
the Low Countries ranged on the Veluwe, and had taken Amersfoort, the States of
the United Netherlands were forced to keep those Men in their Service which the
West India Company had raised; but so soon as Wesel was re-taken, and the
Hartogen-Bosch won by Frederick Henrick, Prince of Orange, thirty six Sail were
sent to Lonque's assistance; of which some came sooner to him than others at
St. Vincent, where he had stayed four Months without doing any remarkable
Exploit. On St. Steven's Day he set Sail with fifty two Ships, thirteen ^loops,
and two Prizes, all Manned with seven thousand Men, which meeting with contrary
Winds and Calms, lay a great while under the Line, the Scurvey began to
increase amongst them daily, insomuch that above twelve hundred lay sick, and
three hundred died since they set Sail from St. Vincent; yet at last Lonque
getting sight of Olinda, sent Waerdenberg on the fourth of February with
sixteen Ships, carrying three thousand Men to Pavo Morello, a Wood, lying two
Leagues Northward from Olinda, where he suddenly Landed, notwithstanding the
Portuguese guarded the Shore with two thousand Men, whom Waerdenberg, after a
short Skirmish, putting to flight, was the whole Night in Arms, and the next
day became Master of Olinda, Takes Olinda
by breaking in on the North at the same time, when Colonel Schutte Stormed on
the South. Moreover, the Enemy surrendered the two Forts on Reciffa, and forsook
the Island.

About the middle of March nine Ships which were wanting to make up Lonque's
Fleet, came to an Anchor by him, having brought him above six hundred Soldiers,
many Guns, all manner of Ammunition under the Command of Lieutenant Colonel
Alexander Seton, and the three Adjutants John de Bruine, Philip Serooskerken,
and Horatius Calandryn, who immediately ordered the Cloister on Antonio Vaes to
be fortified, and built a Fort with four Bulwarks at the Entrance of Pozo in
the Country Reciffa. Seton also set fire on the Suburbs of Olinda, in which
the Enemy had Lodged the Night before, and endeavored to poison the fresh Water
on Antonio Vaes, when on a sudden the Netherlanders fell upon them; two which
drank of the Water died, and others fell into great Fits of Sicknesses, and it
wanted little but that the Admiral Lonque, with a Company of fifty
Musquetteers, had been killed returning from Reciffa to Olinda, he being
unawares set upon by two Companies of Portugueses and Brasilians, who killed
above thirty six of his Men, and dangerously wounded six more, so that he
brought off but eight Men unhurt. The like Misfortune befell the Wood-cutters
on Antonio Vaes, surprised by the Portuguese from an Ambuscade.

Whilst Affairs stood thus about Olinda, there first arrived two Ships from
the United Netherlands at Reciffa, not long after four more, Commanded by John
Walbeek, and eight more under the Admiral Dirik van Uitgeest, who was followed
by the Noah's Ark.

About the same time Dirk de Ruiter set Sail with six Ships, and Peter Ita with
ten, to Cruise at Sea.

Ita being set upon by the Enemy, escapes very narrowly.
About the beginning of February, Lonque having put all things in good order,
prepared to return home, and weighed Anchor with nine Ships. But Ita going from
Reciffa to Olinda, to take his leave of the Council there, was suddenly
surprised after a strange manner; he had ninety Musquetteers for his Guard,
whose Matches were all put out, and their Arms all wet by a great shower of
Rain, which they perceiving from their Ambuscades, immediately got cross the
River, and killed thirty of the Netherlanders, the rest running away, left Ita
to defend himself, which he did for some time with his Sword, but had
absolutely been slain, had he not received Aid from Olinda.

Because the Portuguese made several Attempts upon the Netherlanders, not
without damage on both sides, the West India Company often sent Ships to their
assistance; and likewise many Brasilians deserting the Portuguese, joined with
the Netherlanders, who built a five-corner'd Fort with Bulwarks about the
Cloister on Antonio Vaes; which to prevent, the Portuguese ventured many a
Sally, though not without considerable loss on their part. They also reported,
that Frederick de Toledo was making thither with a great Fleet, to drive the
Netherlanders out of Brasile; at which they taking the Alarm, put themselves
all into a posture of Defense, raised new Works about the Castle on Reciffa,
whilst the Ships which Cruis'd on that Coast brought in several Prizes.

John Walbeek being chosen General by the West India Company over Brasile, had
a Design on the Promontory St. Augustine; but it came to no effect, because the
Sea beat so vehemently against the Shore.

Great Supplies sent to Brasile by the Netherland! West India Company.
The Report of the great preparation of a Fleet which was making ready in Spain,
moved the West India Company to raise mo're Men, and to send out Admiral Paters
with seventeen Ships, which all arrived safe, except the Black Lion Frigate,
which carrying the Lieutenant Colonel Eltz and Captain Uitgeest, was never
heard of.

Joost Bankart was also sent out in March with eight Ships to St. Helena, to
Cruise there for the rich Carraks which used to Water there; but though he
stayed till August before this fruitful Island, yet saw not one Ship at Sea,
nor a Man on the Island, but great numbers of Sea-pies, which are so tame, that
they suffer themselves to be taken up with the Hand, or knocked on the Head
with Sticks.

Near this Isle Ita took a Ketch Prize, and rallying his whole Fleet together,
Steered for the Caimans; the most Eastern Isle whereof being about three
Leagues long, is full of Rocks, with a high Point on the East; the other part
thereof is plain. Then dividing his Fleet into seven Squadrons, he made them
all ready for an Engagement, when he was informed by an Englishman before
Corientes, that Frederick de Toledo had set Sail with eighty Ships from Havana
to Spain, of which he had sent back eight Gallions to Carthagena: Hereupon
bending his Course near Havana, he put the whole Country to an Alarm, burnt a
rich laden Vessel, and another that carried a Flag on the Fore-top, and a third
laden with Ballast.

Joachim Guysen being made Commander of the Dolphin Frigate, and sent to join
with Admiral Pater's Squadron, was driven below Jamaica, and at last struck
against the great Caiman, where his Vessel was all shattered to pieces; but all
his Men and Goods being saved, he spent sixteen Weeks in making a Ketch of the
pieces of the Dolphin, and brought a hundred and twenty Men, four Brass, and
two Iron Guns to the Fleet, having buried the rest on Caiman.

Five Leagues beyond Havana, a Spanish Ship laden with Campeche Wood and
Sarsaparilla, being chased against the Shore, was set on fire by her own Men,
which the Hollanders attempted twice in vain to put out.

After this Ita's Fleet lay long upon the Coast Cuba, but finding no Spanish
Vessels, and their Provisions growing scarce, returned back to the Texel, where
they arrived without doing any farther Exploits.

In the mean while Pater lying before Punta del Gallo, intending to Invade the
City built on the Shore of the Island Trinidad; but the Fort built at the Mouth
of the River, and contrary Current preventing his Design, he ran through the
middlemost Hole of Boccas to Blanca, where he caught two thousand Goats and a
Bonaire, set several Towns on fire, whilst the Spaniards made a Smother of dry
Stubble all along the Fields, through which the Hollanders were to return, that
so they might be choked with the Smoke; which their Invention had proved
successful, had not the Hollanders forced a Way through a Wood. At last the
Fleet leaving Hispaniola, Steered for St. Martha, a Town built on the Main
Coast between Carthagena, and the River La Hacha, being instigated thereto by a
Letter (taken by the Hollanders in a Prize) writ by the Governor Hieronymo de
Quero to the Spanish King; which Letter set forth the present Condition of St.
Martha, St. Martha taken by the Dutch.
whereby they conceived great hopes of a possibility of taking it, and of the
Advantages that would accrue thereby: nor did it happen contrary to their
expectation; for the Admiral Landing his Men, took the City without the least
resistance; and though the great Fort fired some Guns, yet it soon surrendered
on promise of Quarter; the City also was saved from being burned, by paying
fifty five hundred Pieces of Eight, after they had plundered the same, and
carried away whatsoever they thought good. Mean while the Provisions growing
scarce in the Fleet, Pater judged it convenient to return home, where he
arrived safely with all his Prizes.

The valiant Exploit of John Lichthart.
Notable Exploits were performed by John Lichthart, one of which, amongst others
ought not to be omitted, viz. he setting Sail homewards from Reciffa about the
beginning of October Anno 1630. chanced to fall with his Ship, the Over-yzel,
amongst five Biscayan Pirates, Cruising between the French and English Coast,
which thought to clap him aboard on a sudden; but they seeing him bear up to
them, were afraid to venture, and Tacked about: after which he was set upon
about three Leagues to the Northward of the Lizard, by three Frigates belonging
to Dunkirk, the biggest whereof carried thirty six Guns, the second twenty
eight, and the last twelve; with which three he maintained a Fight eight hours,
in which he had fourteen Men killed, and thirty two wounded; his Ship resembled
a Wreck, the Mainmast being shot overboard, the Rudder hung by pieces at the
Stern, and the Tackling all shattered and torn, besides seven Shot under Water,
and not less than four hundred through the sides above, but not without
sufficient marks of retribution on the Dunkirkers side; but Lichthart getting
into Plymouth, mended his Ship, and from thence Sailed to Amsterdam, where he
was Presented with a Gold Chain in recompense of his Valor.

The Expedition of the Brown-Fish Frigate.
The Expedition of the Brown-Fish Frigate is also remarkable, which Sailing
beyond Cape deVerd, Steered by Cape Roxo along the Shore to the River Catchieu,
at whose Mouth lie two Shelves, and between them ran a Channel through which
the Ships passed. The Brown-Fish Sailing about a League up the River, which is
a Mile in breadth, took a Portuguese Barque. The Seamen also Landing on the
Isle Bissis, spoke Portuguese with the Natives, who are Coal-black, and have
strong Bodies, go Armed with Darts, Bows, Arrows, Symiters, and were Baptized
by a Priest sent thither from Portugal, who with a few Contrymen had built a
Chapel and some Houses there.

From hence the Brown-Fish Sailed to the most Northern Isle Bisegos, which is
continually at Wars with Bissis. The King of this Isle receiving some Presents
from the Nepherlanders, gave leave to his Subjects, shie at first, to go aboard
of them.

Steering from hence to Noronho, they found the Inhabitants carried away, and
their Gardens and Houses ruined, so that they could get nothing but wild
Pumpions; to refresh themselves with; therefore leaving the Isle they anchored
at Reciffa.

In the interim, whilst these Expeditions were carried on as has been
related, Captain John Boon-eter (who parted from the Admiral Ita's Fleet with
eight Sail of Ships) Cruis'd to and again before Hispaniola till May Anno 1631.
near Mona he took a rich Vessel coming from Porto Rico, another before the
Island Vacca, and a third full of Ginger, with which he Steered to the
Tortugas, being seven in number, resembling rather sandy Flats than Isles.
Before Havana he also chased several Vessels, but lost sight of them in the
Night. Mean while their Provisions growing short, the Seamen were desirous to
return; which Boon eter would no way yield to, because the time began to
approach in which the Spanish Ships came from all places to Havana; but the Men
mutinying forced him to Steer to the Texel, where they arrived without doing
any considerable Exploit advantageous to the West India Company.

But at the same time fourteen Ships, three Sloops, and seven great Pinnaces,
weighed Anchor from Reciffa with a thousand two hundred and sixty Men, divided
into twelve Companies, under the Command of Hartman Godefrid and Stein
Callenfels; who Landing on the Island Tamarica, marched along a bad and narrow
Path, The Fort of Tamarica assaulted by the Dutch in vain.
partly craggy and partly sandy, to a Fort built on a high Ascent overgrown
with Brambles in such a manner, that it was impossible for them to break
through, whilst they in the Fort fired continually upon Stein Callenfels, who
judged it convenient to draw off, and Storm the Castle on another side.

The Admiral Pater newly come from the Texel to Olinda, sent three Ketches, a
Sloop, and two Pinnaces, beyond the Town Tamarica, to prevent the Enemies
crossing over to the Main, and keep off their Fireships. They also received
Information from three Portuguese and five Brasilian Prisoners, That the
Castle, surrounded with Fens and Brambles, had sixteen Guns; and that
Albuquerque had sent eight hundred Men to assist the three hundred that lay in
Garrison there before. The Captains Le Grand and Arcisseusky found two other
Ways that led to the Fort, but altogether unfit to march along with their Men
and Guns. Pater also Rowed round the Island with Sloops, and fathomed the
Water, whilst Arcisseusky Sailing up the River to Garasi, supposed that he had
found a much better place to make an Onset on the Castle in, than had been
found out yet; but the Council of Olinda and Stein Callenfels looked upon it as
too great a hazard to Storm a Fort, to which the Ways lay so much to the
Enemy's advantage, a small number in the same being able to beat off a
considerable Party; therefore it was judged best, and concluded upon, to build
a Fort on a little Isle near Tamarica, at the Mouth of the River; to which
purpose the Engineer Buuren contrived a square Castle with a long Horn-work,
which was called Orange; in which the Captains Arcisseusky, Mellingen, and
Beyer, were left in Garrison with their Companies, whilst the rest of the
Regiment returned to Reciffa.

Mean while Antonio de Oquendo brought a great Fleet to St. Salvador; and
Callenfels drew four Companies of Musquetteers, and a great company of Seamen
with Pickaxes and Spades out of the Fort Frederick Henrick into the Field, and
marching Southward along private Ways, he found the River strongly fortified
near the Forts Affogados, having above and below a row of strong Pallisado's;
yet the Portuguese that guarded these Works after a small resistance fled, and
left all: But because a general Alarm drew many People in Arms out of Real, and
several other places, Callenfels drew off in good order, and was informed by a
Prisoner called Peter Alves, that the Fort Affogados received that Denomination
from the River on which it was built; that there lay generally a hundred and
fifty Men in Garrison there; that about a Mile farther was the Fort Pirange;
that Peter de Acunha bore the chief Command next to Albuquerque over the
Militia, who used few Muskets but what had Firelocks; and that they wanted no
Ammunition, for six great Carvels laden with the same had not long since
stored them with great plenty thereof. The Netherlanders also understanding by
Letters which they had taken, that the Tapuyans were very much incensed against
the Portuguese, who stood in great fear of these salvage People, it was judged
convenient by the Council at Olinda, to invite the Tapuyans to be their Friends.

Fight between the Dutch and Spanish Fleet.
On the eleventh of September Anno 1631. Admiral Pater and Vice Admiral Martin
Thyszoon, whose joint Forces were fifteen Men of War and three Ketches,
carrying nine Companies of Foot, Commanded by Captain Engelbert Schutte,
descrying the Spanish Fleet about an hour before Sunset, animated all the
Officers and Captains to regard their Honor and Oath which they had taken;
telling them, That on this Engagement would depend the Welfare or Ruin of the
West India Company. But his Men were not so much heartned by his Speech, as
daunted at the sight of the Spanish Fleet, which consisted of twelve Castilian
and five Portuguese Gallions, and twenty six other Vessels, as Pinks, Fly-boats
and Carvels, all well Manned and full of Guns, the Gallions carrying whole and
Demi-Cannons; the Admiral, called Antonio de Oquendo, carrying forty eight
great Guns in his Gallion, called St. Jago; whereas, they had received
information but of four Gallions and eighteen lesser Vessels; nevertheless
Pater no whit discouraged, boarded him about ten a Clock the next Morning,
whilst Captain John Mast boarded him on the other side, which occasioned a
bloody Engagement; and it would have proved fatal to the Spaniard, had not
Pater's Stern taken fire, which he endeavoring in vain to put out, Admiral
Pater drowned.
and none coming to his assistance, after he had hung a good while by a Rope at
the Spanish Admiral's Bow, he was forced through faintness to let go and fall
into the Water, whilst his Ship was blown up, a few of his Men only being
saved by Oquendo. In the mean time Martin Thyszoon boarded the Gallion Antonio
de Padua, Commanded by the Vice Admiral Francisco de Vallezilla on one side,
and the Utrecht Frigate on the other, which after half an hours Engagement lost
her Mainmast, and after a sharp Fight of four hours the Fire took hold of her
Sails; which the Netherlanders not being able to quench, leaped desperately
over into the Spanish Vice Admiral; but he having two hundred and sixty Men
aboard, beat them off, forcing them to leap into the Water, or sell their Lives
at a dear rate. But Captain Thyszoon had better success, for he not only sunk
the Vice Admiral, but took the Bonaventura Gallion, and likewise gave the
Gallion John Baptista so many shot under Water, that she sunk likewise. The
Night approaching ended this bloody Engagement; and the Netherlanders Fleet
much damnifi'd stood Northwards, with intention to return to Reciffa. The next
Morning Oquendo had lost sight of them, but descried them again on the
fifteenth of September, and kept in view of them the six following days, five
Leagues from him to the East, or East South-East, Martin Thyszoon coming to an
Anchor before Reciffa on the twenty second of September.

About the same time the Amsterdam Frigate set Sail from thence for St.
Salvador, with intention to join with Pater's Fleet there, but not finding the
Admiral, returned, and near Cape St. Augustine discovered the Spanish Fleet;
wherefore running close behind them she received four Guns from Oquendo, which
she answered, and kept at a distance from them the whole Night, in hopes to
meet with one single Vessel or other belonging to the Fleet; but the Spanish
Vice Admiral bearing little Sail, guarded the Rere, and fired continually at
the Amsterdam Frigate, who fearing an unlucky Bullet, made all the Sail she
could possible, and brought news of the approach of the Spanish Fleet to
Reciffa. Soon after which the Elephant came from the Dutch Fleet thither, with
a full Account of the forementioned Engagement, viz. That besides the Admiral
Pater, there were slain Captain Thomas Sickes, Cormillion, and Lieutenant
Steenbergen, also that two Ships, the Prince William and the Povince of
Utrecht, were sunk: In lieu of which they had taken the Gallion called The
Bonaventura, with twenty six Brass Guns, weighing above sixty four thousand
Pound, two hundred and forty Castilians, and a great parcel of Sugar and
Tobacco; Amongst the Prisoners was one called Francisco de Fuentes, who being
Examined, gave this Information, viz. That the Fleet carried two Regiments of
Spaniards and one of Italians; in which three Regiments were four thousand Men,
under the Command of Conde del Bangniola; and that upon the setting out of
Ferdinand, the King's Brother, to the Netherlands, all the chiefest Gallions
and Dunkirk Ships were sent for, and English Vessels hired, to convey him safe
to the Flemmish Coast, which made Oquenda set Sail with so much the lesser
number to St. Salvador; that the sunk Gallion, called Antonio de Padua, had
fourteen Brass Guns in her Hold, besides twenty six that were mounted.

Two Tapuyan Kings offer their Service to the Hollanders.
Soon after a Brasilian that had passed by Albuquerque's Army to Olinda, brought
Information, That he was sent by Jandui and Oquenou, two Kings belonging to the
Tapuyans, to enquire if the Topatingas (for so they called the Netherlanders
that belonged to the West India Company) did yet reside in Pernambuco, with
Proffers to assist them with their Forces. Moreover, he informed them, That
since his departure from Boudewyn Henrickszoon, a great many of the Tapuyans
Petivares were killed by the Portuguese near the River Grande and Inlet
Trajiciaon, because they had assisted Henrickszoon, who had left them helpless
at his departure. He added also, That if the West India Company would give the
other Brasilians any assurance to assist the Tapuyans, it would be necessary to
Consult about it near the River Grande.

This Proposal was found to be of so weighty a Concern, that Ellert Smient
being sent with the Ship called The New Netherland, and a great Sloop, to
Siara, to make farther enquiry into the Business, was accompanied by a Renegado
Portuguese called Samuel Cochin, and several Brasilians (whom Henrickszoon upon
their Request carried with him from the Inlet Trajiciaon to Holland) who went,
under pretense of visiting their Relations at the River Grande and Siara, to
invite their Contrymen to join with the Netherlanders.

Olinda deserted and demolished by the Hollanders.
During Smient's absence many Consultations were held about the demolishing or
defending of the City Olinda, about which there had formerly been many
Contests; but at last the Voices carried it, which were for the demolishing
thereof, in regard it was of little Consequence, and could not be kept without
many Men and great Charges, because of its bad Situation, whenas their Men
might do greater Service in other places: Wherefore they began to carry all
things necessary from Olinda to Reciffa, and on the twenty fourth of November
the City was set on fire with Barrels of Pitch and Tar, being in a light flame
at every corner, whilst Stein Callenfels drew off the Garrison in good order
to Reciffa; and immediately sixteen hundred Men under his Command were put
aboard of sixteen Vessels, with intention to go to Parayba; but the Enemy
having a fortnight before had notice of this Design, had fortified himself all
along the River. Callenfels approaching, espied twelve Portuguese Standards,
and the Men ready on the Breast-works to prevent his Landing; yet nevertheless
he not regarding their Bullets, pressed in amongst them, and forced the Enemy
from his Works.

Near the Water stood a Stone Castle, and on one side of it a large
Storehouse; on the Mountain near the City appeared the Franciscan Cloister;
the Fort raised of Earth had four Bulwarks, and twenty six Guns, according to
the Information of the Eyewitnesses Drevis and Berster, who were sent thither
as Spies.

Callenfels attempts to take the City, but without success.
Callenfels Landed not so carefully but that he lost forty Men, either killed
from behind the Breastworks, or out of a neighboring Wood. Being informed by a
Portuguese Prisoner, of the ill Condition of the Town, and how slenderly it was
provided, he immediately raised a Sconce, two Watch-houses, and a Pallisado,
from which he fired with two Guns on the Castle, and made several Trenches; but
the Besieged were stronger in People and Guns than the Besiegers, who being
scarce able, by reason of their small number, to keep Guards in all places,
were also tired out under a hot Climate, and fainted for want of Provisions,
insomuch that in two days there died and fell sick above two hundred; wherefore
Callenfels judged it best to draw off in time; which that they might do
securely, they made a Redoubt, and the six Companies Commanded by the Captains
Redinchoven, Meppelen, Cloppenburg, Schenk, Byma, and Cook, resolved upon a
desperate Attempt, as follows: Marching privately through a Wood behind the
Enemy's Works, they fell in at one side upon the Portuguese Trenches, from
whence they drove them after a small resistance, and forced them to fly
toward the Fort, whither they were pursued with such eagerness, that those who
were in the Fort, lest the Hollanders might get in with them, locked up the
Avenues against their own Men; at which they were so amazed, that some of them
climbed up by the Walls of the Fort, but were either killed by the Assailants,
or knocked on the Head by their own People, because several Hollanders went to
climb up amongst the Portuguese; the rest running about the Fort, fell into the
midst of the Netherlanders, where they were all cut off, being in number above
a hundred. The Hollanders also in this resolute Design, had about twenty Men
killed, and fifty wounded; after which they put lighted Matches on Sticks in
their Enemy's Works, as if they had never made any Attempt on the City Parayba.

Whilst this Expedition fell out so unfortunately, Smient performing his
Voyage, found in the Inlet Trajiciaon a Portuguese Vessel haled near the Shore
under the protection of two Pallisado's; wherefore supposing it best not to
make any Attempt on the same, he ran to an Anchor before Ubranduba, twenty
Leagues below the River Grande; where the Natives Marcial, Tacou, Ararova, and
Matauwe, who had been in Holland, Landing, went to see, and speak with their
Contrymen to join with the Netherland West India Company: and some days
after the Seamen Landing again in the same place, met with Tacou, together with
eight more stout Men, and seventeen Women and Children, who carried a slain
Portuguese called Juan Perera, to the River Grande, about whom they had found
Letters containing the whole Condition of Siara; which the Brasilians imparting
to Smient, he sent a Ketch thither before, and followed after himself; they
Steered along the Shore beyond the Shelves Guamare, by the Mountains Sailinas
and Porto de Mel, the Haven De Onces, and River Juaguarive, to the White Point,
where the Brasilians Landing spoke with their People, and toward the Evening
brought good tidings, and desired that they might be Landed at Siara, where
they would put their Design in practice: Smient following their Advice,
received them aboard the New Netherland, and Sailed along by the square Fort
Siara toward a smooth Shore on each side, hedged in by thick Woods, where the
Brasilians intended to Land; but the Portuguese, and Brasilians belonging to
their Party, being gotten into the Wood before, fired so vehemently, that they
were forced to Retreat, and Sail five Leagues farther beyond the Cape Opese,
made dangerous by the many blind Cliffs that lie about the same. Smient
anchoring here, Landed the Brasilians, on promise that they would return in two
days; but the Seamen seeing sometimes ten, sometimes fifteen Armed Portugueses
ashore, judged that the Brasilians had been slain by them, and therefore
weighed Anchor to the great dislike of the West India Company.

Since this unsuccessful Design on Parayba, the Council at Reciffa were no whit
discouraged, but resolved to make an Attempt on the River Grande with twelve
Ships and two Sloops, carrying ten Companies of Soldiers, besides Seamen; but
by reason of the difficulty of Landing (because the Coast being very Rocky,
makes the Sea go very hollow) the strength of the Place, both in respect of its
Fortification and number of Defendants, and the joining of the Brasilians with
them, they were forced to return without effecting their Design.

The Expedition of Nekker, Houte-been, and others.
About the same time eight Sail arrived at Reciffa from Holland, and Jonathan de
Nekker, Cornelis Corneliszoon, alias Houte-been, and Reinier Peterszoon, set
out with three Frigates from the Texel to the Isle Vacca, where with Hunting,
Fishing, and gathering of Fruit, they refreshed themselves, and afterward
Steered to the River Magdalena, discernable at three Leagues distance by the
thick yellow Water it discharges into the Sea through three Mouths. Between the
Western and middlemost Mouth lies an Isle in the middle of the River, behind
which Houte-been came to an Anchor, whilst Nekker and Peterszoon kept Guard
near Punto Verde; where though the Wind blew very fresh in the Night, yet the
Water remained smooth: About Daybreak Nekker discovering a Sail, made chase
after the same, but not able to come up with her, lost her the following Night,
and in the Morning saw a Barque, which running ashore was set on fire by
Peterszoon; after which Nekker chased two other Ships, which likewise getting
from him, he stood off at Sea out of sight of the Isles Zamba, which are low on
the West, and Hilly at the East End, where the Sea beats vehemently against a
Promontory, and chased a Barque ashore, whither he sent a Boat with eight Men;
which being beaten to pieces by the Waves, drowned four of them, and the rest
getting ashore were killed by the Spaniards. Soon after which four Spanish
Ships set Sail after Nekker and Peterszoon, and had not the Night favored them
they had been but in a bad Condition; for they were not able to get their
Seamen aboard, who having taken some Wine ashore, had made themselves Drunk;
about Daybreak they descried the four Spnish Vessels, which were gotten so far
from them, that they could but just discern them from the Main-top. Not long
after they took two Barques, and came to an Anchor behind Zamba by Houte-been,
who being driven by a Storm out of the River Magdalena to Jamaica, had chased a
Barque ashore there, and a Ship with four hundred Negro's against St. Martha,
and since took a rich laden Barque near the River Magdalena. In like manner
Nekker and Peterszoon took a Ship coming from Caraques, leaving Houte-been
alone before Magdalena, who not long after discovered eighteen Spanish Ships
near the High-land St. Martha, which were Steering to Carthagena; one whereof
belonging to Carthagena he made Prize of, but was forced to forsake her in a
great Storm; after the ceasing of which he took another Frigate, the Men whereof
informed him, That the Admiral Thomas de Caspure was going with eleven Ships
from Cape Antonio to Porto Belo, to lade the Peruvian Silver there. The Ship
with Angolan Negro's, taken by Houte-been, he set free, but kept a Frigate laden
with Tallow, Hides, Tobacco, and Flesh, which he had taken just before the
Coast of Rio Grande; and thus he went Privateering up and down, when the
Plate-Fleet from New Spain weighed Anchor from Juan de Lua, the like of which
in Riches had never set Sail before, for it carried 2169340 Ryals of Eight for
the Merchants, an unvaluable Treasure for the King, besides many rich
Commodities which several bought upon their own Accounts, that were not entered
in the Custom-house: all which Treasure, laden in nine Gallions, besides a
considerable number of Frigates and small Vessels, was committed to the Charge
of Miguel de Echacareta; but he dying before the Fleet set Sail, Manuel Serano
de Ribera was chosen Admiral; but a dreadful Storm arising as they were Sailing
before the Coast of Campeche in their Way to Havana, the whole Fleet was in a
manner utterly destroyed, with a most unvaluable Treasure: The Admiral,
Vice Admiral, Gallion Teresia, and several other Gallions, sunk, with at least
two thousand Men, a great number of Persons of Quality, and amongst the rest
the Marquess Salinas, who was most treacherously slain by thirty Persons, The
Marquess Salinas murdered for his Jewels
who made themselves Masters of a Sloop, into which he went for fafety out of
the sinking Admiral Juseppe: That which instigated them to this horrid Act, was
the sight of a small Trunk of Jewels which he carried into the Sloop: Not long
after falling out amongst themselves about dividing the Spoil, several of them
were discovered, apprehended, and put to death.

This Fleet weighed Anchor the day after their Admiral Miguel de Echacareta was
buried, who died so suddenly that he could make no Will. A few days after the
departure of the Fleet, a hundred and seventy Houses were burnt at Juan de Lua.
It appears that the Spaniards out of fear of the Netherlanders, set Sail on the
tenth of October, notwithstanding it was at an inconvenient time, because about
that Season the Hurricanes rage most terribly in the Bay of Vera Crux.

By a Letter from the Treasurer Franciscus Suarez it appears, that the two
Regiments in the City St. Salvador, the one Commanded by Christopher Mexia
Bocanegra, consisting of nine Companies, each of sixty Men, and the other
Commanded by Vasco de Mascarennas, consisting of thirteen Companies, cost the
King of Spain yearly 21515 l. to maintain them.

Walbeck's Exploits.
The Netherland Council at Reciffa no way discouraged by their successless
Attempts made the last Year on Rio Grande, sent thirteen Companies of Soldiers
aboard of seventeen Vessels, to build a Fort at the River Formosa, where the
Portuguese being too weak to resist them, set fire on a Storehouse with three
hundred Chests of Sugar, and fled. Walbeck was Commander in Chief in this
Design, who Landing on Formosa found no fit place to build a Fort in, because
the Shore, not being above a Musket Shot broad, was enclosed with Woods,
behind which lay high Mountains that Commanded the Shore; therefore marching to
Serinhain he burnt several Houses and a new Sugar-Mill, near which in a
Storehouse he took twelve hundred Chests of Sugar, which for want of Carts he
could not carry to his Ships. Also before Porto Calvo he burnt a Carvel, and
took a great number of Cattle on Camarigibi, and returned without any farther
Exploits to Reciffa, where the Cruisers had brought in several Prizes during
his absence.

The Council resolving not to sit idle, set out another Fleet of eighteen Ships
under the Command of Martin Thyszoon, with a Regiment of fourteen Companies
under Stein Callenfels.

The Expedition of Martin Thyszoon and Stein Callenfels.
This Fleet approaching Cape Augustine, they found a ridge of Rocks along the
Shore, against which the Sea beat with great vehemence; at length they came
before a small Inlet, at whose Mouth lay a small Fort from which the Enemy
fired upon the Manned Boats which Rowed by the same: at some distance they
discerned two Breastworks, one raised above the other near the Shore; on which
when the Hollanders thought to Land, three hundred Portuguses fired at once
upon them; and on a Hill not far from thence appeared more Men, which amazed
the Council of War, for the Inlet was so narrow, that not above six Boats could
Land at once; and it was evident, that though the Enemy should chance to be
beaten from behind his Breastworks, yet the Hollanders would lie exposed to the
Enemy's Guns from the Fort Nazareth built on the Mountain; besides, Nazareth,
if gained, could scarce be defended, unless the whole Mountain were Entrenched
round, which would not only be very chargeable, but also impossible, because
of the red Earth, altogether unfit for Fortifications; and the barren Mountain
afforded neither Wood, nor any thing else; besides, the Storming of it would be
very dangerous: The Entrance into the Haven was difficult, because a stony
Bank before the same suffered no Passage but betwixt small Openings; the
chiefest whereof was guarded by a Water-Castle, and farther within by the Fort
Puntael. Along the Seashore their Landing was prevented by the violent beating
of the Waves, and a great square Tower on the Way up to the Fort Nazareth,
whose Church is seen at a great distance off at Sea. All which considered, they
judged it best to draw off their Men again, and so they returned without having
effected any thing to the purpose, only Captain Schuppe took two Carvels with
five hundred Chests of Sugar in the River Formosa.

Soon after Martin Thyszoon being sent out with twenty two Sail, sent four
Ships for Holland with the Lieutenant Colonel Stein Callenfels, and the
Councellor Serooskerken; yet thirteen Sail remained still before the Coast of
Brasile, under the Command of Captain John Mast, who whilst he stood to and
again from the Shore, and Cruising up and down, the Governor of Reciffa and
Colonel Rembach marched with five hundred Men and forty Negro's, from Reciffa
about six a Clock at Night, by Olinda along the Shore: Whereupon the Portuguese
Horse-watch ran instantly to Real, two Leagues from Olinda, to give notice
thereof to Albuquerque; but they surmounted all the Difficulties they met with
by the Way (which were the greater in regard of the abundance of Rain that had
lately fallen,) and on the first of May 1632. came to the City Garasu about
Noon; The City of Garasu surprised by the Hollanders.
where whilst Rembach stood still in good order with three Companies, the
Governor of Reciffa fell upon the Town with three Companies. The Inhabitants
had not the least thoughts of being molested by the Netherlanders there,
because they judged the Ways which led thither could not be passed in that
rainy Season. In the first Onset a hundred Portugueses, most of them great
Merchants, were slain, they being come thither with their Goods from Olinda;
and amongst the Prisoners which they took, were six Franciscans.

This Victory the Hollanders obtained with the loss but of eight Men, and
twenty five wounded, besides Captain Rembach, who was also wounded. The
Governor of Reciffa entering the City, stav'd two hundred Pipes of Wine, to
keep his Soldiers from over-drinking; and because there were many fair Women
there, he caused them all to be locked up in the Church of St. Cosmo, to
preserve them from the Soldiers outrages.

Description of Garasu.
The Priest Duarte Mendez Serraon (a Letter of whose John de Laet quotes) values
the Booty carried away by the Hollanders from Garasu, at 9000 l. Sterling. besides
the damage which the Place suffered, being almost ruined. He relates farther,
That the City called Villa de Santo Cosmo de Garasu lay five Leagues to the
Northward from Olinda; and that in it were three Churches, viz. Cosmus,
Misericordia, and Heremitage de Santa Crux; as also two Cloisters, viz.
Invocation de Antonio, inhabited by Capuchins, and another dedicated to
Franciscus, inhabited by Persons of his Order; That the chief Church Cosmus,
built like a flat-roof'd House, had a fair Entrance, before which stood two
Turrets, and in them hung Bells; That the Franciscan Cloister was enclosed
within a great Wall in the middle of a pleasant Garden, and had on each side a
Tower; That most of the People who kept the Feast of St. Philip and St. Jacob,
were at Mass when the Hollanders came thither, and though they saw the Soldiers
out of their Windows, judged them to be Portugueses, who (as it was reported)
had a Design upon Tamarica.

The Governor of Reciffa marching with his Booty from Garusa, set several
Houses on fire, and marched toward the Fort Orange, on the Island Tamarica,
Albuquerque informed thereof, dispatched a Spanish Regiment, Commanded by
Colonel Ferdinand Ludovico Barbalho, and Paulo de Perado, with a considerable
Body of Volunteers; but they all came too late: Whereupon the Portugueses,
being thus kept in continual Alarms ashore, and sustaining every day more and
more Losses at Sea, began to desire Peace, and the rather, because they could
not hear of any Fleet coming from Spain to their assistance; and hearing a
Report, that the West India Company were making great Preparations. To which
purpose Peter Alvares (acquainted with the Dutch Commanders, as having been
their Prisoner) was sent by Duarte de Albuquerque (to whom the Lordship of
Pernambuco properly belonged) and by his Brother (being General of all the
Forces in Brasile) to Reciffa, to Treat about the deciding of the Differences
between them and the Netherland West India Company: But the Council in Reciffa
weighing the many Disadvantages that would ensue, if they should upon easy
Terms patch up a Peace with the Portugueses, returned Alvares this Answer: That
the West India Company was resolved, to the utmost of their power, to keep all
those Places which they had taken by force of Arms; but that if he could move
Albuquerque to deliver up the Country to them, he should be bountifully
rewarded.

After this the Hollanders Landing at Barra Grande, took great quantities of
Wine and Tobacco, and burnt two Villages; as also the Sugar-Cane Fields, and
Sugar-Mills on Catuwanha, also one at Barra Grande, and three at Porto
Francisco.

At the same time the Hollanders also scattered Letters amongst the Portuguese,
signifying their trouble for the great effusion of Blood in those Parts, which
was occasioned by their own stubborn and unreasonable Proceedings; likewise
intimating the great Preparations that were making on their own part, and on
the other side the great unlikelihood, and indeed impossibility, as things then
stood, of receiving farther Succors from Spain.

The Hollanders Councels betrayed to the Portuguese by Leonard van Lom.
These things bieng powerfully urged, had perhaps taken greater effect with the
Portugueses, had not the secret Counsels of the Netherlanders been betrayed by
Leonard van Lom, Overseer of the Prizes, and Translater of the Portuguese
Letters, who confessed that he was persuaded to that villainous Action in
Amsterdam by a Portuguese Merchant, called Duarte Rodrigues Delves, with whom
he had made some Agreement; and for the better confirmation had received the
Sacrament upon it of an Amsterdam Priest: His Agreement was, "That he should go
to Reciffa, enquire "after all Concerns, and give speedy advice thereof to
Rocque de Barros; which he did by a Mulatto, who carried Letters between them.

This Villain the Council judging worthy of Death, first caused his two
fore-Fingers to be cut off, next his Head, and afterward his Body to be
divided into four Quarters. The Mulatto was likewise Beheaded.

About this time the Treasurer Ceulen viewing the Isle Mayo, found the same to
be surrounded with steep Rocks, abounding with Horses, Asses, Partridges and
Goats, besides two Salt-pans. The Inhabitants, which go Armed with Half-pikes
and rusty Hangers, are said to be a sort of out-lawed Portugueses, to the
number of thirty, amongst whom was one Woman. They had a Governor, called
Amaro, to whom they gave yearly eight thousand Goat Skins.

Ceulen Sailing from hence Steered by the Island Del Fogo, known by a great
Mountain, whose high top vomits Fire. Not far from which he took the Ship St.
Peter laden with Wine, with which he returned safe to Reciffa, where a while
after Gysselling arrived also, and was no sooner Landed, but four Ships, two
Sloops, six Cock-boats, a Barque and a Hoy, set Sail under the Conduct of John
Mast with four or five Companies of choice Musquetteers, Commanded by Colonel
Schuppe, who Landed behind the stony Bank of the River Alexio, surprised some
Portuguese and Negro's in their Houses, and marched in the Night so fast, that
by Daybreak they were got to the Shore of the River Formosa, where they took
two rich laden Fly-boats and a Carvel; and afterward Landing in the Road
Camarigibi, they took fifty Portuguese in a Village, as also a Storehouse full
of Chests with Sugar and Tobacco, burnt all the Buildings thereabouts, and
amongst others a brave Sugar-Mill: Captain Byma burnt also an eminent.
Sugar-Mill near the Brook Maria Farinha. Martin Thyszoon lay a long time under
the Line; but at last getting to the Isle Vacca he gave each Captain his
Orders, and divided the Fleet, which joined again before Havana, passed through
the Straights Bahama (where he met with great Storms, and many other
Inconveniences) to Holland. But Galeyn van Stapels, who parted with a Frigate
from Thyszoons Fleet near Bonaire, Steered by the Promontory Cotoche to Sisab;
which Village having plundered, he set it on fire, fetched a Barque in the
Night from the Road of Campeche (whose City is seen at a great distance off at
Sea, by the white Cloister Francisco) and so set Sail for Zealand. Houte-been
arrived also about the middle of June with a rich Booty in the Texel.

Schuppe and Lichthart take the Fort Formosa.
Not long after Houte-been weighing Anchor with the Otter Frigate, returned to
Reciffa, and in his Way thither took a Ship laden with Wine. Colonel Schuppe
immediately upon his arrival had a Command given him of five hundred Men, and
John Lichthart of three Sail of Ships, a Pinnace and five Sloops; with which
they set Sail to the River Formosa. Schuppe Landing his Men there, marched up
to the Fort Formosa, fortified with Moats, steep high Walls, and four Guns,
Stormed and took the same, killing all those that were in the Garrison, except
the Governor Peter Albuquerque: In which Victory nevertheless the Hollanders
lost the valiant Captain Philbert du Basson, who being shot in at the Throat
with a Bullet, which came out behind the Ear, died of the same, the Wound
immediately festering, to which all Wounds are very subject in Brasile. The
Hollanders also burnt four laden Barques, a Storehouse full of Sugar, and
pulled down the Fort they had taken.

Setting Sail again, they Landed to the Northward of the River Antonio Grande,
where they gained a Platform with five Guns, destroyed six Ships, and took two
more in the Haven Camarigibi; from whence they returned to Reciffa, after
having spoiled and taken thirteen of the Portuguese Ships, several Sugar-Mills,
Storehouses, and a Castle.

The Swol Frigate came also in a shattered condition to Reciffa, having been
Engaged with a Spanish Gallion carrying twenty eight great Guns, and full of
Men, which nevertheless she would have mastered, had not an unfortunate Shot
spoiled all her Rigging.

About the same time the Captains Byma, Everwyn, and Rinking, set; Sail with
their Companies in three Ships to Porto Francisco, where Landing, they burnt
three Sugar-Mills, besides several other brave Buildings, and brought away a
rich Carvel, whilst Laurence van Rembach was made Colonel in Waerdenberg's
place, and Sigismond Schuppe Lieutenant Colonel.

The Proffers which the Tapuyan Agent made to the Hollanders had been very
advantageous, had not the Summer Season been too far spent: for he had
promised, That if they would Land a considerable Party of Men two Leagues
Southward from the River Grande, all the Tapuyans should join with them, and
assist them in driving the Portuguese out of Brasile.

After this Schuppe and Lichthart went with thirteen Companies of Soldiers, and
two hundred Seamen, to fall upon the Enemy's Camp at the Afogados, where
Albuquerque had raised several Works, partly for the securing of Verga, the
best Spot of Land in all Pernambuco, where there are likewise more Sugar-Mills
than in the whole Country, and partly to keep an open Way between Arryal and
the Promontory St. Augustine: To which purpose they marched by the Fort Aemilia
along the plain Country, to the Stream Capivaribi, which they had crossed
before the Portuguese knew any thing of their approach, who being but a hundred
and thirty, forsook their Works and ran into the Woods; but assisted with four
Companies of Italians, they Sallied out of Real, and fell with great eagerness
on the Seamen, who being guarded by forty Musquetteers were raising of Works in
the Road which leads to Real, and put them to flight; but being rallied, and
seconded by Colonel Redburgh, they drove the Enemy into a By-way, guarded by
Byma and Bongarson; where being stopped, and Captain Cloppenburgh from another
side falling in amongst them with his Musquetteers, they became encompassed,
and had been all slain, had not Le Grande, by making way for Cloppenburgh,
given them an opportunity of getting away between them.

The Council at Reciffa, to secure the footing which they had got on the other
side of the River Capavaribi, took order about the building of a Fort, which
required the greater Labor, because the Earth was very stony: not far from
whence Captain John Smith walking, was shot by a Party of Portuguese lying
behind some Chests of Sugar; the Blow whereof giving notice to his Ensign, he
speedily marched thither, and surprising the Portuguese, killed most part of
them. The like success had Le Grande, Cloppenburgh, and Bongarson, who marching
out upon a Design, surprised unawares in John de Mendoza's Sugar-Mill, two
Companies of Portuguese, who having watched there the whole Night, and
composing themselves in the Morning to sleep, were set upon, and most of them
killed, and the old Commander Antonio Ortizo de Mendoza taken, who not long
before came thither with a Regiment of Portugueses; the Sugar-Mill was also set
on fire.

These successful Expeditions still adding to the Hollanders fresh Courage,
they followed the career of their Successes, and placing three Companies in the
Works of the Afogados, drew their Army into three Divisions; Colonel Rembach
was to Command the Forlorn; Schuppe, the main Body; and Byma, the Reserve; in
which Order they waded through the River Capivaribi, placing some Musquetteers
in a House built near the Highway, to secure their Return that way, and came
without any resistance to the Arryal; where they found a long Street, with
Shops on each side full of all sorts of Goods, which they pillaged,
notwithstanding the Enemy fired furiously from the Castle upon them, and
wounded Colonel Rembach and Captain Redburgh. To the Northward before the
Castle lay a Redoubt with two Guns, which Schuppe mastering, killed all that
were in the same; but being too weak to carry away the Guns, he nailed up the
Touch-holes, and marched off with his Men, but in such disorder, that the
Portuguese Sallying out of their Garrison, fell in amongst them in that manner,
that they were not able to bring away their wounded Men, amongst whom was
Captain Redburgh; and it had been worse, had not Remback (who though he was
shot in at the Shoulder, under the Blade-bone whereof lay the Bullet) kept them
off till such time as the Hollanders were got over the River Capivaribi, near
the forementioned House, guarded by a Company of Musquetteers, who killed
above fifty of the Portugueses, besides fifty that had been slain in the former
Skirmishes; the Hollanders themselves also had lost a hundred and thirty Men:
yet notwithstanding they ceased not, but marched in Parties through all parts
of Verga, where they met with no opposition, but found the Sugar-Mills full of
Sugar, left to be kept by a few Negro's. Rembach also sent a Drummer to Real,
to demand the Wounded, especially Colonel Redburgh, with a Letter from the
Prisoner Antonio Mendoza, requesting the Governor Albuquerque and Duke of
Bagnola, that they would be pleased to release the Hollanders on Exchange, or
else upon Ransom. The Drummer being civilly Entertained by Albuquerque, brought
back with him a strange Oil called Aury, for the wounded Mendoza; with which a
Wound made by a Bullet being anointed about three Fingers breadth, it draws out
the same. Bagnola afterward sent it to Rembach, in requital for his kindness
in sending Mendoza in a Hammock to Real. Mean while the Hollanders still
fortified their Works at the Afogados with Pallisado's and Platforms, on which
they put five Guns. They likewise worked daily on the forementioned Castle,
whilst Schuppe marched with four hundred Men in the Night over the River
Jangada to Moribeca; which approaching, he perceived the Way stopped up with
felled Trees; wherefore he marched about to the Village, which he found
forsaken by the Inhabitants, and all the Houses left empty, only five hundred
Chests of Sugar that had been brought thither from Verga, which Schuppe
Commanded to be set on fire with the Village, leaving only the Church, and at
his Return burnt also a Sugar-Mill.

Articles between the West India Company and the King of Spain
The Governor Albuquerque having formerly never spared any Hollanders which fell
into his hands, began now to be better advised; and it was also Agreed upon
between the King of Spain and States of the United Netherlands, That they
should burn no Church, unless the one, or the other Party made resistance in
the same; That the Victor should be obliged, upon request of Quarter, to spare
his Enemies, and release the Prisoners for an indifferent sum of Money; That
both Parties should forbear to use chewed or poisoned Bullets.

Schuppe being chosen Chief over the Militia in Rembach's Place (who died of
his Wound,) lay not long still, but setting Sail with eleven Ships to the Isle
Tamarica, Landed seven Companies before the Castle Nostra Sennora de
Conception; which, though well provided and fortified, the Governor Pignioro
surrendered, on Condition that he might depart with all his Men and the Church
Ornaments.

Matthias van Ceulen and Schuppe Rowing up the Stream Goiana with Sloops and
Boats, put to flight Laurence Cavalcanti, burnt diverse Sugar-Mills, and took
abundance of rich Merchandise: Ten days they made havoc in the middle of their
Enemies Countries without any resistance; for all of them fled to the Aldas,
(so they call the Brasilian Villages): At last they returned home with great
Booty, especially of Sugar and Brasile Wood; whilst those at Reciffa were not
idle, doing the Portuguese great mischief by their continual Sallies, Tourlong
burning a Fishers Village, and Bongarson a stately Banqueting House belonging
to Cavalcant near Arryal; as also Pedro Acunha de Andada's Sugar-Mill, from
whence he took great Booty.

The Portuguese begin to fall off to the Hollanders.
About the same time the Portuguese of several Parts, terrified by continual
Alarms and Losses, began to incline to the West India Company, believing that
they should utterly be ruined, if they continued to join with Albuquerque's
Party (who claimed Pernambuco wholly to himself) and therefore cared not
whether he or the Hollanders were Masters, so they might live peaceably. Mean
while the Hollanders marched from the Afogados to Arryal: Schuppe marching
before with two hundred and fifty Seamen, was followed by the
Lieutenant Colonel De Vries, and he by a Company of Negro's that carried
Provisions; next Byma marched with the Reserve. The Treasurer John Gyseling
also accompanied the Army, which Encamped near Francisco Brito Machado's
Windmill, and Garrisoned the half-finish'd Fort near the Sugar-Mill belonging
to Marcus Andre, whilst three Companies Commanded by Captain De Vries marched
to Monteroos-Mills to take the same; but the Portuguese lying in an Ambuscade
had given them a shrewd Rebuke, had not Schuppe, hearing the Guns, sent away
the Captains Picard and Garstman, who coming out from amongst the Sugarcanes,
put the Enemy to flight; yet the Portuguese began to increase daily, insomuch
that they got above two thousand Men together at Arryal, whilst the Dutch Army
began to want Provisions; wherefore Jacob Huigen was ordered to fetch a Supply
from Reciffa; but as he was coming up the River with the Exeter Ketch, and a
Boat hung about with Hides to secure his Men from the Bullets, and being within
Musket Shot from the Works where Captain Schuppe lay, the Enemy's whole Power
shot so vehemently upon him from the top of a Hill, that both the Ketch and
Boat were sunk; Jacob Huigen slain.
Huigen himself received two mortal Wounds, and most of his Men were killed, a
few wounded only escaping with Life. Schuppe therefore was forced to return
for want of Provisions, and the rather, because he was informed that Bagnola
was coming with a Supply of seven hundred Men.

Mean while the two Captains, Smient and Dunkirken performed a valiant Exploit,
viz. they went with a few Men in a Boat, and took a great Portuguese Vessel
richly laden, having no more than four Blunderbusses and their Swords in the
Boat with them.

A notable Victory of Byma over Francisco Almeda.
Byma also fell upon the Village Moriwere, where he found most of the People at
Church. Albuquerque informed thereof, sent two hundred Men immediately,
Commanded by Francisco Almeda, to intercept him in his Return; but he marching
on to Tamarica, they pursued him; he marching but slowly, because the narrow
Way was stopped up with felled Trees, they overtook him half a League beyond
Garasu, near Peter Rocha's Sugar-Mill; where after a sharp Encounter between
them, a great slaughter was made amongst the Spaniards, Almeda and many other
Persons being slain, and the rest put to flight. Byma having obtained this
Victory, marched to Garasu and burnt the same, sparing only the Churches and
Cloisters, according to the Articles made between Albuquerque and Rembach.

Schuppe prevented from crossing the River Jangada by the many muddy Creeks,
returned back to Reciffa with great Booty, which he had taken out of a
Storehouse. The Dutch Cruisers also brought in many Prizes.

Van Hoorn 's Exploits.
The Exploits performed by John Johnszoon van Hoorn, with four Ships, three
Ketches, and a Sloop, are likewise very remarkable; for with this Fleet in the
first place he took the City Truxillo, and from thence Sailing toward the City
Campeche, and Storming the same valiantly, soon became Master of it; the Booty
of which two Places being brought aboard, increased considerably the West India
Companies Stock.

In regard Albuquerque understood the Situation of Pernambuco better than the
Hollanders, and had all the Natives to assist him, and by conserence was the
better able to defend himself against their continual Alarms, the Council at
Reciffa therefore judged it convenient to make a farther Voyage to the South,
that the Portuguese, who were highly discontented about the Losses which they
had sustained, might be the sooner induced to submit to their Government: To
which purpose ten Ketches, Manned with seven hundred Soldiers, besides Seamen,
set Sail on the tenth of October, under the Command of John Gyseling, Schuppe,
and Servaes Carpentier, who first ran into the River Porto de Piedras, where
they took a considerable number of Chests of Sugar, out of Mills, Barques, and
Storehouses, waded through the little Stream Tatona Mansa, burnt a Village of
the same Denomination, and Sailed to the River Camarigibi, which they Rowing up
in the Night, were got not above four Leagues by Daybreak, the contrary Tide,
and the Plants called Mangues having hindered them from getting farther; but
being informed by certain Portuguese Prisoners, that abundance of Sugar lay in
Porto Francisco, they marching thither, found under a Straw Roof in a Wood,
seventy four Chests of Sugar, and a great deal more in several Storehouses.
They also pillaged the whole Country toward Alagoa del Noort, St. Miguel, and
Alagoa del Zur. Not far from which Schuppe falling upon the Village Sennora de
Conception, burnt the same, as also a Ship upon the Stocks, the Houses at the
Mouth of the Stream Alagoa, and the Tackling belonging to the two Ships, and
carried away with them a very great Booty.

Tourlon also marched with four Companies from Tamarica to Mangianguape, where
the Garrison from Garasu, and some Jesuits lay, to dissuade the People from
submitting themselves to the West India Company, to which they were much
inclined. But Tourlon marched not so privately, but that the Enemy had notice
thereof, and fled; wherefore he finding Mangianguape empty, offered the same to
the Flames, as also several Sugar-Mills, but spared the Lives of all those who
begged Quarter.

Byma about the same time with a hundred and forty Musquetteers, besides two
Companies of Seamen, leaving the Afogados in the Night, marched to Amaro by
Daybreak, which he set on fire, with a Sugar-Mill and a Storehouse full of
Sugar, after every Soldier had taken as much as he could carry: upon which the
Enemy taking Alarm, placed their Ambuscades so cunningly, and fell upon them so
furiously, that they had undoubtedly killed every Man of them, had not a Party
come in timely to their assistance, and forced the Portuguese to fly to a
neighboring Sugar-Mill built on a Hill, from whence they fired with great
eagerness, and made a mighty noise, blowing their Trumpets and beating their
Drums. Byma's bold Attempt.
Byma being forced to pass by the Mill within the reach of the Enemy's Guns,
resolved upon a bold Attempt, and commanding his Men to throw away their Sugar,
and other Booty with which they burdened themselves, on a sudden ran up to the
top of the Hill; which Action so amazed the Portuguese, that they fled without
offering the least resistance. Byma thereupon proceeded on his Way to the
Afogados, leaving behind him above seventy slain, and diverse wounded.

Prizes taken by Smient and Lichthart.
During these Exploits on Shore, the Commander Smient Cruis'd with six Sail
before Paraiba; two Ships belonging to his Fleet steering toward the Haven of
Formosa, discovered five Carvels, a Pink carrying twenty six, and a great
Fly-boat eighteen Guns, both Dunkirkers; one of the Carvels ran aground, and
was stav'd to pieces, two of them got into Rio Grande, and the other two were
taken.

About the same time Lichthart with two Sloops passed into the River Conayou,
set upon seven Barques of the Portuguese, Manned with seventy Seamen, and plied
them with his Brass Guns after such a manner, that few escaped with their
Lives: he took what he thought fit out out of the Barques, and afterward set
them on fire.

Van Ceulen 's Expedition.
The Treasurer Matthias van Ceulen weighed Anchor with four Ships and seven
Ketches, Manned with eight hundred Men, with which he set Sail to Rio Grande,
with intention to fall upon the Fort Tres Reyes. In the River he took two
Carvels, though they lay close under the Castle, Landed a Company of Soldiers,
and a hundred and fifty Seamen on the Southern Shore, guarded the fresh River
with Boats, marched directly to Tres Reyes, and Encamped himself near the
Redoubt which lay before the Castle, being followed by Byma, Garstman, and
Cloppenburgh, who in their Way took a House built on a Hill, and considerable
Booty in it. Byma getting about Noon to the Village Natall, left some of his
Men there, whilst he marched with the rest to the Castle Tres Peyes. Ceulen
sending to demand the Castle, received at first a resolute denial from the
Governor Peter Mendez de Govea; but when the Besieged saw the Hollanders
resolutely bent upon a Storm, they sent to desire a Treaty, and after some
small Capitulation the Castle was surrendered upon Articles. Garstman being made
Commander of the Castle, had a hundred and fifty Soldiers allowed him. The
Fleet set Sail again, after they had pulled down and destroyed all the Works
which had been raised, and made the Inhabitants take an Oath to be faithful to
Garstman, who changed the Name of the Castle from Tres Reyes to that of Ceulen,
being the Name of the Treasurer, who bore the chiefest Commmand in the Siege,
and when the Brasilian King Jandui came with a great Train to congratulate the
Companies success, received him with great civility.

In the beginning of the Year 1634. twenty six Sail weighed Anchor from
Reciffa, to Cruise up and down in Squadrons before the Inlet Todos los Sanctos,
the Promontory St. Augustine, the Rivers Francisco and Parayba. Schuppe and
Lichthart also set Sail with two Ships, a Ketch, two Pinnaces, and a Sloop,
carrying two hundred Soldiers besides Seamen.

Mean while fresh Forces were sent from the Texel, the Maes and Zeland, to
Reciffa, where the Council undertook another notable Design, viz. to surprise
the Forts along the River Parayba: whither coming with twenty Sail, they
divided themselves into two Squadrons under the Command of the Treasurer John
Gyseling, Schuppe, Lichthart drives the Portuguese out of the Puntael.
Servaes Carpentier, and Lichthart. Having received some repulse at the Fort
Nazaretta, they resolved upon Action in some other place, and to that purpose
Steered toward the Point St. Augustine; by Daybreak a part of the Fleet ran
into the Mouth of the Haven, notwithstanding the Portuguese fired upon them
with great Guns from the Castle, and all their Works, without doing any
considerable damage, only the Sea-knight Ketch running aground was shattered
all to pieces; whilst the Hollanders Commanded by Captain Lichthart Landed
near Puntael, and fell upon the Portuguese in such a manner, that they forced
them to forsake he Place, burnt above two thousand Chests of Sugar, several
Storehouses, and a great Ship, besides two Barques.

Lichthart being Master of the Puntael, was very busy in finishing a Stone
Redoubt which the Enemy had begun, and secured it by a Wall and Pallisado's.
Here he placed two Companies, and raised several Works, whilst the Portuguese
receiving Aid from all the neighboring Places, set upon the recovery of the
Puntael, being the rather encouraged thereunto, in regard the Hollanders Forces
were still in their Ships. They endeavor in vain to regain the Puntael.
Fifteen hundred Portugueses were divided into two Parties, the greatest of
which came through behind the adjacent Morasses, and forced in on the side or
the place near which the fifteen Ships taken by Lichthart lay at an Anchor,
whilst the other Party fell upon the Outworks; where though the Hollanders
defended themselves valiantly at first, yet they were forced to Retreat to the
Redoubt, where both Parties fought with great eagerness; but the Hollanders
Ketches haling near the Shore, and firing in amongst the Portuguese with their
great Guns, forced them to fly, and contrary to their Custom, to leave their
dead Bodies behind them.

Soon after, whilst Gysseling, Schuppe, and Lichthart stayed at the Puntael,
the Portuguese, designing to take Reciffa, kept the Afogados and the Fort on
Antonio Vaes in continual Alarm; which made the Hollanders send most of their
Militia thither, and to fortifies yet more strongly than before. The Castle De
Bruin first discovering the Portuguese wading through the Water, fired great
Guns at them, upon the hearing of which Waerdenburgh and St. George fired also.
The Treasurer Ceulen and Lieutenant Colonel Byma marched with a Company of
Soldiers to the Stone Redoubt, from whence they fired stoutly upon the Enemy;
yet thirty of them got by the Pallisado's and Stone Redoubt: wherefore Ceulen
marched in with some of his Men to assist the Citizens, and keep the wooden
Battery, where the Portuguese were stopped, and with great and small Shot put to
flight. The Prisoners which the Hollanders took informed them, That Martin
Suares, chief Commander over the Pottuguese that made this Attempt, had divided
his Men into three Parties; the Reserve, which consisted of three hundred Men,
was to march on upon the making of a sign when the other Parties were past, one
along the River Bibiriba, and the other along the Shore by the Stone Redoubt
into Reciffa, to burn the Place, as also all manner of Provision and Ammunition.

Whilst this Design of the Portuguese fell out so unfortunately, being
discovered to Ceulen by a Renegado, the Hollanders at Reciffa received two
Companies from their Regiment at the Puntael, and a considerable number of Men
raised in Holland by the West India Company. Ceulen and Byma thus supplied,
went continually out in Parties, burnt in view of the Garrison in Arryal the
Sugar-Mills belonging to Francisco Montero and Lewis Ramires, and were informed
by five Italian Renegado's That there were not three hundred Men in Garrison in
Arryal; which so encouraged Byma, Byma attempts the taking of Real, but without
success.
that he resolving to fall upon the same, marched thither in the Night with a
thousand Men from Reciffa, and by Daybreak shot sixteen Granado's from a
neighboring Hill, of which seven fell into Arryal, but did little Execution;
besides, the Strength of the Place was such, and the number of Men so
considerable, that his Design had no other success, than that a Hand-granado
falling short amongst the Houses before the Fort, set fire on them, and in a
short time burnt a whole Street with rich Shops, and the Habitations of the
Italians.

The Portuguese at the Puntael being informed, that Byma had Besieged Arryal
with a thousand Men, judged that most of the Hollanders were gone thither from
the Puntael; which they were the apter to believe, because the Hollanders
coming but little abroad stayed within their Redoubts, which Lichthart had
joined to a Battery; wherefore they made another Attempt with a hundred and
twenty Men on the Puntael; but a Carvel with two Brass Guns, and a Company of
Soldiers lying at Anchor near the Place by which the Portuguese were to pass,
and they not expecting to meet with any resistance there, they were, as soon as
they approached the Carvel, fired upon by the Hollanders, who killing several
of their Men, so affrighted them, that they returned without making any farther
Attempt.

Overtures of Peace from the Portuguese.
Whilst every day more and more Prizes were taken by the Hollanders, and
brought into Reciffa, and fresh Supplies sent them from Holland, there began to
be some Overtures of Peace from the Portuguese; wherein also the King of Spain,
by reason of the several Damages he had sustained from the Dutch, began to
concern himself, and to menace them with the great Forces he was able to raise,
by reason of the late safe arrival of two rich Plate-Fleets, if they came not
to reasonable Terms. But answer was returned from Byma, That if they were
minded to Treat about giving of Quarter, or any such like Point in difference
between them, they should find him ready; but that the West India Company would
never resign those Places taken in Brasile with the Sword, either for Money or
Goods, but would defend them to the utmost of their Power.

The Hollanders also changed the Names of several Places taken from the
Portuguese; for the Castle near the Promontory St. Augustine was called
Gysseling; the Town on Tamarica, Schuppen-stadt; the Fort at the Afogados,
Prince William; and the Puntael, The Fortress Vander Dussen.

Ceulen and Gysseling return home.
Notwithstanding the Requests of the States of the Netherlands and West India
Company, to the Commissioners Ceulen and Gysseling, to stay longer in the
West Indies, yet they prepared for their Voyage home, and the speedier, because
they expected great scarcity of Provisions, unless a sudden Supply came from
Holland. During their two years Government here, they had taken five thousand
five hundred and nineteen Chests of Sugar, a hundred fifty nine thousand nine
hundred thirty and nine Pound of Brasile Wood, one and thirty Ships laden with
several Goods, which amounted to 230000 l. besides the value of the Ships and
Guns, the taken Forts, destroyed Sugar-Mills, and other Buildings. They left at
their going away above four thousand Soldiers, divided into thirty two
Companies, to guard Brasile, under the Command of Schuppe and Arcisseusky, and
carried with them a hundred Soldiers, besides one and fifty sick and maimed:
Moreover, thirty two Sail of Ships, Manned with a thousand and eighty seven
Seamen, Jandur's great Service to the Netherlanders.
were ordered to Cruise up and down before the Coast of Brasile, besides four
Ketches before the Promontory of St. Augustine, and six Ships in the Haven of
Pernambuco.

After Ceulen and Gysseling had set Sail for Holland, diverse Prizes were
brought into Reciffa, as also several Ships arrived there from the Texel and
the Maes. The Hollanders went out continually in Parties, whilst Schuppe and
Lichthart set Sail also with eight Ships, Manned with six Companies of
Soldiers, besides Seamen, to plunder and pillage all the Havens to the South,
where several Portuguese Vessels lay laden with Sugar. But Janduy, who with his
Subjects the Tapuyans, joined with the Governor Garstman, killed at one time
thirty seven Portugueses, and not long after two hundred and sixty more; taking
his leave of Garstman, went home with six Hollanders, leaving his Son, the
young Janduy, and his Brother Caracara, together with his Nephew Copun, to his
care.

Janduy made it his Business to persuade the adjacent Tapuyans to join their
Forces with his, and so by the Hollanders assistance to fall upon the
Portuguese. Mean while the young Janduy and Copun went to Reciffa, which was
the rather permitted, that they might be able to damp the Reports which the
Portuguese had spread amongst the Tapuyans, viz. That the Hollanders were very
ill provided, and therefore made all possible Preparations to defend Reciffa,
and consequently the whole Country of Brasile, and so leave those Tapuyans
that joined with them to the mercy of the Spaniards.

Ambassadors sent to consult with him about carrying on their Designs.
Not long after were dispatched from thence the Counselors Jacob Stackhower,
and Colonel Arcisseusky, with the Interpreter Antonio Parapoavo, to Treat with
Janduy about the Design which they had upon the Portuguese, and also what
Advantages he should receive, if he would assist the West India Company with
his Forces, whenever he should be sent to.

His Power, Enemies, and Allies.
King Janduy bore Command over sixteen hundred Men, whose Wives carried their
Hammocks after them to sleep on in the Night, having no settled Habitations, but
ranging in Parties up and down from place to place to get their Food; the young
People went commonly along with Beretiawa, and the old with Janduy; round about
whose Country dwelt the poor Natives Aciki, as also Juckerijou, Ocioneciou,
Pajoke, and Aponorijou: the first are Commanded by King Coctaculy; the second,
by Marakou, a Friend of the Portugueses; the third, by Nonhu; the fourth, by
Kidoa; and the last, by Jarepo: which two last are no way inferior in Power to
Janduy, but the others much weaker.

Four sorts of People continually Warred against Janduy, viz the Jenho, who
live so far up in the Country, that no Christians ever came to the knowledge
of them; the other three are the Woyana, Carivy, and Caririwassu, who assist
the Portuguese.

The forementioned Interpreter Parapoavo was met in his Journey by a Company
of Tapuyans, led by Commendaoura, Janduy's Sisters Son, who was to succeed him
after his death, according to the Custom of the Tapuyans, whose Sons do not
succeed their Fathers in the Throne, but their Sisters Sons. Commendaoura told
him, That he was empowered by his Uncle to Treat with the Hollanders; to which
purpose coming with forty Men before the Castle Ceulen, he informed them, That
Jandouy could not come to them with his whole Power, because there was no fresh
Water in the Mountains Mitiapa in the Summer; Moreover, that he Mourned for his
deceased Wife. Janduoy was also requested to go to Parayba, where he should get
great store of Booty, and that the Hollanders would follow them with a
considerable Power.

The Fort Conayou taken by Arcisseusky
Arcisseusky being informed of the Condition of Conayou by two, who having been
taken Prisoners by the Portuguese, leaped overboard from a Carvel, bound from
thence to Portugal, and swam ashore, marched from the Fort Ceulen in the Night
with two hundred Men, besides forty Tapuyans, who killed more Venison for the
Hollanders than they were able to eat; and coming within two Cannons-shot of
Conayou, he divided his Men into four Parties, that so they might Storm the
four Corners of the Fort at once; which having done by swimming over the Moat,
and climbing up the Walls, which were a Pikes length, they got into the Fort,
in which they found eleven dead Bodies, ten Iron Guns, two Hooks, and several
Chests of Sugar; and amongst other Prisoners they took the Captain Alvares
Fragoso d' Albuquerque.

Stackhower also setting Sail when Arcisseusky left the Castle Ceulen,
intending to meet him again at an appointed time before Conayou, was kept back
by contrary Winds.

After this Arcisseusky set Sail to Mongoangape, where Rowing up the River, he
took a Ketch with two hundred Chests of Sugar, as also a Carvel and a Boat, and
Landed where the River bends about a Mountain, which so affrighted the
Portuguese, that they quitted Antonio Marino's Sugar-Mills. Soon after the
Fleet took a Barque with Wine, and returned to Reciffa.

Mean while Schuppe was not idle, for going up the River Camarigibi, he burnt
diverse Houses, as also on each side of the River Alagoa; where he also took
four rich Sugar-Mills, whilst many Vessels from the United Netherlands brought
several Ships into the Haven of Pernambuco, which they had taken on the Coast
of Brasile.

About the latter end of November 1634. thirty two Sail, divided into two
Squadrons (the first carrying in one and twenty Ships, a thousand nine hundred
forty and five Soldiers, the second on eleven Ketches, four hundred and nine)
under the Command of Schuppe, Arcisseusky, Carpentier, and Stackhower, weighed
Anchor to go to Parayba; where Schuppe Landing first with six hundred Men, fell
upon the Enemy in such a manner, that he put them to flight, and forced them to
leave a great part of their Arms, Hats and Coats behind; and it wanted little
but the Governor Antonio d' Albuquerque had been taken in the pursuit: Mean
while the rest of the Hollanders Landed, and Casper Ley marched along a
Cart-Road with three Companies directly to the Fort Santa Margareta, and
Encamped himself behind a Hill, about a Musket Shot from the Walls of the
Fort: Schuppe going along the Shore, The Fort Santa Margareta attempted by the
Hollanders.
found diverse forsaken Works, and Entrenched along the River on the East Side
of the Castle. Arcisseusky marched on the Right Hand along the Seashore in
view of the Portuguese in Garrison. In the River lay an Isle, on which was
built the Castle Restinga, which could receive constant Aid from the Castle
Margareta on the Main.

Lichthart going in between the Island and the Castle Margareta with six well
Manned Boats, took two Barques and a Boat behind the Island, and marched
through a Wood to Restringa; where he found that the Fort separated from the
Island, was surrounded with Water, wherefore he withdrew into the Wood till the
Water was fallen down, and then Stormed the Fort Restringa, and notwithstanding
the Portuguese fired continually upon him with two Brass Guns, he soon became
Master of it, and cut off all those whom he found had born Arms; whilst
Schuppe fired upon the Fort Margareta from a Platform, The Fort Margareta taken
by Schuppe.
and also threw Granado's into the same. Arcisseusky likewise approached nearer
and nearer with his Trenches, on which the Portuguese discharged many Guns; but
after the Breastworks were most of them spoiled, the Governor, Simon de
Albuquerque, surrendered the Fort to Schuppe, who permitted a hundred and fifty
Men that were in Garrison there, to go to their several Dwellings up in the
Country, the rest were Transported to other places, on promise that they would
not bear Arms against the West India Company during the space of six Months.
In the Castle the Hollanders found six Brass Demi-Culverins and fifteen Drakes,
besides other Ammunition, with which the Victors pursued their Conquest,
putting themselves in a posture to go up a Creek which runs two Leagues along a
River to Parayba, and to fall upon that City, when two French Renegado's coming
from the Northern Fort Antonio brought information, That that Fort was guarded
but by a few Men, and had but little Gunpowder, and if the Hollanders would
but once make a show of Storming the same, it would soon be delivered to them,
though for its Situation it is invincible; but Schuppe supposed that there
might be a Plot in this Information, and the rather, because he heard that the
Duke of Bagnola was coming thither with six hundred Men; nevertheless, to be
better assured thereof, The Fort Antonio taken by Lichthart.
he sent a Drummer to demand Antonio: The Governor thereof, called Magaglianes
desired three days time to consider, which was utterly denied him, and he had
only leave to carry away the King's Standard, and his Request granted, That
the Hollanders should make a show of Storming the Castle, that it might not be
said he had surrendered such a Fortress without a Gun being fired; after which
Lichthart went into the Castle, wondering at such a Victory; for the Fort, on
which no Charges had been spared, lay upon an inaccessible place, and had five
Brass Culverins and nineteen Iron Guns.

The City Parayba deserted by Bagnola.
The Hollanders encouraged by their good Success, went the same Night up the
River Parayba to the Creek Tambia Grande; where Landing, they found all the
Works empty, three Iron Guns lying dismounted on the Ground, the City Parayba
without People, and the Guns about the same either made useless, or sunk in the
Haven. A Hamburgher that had lived a considerable time in Parayba, otherwise
called Philippea, informed the Hollanders, That Bagnola seeing no means to
defend Parayba, was gone to Goyana with two Companies, one of Italians, and the
other Spaniards, who were marched into the Woods, after they had burnt three
Ships, and two Storehouses full of Sugar, in which there were consumed near
upon three hundred Chests.

Before this Design upon Parayba was undertaken, the West India Company sent
out four Vessels under the Command of John Walbeek, to the Isle Curacao; the
Situation of which John Otzon knew exactly, having been a long time a Prisoner
there: Walbeek getting through a narrow Mouth between several Rock into a
convenient Harbor before Curacao, Landed seventy five Musquetteers who were
Encountered by seventy Brasilians Armed with Clubs, which the Spaniards had
animated to fight, by making them half Drunk. The Hollanders having marched all
over the Island, burnt the Village Maria, and at last agreed with the Governor
Alonso Lopes de Morla to leave the Isle.

Schuppe changed the Name of Parayba, or Nossa Sennora das Nieves, or
Philippea, into Frederick-Stadt, in honor to the Prince of Orange, named
Frederick Henrick.

Parayba, or Henrick-stadt described.
This City has two great Marketplaces, twelve Streets, and a large Franciscan
Cloister, built near a Lake, and enclosed within a Wall by a broad Bay, which
the River Parayba makes before the City; the Country about which is
mountainous: In other places, especially along the River, lie many fruitful
Plains, abounding in some places with the Grain Mandihoca, which is ground to
Meal, Potato's, Lemmons, Cabbages, Cucumbers, Bananas, Cocoa-Nuts, Ginger,
Araba, very delicious when Preserved with Sugar, and Cacious, somewhat like
Chestnuts, of which the Natives make an intoxicating Liquor.

Whilst all things were put in good order at Parayba, Colonel Picard marched
with eight Companies to the House Validaris, if possible, there to take the
Governor Antonio Albuquerque Prisoner; but he being forsaken by all the
Brasilians (who came back with Picard and their Commander, the Jesuit Emanuel
de Morais) absconded himself; not long before which a Proclamation had been
published in the Name of the States of the United Netherlands and the
West India Company, promising great Civilities and Advantages to all the
Inhabitants of Parayba, whether Natives or others, that would come in and
submit to their Government.

This Invitation was so well received, that many who were kept back so long as
Albuquerque appeared, as soon as they heard of his obscuring himself, came in
to the Hollanders, as Duarte Gomes, and several eminent Portugueses, with a
considerable ^umber of indifferent quality; as also the Inhabitants of the
Province of Rio Grande ^ame to Frederick-Stadt, to claim the benefit of the
Proclamation.

Arcisseusky and Stackhower marching to Goyana with seven hundred and fifty
Men, took up their Quarters in the Village Capivaribi, lying at a River of the
same Name; where all the Inhabitants of Goyana being fully satisfied with the
Hollanders Proposals, owned their Government, and fell off from the King of
Spain. Rebellino forced to fly from place to place.
But the Spanish ^aptain Rebellino, animated by the Jesuits in the Village
Mosuick, got three hundred ^oldiers together, besides a considerable company of
Brasilians, Commanded by ^amaron, and burnt all the Sugarcanes and Brasile
Wood in Goyana; whither Arcisseusky marching, soon put them to flight, and
burnt the Village Mosuick, with the church and Jesuits Cloister, from whence
the Enemy ran to the strange Mountain ^iritbi, which in the rainy Season,
especially when great Showers fall, makes a ^oise like claps of Thunder, or
like great Guns. The same Wonder is observed of ^^e Mountain Pasayra, in a Wood
behind Girgolio Barro's Sugar-Mills; the mystery whereof we leave to
Philosophers to enquire into. Arcisseusky followed Rebellino, who had
ambuscado'd himself about half a League from Mosuick; from whence he being also
driven, his Men began more and more to desert him, whilst Schuppe with a
considerable number of Men came to Arcisseusky; Encamping themselves about
Musarope, they sent eighty Musquetteers, Commanded by Lieutenant Metting, ^o an
adjacent Wood, where Rebellino Quartering, Engaged with Metting, till Schuppe
coming to his assistance, he fled to Nazaretta. After which the Country
thereabouts enjoyed the happiness of Peace.

The Castle Real taken by Arcisseusky
Arcisseusky staying to settle all things in good order in Parayba, took up his
Quarters near the Castle Real, about a Cannon-shot from the River Afogados, and
a League and a half from the Hollanders Fort so called; yet his Design was not
to lay close Siege to the same, but to prevent all manner of Aid from coming to
it, the rather, because he was informed, that there were not above sixty six
hundred Cans of Meal, and sixty five Head of Cattle in the Fort, for three
hundred Portuguese and seven hundred Brasilians; to which purpose he built
several Redoubts, Batteries and Platforms: after he had lay'n before it three
Months it was surrendered upon these following Articles, viz. That the Besieged
should march out with lighted Matches, Bullets in their Mouths, flying Colors,
and with Bag and Baggage, and be Transported either to Tercera or Madera. The
Church Ornaments they had also leave to carry away with them, but the Guns and
other Ammunition were to remain in the Fort. Hereupon the Governor Andres
Marini marched out with five hundred choice Soldiers, besides a hundred and
fifty which he had out of the Country; and two hundred Families that dwelt
about Real, ransomed their Goods for 5000 l. In the Fort the Hollanders found
fifteen Brass, and five Iron Guns.

Mean while Lichthart set Sail with six Ships and five little Ketches, carrying
five Companies; with which Landing on Barra Grande, he marched two Leagues
along the Shore to the Church of St. Bento, built on a high Hill, round about
which he Encamped himself, and fortified the same with Pallisado's.

Hither the Inhabitants of Porto Calvo came in great numbers to take the Oath
of Allegiance to the West India Company.

Lichthart assisted by Captain Cornelis Exel's Company, marched directly to
Porto Calvo, notwithstanding he had but three hundred and twenty seven Men,
with which he went a^ong a troublesome Way, up Hill and down Hill, and coming
near Porto Calvo, was informed by a Portuguese, That the Duke Bagnola possessed
a Church there full of Port-holes, with two hundred choice Men, besides a
Company newly arrived there from Serinhain; Bagnola routed by Lichthart.
and that he had a strong Fortification near the River; nevertheless Lichthart
marching toward him, discovered his Forces ranked on a steep Mountain, whither
he running with his Men, forced Bagnola to quit the Church, as also those that
lay in Ambuscade near the Highway, whilst eighty Brasilians, some
Portugueses, and a Company of Neopolitans, thought to have fallen upon the
Barques of the Hollanders; but seeing the States Flag upon the Church, and
Bagnola routed, they soon Retreated. This Victory cost the Hollanders but seven
Men, besides eighteen wounded; for which the Portuguese lost many more.

The Inhabitants of Camarigibi, Antonio, and about Porto Calvo, accepting of
the Articles proposed in Parayba, took the Oath of Allegiance to the Hollanders.

In the interim after Arcisseusky had taken the Fort Real, and given Command
thereof to Verdoes, he set forth with ten Companies and three hundred
Brasilians, to join with Schuppe, who Besieged the Fort Nazaretta near the
Promontory St. Augustine; but the Governor Albuquerque fearing he should be
surprised, fled from thence with three hundred Men, and left Peter Correa de
Gamba, and Lewis Barbalho Bizerra in his stead. But Schuppe approached so near
with his Trenches and Granado's, that Correa informed of Arcisseusky's coming,
surrendered the Castle upon advantageous Articles.

After this Success Schuppe marched along the Shore, and Arcisseusky up into
the Country, both with intention to fall upon the Enemy in Serinhain.
Arcisseusky marching along a troublesome Way, came to Miguel de Poyaca with six
Companies, where the Councellor Schotte had fortified a Church; and somewhat
farther he met with a brave Franciscan Cloister, where he was informed, that
the Governor Albuquerque had again surprised the Fort Porto Calvo; Porto Calvo
surprised by Albuquerque.
which proved too true; for Schuppe hastening to his assistance through
Serinhain, Una, and Barro, staid at Furicoso, a League from Porto Calvo, for
Arcisseusky, who was coming thither with seven Companies over the deep and
crooked Stream Serinhain; and before Villa Foamosa, a pleasant Village, in
which stood an old Jesuits Cloister and a little Church, both their Forces
joined together, making up seventeen Companies of Foot, and one Troop of Horse;
but they came too late: for after a long and stout Assault, and no less
Resistance from the Besieged, the Place was surrendered to Albuquerque, who
caused Domingo Calabar to be Quartered; a Man not inferior for Strength and
Activity to that Milo Crotoniates, so famous amongst the ancient Grecians:
Amongst other proofs of his OBSIDIO ET REPUGNATIO PORTUS ^^^VT

A. Castram paracon. B. Vrbi. C. Basilica. D. Castella duo hosti d^relickta.


Strength it is related, that he took a Stag running full speed by the Horns,
and turning its Neck, pulled the Tongue out of its Mouth. The reason why
Albuquerque caused him to be put to that death, was because he had once joined
with the Hollanders, and done the Portuguese much hurt. But Schuppe and
Arcisseusky marching to Porto Calvo, to Engage with Albuquerque, who was eight
hundred Portuguese and a thousand Brasilians strong, found the Place ruined,
and about a hundred Hollanders unbury'd, and Albuquerque marched away, driving
the Inhabitants about Porto Calvo before him, with three hundred Prisoners: The
Hollanders following him, built a Fort at Praipuera, to prevent the Portuguese
from returning to Porto Calvo. Schuppe also demanded three Companies more to
supply the places of the sick and slain Men, as also those who were so
miserably plagued by the Bicios, that they were not able to go. These Bicios
are little Animals, which creeping in at the Pores, cause an insufferable pain.
Schuppe's Request was the sooner granted, because the Council at Reciffa judged
it convenient to pull down the Forts Real and Nazaretta, being already much
decayed and unserviceable, and that those who were in Garrison in them, should
Encamp in the Fields. Schuppe had long before this time fallen upon the Enemy
in the Afogados, but that he wanted Provisions, and little Vessels, which were
required for that Expedition. But marching up into the Country, he left the
Command to Arcisseusky, who much forwarded the building of the Fort on
Paripuera.

A great Fleet of Spaniards appears before Reciffa.
The Year 1635. being almost expired, one Morning about Daybreak thirty two
Sail were seen to Steer directly toward Reciffa; two Ships of an extraordinary
bigness were followed by nine Gallions, and these by the rest of the Fleet,
consisting of Pinks, Carvels, and Barques; all which approaching, were known to
be Spaniards, which struck no small amazement to the Inhabitants of Reciffa,
most of their Ships being Cruising abroad before the Coast of Brasile, and
their Men a great distance off in the Field; only five Ships fitted for an
Engagement being at Anchor, and five more deeply laden: Mean while the Spanish
Admiral approached within a Cannon-shot of the Fame Ketch, discharged one Gun,
and stood off to Sea again, being informed that Real and Nazaretta were taken
by the Hollanders. On the other side, all the Places in their possession had
notice of this Fleet, which Lichthart followed with six Ships and two Ketches,
carrying two Companies of Soldiers, besides Seamen, and keeping just within
sight of them, saw them at last come to an Anchor, before Paripuera (where a
part of the Dutch Forces lay under the Command of Arcisseusky,) and make
preparation to Land their Men: Whereupon Lichthart Landed also, with the
Councellor Carpentier, and joining with Arcisseusky, took up a valiant
Resolution, to Sail close up to the Spanish Fleet with his eight Ships, whilst
Arcisseusky marched in the Night with six hundred Men to Jaragoa, to prevent
the Enemy's Landing; but having a Portuguese for his Guide, was led a wrong
Way; wherefore returning, he secured the Way to Paripuera, whilst the
Portuguese Inhabitants, contrary to their Oath, refused to carry or bring
Provisions to the Dutch Forces, and joining together combined with the Spanish
Seamen, and killed all the Hollanders which they could meet either on the
Highways, or in their Houses, making use of the Negro's to carry the Spaniards
what Intelligence they could give them of the Hollanders Proceedings: Wherefore
they thought it the best way to be rid of such Villains, to destroy them all
that dwelt in the Country between Paripuera and Porto Calvo, and for the space
of ten Leagues burnt all their Sugarcanes in the Fields, their Mills and
Houses. Arcisseusky caused Edicts to be put upon every Church Door, That all
the Inhabitants should remove from Porto Calvo, where the Dutch Army was to
Encamp, to keep them from the Spanish Oppression.

That Summer having been so dry, that no man ever remembered the like, had dried
up all the Morasses, so that the Spaniards marching over them and high
Mountains, got a back Way into the Country. In the mean time John Walbeck made
a Fort with five Bulwarks on the Island Caracao, near the Haven Santa Cruz.

Houtebeen also ran with two Ketches, the Otter and Brack, to Anchor before
Curacao, and from thence to the Haven St. Jago de Cuba, where the Watch made no
Alarm, because he carried Burgundy Colors, by which also several others, both
Portuguese and Spaniards were deceived. Not long after he burnt one Barque with
Tortoises, sunk another, and set a third a Drift; after which having refreshed
at Jamaica, he Engaged with several Spanish Men of War and took them, besides a
great number of Prizes, in one of which he found such abundance of Copper,
Indigo, Money, Canaster, Tobacco, and Piece-Goods, that the two Ketches were
not able to load the same; Houte-been taken by Dunkirkers.
but at at last Steering for Holland, he was set upon by seven Dunkirkers,
Commanded by Colaert, and after long and stout resistance was taken.

Captain Abraham Roosendael setting Sail from the Texel, met with a Frigate
carrying forty six Chests full of Ryals of Eight, being in number eighty six
thousand, designed to pay the Forces at Porto Rico; besides a quantity of
Plate, which amounted to a considerable sum of Money; with all which he arrived
safe in his desired Port.

Arcisseusky fortified himself along the crooked River Paripuera, full of
Crocodiles, which hurt none, unless provoked. This River runs five Leagues to
the Northward of Punta de Jaragoa, where the Spanish Forces Landed.

Southward from Jaragoa lie the Alagoas del Nort and Zul, distinguished by a
high Tract of Land; where the Spanish General Lewis Rochas Borgia left his Guns
and a thousand Men, under the Command of the Duke Bagnola, whilst with three
times as many more he went to Porto Calvo to be there before the time which the
Hollanders had in their Edicts set the Inhabitants for their removal.

Arcisseusky had by this time built on the North part of the Mouth of Paripuera
a Redoubt like a Castle, out of the middle whereof rose a wooden Tower, filled
with Earth, and secured by a Half Moon; on one side whereof he lay Encamped
with fifteen Companies. On the South side of the River stood also two strong
Forts. Arcisseusky having not the least thought that Borgia would come over the
Mountains, and through inaccessible Woods and Morasses, a back Way into Porto
Calvo, received news on the thirteenth of January 1636. by a Renegade Negro,
that the Spanish Army, consisting of three thousand Men, were come to Rodrigo
de Barrors his Sugar-Mills, about five Leagues from Paripuera, and was suddenly
expected to fall upon Colonel Schuppe in Porto Calvo; whereupon Arcisseusky
immediately set forth with twelve hundred Men and two Fieldpieces, burnt all
the Houses, Sugar-Mills and Canes he could meet with. Mean while Borgia (upon
whose Approach Schuppe had left Porto Calvo) observing by the Smoke in the
Country, that Arcisseusky had put his Edicts in Execution, leaving a
considerable Garrison in Porto Calvo, went to meet Arcisseusky with the
choicest Men. Arcisseusky being got between Camarigibi and Porto Calvo, without
having any notice of the Enemy's being so near, and his Forlorn being unawares
Engaged, and running back in great disorder, drew up his Men into a posture of
Defense about a Musket Shot from the Enemy; but the darkness of the Night made
a great confusion in both Armies, being as it were mingled pell-mell one with
another. Arcisseusky was much inferior in number to the Spaniards, but
considering it was impossible to march back, in regard the Enemy was as well
behind them as before, and that thousands of Brasilians lay watching for them
in the Woods, in case they should be dispersed, he saw there view of city was
no way but to stand to the hazard of Bartel. About Daybreak both Armies stood
an hour looking upon one another; the place where they stood being surrounded
with Woods and deep Valleys. Borgia drew out his Men on a Hill, overgrown with
Bushes. Arcisseusky had drawn out his Men on somewhat a lower Ground. Borgia at
last sent some of his Musquetteers down the Hill, Borgia's Army defeated by
Arcisseusky and himselt slain.
who fired with a full Volley upon the Dutch, whilst Arcisseusky only
discharged a Field-piece at a Tree, under which Borgia stood to take a view of
the Hollanders Forces; upon the firing of which Gun Borgia began to come down
the Hill with all his Army, against whom Arcisseusky drew out his first and
second Division, whilst Captain Vanden Brande led his Companies within two
Pikes length from the Enemy, before he discharged, which was no sooner done,
but contrary to Order they broke into the left Wing of Borgia's Army, and put
his Musquetteers to flight, who were soon followed by the whole Spanish Army,
some running into the Woods, others into the Morasses, but most of them along
the narrow Way which leads to Porto Calvo. Among the Slain was Borgia himself,
who was Descended from the greatest Families of the Dukes of Lerma and Borgia;
he was about forty eight years of Age, and had served the Spanish King a
considerable time in the Netherlands. This Victory cost the Hollanders about
forty Men, besides as many more wounded. Amongst the Spanish Prisoners was a
Neopolitan Gentleman, called Hector de la Calce, who upon Examination informed
the Hollanders, That with the last Spanish Fleet there Landed two thousand four
hundred Men in Alagoa, with twenty Brass Fieldpieces, abundance of
Wheelbarrows, Spades and Pick-axes, which cost in Portugal eight hundred
thousand Crusado's; with which great warlike Preparations Borgia made no doubt
to have got fast footing in the Country, and to have cut off all manner of
Assistance from the Hollanders; That the Spanish King raised a great many Men
both in Spain, Italy, and Germany, that with the first opportunity he might fit
out a Fleet, which was to be conducted by four thousand two hundred Seamen, to
whom the Castilians were to add eight thousand five hundred Soldiers and two
hundred Seamen, and the Portuguese the like number, to serve ashore, and to
drive all Strangers out of Brasile; That this Design had long since been put in
Execution, had not the Albuquerquers continually deceived the King of Spain,
under pretense that Brasile was in no danger; That Albuquerque would be forced
to resign up the Interest which he had in Brasile, for which the King would
give him a Dukedom in Portugal in exchange.

Schuppe and Arcisseusky judging it no way convenient to fall upon the Enemy in
Porto Calvo, Garrisoned Paripuera with four hundred Men, under the Command of
the Captains Day and Philip Andrews, whom they furnished with Provisions for
five Months, and left Order to defend the Country against the Incursions of
the Enemy; which done, they went aboard with eleven hundred Men, and took in
two Companies of Brasilians at Barra Grande; with whom Landing behind the Isle
Alexio, they came to Serinhain before Daylight, and found all the Inhabitants
fled into the Woods, fearing they would take Revenge on them for murdering of
their Sick which they had left there. They were no sooner Encamped here, but
they received. Information from John Talibon, that the Spanish Army intended to
Besiege the Redoubt in Barra Grande, which therefore, as lying on an ill place,
and not able to resist long, they slighted: After which being furnished with
Provisions out of some Ketches Commanded by the Admiral Lichthart, they
returned, with Intentions to take up their Quarters in Serinhain during the
Winter Season, whilst the Enemy lay in Cockau, on one side of Una and
Serinhain, and kept private Correspondence with some of the Portuguese that had
taken the. Oath of Allegiance to the Hollanders; but Arcisseusky fell so
fiercely upon them, that they all fled to Porto Calvo, and took three Monks
Prisoners, who had been the chief Authors of this private Correspondence.

Soon after twenty eight Ships arriving at Reciffa, brought fresh Supplies of
Men thither from the Maes and Zealand, with Ammunition and Provisions, which
was much wanted; also two Counselors, Henrich Schild and Paulus Serooskerken.

This Fleet was scarce got in, when in the Evening news was brought, that eight
hundred Spaniards were broke in through Poyuca, and had taken John Paez
Baretto's Sugar-Mill, and destroyed all they came at; but that the Hollanders
defending the Church with great Valor, obtained Quarter upon the surrendering of
it.

This raging Army, led by Colonel Rebellino and Madurera, marched to Laurenzo
and Massiapi, whither there resorted daily more Men to them, which put the
Council at Reciffa to a great Dilemma, foreseeing, that if they should send for
Schuppe from Serinhain, the Enemy from Una and Porto Calvo would hem him in,
neither had they sufficient Forces to withstand Rebellino; therefore it was
judged convenient to send to Arcisseusky to join with Schuppe's Army, that they
might both unawares fall upon the Enemy. In the interim a hundred and twenty
Tapuyans, sent by Janduy, came to Reciffa, with information that Janduy was
coming himself, with several other neighboring Kings, to their Assistance.
Schuppe, according to the Councels Order, marched in the Night through the
Sugar-Mills of Rio Formoso, rested the next day in the Valley Orekinda, and
guarded all the Avenues: Whilst he went about to Storm the Village Una,
Mansveld was to Engage with a hundred Spaniards on one side of Iletta's
Sugar-Mills, and Arcisseusky was to fall upon the Village; whither marching
early in the Morning, they saw only a few of the Inhabitants, the Enemy being
gone with his Forces over to Manbucava, nor could they pass any farther,
finding the River too deep to wade through: But it, had like to have gone worse
with Stackhower and Litchthart, who with Maulpas making twelve hundred Men,
were surprised by Rebellino, rushing forth of an Ambuscade near Laurenzo, The
Spaniards under Rebellino routed by Stackhower and Lichthart
where Maulpas receiving a Wound died of the same. This rough Entertainment at
first much daunted the Hollanders; but regaining their Courage, they pressed
upon the Spanish Army in such a manner, that Rebellino being wounded in his
Shoulder, fled in great disorder through the Sugar-Fields to Porto Calvo, and
of fifteen hundred Men saved not above four hundred, the rest being either
killed, or scattered up and down the Country; twelve taken Hollanders were
also released by this means. The Portuguese Design on Paripuera also succeeded
not much better.

Arcisseusky receiving Letters of Advice from the Councellor Serooskerken, that
Camaron lay Encamped with fifteen hundred Men about the Fortress Capavaribi in
Goyana, and that the Besieged could not hold out above four days longer, and
that the Enemy had also taken two Barques full of Provisions and Ammunition,
sent thither to relieve the Besieged, marched with excessive toil through
uncouth and intricate Ways, which were rendered unpassable by the great Rains
that had lately fallen, Camaron put to flight by Arcisseusky.
and came about an hour after Sunset to Capaviribi; from whence Camaron being
fled two hours before, had left Ammunition in three Carriages, secured from
small Shot by thick Planks, which were drawn close under the Walls; also a
Burgundian Flag, two Fieldpieces, and two Barques which he had taken with
Provisions. The Enemy fled to Tapiserica, and from thence to Terra Nova.
Whilst Arcisseusky viewed the Works, and his Men stood in good order, great
numbers of Brasilians Sallied out of the Redoubt, took the Provisions which
Camaron had left, spread themselves up in the Country, robbed the Portuguese
Houses, and killed the People. As soon as Arcisseusky had put all things in
good order, he left the Brasilians in Goyana under the Command of the
Councellor Eyssens, and pursued the fled Enemy, notwithstanding there fell
great Showers of Rain, rested a little in the deserted Village Tapiserica,
formerly inhabited by three thousand People, who possessed several fair
Structures, brave Walks, a large Jesuits Cloister, and a Church. The sweet
Water and pleasant Pastures invited the Hollanders to stay here a Night. The
next Morning marching forward to Terra Firma, they saw a strong Fortification
newly raised, but without People, and heard the Enemy's Sentinels fire;
whereupon Arcisseusky appointing part of the Army to follow at a distance,
marched before with the rest, and being fired upon from an Ambuscade by
Camaron's Party, he ordered Captain Talibon to press in upon the Ambuscade; but
because it was performed in great disorder, he fell in himself on the
right hand of the Enemy, whilst Lichthart's second Division stood still; which
so affrighted the Enemy, that without making the least resistance he fled into
the Woods, leaving many dead behind him. The next day Captain Bohart's Party
tracking the flying Enemy, fell in amongst them, and gave them a total Rout.

Arcisseusky resolved to stay some time in Terra Firma to wait for Camaron, but
he not appearing, he laid waste the Country thereabouts.

Eyssens, slain in a great Fight with Rebellino.
Rehellino and Lewis de Sosa falling upon the Councellor Eyssens, Governor of
Parayba, routed him, and set fire on the Sugar-Mills belonging to Emanuel
Pirez, which forced them with their Swords in their Hands to break through
Flame and Smoke upon the Enemy, who killed nine of them upon the Spot (amongst
whom Eyssens and his Secretary) the rest being either taken or fled.

Immediately after Arcisseusky being informed by two Prisoners, that the
Spanish Forces Commanded by Sosa, Dias, and Rebellino, were all joined together
in the Wood Antonio, where Camaron was also expected, he marched away presently
with half his Army, and as soon as the Captains Metting and Tourlon, whom he
commanded to follow him the next day, were come up to him, he fell upon the
Enemy, who lay on a Hill, at whose Foot was a deep Valley, through which he
climbed to the top; which valorous Attempt so amazed the Spaniards, Rebellino
put to flight by Arcisseusky.
that without firing a Gun they fled into the Wood: After which Metting and
Tourlon went back to Laurenzo; and Arcisseusky destroyed the Rossas, of which
the Farinha is made, that so by scarcity of Provisions he might prevent the
Enemy from so often joining together in Parties: In the mean time ten Ships
from Holland arrived with fresh Forces, Ammunition, Provisions, and two taken
Prizes, at Reciffa.

Several Prizes taken by Houte-been after his Releasement.
Houte-been being released from his Imprisonment in Dunkirk, set Sail from
Holland with three Ships, and took ten Iron Guns out or one Ship, and several
Pipes of Wine out of another before Matanca; after that a Tartan from Havana,
two Frigates with Meal, one full of Wood with two Guns, two Barques carrying
Bananas, a rich laden Pink, two Ships with Hides, and one with Sugar. Near the
Island Baru he heard several great Guns shoot off, whereupon making thither, he
found the Zealand Privateer Martman Engaged with a Ketch carrying ten Brass and
six Iron Guns, which was run ashore; whereupon Houte-been went to his
assistance with a well Manned Boat; which the Spaniards seeing, set fire on
their Ketch and fled; but the Flame having only hurt the Stern, fifty Men were
ordered to get her afloat, who having begun to unlade the Tobacco, and to take
out the Brass Guns, the Gun-Room took fire, and blew up both Men and Goods; An
unlucky Accident.
of which twenty four being sadly hurt, died, the rest escaping miraculously.
Not long after Houte-been took a Ship with Hides, fraighted the Alcmaer Pink
with his Prizes for the Texel, ran close by Carthagena, and kept a considerable
time in sight of the Plate-Fleet, of which he carried one of the heaviest
Sailers away with him; Being thus enriched, he returned home.

Grave Maurice sent by the United States to Govern Brasile.
Whilst Businesses were carried on after this manner both by Land and Sea in
Brasile, the West India Company resolved to send some Person of Quality thither
as President or supreme Governor; and after no long Consulation who should be
the Person, Grave Maurice of Nassaw was pitched upon, as being not only eminent
for his Noble Alliance by Marriage to Emperors and Kings, but also for his
excellent skill in Martial Affairs the proofs whereof were known to all Men, as
his marching to the Paltz against Spinola, his being in the great Siege of
Grol, Hertogen-Bosch, Maestricht, Venlo, Rhynberk, and Schenkenschans, at all
which he received great Honor; all which considered, they made him chief
Governor of Brasile, giving him a Commission Signed by the States of the United
Netherlands and West India Company, to Govern with absolute Power, as well in
Civil as Martial Affairs, to the best advantage of that State. At first they
resolved to send a Fleet of thirty two Sail thither, but they afterward
reduced that number to twelve, which they Manned with two thousand seven
hundred Men. Grave Maurice set Sail on the twenty fifth of October 1636. only
with four Sail, whereof the Admiral Ship called The Zutfen, carried but three
hundred and fifty Men: about the Sorlings they met with blustering Weather,
insomuch that the Fleet was forced to put in at Falmouth, and after forty days
stay there, weighed Anchor, and Steered for Cape Verd, and refreshed at the
Isle of May, famous for Salt-pans, and inhabited by a few Negro's, and banished
Portugueses.

He is joyfully received at Reciffa.
On the twenty third of January 1637. Grave Maurice arriving at Reciffa, was by
every one received with great joy; as also Adriaen vander Dussen: and soon
after Matthias van Ceulen, Servaes Carpentier, and John Gysseling, were chosen
to be of his Privy Council; whose first Work was exactly to know their Forces,
which were either Inhabitants that were to guard Towns and Fortresses, or
Soldiers that marched into the Field, two thousand six hundred whereof were
appointed to defend Reciffa, the Afogados, the Promontory St. Augustine,
Tamarica, and Parayba: the greatest Party, which lay in the Field, consisted of
two thousand nine hundred Men, and another lesser Party of six hundred; which
last flying Regiment was to be continually employed to make work for the Enemy.
They also took an Account of what Provision and Ammunition they had in store,
and found that there was want of both, especially of Match. Next he inquired
after the Enemy's Condition and Power.

From Porto Calvo the Portuguese made continual Sallies out into the Country,
which they spoiled and pillaged, insomuch that the Brasilians being oppressed
by them, deserted their Villages, and came for refuge to the Hollanders. The
Garrison in Serinhain was also much too weak to withstand the Incursions of the
Enemy, the rather, because the Portuguese came along private, and to the
Hollanders unknown Ways. All which Grave Maurice considering, caused a Fast Day
to be proclaimed, on which they desired Gods assistance in the carring on of
their Designs. He marches against the Portugueses.
After which he marched with the Army to Serinhain, from thence cross the River
Una to Barra Grande, and thenceto meet with Bagnola, who though he was four
thousand Men strong, besides Negro's and Brasilians, had stopped up all the Ways
with felled Trees, and fortified others. On a Mountain, a League from Porto
Calvo, Bagnola kept his Station. At the foot of the Mountain flowed a Brook,
whose Shore was overgrown with Rice and young Trees, before which lay a high
Bank; opposite to which Grave Maurice Encamped himself toward the Evening,
with intentions to fall upon him the next Morning, notwithstanding his Army
consisted not of above fifteen hundred Men, of which there were six hundred
Brasilians. Grave Maurice's Guard marching before were followed by Schuppe and
Arcisseusky, and they by Lichthart, whose Men were all Seamen; all of them
firing their Guns amazed the Enemy, whilst two Companies of Brasilians, and
three of Hollanders crept through the overgrown part on the right hand of the
Mountain, and as many more on the left, fell unawares upon him; but Maurice's
Guard Engaging with a thousand* Portugueses, ran through the Water up against
the Works with such undaunted Courage, that Bagnola Retreated, leaving four
hundred Men slain, besides three Brass Guns, and a great number of Prisoners;
those which escaped fled to Porto Calvo: But Bagnola fearing to be Besieged
there, left Povacon, which Castle, built on one side of Porto Calvo, lies
twenty five Leagues from Reciffa, on a Plain, partly surrounded with Mountains
and Pastures. The River Porto Calvo runs so crooked, that it almost surrounds
the Castle and Town. The Country hereabouts is full of Pools. Two Forts, each
built on a Hill near Povacon, Bagnola had caused to be undermined and filled up
with Gunpowder; but they taking fire, were blown up before the Hollanders came
thither, who found them smoking, and lying like a heap of Rubbish. Maurice
marching forward, Besileg'd Povacon; Povacon taken by (...) Hollanders.
and Encamping himself below the Hill where one of the Forts had stood, he
raised a Redoubt, and with a Trench approached the Moat. Whilst Schuppe lay
along the Town from the Church, Lichthart made a Battery to the North, and
somewhat farther Arcisseusky another; then firing from four Batteries on
Povacon, the Besieged answered them again from their Walls, and on the
thirteenth day the Governor Michael Giberton surrendered the Castle upon
honorable Articles: for those in Garrison being Italians, Portugueses, and
Castilians, to the number of five hundred, befides the Wounded and Sick, were
to be Transported to Tercera. Maurice entering the Castle, took two and twenty
Brass, and five Iron Guns, four Mortar-pieces, a great many Bullets, Matches,
Gunpowder, and other Ammunition, this being the King of Spain's Magazine.

Near Moribeca, and before St. Laurenzo, the Enemy received a shrewd Repulse
by the flying Regiment, led by Stackhower; but Lieutenant Helmich obtained
special Honor herein.

Grave Maurice after these Exploits took Shipping in Barra Grande, at a great
Inlet near Porto Calvo, and Landed again at the Promontory Sergoa, from whence
he pursued the Enemy to the River Francisco; the Inhabitants about which
desired, and obtained free Conduct. Bagnola lay on the other side of the River
Francisco, in the Town Openeda; wherefore Schuppe, who was sent to the Afogados
to be near the Enemy, was afterward commanded to go to Openeda to secure Grave
Maurice's Passage over thither; but he coming thither after him, Maurice
crossed to the Shore on which Openeda lay with Boats, and got great Booty; and
the more, because the Natives had not secured any thing, Bagnola assuring them
that the Castle Povacon could endure at least a Siege of four Months.

Openeda belonged properly to the Lord Melchior Albes. Near the Town rose a
stony Rock out of the deep River Francisco, eighty Foot high; from which Rock
there jutted out like Redoubts five Points, and it was called Maurice Castle.
Along the Shore of the forementioned Stream lay several very pleasant Isles.
Bagnola escaping privately from hence, was followed by his Men kneeling on
floating pieces of Timber, which with Sticks they Rowed over to the Northern
Shore, notwithstanding the Stream glides so swift, and is so broad, that a
six-pound Bullet cannot be shot over the same; at the Mouth thereof Maurice
built another Castle. A League from his Camp seven hundred Tapuyans (a great
salvage and strong People, whose Language the Portuguese, Brasilians, and
Tapuyans that belonged to Jandui, could not understand) had Ambuscado'd
themselves, and with signs and motions of their Bodies they gave the Hollanders
to understand, that they would kill the Portuguese if they offered to cross the
Rivers.

Maurice advising Prince Frederick Henrick of his Transactions, desired that he
would send over Planters thither, whether they were banished Germans or
Vagabonds, out of their Houses of Correction; for without them the fruitful
Country of Brasile would render but a slender Account to the West India
Company, nor be able to prevent the Invasions of the Spaniards.

The fruitfulness of this Tract of Land was not inferior to any Country in the
whole World, Cattle grazing up and down in Herds of five, six, and seven
thousand. Moreover, Maurice advised them about the scarcity of Provisions,
without which they were not able to maintain War. Grave Maurice begins his
Government with the making of good Laws
He also settled the Traders in a good Order, dividing all those free People
which bore no Offices, into four Companies, under Captains, Ensigns, and
Lieutenants. The Customs and Tributes were Farmed, Marriages were ordered to be
performed by the Netherland Priests, the Jews had leave not to Watch on their
Sabbath, all manner of Debosheries were strictly forbid from being acted on the
Lord's Day, and Punishments ordained for Drunkards and other Deboshees; several
Schools were also erected for Youth, and for the instruction of the Brasilians
in the Christian Religion; an lastly, it was permitted to any that would, to
build in the ruined City Olinda, or else to repair those Houses that were
fallen to ruin.

Some of the Portugueses filled Maurice his Ears with a Report of the
Silver-Mines at Couhaou, Copaou, Terra Nova, and about Cape St. Augustine; but
he not regarding them, placed Sheriffs over the Villages, and Oveseers over the
Almshouses and Hospitals, issuing out Orders also for the delivering of the
Provisions, which being very scarce, every Man had a certain Allowance, that so
it might last the longer; but when in this Distribution the meaner sort began
to be scanted, the Peoples Complaints were such, that an Insurrection was like
to ensue, if not carefully and speedily prevented: whereupon the decayed and
deserted Sugar-Mills of the Portugueses were put to Sale, and sold some for
three, others for six and seven thousand Pound, insomuch that the West India
Company got above 200000 l. for them all. Soon after they fortified their
Castles and other strong Holds, and broke down those that were judged useless.
The Brasilians obtained liberty also to inhabit their Villages and till their
Land, that they might make Provision for themselves, and not oppress the
Planters that lived near them. The Portuguese that had submitted themselves to
the Government of the Hollanders, had free leave granted them to exercise the
Roman Catholic Religion, only they were not to send for any Priests from St.
Salvador, which if they did, they should be dealt with as Plotters of Murders
and Treasons; they had liberty also to re-build their Houses in Olinda, paying
Tribute with the Hollanders: Moreover, they were promised that they should live
free from all Oppressions of the Hollanders. There was also order taken about
paying the tenth part of the Sugar and Farinha. The Income also of Fishing and
Fowling, amounted to a considerable sum of Money. And to prevent deceit in
Trade, Measures and Weights were made according to those of Amsterdam. For the
Converting of Pagans, Jews, and Roman Catholics, able Teachers were sent into
the Country to promulgate the Gospel.

About this time there went a Report, as if the West India Company were
inclined to remove their Seat from Reciffa to the Island Tamarica; but Maurice
advising them that it would not be so convenient for them, they changed their
Resolution.

Isleos taken by Lichthart.
Whilst Lichthart Cruis'd a considerable time before the Haven Todos los
Sanctos, he Crain'd his Ship in the Bay of Camaniu, took the Town Isleos, with
a hundred and fifty Men. In the Town, which is built on a Promontory, he took
but little Booty, and saved the Houses, which were built most of Stone, as also
the four Churches and Jesuits Cloister, and returned to Reciffa.

About this time the invincible Castle Mina, afterward called St. Joris, was
taken by the Hollanders, upon the Advice of Nicholas van Yperen, Commander of
Guinee, who sent word to Grave Maurice, that the said Castle might easily be
conquered, if any Forces could be sent him front Reciffa: Whereupon Maurice
immediately sent sent John Coin thither with nine Ships, which set Sail on the
twenty fifth of June, Anno 1637. who in the Road Commendo joining with Yperen,
soon after he was set down before it, and was preparing to Storm, had it
surrendered to him upon Terms no less advantageous to the Hollanders, than
dishonorable to the Besieged, yet not without the loss of many Men; for in
their March thither they were fiercely set upon by the Negro's inhabiting the
Village near the Castle; in which Conflict Colonel Latan amongst others was
slain. Colonel Latan slain.
The Fort might very well have endured a longer Siege, it being surrounded with
double Moats, each twenty five Foot deep, and high Bulwarks, which could not be
undermined because of the Rocky Ground on which they were built; and to make it
yet more stronger, Coin after he had taken it raised a Fort on the Hill, from
whence he had fired on the Castle, in which he found thirty Brass
Demi-Culverins; and leaving Walraeven Malburg as Governor, he returned to
Reciffa.

During these Proceedings of the Dutch in Guinee, the Duke of Bagnola ransacked
the Country about Seregippa del Rey; Maurice not able to go himself, having
had a Fever three Months, sent Schuppe and Gyseling with two thousand three
hundred Soldiers, four hundred Brasilians, and two hundred and fifty Seamen,
whilst Lichthart Steered to Todos los Sanctos, that so he naught draw the
Enemy down to the Seacoast. Bagnola flying to Terra Gratia d' Avila, Schuppe
demolished the Town Seregippa, the Sugar-Mills, and all manner of Fruit Trees,
and marched with incredible speed to the Stream Francisco; where Encamping on
the Southern Shore, he drove three thousand Head of Cattle before him, that so
he might starve the Enemy.

The Brasilians offer their assistance to the Dutch for the taking the Fort
Siara.
In the interim the Brasilians in Siara desired Aid against the Portuguese,
offering, That if the Hollanders could conquer the Fort there, they would soon
destroy all the Portuguese; that the Charges of the Siege might easily be made
good, the Country producing abundance of Ambergris, Crystal, Cotton,
Pearls, Salt, and other Merchandise. In confirmation of this their Resolution,
the Brafilians left two eminent Persons Children of Siara in Reciffa: Whereupon
George Garstman being sent thither, was no sooner Landed, but he made his
Arrival known to the Brasilian Governor Algodoi; who came to meet him with two
hundred Men, bearing white Flags in token of Peace: Thus assisted he set upon
Siara, which is a square Fort, built at the foot of a Hill, has within its
Walls six Houses, two Redoubts full of Port-holes, one on the North, and the
other on the South, jutting half way out from the Wall; as also two Gates,
secured with large Portcullises: without the Fort appears the Governor's House,
about which were several Huts for Portugueses.

This Lordship, already spoken of, is reckoned amongst the Northern parts of
Brasile, and has only twelve Leagues in circumference. The Haven before the
Castle, which the River Hacu makes, is of little consequence: The Ground in
some places rises with high Mountains, in others, especially on one side, it is
overgrown with Wood: has also several brave Pastures, especially along the
River.

The Fort taken by Gartsman.
Garstman approaching the Castle Siara, found little resistance, so that he
took it with small expense of Blood, most of the Portuguese being taken
Prisoners, a few only escaping by flight.

After this Grave Maurice took great care of the Civil Affairs, building a
Guild Hall at his own Cost and Charge; sent all manner of Minerals, dug out
of the Brasilian Mines, to the Netherland; laid great Penalties on those that
stole the Custom of Goods, and punished with Death Murders, Robberies, and such
like Capital Offenses, besides several wholesome Laws relating both to the Civil
and Ecclesiastical Government; and as soon as he was recovered from his tedious
Sickness, he marched up into the Country to the Rivers Grande and Parayba, to
take care to furnish the Forts with Provision and Ammunition. Near the Castle
Ceulen he was received by the Tapuyan Agents, and Presented by them with Bows,
Arrows, and brave Ostrich Feathers, used by them when they go to the Wars: in
return for which they received Linen Shirts, Knives, Shells, Bugles,
Fishhooks, and Nails. Maurice caused a deeper and wider Moat to be dug about
the decayed Castle Cabo Dello, raised the Works, and called it by the Name of
his, Sister Margareta; he also pulled down the Fort Antonio, keeping only a
Tower to defend the Highway. Restringa was likewise strengthened with
Pallisado's, and the Cloister near the Town Parayba fortified against an
Assault, and Elias Harkmans made Governor of the same.

Whilst these things were transacted on the Land, Captain Schuppe at Sea
Engaging alone between Todos los Sanctos and Terre Garcie d' Avila with three
Spanish Ships, drove one of them aground, and brought another away with him to
Reciffa. The Letters found in the taken Vessel made mention, that in the River
of Lisbon lay ten Galleys, and twenty more before Cales, to which were to join
thirty Pinks; which Fleet some supposed was coming for Brasile; others, that it
was only a Plot of the King of Spain to get Money from his Subjects, according
to the Custom of several other Princes.

Hereupon Maurice wrote to the West India Company, that they would Rig out a
Fleet with all possible speed, which might fall upon the fore-metion'd Spanish
Fleet, and fetch those Sugars which lay ready in Brasile to be Laden.

About the same time a Party of the Portugueses crossing the River Francisco,
came to the Stream Miguel, whither Picard marching, put them all to flight.

Grave Maurice sets forth with a Fleet for the retaking of St. Salvador.
Grave Maurice having a Design on St. Salvador, the Portuguese Metropolis in
Brasile, formerly taken by Peter Hein and Jacob Willekens, and not long after
lost by the faint-heartedness of William Schouten and Hans Kyf, though in all
likelihood not strong enough to undertake so weighty a Design, yet considering
it he should stay longer, the Season would not permit him, therefore he went
aboard, hoping that he should receive some Aid from the Netherlands; his Army
consisted of three thousand four hundred Netherlanders, and a thousand
Brasilians. He had the greater hopes of Victory, because he received
information from St. Salvador, that the Soldiers in Garrison there mutiny'd for
want of Pay, and that the Governor and Duke of Bagnola were at difference
concerning the management of the War. But before he set Sail he had seeur'd all
Places against any Invasion, and got ready twenty two Sail, furnished with
Ammunition and Provision, with which on the eighteenth of August Anno 1638. he
weighed Anchor, and met with six Ships at Sea, which he took, and arrived on
the sixth day following before the Mouth of the Inlet Todos los Sanctos, which
he could not enter by reason of contrary Winds, but Cruis'd up and down before
the River Vermelho and the Isle Tapoam; whereupon the Governor of St. Salvador
and Bagnola drew the Portuguese Forces down thither to prevent his Landing:
About Noon the Wind coming about fair for the Hollanders, brought Maurice
within Shot of the Ships, Forts, Walls and Batteries of the City St. Salvador,
so that he thundered with his Cannon against them, and Landed on a Promontory
near the Sconce Bartholomew, without the least resistance, in a convenient
place about a League and a half from the City; where Encamping himself, he was
informed by the Prisoners which he had taken, that about half a League farther
was a narrow Bank, bordered with Morasses, so that none could pass along the
same but at Lowwater, and then only at a certain time. Tourlon being sent
before with three hundred Musquetteers to discover the Place, found the Way not
only as the Prisoners had informed, but also fortified by the Enemy; against
whom Maurice drew out his Men, ordering Captain John vander Mast in the mean
time to run with ten Sail directly upon the City, and to drop his Anchors just
without shot of it. Having beaten the Enemy from his Works, he broke through
all the Paths, Hedges and Banks, till at last he came and Entrenched himself
near the Outworks of the City, by which his Army was secured from any Assaults
from the Seaside. Colonel Brand also with little trouble took the Fort
Philippo, built on the Shore, and fortified with five Guns. The next day
Maurice Storming the Castle Philippo, soon became Master of it, notwithstanding
it was well Garrisoned, and had thirteen Brass Demi-Culverins. The taking of
this Castle afforded the Besiegers a free Passage to their Fleet. They also
raised two Batteries, from one of which they shot night and day with seven
great Guns, and from the other with the like number of Fieldpieces, on the
Castle Rosario, which the Portuguese, forsook but going about to take a
Horn-work on the top of the Carmelites Cloister, he lost many Men in the
Attempt, and amongst the rest the Captains Howin, Echbrecht, Boward, Hollinger,
and the Engineer Berchem; Grave Maurice is forced to leave the Siege of St.
Salvador.
and in the end, after many bold and resolute Attaques, what with the strength
of the Place, both for number of Defendants, and well fortifi'dness thereof,
and what with the want of his expected Supplies, and lastly the sickliness of
his Army, by reason of the extraordinary Rains that fell, to the loss of many
Officers of note as well as common Soldiers, besides what were slain by the
Enemy, he made as honorable a Retreat as he could, so that this Expedition
proved altogether unsuccessful.

Mean while the Provincial States of Holland and Zealand differed about
allowing of a free Trade to Brasile, and sending of Colonies thither: Whereupon
Grave Maurice writing to them his Opinion, demonstrated with good Reasons, that
a free Trade, and fresh Colonies, would be much to the Companies advantage;
which was approved of by the States of the United Netherlands and West India
Company, who only engrossed the Trade of Negro's and Brasile Wood; and on the
Imported and Exported Goods they put a certain Custom.

The West India Company considering what Treasure Peter Hein had brought from
Matanca to Holland, they resolved to venture another Expedition thither; and to
that purpose set out fourteen Sail under the Command of Cornelis Houte-been,
who weighed Anchor out of the Texel on the fourteenth of August Anno 1638. and
arrived safe at Reciffa; where Houte-been having spent some days in Consulting
with Grave Maurice, went aboard again, and at his entering into the Ship,
bruised his Leg between the Boat and the sides thereof, which some
superstitious Persons looked upon as very ominous; but this Wound was not so
great as to keep him back from whatsoever Service came in his way: for
discovering the Spanish Fleet from Terra Firman near Cuba, before the Rocky
Isle Organes, which consisted of eight great Gallions, and six lesser Ships,
whose Lading was valued at two hundred Tun of Gold, Houte-been Engages the
Spanish Fleet.
and Commanded by Carel Dievaro, he clapped the Admiral aboard, threw in his
Grapling-Irons, and made him self fast, with a Resolution either to take him or
die, whilst the Dutch Vice Admiral Abraham Michaelzoon Roosendael boarded the
Spanish Vice Admiral, and the Rere-Admiral John vander Mast the Enemy's
Rere-Admiral; and doubtless, had not the Vice Admiral and Rere-Admiral been
slain, together with Verdoost, Captain of the Orange-Tree, and other eminent
Officers, and those that survived failed in their Duty to him for want of
Courage, he had given them a signal Overthrow; but whilst with much ado he had
prevailed with his Captains to renew the Combat (having been forced by the
coming on of the Spanish Vice and Rere-Admirals to quit his hold) and was
preparing for a second Onset, the Sea began to be rough, and the Enemy was
gotten to the Windward. Some few days after being informed, that the Spanish
Fleet lay before the Flats of Cuba and the Rocky Organes, Steered thither,
resolving to venture once more; but when he came there, the Spaniards were
gone; whereupon he sent some of his Ships to Brasile, others to Cruise before
Cuba, whilst he himself went for the Netherlands.

Whilst this Expedition fell out so unfortunately, Cameron, General of the
Brasilians, sent three Agents to Grave Maurice, desiring to enter into League
with the West India Company, upon some Differences that were risen between him
and the Duke of Bagnola. Grave Maurice seeming much inclined to his Offer,
treated the Agents very nobly; who not long after, obliged by his Civility,
informed him, that Cameron, an inconstant Man, had made Peace again with
Bagnola. But that which chiefly obstructed Grave Maurice's Designs, was the
want of Provisions, Ammunition and Men, notwithstanding his continual
Complaints to the Company.

About the beginning of the Year 1639. the Spanish Fleet, consisting of twenty
eight Sail, most of them Gallions, appeared in sight of Reciffa, but Steered
Southwardly; Grave Maurice hereupon sent out the best Sailers to follow them,
and see whither they were bound, or if they intended to Land, whilst himself
marched along to Porto Calvo; but informed that they were gone into the Inlet
Todos los Sanctos, he returned to Reciffa, after he had stored the Forts Porto
Calvo, Una, Serinhain, and that at the Promontory St. Augustine, with all
Necessaries.

About the same time Arcisseusky arriving from Holland with a Commission to be
General over the Forces there, Arcisseueky Imp^aches Grave Maurice and his
Council.
imparted to some Friends the Copy of a Letter that he intended to send to the
Amsterdam Burgomaster Albert Coenraedszoon vander Burgh, containing many
Accusations against Grave Maurice and his Council; of which he being informed,
called a general Assembly, to whom he makes a large Speech, wherein he declared
how faithful a Servant he had been to the States of the United Netherlands for
the space of twenty years, complained of the malice of Arcisseusky in
wrongfully aspersing him, both in the aforesaid Letter and otherwise, answered
particularly to every thing which was laid to his Charge, (as he did afterward
in a Letter also from himself to Vander Burgh) and lastly made it his
peremptory Request, that he might return home, and leave Arcisseusky in Power,
or that Arcisseusky might be sent home, and he remain undisturbed in his
Government; and so withdrew, leaving them to their own Consultations. It
exceedingly perplexed them, and took up a long Debate what Judgment to give in
this Matter, which before they concluded on, they proposed several Expedients
of Reconciliation between them; but seeing it was all in vain, they unanimously
judged it convenient, Is sent back into Holland.
that Arcisseusky should return; who not long after accordingly weighed Anchor
from Parayba for Holland.

Arcisseusky arriving in Holland, appeared unexpectedly before the States of
the United Netherlands and West India Company, Several Judgments concerning him.
where several Judgments were passed upon him; some said he deserved severe
punishment, for his misbehavior to Grave Maurice; others seemed to have
compassion of him, because he had done so many noble Exploits; most laid the
blame on the Company, who rashly sent him with a Commission as Chief over the
Militia, not without impairing Grave Maurice's Power; but these Discourses fell
amongst those who were not called to give their Opinion of this Case.

Coin sent Field-Marshal in his stead.
John Coin was chosen Field-Marshal in Arcisseusky's stead, whilst the
Counselors Matthias Ceulen, Adrian vander Dussen, John Guiseling, and Servaes
Carpentier, were ready to come for Holland, and on the twenty ninth of October
1639. they set Sail from Parayba, Vander Dussen bringing with him an exact
Relation of the Condition of Brasile, so far as concerns the West India
Company, which being material, we shall reserve it for a more fit place.

It being feared that the Spanish Fleet in the Harbor of Todos los Sanctos
might undertake some Design or other against the Hollanders, Grave Maurice kept
a watchful Eye upon them, repaired all decayed Forts, raised new Forces, sent
out some Vessels to watch the Fleet, and prohibited the Transporting of
Provisions, animated the Brasilian Commanders to fight against the Portuguese,
and forced the Owners of Sugar-Mills to Plant store of Mandihoka, that so his
Provisions might last the longer.

A Party of the Enemy, consisting of about twelve hundred Men, having passed
the River Francisco, was soon after opposed by Colonel Donker.

A Spanish Fleet lies before St. Salvador.
The Spanish Fleet having lay'n a whole Year before St. Salvador (because they
had lost near three thousand Men, who on the Coast of Africa died of several
Distempers, and therefore waited for a fresh Supply) set Sail on the ninteenth
of November Anno 1639. with eighty seven Sail, carrying sixteen thousand Men,
of which thirty seven were great Gallions. Ferdinand Mascarenhas, Duke of
Torre, being chief Admiral, carried the Flag and sixty Brass Guns in the Ship
Domingo; the Portuguese Admiral, Roderigo Lobo, carried fifty two Guns in the
Gallion Bernardo; of all which, with the number of the Enemy's Forces, Grave
Maurice was informed by a Letter taken out of a Pink laden with Sugar; and also
that the Spaniards were in great hopes of the Portuguese deserting the
West India Company, with whom they were forced to join; that this great Fleet
was ordered to Cruise two years before the Coast of Brasile, and to Land diverse
Men under the Command of Bagnola, Francisco de Moro, Antonio Roderigo, Nunno de
Mello, Jacob Pirezio, Francisco Pezam, and Lopes Barbalio; all which made
Maurice write continually for Aid, Which the West India Company must send
speedily, unless they were resolved to lose what they had gotten in Brasile, as
also the People, who had hitherto defended the same with the loss of their
Lives and Fortunes.

A Negro that served a Spanish Captain, called Henrick Dias, being taken,
informed the Hollanders, That the Spanish Fleet was much weakened by a poisonous
Air on the Coast of Africa; and that they had left a considerable number of
their Men in the Hospital at St. Salvador; that the Admiral was resolved with
divided Forces to burn all Places he came at, and to receive the Negro's,
Mamolucks, Mulatto's, and Brasilians, under his Jurisdiction. But Grave Maurice
gave little credit to this Relation, because the Spaniard doubted not in the
least, but that he should take Brasile from the Netherlanders with his
forementioned Forces, why then should he ruin what he hoped to posses? None
knew whither the Spanish Fleet intended to go; for setting Sail under the
Command of Antonio Oquendo, under pretense of falling upon the Netherlands,
they Steered their Course to Brasile, and at last from the Inlet Todos los
Sanctos to Goyana; but four days before they weighed Anchor, William
Corneliszoon Loos, who had some time been Cruising before the said Inlet, came
back to Reciffa with thirteen Sail of Ships, which wanted all manner of
Necessaries.

The West India Company had now been in a mean Condition, had there not happily
arrived first eight, next two, and at last nine Ships from the Texel, the Maes,
and Zealand, with Provisions, and a Supply of Men; which Maurice had no sooner
taken out, and unladen the Ships, but he fitted them for an Engagement, and
made up the number of forty one Sail, who yet were not to be compared to the
Spaniards, whose smallest Vessels carried more Men and Guns than the biggest of
the Hollanders, which in all had but two thousand one hundred and ninety six
Men, and one Ship with another under twenty Iron Guns: Cornelsizoon Loos with
his small Power sets out to Engage the great Spanish Fleet.
With this small Power the Admiral William Corneliszoon Loos went to meet the
Enemy, and before the River Michael took four Spanish Ships, which carried
Ammunition and Provisions for the Army, which Lopes Barbalio commanded ashore.
On the twelfth of January, Anno 1640. he descried the Spanish Fleet between
Itamaraca and Goyana; not far from which Mascarenhas thought to Land seven
thousand Men at Paomorello; and they were already gotten into little Vessels
when the Hollanders Fleet made toward them, and about three a Clock in the
Afternoon began a bloody Engagement for four hours, in which Loos Engaging with
the Spanish Admiral and four Gallions, Admiral Loos slain.
was killed in the middle of the Fight, which ended in the Evening. Jacob
Huigens carrying the Flag the next day in sight of the Promontory Blanco,
chearing up his Men, Huigens chaseth the Spanish Fleet.
went to renew the Fight with Mascarenhas, and with a few small Ships Engaged
several great ones, of which they had an advantage only in their nimble
turning and winding. In this Engagement Huigens lost the Ship called The Sun,
which sunk with Colonel Mortimer and forty four Men, thirty four being saved in
the Boat. The Hollanders Loss was the less, because the Spanish great Gallions
fired over Huigens's Ships, which fired in the midst of the Spaniards Vessels.
Huigens not being tired with two days Engagements, fell upon them a third time
before Parayba, and firing at the Spanish and Portuguese Admirals, pursued
their Fleet to the Northermost Coast of Brasile, where by a strong Current they
were driven Westerly; and the Swan, Commanded by Jacob Alderick, losing her
Mainmast, was cut off from the Fleet by twelve Gallions; and three hundred
Spaniards were already Masters of the Deck, when Alderick breaking from the
Enemy, drove toward the Shore, Alderick's valiant Exploit
and either killed the Spaniards that were in his Ship, or forced them to leap
overboard, whilst Antonio Cunha de Andrada, not knowing that Alderick was
aground, making up to him, ran also aground, which occasioned a new Fight, and
at last Andrada was made to surrender his Gallion, and with it three thousand
Pound of coined and uncoin'd Silver, besides other rich Goods, and two hundred
and thirty Men, who were all sent Prisoners to Pecissa.

January the seventeenth Huigens ventured a fourth Engagement between Rio
Grande and Conyaou, where approaching the Spanish Fleet, a sudden Calm
prevented him from coming within shot of them, till against the Evening the
Wind began to rise, but the Night approaching, it was not judged worth while to
Engage for so few hours, therefore they referred the bloody work till the next
day; when about Daybreak Huigens ran through the midst of the Enemy's Fleet,
The Spanish Fleet again put to flight by Huigens.
and fired so fiercely on Mascarenhas, that he Tacking about, stood away right
before the Wind, and not being able to get beyond the Shelves Baxios de
Roachas, nor to get Water on the Coast, because the Hollanders Ketches guarded
the same, he Sailed into the Offin toward the Line with a South-East Wind.
After which Huigens lay eight days before Rio Grande to refresh and rest
himself, and on the first of February he arrived at Reciffa, where Maurice
caused a Thanksgiving Day to be kept for this wonderful Victory, whilst the
Enemy was exceedingly abashed.

Several Disadvantages occurred toward the overthrow of the Spanish Fleet; for
first it was much weakened by the Disease which raged in the same on the Coast
of Africa, insomuch that it lay still a whole year in Todos los Sanctos to
gather fresh Forces, whilst Maurice put himself in a posture of Defense:
Secondly, they lay becalmed, and met with contrary Winds for several Months,
when as the Voyage between St. Salvador and Pemambuco is commonly not above
twelve days; which tedious Passage occasioned also a Distemper and
faint-heartedness amongst the Spaniards, whilst diverse Ships arrived at
Reciffa from the Netherlands, without which it had been impossible to have
Engaged with the Enemy, in regard till then all manner of Ammunition and
Provisions were wanting. Huigens also had continually the advantage or benefit
of the Wind, and lost in the Engagement but two Ships, a hundred and twenty
four Men, besides twelve wounded: Moreover, but twelve Ships only of the Dutch
Engaged with this great Spanish Fleet, the rest never coming within shot;
wherefore the two Commanders, John Coopman Ryk, and Peter Jacob, were condemned
to be Beheaded; Cornelis Johnszoon and Peter Dirkszoon had their Swords broke
over their Heads by the common Hangman; Cornelis Lucifer, Dirk Eger, and Jacob
Clavor, were banished; and others came off by paying great Fines: but the
Spanish Fleet lost in the four Engagements twenty Ships, and some thousands of
Men, the Joseph alone having four hundred slain in her. Lastly, anchoring near
the Island Margareta, the Portuguese Admiral Cosmo de Couto, and the
Captain General Francisco Pimentello, falling out, the Spaniards Steered to
Tercera, and from thence to Cales, where there Landed but few Men, most of them
dying of Hunger and Thirst in their Return home: Four Gallions, with two Pinks,
got into the Spanish Harbors, the rest being either stranded before New Spain,
sunk, or returned to the Inlet Todos los Sanctos.

Before the forementioned Fleet weighed Anchor from St. Salvador, two thousand
Portugueses, besides Tapuyans and other Brasilians, marched under the Command
of Cameron, Vidal, and Barbalio, with divided Forces into the Country, partly
to get Provision, and partly to do what mischief they could to the Hollanders,
far and near: their Orders were to join in the Village St. Laurence, seven
Leagues beyond Paomarello, that there they might make way for the Seamen to
Land, if the Netherland Forces should chance to guard the Seacoast
thereabouts, and to join with them as soon as they were Landed. But Grave
Maurice encouraged by his late Victory at Sea, immediately sent the
Field-Marshal Coin against Cameron, who diviidng his Army into small Companies,
had distributed them through the Woods; Cameron's Forces and Barbalio's put to
flight by Coin.
in which Coin followed his Example, and with divided Forces pursued Cameron's
Army, and overtook his Captain Tak and two hundred Men at Poyuca; (whereof
Lopes Barbalio was Governor) who fled, notwithstanding he Commanded six hundred
Men.) Soon after which the Muster-master Mansveld met him near the Village St.
Laurence, Engaged him, and putting him to flight, found several Papers of
Concern that he had left behind, Portugueses Plot against the Netherlanders
discovered.
and amongst others a Letter, in which Barbalio was commanded to spare neither
Brasilians nor Netherlanders alive, but to kill all, without regard either to
their Age or Quality, except the Portuguese. Moreover, Andries Vidal urged the
Owners of the Sugar-Mills in the Netherlanders Brasile, immediately to take up
Arms, to regain their ancient Freedom, as soon as Mascarenhas appeared with the
Spanish Fleet on the Coast of Brasile: Thus Vidal, by Letters and private
Conferences, prevailed so much, that most of the Portuguese were ready against
their Oaths to root out the Netherlanders: The sign when they should be ready,
was the burning of some Sugar-Mills, Vidal imagining thereby to have drawn the
Netherlanders from the Seaside, and so made the Seacoast free for the
Spaniards to Land securely in. But the Garrison under Coin along the Seashore
near Alexis, not ignorant of the Enemy's Plot, kept their Stations, and
suffered the Mills to burn. The like did Craey at the Promontory of St.
Augustine, Picard at Paomarello, Captain Day at Cantolaria, and Donker on
Goyana; Hoogstraet kept Guard up in the Country; Tourlon also sent out by
Maurice against Francisco Sosa and Henrick Dias, who had pillaged all the
Country about the River Conajou, fell upon them in such a manner, that he
destroyed eighty seven of them, and wounded a considerable number more of them,
made the rest fly to St. Salvador.

Two Months before the Spanish Fleet set Sail from Todos los Sanctos, three
thousand Tapuyans came to Rio Grande with their Wives and Children, from an
unknown Country remote from the Sea. Grave Maurice requested their King John
de Wy, that he would please to keep Watch along the Seacoast, and prevent the
Landing of the Spanish Seamen: Whereupon De Wy sent his Son to the Castle
Ceulen, making solemn Protestations, that he was ready to lose his Life and
Fortune for the Netherlanders, in helping them to drive the Portuguese out of
Brasile. Maurice also joined two thousand Brasilians, and Colonel Garstman with
sixty Netherlanders, to the Tapuyans, that so he might train them up in Martial
Discipline, whilst the Tapuyans Wives and Children were placed on the Island
Tamarica.

About the beginning of the Year 1640. Houte-been and Lichthart brought a
considerable Fleet from the Netherlands to an Anchor at Reciffa, where a
Consutation was held, whither these Ships might be sent to do most Service:
every one had an Eye on St. Salvador, not long since Stormed in vain; but
Maurice judged that they had not Forces enough to undertake so grand a Design,
but thought it would be better to Land some fresh Forces near St. Salvador,
that there they might burn the Sugar-Mills, and destroy all things they could
find, in revenge of what the Enemy had done at Parayba. Whereupon Tourlon and
Lichthart set Sail with twenty Ships, Manned with two thousand five hundred
Men, to the Inlet Todos los Sanctos, where they burnt all the Portuguese
Sugar-Mills, Houses and Villages; neither did their Swords spare any alive but
Women and Infants: The Cattle which they found they carried aboard of their
Ships, and burnt all other Provisions.

In the mean time Houte-been and Coin fell upon Porto Franco, where they ruined
all things, to no other end, but that the Enemy might call home his Forces out
of the Netherlanders Brasile, to defend the Province Todos los Sanctos. Capt.
Brand taken Prisoner.
But Captain Brand going up too far into the Country with his Army, was
suddenly set upon, had a hundred of his Men slain on the Spot, and was himself
taken Prisoner, together with many more. Also the Storming of the Town Spirito
Sancto by Coin proved unsuccessful, Coin unsuccessfully Storms Spirito Sancto.
because he led an undisciplined Company, and wanted little Vessels to Land in
on a sudden; for the Enemy having had timely notice, immediately raised a
Sconce about the Town, and with five Brass Guns fired stoutly on him, who
endeavored to climb up the Hill, but was forced to sound a Retreat, his Men
failing in their Courage; yet at last breaking into the Town, he set some of
the Houses on fire, which being built of Stone, resisted the Flame; so burning
only four hundred and fifty Chests of Sugar, he left sixty Men killed, and
brought back eighty wounded. Lichthart in the mean time made great havoc about
St. Salvador.

In this Conjuncture the West India Company suffered much by Robberies and
Spoils committed up and down the Country, by the setting their Woods of
Brasile on fire by a company of Negro's, Woods of Brasile set on fire by Peter
Vist.
the chief Ringleader of whom was one called Peter Vist, who from Caves and
almost inaccessible Ways came forth in the Night, and set fire on whatsoever
places he came to, notwithstanding a hundred Negro's of his crew were soon
after caught, which he at several times had by force taken out of their Masters
Sugars-Mills; which Grave Maurice prevented as much as possible, by keeping
Soldiers up and down in Arms. He also used the Portuguese very civilly, who
though they promised Obedience, because they lived under the Jurisdiction of
the West India Company, yet were ready on all occasions to show the contrary;
wherefore Grave Maurice sending for the chief of them to Reciffa from
Pernambuco, Itamaraca, and Parayba, told them before the Privy Council, that
they might easily see how vainly they expected that the Spanish Crown should
take Brasile from the Netherlanders; that formerly they depended on the Spanish
Fleet Commanded by Mascarenhas, but that being destroyed by a small Force, that
hope Was lost; therefore if henceforward they would Trade on their own
Accounts, they might be assured they should not suffer in the least, either in
their Goods, Religion, or Persons.

Hector de Calce taken P^isoner.
The Neopolitan Field-Marshal Hector de la Calce, setting Sail from the Haven
Todos los Sanctos with an old Ship carrying six hundred Men, was forced to run
aground in the Haven of Parayba, where he and the chief Commanders were taken
Prisoners, whilst the Common Soldiers by reason of the scarcity of Provisions,
were set at liberty.

Houte-been and Lichthart weighed Anchor with twenty Ships, carrying two
thousand Soldiers and seven hundred Seamen to Havana, to Cruise for the
Plate-Fleet, but the Spanish Ships keeping within their Harbors, and their own
being dispersed and scattered by ill Weather, their Voyage proved in vain.

Not long after Grave Maurice sent some Ships under Lichtharts Command to
Cruise before the River Januarius, and others for the same purpose to Angola;
but he effected little, for he only took two Ships, one whereof being laden
with Wine, was sold for 9400 l. Sterling.

The news of the Portuguese Crowning the Duke of Bragancia, and casting off the
Castilian Yoke, which very much changed the face of Affairs in Brasile, was
about this time brought over by the Jesuit Francisco Vilhent, and the
Under-Field-Marshal Peter Corera de Gama, who were by Bragancia sent to St.
Salvador, not only to bring the tidings of the Portugueses Revolt, but also to
take the Oath of Allegiance from Montalvan to the new King, which he made no
scruple of; so that from thenceforth all but the Castilian and Neopolitan
Soldiers, cast off their Obedience to the Crown of Spain. Whereupon Montalvan
desired Grave Maurice to allow a Cessation of Arms, till such time as they
might both receive information what Tristan Mendoza, in the new King of
Portugal's Name, had Treated with the States of the United Netherlands about;
and to make the Request seem the fairer, several Dutch Prisoners were set at
liberty, and the Companies with which Paulo Acunhas was marching to Pernambuco,
were called back.

Grave Maurice desiring in his Letters to be released from his Employment in
Brasile, Grave Maurice desired by the States and West India Company to continue
in his Government of Brasile.
received for Answer from the States, That it would be very disadvantageous for
the States for him to come home, now he thoroughly understood the Intreagues of
the New World, in which he might do much good, especially since the Portuguese
being revolted, would in all probability assist them in destroying the King of
Castile's Forces; therefore it was now the most proper time to prepare for
Action.

To this Request of the States was added that of the West India Company, who
also sent earnest Letters to the same purpose; which made Maurice defer his
Return, and prepare himself for some grand Undertaking: And first he joined the
Province of Seregippe Del Rey to the Netherland Brasile, built a Fort and
Armory in the same, and built a Wall about the Town; which Work was the more
followed, because Seregippe, which bordered upon the Province of Todos los
Sanctos, fed abundance of Cattle, and gave great hopes of Silver-Mines.

Grave Maurice likewise observing what great Profit proceeded from the Angolan
Negro's, and that the Spanish Sugar-Mills could not work without them,
undertook to ingross that Trade wholly into the West India Companies hands; to
which purpose Loando St. Paulo being judged a fit Place for a Factory,
Houte-been was sent thither which twenty Ships, Manned with nine hundred Seamen,
two thousand Land-Soldiers, and two hundred Brasilians: the Land-Men were
Commanded by Hinderson, who arriving with the Fleet on the twenty fourth of
August 1640. before Loando St. Paulo, ran in between the Enemy's Castles, St.
Crux, Bento, Sibylla, Vincent, Velho, and against five Batteries along the
Water side, all full of Guns, and fired so vehemently upon the Enemy, that
being forced to leave his Works, he made room for Hinderson to Land; who
immediately marched to the Town, which Peter Caesar Meneses defended with nine
hundred Portugueses, and some thousands of Negro's, Loando taken by Houte-been.
who stood the first Onset; but Hinderson falling upon them again, so
affrighted them, that they fled; which Meneses perceiving, soon followed, and
left him Master of the City, in which he found only a few drunken Soldiers,
decrepid old People, twenty nine Brass Guns, besides several Iron ones, and
great plenty of Provisions and Ammunition. Mean while Houte-been took thirty
Ships haled near the Shore.

Description of the City.
This City is built on a Hill, and has several fair Buildings and Cloisters,
amongst which the Jesuits and Capuchins are the best. Along the Seashore, at
the foot of the Mountain, stands also a long Row of Houses, near which
Hinderson immediately cast up Bulwarks against any Assault, and likewise two
Sconces, the biggest whereof is on the utmost Point of Loando, near the Fort
Sibylla.

Meneses in vain Expostulates.
Twelve Companies being left here in Garrison, quite contrary to Meneses his
expectation, who thinking that the Netherlander came only for Booty, and not
to take or keep the City by force of Arms, made his Complaints therefore by
Letters to Houte-been, alleging, That there was Peace made between the King of
Portugal and the United Netherlands, and that the former Acts of Hostility were
changed to friendly Correspondencies. But Houte-been answered, That he knew not
of any such Agreement between Portugal and the Netherlands; and if he had known
it, how should he be sure whether Meneses held with the Castilians or
Portugueses? If Meneses knew of this Agreement, and was of the Portuguese
Party, why did he receive those as Enemies, whom he must acknowledge as
Friends? His Complaints were now too late, since the Hollanders had obtained
the Victory with the loss of their Blood.

Meneses therefore seeing no hopes to regain Loando, either by Complaints or
Force, desired eight days Cessation of Arms, that in that time he might fit
himself to go from thence to another Place; which the Netherlanders in Garrison
would not hearken to, but commanded him to march away immediately sixteen
Leagues from Loando.

Mean while the Angolan Princes joining with the Netherlanders, fell upon the
Portuguese where-e're they met them. Moreover, several Citizens returned to
Loando, and proffered half their Negro's, if they might but have liberty to be
Transported to St. Salvador with the other half; but it was judged more
convenient to keep them, and by fair means also to invite the rest, because it
appeared by the Angolan Accounts, Great profit of the Negro-Trade.
that the profit of the Negro-Trade amounted yearly to sixty six Tuns of Gold,
the Charges of the Garrison, and fitting out of the Ships being deducted from
it. The Spanish King had yearly above fifteen thousand Negro's from hence to
employ in his American Mines.

The Isle of St. Thomas taken by Houte-been.
Houte-been Sailing over from Loando to the Isle of St. Thomas, Landed some of
his Men over against the Sugar-Mills of St. Juna, and ran with his Fleet to an
Anchor near a square Castle, with intention to use no Hostility, unless
provoked; which the Portuguese did by firing their Guns, and were answered by
Houte-been, one of whose Ships called the Enchuisen was blown up; those that
Landed also met with some resistance from diverse Negro's; yet at last they
gained the Fort, in which they found six Guns, and soon after marched into the
Town Pavaosa, where the Inhabitants had left nothing but empty Houses; the
great Castle they were forced to let alone, because the Scaling-Ladders would
not reach to the top of the Walls, which were twenty eight Foot high: But
Houte-been coming ashore, raised a Battery behind the Church, from whence he
fired with six Demi-Cannons, and threw sixty five Granado's amongst the
Besieged, twenty whereof burst with such violence, that all (...) which reached
from Maragnan to the River Real; with the necessity of keeping the Soldiery
undisbanded, in regard the Portuguese were ready to take all advantages,
notwithstanding the Articles of Agreement; with the discontent of their own
Men, and their readiness to mutiny upon the report that they were to be
Disbanded; with the great Inconveniences of altering the Government of the
West India Company; with the number of Soldiers wherewith every Place belonging
to the Company was at that present furnished, which amounted in all to near
five-thousand Men; and with the impossibility of keeping those Places, unless a
speedy Supply of Men and Provisions were sent.

Grave Maurice received a Letter from Mascarenhas, wherein he made great
complaint of the Netherlanders Actions on Loando, St. Thomas, and Maragnan,
during the time of the Treaty, and used many Arguments for the delivering back
of the Places then taken; but Maurice took little notice of the said Letter,
being busy about settling all Affairs in this quiet Juncture of time: He freed
all new Planters from the paying of Tenths for seven years, sold several Fields
to be Cultivated, repaired all decayed Forts, kept the Catholics in strict
awe, ordained good Orders for Schools, Almshouses, and payment of Money, and
gave particularly Liberty to the Portuguese both in Spiritual and Temporal
Affairs.

The Fort Calvaria taken by the Maragnans and others.
In the mean time sad news was brought, viz. That the Maragnans, assisted by the
Portugueses and Brasilians, had taken the Fort of Calvaria near the River
Tapicuru, destroyed all those that were in Garrison, and Stormed the City
Lodowick: Whereupon Hinderson was dispatched thither immediately with three
hundred Netherlanders, and two hundred Brasilians from Siara; which the Enemy
hearing, though there were seven hundred Portugueses, and three thousand
Brasilians, left the Island Maragnan, and went over to the Main Continent.

The occasion of this Plot was imputed to the fault of the sottish Governor of
St. Lodowick, and his Secretary William Negenton, who by their Folly and
Misgovernment provoked the Natives to Rebellion.

Grave Maurice his Design upon Buenos Aires diverted by Pirez his taking of
Pavaosa.
In the interim Grave Maurice had a Design upon the City Buenos Aires in the
Southern parts of Brasile, near the River La Plata, where a Way leads by Land
to Peru; and whither the Silver and Negro's were often brought, especially when
any Ships were suspected to block up the Channel of Panama.

Whilst Maurice was preparing for this Expedition, news was brought that two
Ships had Landed their Men on the Island St. Thomas, under the Command of
Laurence Pirez, who had driven the Netherland Garrison out of Pavaosa, and
Besieged the Fort, out of which many for want of Water ran to the Enemy; and it
was feared that the same Misfortune would suddenly befall the City Loando and
Seregippe del Rey; which prevented Henrick Bower's Expedition to Chili, and
Lichthart's to Buenos Aires, and so alarmed Grave Maurice, that he thought it
expedient to give speedy notice thereof, to warn the Netherlanders on Angola,
that they should keep strict Watches, and beware of the treacherous Portuguese,
who affirmed, That it was lawful for them during the ten years Peace, to
re-take those Places which had been taken from them during the Treaty of Peace
in the Hague.

Description of the Palmares.
These Proceedings forced Grave Maurice to Disarm most of them; and because the
Negro's did much mischief from the Palmares, especially to the Husbandmen in
the Alagoas, Maurice gave order to destroy their Habitations. The Palmares were
two Villages, built along the River Gungohuby under close Woods, six Leagues
Northwardly from Parayba: The Inhabitants of them, being then about six
thousand in number, were most of them fled Negro's, who gathering together in a
Head, destroyed all the Country thereabouts: They dwelt in Huts of Boughs and
Straw interwoven; behind which were Gardens and Orchards of Palm Trees, and
conformed to the Religion and Government of the Portuguese.

Grave Maurice counter-sollicited by Agents from the King of Congo and Duke of
Sonho.
Whilst three hundred Musquetteers, a hundred Mameluks, and seven hundred
Brasilians were fitting to go to the Palmares, there arrived Agents at Reciffa
from the King of Congo, who brought as a Present to Grave Maurice, two hundred
Neno's, a Golden Collar and Pot, besides many Negro's for the West India
Company. These Agents desired Aid against the Duke of Sonho, who treacherously
Plotted to drive the King out of Congo; which Plot was discovered by scattered
Letters, Signed by the Governors and Bishop at Loando, a little before Loando
was taken by the Hollanders. Maurice courteously Entertaining the Agents,
proffered himself to be a Mediator to decide the Difference, and gave them a
long Velvet Coat Laced with Gold and Silver Lace, a Silk Coat and Scarf, and a
Beaver Hat with a Golden Edging.

Not long after there came Agents from Sonho, to beseech Grave Maurice that he
would not assist the King of Congo; one of whom went to the Hague, and was
followed by two from the King of Congo, who opened their Letters before the
Prince of Orange.

The Agents from Gongo, what kind of Men.
The two Agents from Congo were strong and black Men, very active, and having
grim Countenances; they Danced after a strange manner; and showing the Picture
of their King sitting in great State, acted the Postures in which his Nobles
and other Subjects showed him Reverence: their Strength was such, that they
were able with ease to carry each of them two hundred thirty five Pound weight:
their Ornamentals consisted of Elephants Tails.

In Loando the Governor for the Dutch, named Cornelis Niewland, and the
Portuguese Governor Peter Caesar de Meneses, came to this Agreement, That since
the ten years Peace was concluded on between the Portuguese and Netherlanders,
Meneses should possess the Country washed by the River Bengo, and call in the
ancient Natives to live and Trade as formerly; all which was faithfully
performed: nay, Meneses furnished Niewland with as much Meal as he required,
toward the maintaining of a thousand Negro's, whom he had bought; and the
Hollanders and Portugueses began now to be every day more and more friendly and
familiar with each other, when on a sudden Niewland not only remembering what
was done lately on the Islands Maragnan and St. Thomas, Meneses surprised by
Niewland after they were come to ternis of Agreement.
but also stirred up by other later Actions, which gave him occasion of
jealousy, sent two hundred Musquetteers in the Night from Loando, to take the
Governor Meneses, with some others, who he feared might make an Insurrection.
The Soldiers accordingly about Daybreak fell unawares upon the sleeping
Portugueses, killed forty of them, and carried Meneses and many other Persons
of Quality away Prisoners, together with a Booty valued at above ten thousand
Ducats, and sent a hundred and sixty Portugueses in an old leaky Vessel to St.
Salvador; but they being tossed to and again at Sea for a considerable time,
eight of them died, the rest almost starved, Landed on Permambuco; Alvares de
la Bento his Complaint to Grave Maurice of his Countrymen.
where Simon Alvares de la Benho being amazed to see his Contrymen thus
hardly dealt with, complained of Niewland, Mols, and Cross, who were the chief
of Loando, that they had broke the Laws, and the sworn Articles of Peace;
urging that it would be very unjust that the poor Portugueses should not have
Satisfaction for the Wrong which they had sustained, as also for the loss of
their Goods. To which Grave Maurice answered, That Loando belonged to the
West India Company, and that for his part he had nothing to do with that City,
but that if the States were accquainted therewith, they would without doubt be
highly concerned at it.

Christopher Santches, a free Negro, gave information of the sad Condition of
the Island St. Thomas, viz. That the greatest part of the Hollanders that had
been left upon that Island being dead, Pirez hereupon with the King's Consent
fitted out two Ships, and setting Sail from Lisbon about the beginning of July
1642. first refused to pay the usual Custom at the Island St. Thomas,
afterward fell upon the Hollanders, whom he Besieged in the Castle, and
against the Law of Arms poisoned all the Waters.

To prevent the future Inconveniences that were likely to arise from a Famine
which about this time afflicted the whole Country of Brasile, Grave Maurice
judged it convenient to sell the Lands in the Alagoas to new Planters; to which
purpose Henrick Moucheron was chosen Overseer, to take care that all the Fields
about Porto Calvo, and along the River Francisco, as also in the Alagoas,
should be Sow'n with Bread-Corn.

Grave Maurice takes his leave of the several Governors in Brasile.
Grave Maurice obtaining leave at last to go home, took Leave by Letters of the
Governors of Serinhain, Porto Calvo, Iguarazua, Itamaraca, Parayba, Rio Grande,
and in Person of the Council at Reciffa, who all thanked him for his prudent
Government, manifesting their hearty sorrow for his departure, Which without
doubt would produce many Inconveniences. But though the Council of the
West India Company had ordered him to return home about the beginning of March
1643. yet he went not so soon, because he was to reduce the number of Militia
to eighteen Companies, and also to the settle Revenues, and dispose of Offices,
in which be found much trouble; wherefore before his departure he wrote to the
States of the United Netherlands, assuring them how impossible it was to defend
Brasile, which extended some hundreds of Leagues, with so small a number of
Men, since the Portuguese covered inward malice under a feigned show of
kindness, and at the same time watched all opportunities to drive the
Netherlanders from their Plantations, being very much exasperated by the
privilege of Religion granted to the Jews, whilst their Monks and Jesuits
were banished. Moreover, in regard they owed the West India Company above fifty
nine Tuns of Gold, they sought to cancel that Obligation, by making themselves
Masters of whatsoever their Creditors had in Brasile, so that there was no way
but to keep them under by force of Arms.

He leaves the Government and returns home.
After Grave Maurice had sent this Letter to Holland, he left the Government of
Brasile to the chief Council, the Militia to Henrick Hoes, Captain of his
Lifeguard, with Directions for Governing after his departure. Having settled
all things in good order, he went from Maurice-stadt through Paratibi and
Iguarazu to Parayba; where Janduy sent him three of his Sons, with twenty
Tapuyans, desiring him not to go away; two of them with several Carapates and
Waypebarans, (a People who made themselves Masters of the great Palmares) and
five other Brasilians went aboard with him on the twentieth of May 1644.

The Fleet, consisting of thirteen Ships, and Manned with fourteen hundred Men
of all sorts, was laden with so many Merchandises as were valued at twenty six
Tuns of Gold; with which Grave Maurice arriving at the Texel, Landed at the
Helder, and gave an Account of his Government in Brasile, and of the then
present state of that part of it which belonged to the West India Company.

Ill management of Affairs after Maurice his departure.
After Grave Maurice's departure, Hamel, Bassi, and Bullestraet, bore the chief
Command in Brasile: The Charges made by the War were mitigated, and the number
of the Soldiers in Garrison reduced to sixteen hundred; some Forts lay without
a Man in them, whilst the King of Portugal watched for such an opportunity;
for he seemed to be as much concerned for that Country, as for his Kingdom of
Portugal, and the rather, because his Predecessor Sebastian received above
forty hundred thousand Ducats yearly out of the same, besides the Presents and
other Gains made by the Portuguese; wherefore he gave order to the Governor of
St. Salvador, to be very vigilant, and assured him, that in a short time he
would send him both Men and Provisions. A Mulatto called John Fernandes Viera,
Viera's Treachery.
did not a little assist the Portuguese in their Design; for he having lived a
considerable time in a Counselors Housech in Reciffa, had narrowly observed
all Passages, and insinuated himself into several Statesmens Affairs, by
Presenting them now and then with some Rarities, insomuch that he came in time
to Farm the Rents which the Weft-India Company received from the Sugar-Mills;
but at length being discontented because the Council would not make any
abatement upon the same, when he complained that he lost by Farming the
forementioned Tax, he held private Correspondence with Andreas Vidal, that
when a convenient opportunity presented it self for the Portuguese to fall on
the Hollanders, he might be assisting; to which end he had gotten several Arms
and Ammunition together.

In this Plot a Jew named Moses Accoignes, living in Viera's House, a League
from Reciffa, to keep him from Arrests, was persuaded to join, which he
seemingly promised to do; but went away by Daybreak, and discovered the Design
to the Privy Council, who being rocked asleep by the Portugueses fair
Pretenses, gave no credit to the Relation.

A Plot against the Netherlanders to be carried on by a Wedding.
For the better carrying on of this Design, Cavalcantelca, Provost-Marshal in
Maurice-stadt made a great Wedding for his Daughter in Viera's House, to which
the chiefest Persons of Quality, both of the Portuguese, and also all the
Privy-Councellors and Military Officers belonging to the West India Company
were invited: and the Plot was so contrived, that whilst they were all at
Dinner, the Portuguese were suddenly to fall upon the Netherlanders and kill
them, both Servants and Masters; this done, some were to go to Reciffa or
Maurice-stadt, with news that the Wedding People were coming; whereupon part
were to press into the City, others to keep the Gates, till all their Forces
were come thither, which then might easily secure and seize upon the Magazine:
some Barques also under pretense of loading Sugar, were in the mean time to set
upon the Haven and Fort near the Shore. All things were accordingly prepared
for the Wedding, nothing being wanting that could be purchased with Money; and
near the Forts of Rio Grande and Parayba were Stage Plays to be Acted in
public, it being concluded that the Soldiers in Garrison would certainly be
there to see them; the Actors being privately Armed with Pistols and Ponyards.
And to oblige one another the more for the carrying on of this bloody Design,
Viera had caused the chief Conspirators to take an Oath before the high Altar.
The twenty fourth of June 1645. was the Day on which this Tragedy was to be
acted; but a few days before two Portugueses and five Jews, The Plot discovered
by some of the Conspirators
who had been sworn Confederates, their Consciences checking them for so
villainous an Undertaking, made an ingenuous Discovery of the Plot. The
Councellor Moucheron was also informed, that the Portuguese Colonel Camaron and
Diez were coming with great Forces from St. Salvador.

The Council when they might easily have apprehended Viera, sent for him by a
Jew called Abraham Coing, under pretense of Treating about some Business
concerning the West India Company; he promised to come in the Evening, Viera
flies into the Wood.
but suspecting he was betrayed, fled into the Woods, and gave speedy notice to
all his Accomplices, who followed him in great numbers. The Soldiers sent to
search Viera's House, found none but old Men and Children.

The Councellor Van Houten went immediately with seven Sugar-Vessels to
Parayba, fortified the Forts Margareta, Pestringa, and Antonio, and made room
for the Brasilians that had removed thither from their Villages, in the Houses
deserted by the Portuguese in Frederick-stadt. On the other side, Amador da
Rouge, one of the Conspi rators, spirators, went with a Company from Poiouca
through the Country, killed seven Dutch Seamen, with three Jews, and erected
Gibbets, on which he threatened to hang all those who did not take up Arms for
the King of Portugal. Colonel House informed hereof marched with five hundred
Men to Poiuca to meet the Portuguese, who were scattered up and down the
neighboring Woods. He also published an Edict, in which every one was Licensed
to return to their Habitations, with promise of pardon for their Rebellion, if
they would take the Oath of Allegiance anew, onelv Viera, Cavalcantelca, and Da
Rouge, were excluded, and nine thousand Guilders promised to those that brought
them dead or alive, which made two hundred Inhabitants in Reciffa march into
the Country under the Command of Captain Blar, to find the forementioned
Traitors; and at last joining with House, they pursued the fled Portuguese.

Hoogenstraet ^^^t to Treat ^^ith Autonio Silva, is pri^^^ely tempted by him to
deliver up the ^ort St. Augustine.
In the mean time the Council sent the Captains Vander Voort and Hoogenstraet,
to Antonio Silva, Governor of St. Salvador, to acquaint him with the
treacherous In surrection of the Portuguese, and of Camaron and Diez coming
from St. Salvador to their assistance, urging, that these treacherous
Proceedings and breach of Oath, could not but redound to the dishonor of the
Crown of Portugal. Whereto Silva answered, That Camaron and Diez were not under
any Obligation of Oath, but that he would check the Insurrection in Pernambuco,
and take care that the Authors thereof should make Satisfaction to the
West India Company. Notwithstanding which fair Pretenses, he so wrought with
Hoogenstraet, that after a private Conference between them it was agreed, that
for a certain sum of Money he should surrender him the Promontory of St.
Augustine, of which he was Governor; but at his Return to Reciffa being made
chief Commander of the Castle there, and being jealous what might follow his
private Treating with Silva, he declared to the Council, that Silva had desired
him to surrender the Fort St. Augustine, which he had granted, for no other
end, but to catch the false Portuguese in their own Nets, and to trapan all
such as should be sent to take possession of it; and that if the Council had
any suspicion of him, they might make use of his Service in some other place.

About this time a hundred and fifty Tapuyans, led by a German Soldier call
Jacob Rabbi, Sallying out of their Woods, fell upon the great Village Conyahou,
under the Jurisdiction of Rio Grande, broke into the Church, murdered all the
Portuguese, and eating their raw Flesh, demolished the Place.

House also unfortunately Stormed the Mountain Santantan, where the Enemy lay
Entrenched, being forced to Retreat with the loss of above a hundred Men,
amongst whom was Captain Lo.

Grave Maurice his stately Palace demo^^h'd.
The Privy Council caused a part of Maurice-stadt to be pulled down, as also the
stately Palace Freyburgh, for which the Jews proffered Grave-Maurice 6000 l.
together with the stately Garden, which were thought to exceed the famous
Gardens in Thessalia; but on the other side they kept Men at work Night and Day
in repairing the decayed Castle at Reciffa.

Bonavides appears with a great Fleet ^^fore Reciffa, but pre^^^ds Friend^^p.
About the same time the Admiral Salvador Correo de Bonavides, brought thirty
four great Sail of Ships to an Anchor before Reciffa, the Gallion which he
Commanded carrying sixty Brass Guns. The Admiral Lichthart ran to meet him with
five Vessels, and sent him word, that if he fell down to Leeward, since he was
got to the Windward, he should soon find, that five Ships durst Engage with a
Fleet six times as strong. Whereupon Bonavides sent two Messengers to Lichthart
to tell him, that he came as a Friend to damp the Portuguese Insurrection in
Pernamhuco; to which purpose he had already Landed some Companies at Tamandera.
Lichthart sending the two Messengers to the Council at Reciffa, they sent two
of their own Members view of Suriname SERINHAIM
PONTA TAMANDEI^
The Names of the Ships both of the Dutch and Portuguese Fleet.
A. The Portuguese Amiral. B. Their Vice Admiral. C. The rest of their Ships.
D. Three of their Barques. E. Three Carvels, which lay to watch in the Bay. F.
The Enemy's Battery. G. The Utrecht, being the Dutch Admiral. H. The Ter Veer.
I. The Zealand Vice Admiral. K. The Over-Ysel. L. Salt Land Pink. M. The Folden
Deer Faigat. N 0. The Leyden Pink, and Unicorn Frigate. P Q. A Dogger and three
Netherland Barques.


bers to Bonavides, desiring to know of him what called him thither with so
great a Fleet, and without giving the least notice, contrary to the concluded
Peace of ten years?

Whilst the two Commissioners went with the forementioned Orders to the
Portuguese Fleet, a Netherland Vessel endeavored, notwithstanding the Wind was
contrary, to get out to Lichthart's assistance; which Banavides observing,
stood away Northerly before the Wind: but Lichthart overtook a Ketch belonging
to the Portuguese Fleet.

Serinhain, taken by Vidal and others.
Mean while the Portuguese upon Land being two thousand strong, under the
Command of Vidal, Diez, Camaron, and Acoignes, Stormed the Fort Serinhain,
where the French Captain Montagne could make but little resistance, not having
above forty Men, and being unprovided of Ammunition and Provision; yet he
refisted nine days, and at last got two Barques to convey him to Reciffa.

Soon after this the Portuguese Fleet falling out amongst themselves, Bonavides
Steered back for Lisbon with a few Ships, the rest coming to an Anchor again
near Reciffa; where the Seamen whom Lichthart had taken informed him, that
their Fleet came the first time to Reciffa for no other end, but to stir up the
Portuguese by their Presence to take up Arms, according to a private Contract,
having to that purpose Landed twelve hundred Men at Tamandera, besides the Army
led by Camaron and Diez from St. Salvador to Pernambuco.

Colonel House about this time being sent for back to Reciffa, and staying with
five hundred Men for Captain Blaek's coming, who was sent to fetch all the
Portuguese Women within three Leagues about Reciffa, was set upon in the Night
by Vidal with two thousand Portugueses; the Brasilians, who were above half his
Forces, flying into the Woods, leaving only two hundred Netherlanders to fight
with Vidal, by whom being so much overpowered, they were forced to submit to
his mercy, and suffer themselves to be all carried Prisoners to St. Salvador.

By this time at Reciffa all things were in a confusion, the Pits dug about
Maurice-stadt afforded nothing but brackish Water, which occasioned Sickness.

The Fort St. Augustine treacherously surrendered by Hoogenstraet to the
Portuguese.
Vidal encourag' d by his Victory, marched to St. Augustine, where without
doubt he had stopped, if Hoogenstraet, who had the chief Command of the Fort, had
not been Disloyal; for this Traitor thought it not enough to surrender this
invincible Fort to the Enemy, but also bereaved Reciffa of Provisions and
Ammunition, which he did very subtly, sending earnestly thither for
Soldiers, Bullets, Powder and Shot, in lieu whereof he sent thither two
Barques full of old Men, Women and Children, that so he might deprive Reciffa
of stout Men, and supply their room with unable People. For this treacherous
and villainous Act the Portuguese were to give him 1800 l. and make him a
Colonel: Moreover, all the Soldiers in Garrison, consisting of three hundred
Men, received 3 l. a Man, and were sent to join with a Regiment of six hundred
and fifty Men, over which Hoogenstraet was made chief Commander.

Lichthart gains a noble Victory over the Portuguese Fleet.
The day before this eminent Castle was to be delivered up to the Enemy, Admiral
Lichthart obtained a brave Victory at Sea; for the Portuguese Fleet (consisting
of seventeen Sail, the rest being gone with Bonavides to Portugal) anchoring
before Tamandera, were valiantly set upon by Lichthart, who Engaged with them
on the ninth of September 1645. with the Utrecht, being the Admiral Ship, the
Zealand, Ter Veer, Over-Ysel, the Pinks Salt-Land and Leyden, a Dogger and
three Barques. In the Hole of the Haven Tamandera three Portuguese Carvels kept
Watch, and near a Battery full of Guns lay three Barques, and the other Ships a
little farther nigh the Shore. The Enemy at first shot very fiercely from the
Battery, whilst the Ships drove to the Shore, and the Men leaping overboard
swam ashore, only the Admiral Jeronymo Serao de Payva made some resistance,
but at last surrendered up his Ship, the Netherlanders in their Barques killing
above seven hundred Portugueses in the Water. Lichthart burnt the whole Fleet,
except the Admiral and Vice Admiral, which he carried to Reciffa.

But this Victory was not comparable to the Loss which the East India Company
sustained by the selling of the Promontory of St. Augustine, and the taking of
the Forts Porto Calvo and Rio Francisco; to the last whereof the Barques coming
too late to carry the Soldiers off, they were all made Prisoners by the
Portuguese, as also the Planters, in all to the number of five hundred.

Vidal marching to Tamarica, Stormed Schuppen-stadt, but found such resistance
from George Garstman (who supplied the Prisoner House his Place) that he lost
three hundred Men: Bouilloux put to Death by the Governor of Prayba.
After which he endeavored by means of Fernandes Bouilloux, to purchase the
Fort Margareta for 1500 l. Sterling. of the Governor of Parayba, who immediately
without any farther Examination, caused Bouilloux that proffered the Money to
be put to death.

A Dutch Sergeant in Olinda dealt very treacherously; for he sold the Fort to a
Portuguese Ensign for 100 l. and also most basely betrayed all his Soldiers
Lives to the merciliess Enemy.

The distressed Condition of Reciffa.
By these means Reciffa was round about in jeopardy, as also within; for the
great Thirst of the Inhabitants under a scorching Climate, augmented by the
Hollanders salt Meat, could not be quenched with brackish Water, for fresh was
not to be had; Famine also increased daily, insomuch that the Poor threatened to
fall upon the Rich, which made the Magistrates go Armed from House to House, to
enquire what Store every one had, which being writ down was carried away and
put into the Storehouses, where each received alike share, without respect of
Persons. Fuel also grew very scarce, which made many eat their Meat raw, or
half dressed. In the interim every one that was able, was forced to work at the
Forts of Reciffa, which were beaten down by the Rains; and the Soldiers
continually alarmed by the Enemy, were forced to be Night and Day up in Arms.
The People died more and more daily, when two Fly-Boats arrived there with
Provisions, and News, that a Fleet was coming to their assistance.

The Captains Rhynbag and Montagne went in the Night, each with a Company, to
fall upon the Enemy, who being two thousand five hundred strong, drove them
back, and pursued them within shot of the Afogados, where forty Portugueses
were killed.

About the same time a Terra Neuf Sailor, laden with the dried Fish Bocraillo,
came to Reciffa.

In Parayba three hundred Netherlanders Sallying out of the Forts, fell so
valiantly upon nine hundred Portugueses, that they forced them to fly, not
without a considerable loss. After which a Party of Brasilians surprised eighty
Portugueses, as they were at Mass in Andreas Diez de la Figuereda's
Sugar-Mills, where they spared none but Figuereda's Daughter, whose Beauty so
charmed them, that they comforted her mourning for her Father's Death, and
delivered her undefiled to the Governor of Parayba.

The barbrous Cruelty of Vidal.
Vidal raging for madness because now and then some of his Prisoners escaped,
caused several of them to be cruelly murdered, tying some of them Back to Back,
and then cutting them in pieces; others he threw with Stones tied about their
Necks into the Rivers; others he tied by their Privities, and hung them upon
Trees; and also knocked out the Brains of others.

The Soldiers at Reciffa mutiny for want of Provision.
In Reciffa the Soldiers, consisting of diverse Nations, began likewise to mutiny
crying, They should be all starved; and saying, They had better be slain in the
Field fighting against the Enemy, than die of Hunger in the City. They also
complained, The Commissioners themselves betray Brasile; and threatened by force
to fetch the Provisions out of the public Stores, saying, They had long enough
endured Thirst and Hunger.

These Transactions in Brasile were very ill resented in Holland, the common
People in the Hague being ready to pull down the Portuguese Ambassador's House,
in revenge of the Cruelties exercised upon the Netherlanders in Brasile, had
they not been hindered by the Prudence of Prince Henrick. The Ambassador
pretending to be ignorant of the forementioned Passages, proffered to make
what Satisfaction the West India Company should require. But the States not
satisfied with Excuses, when the Actions plainly manifested what their
Intentions were, Complained to the French King of the unthankful and malicious
Dealings of the Portuguese Crown; and meeting but with small Redress, A new
Fleet sent by the States to Brasile.
they prepared to right themselves by force of Arms, and to that end raised
several Regiments of Land-Soldiers, besides Seamen, to send to Brasile. The
Fleet designed thither, consisting of twenty two Sail, after it had been frozen
up before Flushing three Months, set Sail at last in the beginning of
February, Anno 1646. with the Lord Schonenburgh, a Member of the States, the
Councellor Goch, The Dutch Fleet set out for Brasile.
Treasurer Beaumond, Men very well experienced in Governing of Countries: To
these were added the eminent Merchants of Amsterdam, Haeks and Trovire, to keep
the West India Companies Accounts, and Le Heremiet for their Secretary.
Sigismond Schuppe bore the chief Command over the Militia, and the Admiral
Bankert over the Fleet, which suffered the greatest hardship imaginable; for
being driven by tempestuous Winds into the Downs, two of them driving from
their Anchors were call away on the Flats. The Fleet getting out again, was
once more forced by a Storm to put in at the Isle of Wight; from whence by
reason of continual Gusts they could not stir in nine Weeks time. During this
tedious waiting for a fair Wind, the Brasile Frigate, valued at 20000 l. was
split in pieces against a Rock of the Island, and of three hundred Men thirty
only were saved. A Pink, which came in two Months from Reciffa, brought also
sad tidings to the Fleet, viz. That the Town was in such a Condition, that
without doubt the Fleet would come too late to their assistance: whereupon they
making the more haste, endeavored, not without great trouble, to weigh Anchor
again, whilst the Wind rose higher and higher, and the Waves going very
hollow, drove the Ships down toward Portland Coast, full of Rocks, to which
they were so near, that they saw a Scotchman split in pieces against them; and
had not the Wind come about, and abated of its fury, the Fleet had undoubtedly
perished. No sooner was this Danger past, but another succeeded; for the
Soldiers in the Admirals Ship complaining of the small allowance they had of
Cheese, Brandy, and Tobacco, had made themselves Masters of the Store-room, and
threatened to kill the Lords Goch and Beaumond; but they, assisted with Men from
the other Ships, who came in at the Cabin Windows, so ordered the Mutineers,
that they asked forgiveness, which for many Reasons was granted, only they
were distributed by seven in a Ship throughout the whole Fleet. After a great
Contest between Goch and Beaumond about carrying the Flag, which could not be
decided, Goch was left by the rest of the Fleet, who Steered another Course,
and getting near the Line, lay becalmed six days; in which time he lost very
many of his Men by a strange kind of Scorbute which raged amongst them; at last
Sailing along the Promontory of St. Augustine, he came to an Anchor before
Reciffa, which he found in the greatest Exigency imaginable, insomuch that it
was resolved upon, the next day to surrender the Place up to the Portuguese, on
promise of Quarter only: which Resolution none opposed more than the Jews; for
the Portuguese swore that they would burn them alive, if ever they became
Masters of Reciffa, which made them resolve to die with the Sword in their
Hands, and sell their Lives at a dear rate. Six Weeks after Gochs Arrival, the
remaining part of the Fleet, escaping many dreadful Storms, in which, besides
the two that were lost in the Downs, they lost five Ships and five hundred Men,
arrived also at Reciffa; where the Commissioners appointed Officers to
distribute to every one their certain allowance of Victuals. The prime
Councellor Schonenburgh also decided the Difference between Beaumond and Goch,
as also between Haeks and Trovire, about their Places in the Assembly, viz.
that they should sit above one another by Turns. The old Governors, Hamel,
Bassi, and Bullestraet, were blamed by every one for the decay of Brasile; and
being sent to Holland, were received with frowning Looks, and railed against in
Pamphlets as faithless Persons, who sought nothing but their own advantage, and
were threatened to be called to an Account. It was also laid to their charge,
that they had not given a true Account of the State and Condition of Brasile;
that the State was much more decayed than they had made known, by which means
the present Power proved too weak to do any thing to the Enemy.

Garstman ^^'d and Disgraced upon King Dary's Complaint.
Amongst other Misfortunes which befell the West India Company, the Revolt of
the Tapuyans and other Brasilians was not the least, which happened upon the
occasion of Garstman's putting to Death of Jacob Rabbi, a German, and indeed
their chief Ringleader in all Robberies and Villainies; but Dary their then King
alleging that Rabbi was wrongfully Executed by Garstman, and that his Trial
belonged to him as King, prosecuted Garstman so vigorously, that he and his
Ensign Jacob Boulan, his Accessory in the Fact, had their Goods and Salary
confiscated, and they themselves were sent home in disgrace.

The Portuguese Invitation prevails above the Netherlanders
Mean while the Council seeing that there was not much good to be done by force
of Arms, endeavored by mild ways to invite the revolted Portugueses, who were
all promised Pardon for their Insurrection in an Edict which was published in
all places, only Viera, Almado, De Rouche, Antonio Calvantelca, and
Hoogenstraet, for whom great sums of Money were offered, were excepted. The
Portuguese on the contrary published, That they would receive all those
Netherlanders into favor that would come over to them, and pay the Debts which
they owed to the West India Company, and also Transport them whither they
pleased. These Promises, written in English, Dutch, French, and Portuguese, and
hung every where on the Boughs of Trees, and other public Places, operated
much more than the Privy-Councils Edicts; for in stead of one Portuguese that
came to them, several ran to the Portuguese from Reciffa, notwithstanding a
strict Guard was kept to prevent them, besides the great mortality amongst the
Soldiers and Inhabitants through several raging Distempers, and want of fresh
Provisions: Which general Calamity, it seems, very much cowed the Spirits of
those that were left; for in a Sally meeting with five hundred Portugueses,
notwithstanding they were equal in number, yet they made a shameful Retreat;
yea, though Schuppe came with eight hundred Men to their assistance, yet he
could not prevail with them to face about either by fair means or foul, for
with his own hand he Ran-through an Ensign, Sergeant, and two Soldier, who ran
away first. Yet notwithstanding this base and cowardly Retreat, it was resolved
on to set upon Olinda and the Promontory St. Augustine; and at the same time
Hinderson was sent to make himself Master of Rio Francisco with fifteen hundred
Men, and to harrase all the Country thereabouts with Fire and Sword, that so
he might force the Portuguese to leave Reciffa.

Revolt of the Tapuyans.
Though John Dary, King of the Tapuyans, seemed well enough contented with the
punishment of Garstman, yet a great Party of his Subjects were not satisfied,
but went and joined with the Portuguese, because Garstman had not been
delivered to them in Siara, where they killed all the Netherlanders they could
meet with, and sent Presents to their King Dary, if possible, to oblige him to
join with the Portuguese: But he replied, That he had more reason to punish
them for their ill usage of the Inhabitants in Siara, than to have any thing to
do with the Portuguese.

The Council informed hereof, sent the Interpreter Ralph Baron, who had a long
time Conversed with the Tapuyans, with a Present of Axes, Knives,
Looking-glasses, Shirts, Combs, and the like Trifles, to King Dary, desiring
him to continue his former kindness toward the Hollanders; which Dary
promised, provided he might receive Assistance from Reciffa against those whom
he had made his Enemies for the Netherlanders sake; which Baron promised should
be done as soon as the fresh Forces which were daily expected from the Texel,
Maes, and Zealand, came to Brasile.

The Fort of Rio Grande taken by Hinderson.
Hinderson Landing at Rio Grande, took the Fort without firing a Gun, the
Portuguese at his first coming flying into the Woods. He found here abundance
of Cattle; for no place in the World breeds more than this, several Husbandmen
having fifteen thousand Head of Beasts, of which many were taken to supply the
want of Provisions. at Reciffa. As soon as he had taken the Fort, he caused it
to be pulled down to the Ground, because it stood in an inconvenient place, and
immediately raised another, which was much better to be defended, by reason of
the rising Ground; but he could neither bring that Work, nor any other Design
to any perfection, because of the treachery of his Soldiers, who being most of
them Roman Catholics, were so inclined to the Portuguese Interest, that they
daily more and more deserted the Companies Service, and gave Intelligence to
the Enemy of their Transactions. Amongst others, an Antwerper was apprehended
for an Intelligencer, and being Hanged on a Gibbet, fell three times one after
another on his Feet, the Halter breaking like a burnt Thread, which gave him so
many times of respit and opportunity of supplicating for Life; but his Crime
was too heinous to admit of Pardon. Mean while the fled Portugueses being
supplied with fresh Supplies from all Places, especially from St. Salvador, to
the number of twelve hundred Men, they kiil'd the Out-watches, consisting of
twenty Men: The next Sentinel being warned by the noise, alarmed the new Fort,
which was scarce finished, because a mighty Shower of Rain had washed away the
Walls. Capt. Montague overpowered by the Enemy, and slain.
Hinderson being wounded in the Leg, sent Captain Montagne against the Enemy,
of whose Power he was sensible; yet going to the place where the Watch that was
killed had kept their Station, he met with two hundred Portugueses, divided
into three Companies, and drawn out for Battle, who running away were pursued
by Montagne, till coming up to their Regimeat, which consisted in all of a
thousand Men, divided into five Companies, they fell on all sides upon
Montagne, who fighting valiantly, was overpowered and killed, with three
hundred of his Men, and almost as many more taken Prisoners; amongst whom was
the Minister Astette, four hundred only escaping into the Fort, where
Hinderson stayed expecting the event of Montagne's Exploits.

This Defeat spoiled Schuppe's Design, who by his marching to Rio Francisco
thought to draw the Enemy from Reciffa; but now being forced to think of some
other way, he thought it convenient to invade St. Salvador by Sea, as the Enemy
had done Reciffa by Land. Wherefore Hinderson received order to stay with six
hundred Men (being all that were left of fifteen hundred,) on Rio Grande,
whither a Barque with Provisions being sent, was taken, and the Men in cool
Blood kiil'd by the Portuguese.

At the same time it was given out, that Schuppe was going with the Admiral
Bankert to Hinderson's assistance; and to delude the Portuguese the more,
Schuppe went with two thousand five hundred Men to Rio Francisco, where he lay
some days at an Anchor, upon which the Governor of St. Salvador sending several
Companies thither, Schuppe's Victory on the Island Taperica.
Schuppe Sailed with all speed to St. Salvador, and Landing on the Island
Taperica, four Leagues in circumference, he got a rich Booty, and spared none
whome're he met with, insomuch that two thousand were destroyed, some by the
Sword upon the place, others by their haste to get over to St. Salvador; for
most of the Vessels being too full, sunk with them. Amongst the Prisoners that
were taken and sent to Reciffa, were two Monks, who were designed the same
Entertainment as the Minister Astette should receive in St. Salvador; whereupon
they immediately wrote to their Fraternity, to take care that Astette should
not be burnt alive, as the Portuguese had threatened, because they were to
expect the same usage: whereupon Astette was set at liberty, and had leave to
walk up and down the Streets of St. Salvador. Schuppe fortified himself on
Taperica, near an Inlet under the new Works, and together with Lichthart
watched for all Portuguese Vessels: Lichthart's Death.
But Lichthart dying here, was carried to Reciffa, and there buried. On the
other side, the Governor of St. Salvador sent fifteen hundred Men in the Night
to the other side of Taperica, where with all speed they Entrenched themselves,
and Sallied daily out of their Works upon Schuppe, so that many Men were lost
on both sides; but Schuppe was in the worst Condition, in regard his Soldiers
ran over in great numbers to St. Salvador, where they were well Entertained; of
which he advertised the Privy Council, who were the less able to give him
Redress, as having the same cause of Complaint.

A pitiful Example of a young Soldiers Execution.
Amongst others there happened a sad Accident of a young Soldier, scarce sixteen
years old, and born at Roan, who having robbed his Father's Cash, went in a
Ship to Holland; where he lavishly spending the Money, was forced at last to
List himself in the West India Companies Service, and coming with the
forementioned Fleet to Reciffa, endeavored with two Companies to run to the
Portuguese; but overtaken, was Tried for the Fact, and Condemned to be Hanged,
for none of his Excuses which he made, of going over the River only to fetch
some Oranges and Lemmons to refresh himself, would save him, nor his protesting
that he had no intention of going to the Enemy, nor the Promise that his Father
should release him for ten thousand Crowns, nor his Minority, which ought
chiefly to have been considered, but that Necessity stopped the Ears of the
Compassionate; so that his Execution drew pity from the Beholders a few Weeks
after.

A notable Passage of a Portuguese, Executed for Treason.
A very astonishing Passage happened at Reciffa upon another Sentence of Death
pronounced against a Portuguese, who after the publication of the Act of Pardon
came to Reciffa, and there hired a Seaman for two hundred Crowns, to carry a
Letter, made up in a Leaden Box, to the Governor of the Promontory of St.
Augustine, with order that if he was set upon any where, he should throw the
Box into the Water. The Letter written in strange Characters, contained a
Declaration of the small number of Men in Reciffa, most of the Netherlanders
Forces lying on the Island Taperica, so that if Reciffa were Stormed along the
Bank, and from Mauricestadt, it might easily be taken. This Letter being
intercepted, the Portuguese was taken and Condemned, and as he was carrying to
the Place of Execution cried aloud, You People take delight in my Death, but
you shall be interrupted; and indeed it happened accordingly: for when the
Executioner began to scorch the half-strangled Criminal with Straw, there
sprung up a strange Spirit of Contention amongst the Spectators, who began to
justle and strike one another; and soon after a Whirlwind rose in the midst of
the Marketplace, which in a moment caused them all to stagger like drunken
People, their Hats and Caps were blown up into the Air, the whole multitude
tumbling confusedly on the Ground, the Armed Soldiers flying to the next
Houses, and the Executioner falling down in a Trance from the Scaffold: A full
quarter of an hour this Confusion had lasted, when the People came to
themselves again, and the Hangman returned to his Business, cutting off the
Portuguese's Nose, Ears, Privy-Members, and tearing out his Heart, which he
threw to two Dogs, who devoured the same; then dividing the Body into Quarters,
which were set up at the four Corners of the City for an Example.

The same Punishment received a Mulatto, who endeavored to fire two of the
Hollanders best Ships in the Haven.

Notwithstanding these Punishments, the Soldiers ran away daily; the blame
whereof might justly be laid on the Magistrates, who took no notice of the
Soldiers just Complaints of their Officers, cheating them of a third part of
their Provision, and inflicting severe Punishments upon them as Mutineers, when
they had real cause of Complaint.

Schuppe was at the same time shrewdly put to it for want of Men, who either
died of the then reigning Disease, or ran away to the Enemy; so that he was
forced to leave the Island Taperica, and enclose himself within his new raised
Sconce.

Admiral Bankert gains a great Victory over the Portuguese Fleet.
The Admiral Bankert had better success; for Cruising up and down before the
Inlet Todos los Sanctos, after the taking and sinking of several Ships as they
came in his way, he at last set upon the Portuguese Fleet, consisting of seven
great Ships, of which one got to St. Salvador, another was sunk, and the other
five were taken, being valued at twenty Tuns of Gold, or 200000 l. Sterling. In
this Engagement were killed above four hundred Portugueses, besides two hundred
and fifty who were taken Prisoners, and sent Shackled to Reciffa. Amongst them
was the new Viceroy of Brasile, the Admiral, Vice Admiral, three Monks, and
several other Persons of note.

Marshal House arrives at Reciffa with a fresh Supply.
This Victory began to give some Breath to Reciffa, when at the same time
Marshal House arrived there with seven Ships, Manned with five hundred Soldiers.
This House on the seventeenth of August, Anno 1645. had been taken Prisoner at
the Engenho, having fought so long till all his Powder was spent, so that he
was forced to surrender himself upon promise of Quarter to Vidal, who after he
had taken an Oath upon the Bible, to spare the Lives of all the Hollanders and
Brasilians, fell upon the Brasilians and slew them, being a hundred in all, in
Cold-blood, who yet sold their Lives at no easy rate. Being carried Prisoner,
together with Captain Bristow, Listry, Wildschut, Blar, and two hundred more,
by Viera to Casa de Prugar, he was thence sent to Portugal, where being
released, be brought News to the States of the mean Condition of the West India
Company, and that all things must needs be lost, if they did not speedily take
the Business into Consideration: Whereupon he was furnished with a Supply of
Ships and Men, with which he set Sail for Brasile; where being arrived, most
part of the Soldiers he brought with him were Transported to Taperica, to
assist Schuppe; who as soon as they came to him, marched into the Country;
where being set upon by a thousand Portugueses, he lost sixty Men.

Soon after Hoogenstraet receiving Orders from the Governor of St. Salvador,
who was informed by some Prisoners, that Schuppe had not above twelve hundred
fighting Men, to fall upon him with three thousand, made a furious Assault upon
the Sconce in two places, and Storming the same for two hours together, lost
four hundred Men, which made him draw off a little before Daybreak.

In the interim nine Privateers, fitted out by several Merchants of Holland and
Zealand, came to Cruise up and down before the Coast of Brasile; which the
States the rather allowed of, because the West India Company was not able to
send any more Supplies thither: Nor was it long ere they took five Portuguese
Prizes, and afterward (joining with Bankert) four more laden full of Sugar, in
the Haven Todos los Sanctos, where they threw a hundred and twenty Portuguese,
and fifty revolted Hollanders overboard.

Reciffa being at that time reduced to very great straits, earnestly implored
Aid from the States, but to little purpose, by reason of the Differences
amongst themselves, which happened upon this occasion: The Spanish King by his
Agent in the Hague made Overtures of Peace, and proffered to fall upon the
Portuguese in Brasile: to which Proposition, when as the rest of the States
seemed inclinable, those of Zealand would no ways hearken, being resolved to
have nothing to do with Spain. The Council of Reciffa sent over Messengers to
represent the sad condition of the Place.
The news of this Dissension exceedingly perplexed the Council at Reciffa,
especially when to that news was added, that Bankert, the only terror to the
Enemy at Sea, was Commanded home by the States of Zealand, which yet the
General States strictly forbad. Whereupon they thought fit to send one of their
Assembly to the Hague, to make the States acquainted with the miserable
Condition of Brasile, and to Expostulate with them for their insensibility of
their Condition, and to let them understand, that ten thousand Men would not
restore Brasile to its former Condition: Every one strove to be the Messenger
of these sad tidings, but especially their President Schonenbergh wished it
might be his lot to leave the unhappy Country of Brasile; but because his
departure would not have been without great murmuring of the People, Haeks was
sent in his stead. Together with him went Hinderson (who was in no esteem since
the Destruction on Rio Grande;) they both Embarked on Bankert's Ship and five
others, which in stead of being laden with rich Commodities, and ballasted with
Sugar, as heretofore, were fraught with discontented Seamen, decrepid and sick
Soldiers, unserviceable Jews, poor Travelers, Portuguese, Prisoners, and only
ten Weeks Provisions, whereas all other Vessels at their Return from Brasile
used to have Provision for three Months, which at this time could not be
spared. The Council also made Orders what Persons should go with the
forementioned Ships, viz. None but those whose Names were written in the Lists
which had stuck six Weeks at every Church Door, that by that means no Creditor
might suffer by his Debtors going away, nor any Criminal escape his deserved
punishament. Bankert had scarce been a Week at Sea, when he died of the Palsy:
Bankert's Death and Character.
he was a Man, who for his valiant Exploits was from a Foremast Man preferred
to be Captain; which Office he performed with great Prudence and Valor: but
that which first made him most eminently taken notice of, was his Engaging with
thirteen Dunkirkers, of which he sunk three, and being boarded by three more,
and fired at by the rest, he refused to surrrender his Ship on promise of
Quarter, but placed his eldest Son with a lighted Match in the Powder-room,
commanding him on pain of Death to blow up the Ship with the three Dunkirkers
as soon as he gave the Word; which valorous Resolution so amazed the Enemy,
that they let him go. He also behaved himself bravely in the Downs against the
Spanish Admiral Oquendo. His two Sons that were present when he gave up the
Ghost, would not have his Body thrown overboard, notwithstanding it stunk so
intolerably, that all the Provisions in the Ship were tainted by it; therefore
taking out his Entrails, they Salted the Body, wrapped it up in four Sail-cloths,
and nailing the same up in a pitchy Chest, buried it under the Ballast. Mean
while the Fleet approaching the Flemmish Isles, was surprised by a terrible
Storm, in which the Vice-Admiral's old Ship split asunder, but most of the
People were saved. Between Calice and Dover they met with eight Ostenders,
against whom they made themselves ready to Fight; but they, according to the
King of Spain's Order, instead of Hostility showed them Friendship. All their
Provisions were spent, when they happily Anchored before Flushing, where
Bankert's Body was Interred with great Solemnity.

In the interim the United Netherlands had fitted out another Fleet to assist
Reciffa, the West India Company having first demanded of the King of Portugal
two hundred and eighty Tuns of Gold, to the value of which they affirmed
themselves to have been damaged by the Insurrection of the Portuguese. On the
other side, the King of Portugal was in a quandary about the Business of
Brasile; for first, he had no other thoughts but that Brasile would have fallen
into his hands within the space of three Months, because the Plot there was so
subtly laid; neither did he think the States would have concerned themselves
with the West India Companies Business, which now it was manifest they did.
Besides this, there was a third Inconvenience, viz. that the Spanish Crown
endeavored to conclude a Peace with the United Netherlands; Overtures of Peace
from the Portuguese resus'd by the Netherlands.
wherefore that he might put a stop to the sending of the Fleet to Brasile, he
dealt with the French Ambassador to make very advantageous Proffers in his
behalf, viz. That he would surrender all the conquered Places, and make good
all the Damages that had been sustained thereby. The Fleet appointed to go to
Brasile was hereupon stopped, till the States had Consulted about an Answer on
the forementioned Propositions; but when Haeks brought news of the falsehood of
the Portuguese, the Scale was immediately turned, insomuch that the Portuguese
Ambassador went in danger of his Life, till the Mutineers were put into
Custody. Moreover the Fleet was ordered to Sail with all speed possible to
Reciffa, with promise that another Fleet should soon follow with six thousand
Men; but the many disconsolate tidings that had been brought of late, of the
hardships and sufferings of those that went before, through the unwholsomness
of the Climate, the want of Provisions, the Strength and Cruelty of the Enemy,
made the Seamen and Soldiers very unwilling to go so fatal a Voyage, insomuch
that as many as could, made their escape: yet at last, on the last day of
December, Anno 1647. the Fleet set Sail under the Command of Corneliszoon de
Wit; some Weeks before which Schuppe was forced to desert the Island Taperica,
to go and aid Reciffa, which the Portuguese from a raised Battery on the other
side of the River Biberibi shot at so incessantly, that none were safe either
in their Houses or in the Streets.

Mean while the Portuguese Agent, Francisco de Sousa Continho, proffered the
States to go to Brasile himself, and cause to be restored all those Places
which had been taken from the West India Company, particularly the City St.
Salvador and Tercera, besides Reparation for all other Damages.

Grave Maurice his high Demands.
At the same time Grave Maurice was Treated with to go to Brasile again, but his
Demands were so high, that it came to nothing; for he required 4000 l. yearly
to spend at his Table, and 5000 l. besides during his Life; also 2000 l. to set
him out, and twelve thousand Men to Besiege St. Salvador, which was always
guarded by four thousand, and thirty Carvels lay ready before Lisbon to carry
four thousand more thither.

Angola and Loando taken by the Portuguese.
All things went very ill on the Hollanders side at this present; for besides
that the forementioned Fleet had not its wished success, most of the Men being
destroyed by the immoderate Heat of the Climate, Angola and Loando were also
taken by the Portuguese.

These Misfortunes made the West India Company begin to be very forward to come
to a Treaty with the Portuguese Agent, who before seemed rather to court them,
having offered to Engage for the restoration of whatever they possessed at that
time, when the ten years Peace was concluded; but when they came to insist upon
that Point, he answered, That he must expect new Orders from Lisbon concerning
Loando, because the taking of that Place caused an alteration in the state of
Affairs. But the States no way satisfied with Delays, that were like to prove
both hurtful and disgraceful, resolved to put into Execution what they had
before agreed upon, viz. The East India Company was empowered to make Prize of
all Portuguese Ships toward the payment of the fifteen Tuns of Gold ordained
for the West India Company, to help them against the Portuguese Oppression. The
West India Company also received Commissions to Cruise for Portuguese Vessels
before Brasile.

Schuppe and Coche miserably defeated as they were Besieging Gararapes.
On the seventeenth of February, Anno 1649. three thousand Soldiers that came
over in the forementioned Fleet, besides two hundred Negro's, and as many
Seamen, marching to Besiege Gararapes under the Command of Schuppe and Coche,
were so furiously set upon by the Sallying Enemy, that they were forced to
break up the Siege in great disorder, whilst the Portuguese being in number
two thousand five hundred, fell upon the Rere; and though the Dutch Officers
used all the care they could possible to bring their Men to face about, yet
they were not able to keep them from running away; in which flight great
slaughter of them was made by the Portuguese Horse, consisting of a hundred and
thirty, Armed with Lances, insomuch that in the flight and the pursuit, a
thousand Netherlanders were slain, and nineteen Ensigns or Colors were left
behind as Trophies for the Portuguese; the chief of the Slain were Colonel
Brink and Houteryve.

The Zealanders were much concerned at the improsperous Affairs of Brasile, in
regard a fifth part of the West India Companies Stock belonged to Middleburg,
Flushing, and Veer, insomuch that the Complaints of Widows and Orphans that
shared in the common loss, moved the States to fit out six great Ships, and as
many Ketches, Manned with two thousand eight hundred Men, for Brasile, where
all things ran to ruin, the Grandees both of the Council, Army, and Fleet,
being at variance, and impeaching one another.

The rest of the Provinces, especially Friesland, being less inclined to the
West India Company, were somewhat colder in the pursuit of this Business;
nevertheless, upon a fresh Letter of Complaint from Walter Schonenbergh,
President of the Brasilian Council, they held a Consultation together, how to
raise Moneys for the fitting out of twenty Ships and five Ketches for the
Relief of Brasile.

The Admiral De Wit returning home, was, upon the accusation of the Council in
Brasile, and the General, Sigismond Schuppe, made Prisoner in the Hague; and
together with him the other five Captains that went with him were Committed by
the Admiralty, for returning without the Consent of the Council; but they were
soon released by the Magistrates of Amsterdam, who upon the Admiralties
refusing to deliver them, commanded their Provost-Marshal to break open their
Prison Doors. De Wit released from Prison, justifies his Return.
De Wit after his Releasement justified what he had done before a full Assembly
of the States, and alleged that it was according to the Orders he received
when he undertook this Expedition.

The Portuguese Agent, Sousa Macede, obtaining Audience of the States, told
them how ready the King his Master had been to come to a perfect Agreement of
Peace with them, but that their own Acts of Hostility had been the occasion of
the breach of that Treaty of Peace that had been concluded on; that the
Robberies and Insolences committed by those Portugueses under their
Jurisdiction, was not any way authorized or countenanced by him; lastly, he
offered them free Trade to Brasile, eighty Tun of Gold to the West India
Company, 800000 l. to the Orphans and Widows in Zealand, and payment of all
private Debts. But making no mention of restoring the Places in Brasile, he
seemed to mock the States; who resented it so much, that they would admit of no
farther Conference with him.

Mean while the West India Companies Business in Brasile went daily more and
more to ruin, insomuch that in the Year 1654. they lost all their Forts and
Places of Strength and Habitation, and amongst them Reciffa, the chief
Residence of the Council of Brasile, Schuppe, Haeks, and Schonenbergh, declare
the Reasons of the loss of Reciffa.
who returning home, brought nothing but a doleful Relation of their
unfortunate Proceedings. Schuppe, Haeks, and Schonenbergh, made each of them a
long Oration, setting forth the sad Condition of the Place, and the Miseries
they had endured a long time before they left it; also excusing their total
quitting thereof to the Enemy by the great want of Provisions and other
Supplies, which they so often had written for in vain, at least received short
of what their Necessities required, and by the Clamours of the Soldiers, who
were ready upon all occasions to Mutiny or Revolt, as appeared by their crying
out upon the discovery of a Fleet of Portuguese upon the Coast, Behold our
Deliverers from the Netherlanders Tyranny; lastly, by the growing Power of
their Enemies, which they could not have resisted, though they themselves had
been much stronger than they were.

But the West India Company sensibly touched at the thoughts of their Losses,
were not satisfied with the Relation of Schonenbergh, Haeks, and Schuppe, but
required a Journal of every days Transactions, or Testimonies to confirm the
truth of their Relation: They also demanded an Account of the Condition of the
Storehouses when Reciffa was surrendered, and fell upon them with several
Interrogatories, viz. Why the Fort Afogados was forsaken? Why the Garrisons
were not drawn in from the North to Reciffa? Why they did not keep footing on
the Land, and guard those Places they had left when Reciffa was lost? Why they
made such ado for want of Provisions and Ammunition to dishearten the People?
Why the Money proffered by several Citizens was not taken? Why they did not
burn the Enemy's Fleet, since, according to the opinion of several, it might
easily have been done? How they could testify the Sedition of the Soldiers,
since none of their Commanders complained of it? Whether they used any Means to
encourage the Besieged? Who did, and who did not consent to the Surrender?
Whether no better Terms could have been made? They are tried at a Council of
War.
In fine, they prevailed with the States to secure Schonenbergh, Haeks, and
Schuppe, in their Houses, and on the ninth of September, Anno 1654. brought
them before a Council of War in the Hague, where the chief things objected
against them were, That the Portuguese had gotten by the Conquest of Reciffa,
above two hundred Brass Guns, most of them Demi-Culverins, and four hundred
Iron Guns, valued together at ten hundred thousand Rixdollars; That the
Storehouses were sufficiently stocked with Provision and Ammunition; That they
took care to secure their own Goods, but left what belonged to the West India
Company as a Prey to the Enemy.

Their Pleas.
Schuppe on his part alleged, that he could do nothing of himself, as being
under the Command of the Brasilian Council. Haeks and Schonenbergh pleaded the
want of Men, by reason of the many that daily dropped from them, either by Death
or Defection, to the Enemy, and those that remained, unsafe to be trusted, as
consisting of so many different Nations; also their being blocked up at the Sea
by the Portuguese Fleet, the great want of Ammunition, especially Instruments
of Fortification; lastly, the headstrong Resolutions of the Soldiers, to
deliver up the Place, whatever their Officers should determine to the contrary;
notwithstanding which, to show that it was not quitted upon disadvantageous
terms, they produced the Articles of Agreement upon which it was surrendered to
Francisco, Governor of Pernambuco. In conclusion, the Council of War passed
their Sentence on Schuppe, Schuppe condemn d at a Council of War to lose his
Salary.
viz. That he should lose all the Sallary that was due to him from the
West India Company since the twenty sixth of January 1654. when he Signed the
Agreement with Baretto for the delivering up of Reciffa.

Thus the Portuguese recovered full and absolute possession of Brasile, yet
notwithout fear of an afterclap of War; wherefore the Portuguese Agent, upon
condition of an absolute Peace to be concluded, proffered the States General in
the Hague, Satisfaction for the Damages which the West India Company had
sustained in Brasile, eighty Tun of Gold, a free Trade to Brasile, and payment
of the Debts due to them from several Portugueses in Brasile; but told them,
that to surrender them any Places there, was not in the power of the Portuguese
Crown. On the other side, the Spaniard proffered to assist them in the total
Conquest of Brasile, and to restore them those Places they formerly possessed,
as soon as they had subdued the Portuguese; to which the Zealanders began to
hearken, who being great Losers by the Portugueses Treachery, wished for
nothing more than Revenge; but Holland having a great Trade to Portugal, was
more inclined to Peace: Whereupon His Majesty of great Britain proffered
himself to be Mediator between the Portuguese Crown and the United Netherlands;
and accordingly on the sixth of August, Anno 1661. a Peace was concluded with
Portugal on these Terms:

Articles of Peace between Portugal and the United Netherlands.
I. That Portugal was to pay to the United Netherlands eighty Tun of Gold,
either in ready Money, Sugar, Tobacco, or Salt, or deduct the same out of the
Customs payable in the Portuguese Harbors. II. That the Guns on Reciffa were to
be restored to the West India Company. III. That the Salt-Trade at St. Uves and
other Places under the Portuguese Jurisdiction, whether in Africa or Brasile,
should be granted to the Netherlands, paying the Customs as the Portuguese do
themselves. IV. That the conquered Places gotten on both sides, should remain
in the hands of the present Possessors. V. That the King of Portugal should not
lay an Embargo on any Netherland Vessel, on any pretense whatsoever, though
they should carry all manner of Ammunition to his Enemies, provided it were not
out of any of the Portuguese Havens. VI. That no Netherlander should ever be
called before any Judge about any Difference in Religion, but should have
freedom thereof granted him, either in his House or Ship, and also a convenient
Burying-place. VII. That if any Difference should chance to arise between
Portugal and the Netherlands, they should not extend it to prejudice the Trade,
but every Merchant should be free to call in his Debts, and send Ships without
hinderance. VIII. That this present Agreement should not be broken by any
Misdemeanors acted by any Subjects, either in the East or West Indies, Who were
to be punished by their lawful Judges. IX. That the Havens belonging to both
Parties were to be free for either Men of War or Merchantmen. X. That the
Netherlanders Trading in Portugal, might go Armed, take Houses and
Storehouses. XI. That the Goods laden in an Enemy's Ship might he declared
free Prize. XII That the Portuguese in Brasile should pay their Debts which
they owed to the West India Company, or any other Person or Persons; to which
purpose three appointed Commissioners were to Sit at Lisbon, to hear and
determine the Causes that should be brought before them, and without the usual
Circumstances, pass their Sentence, which was to be Executed by a higher Power.
A few days after this Agreement was concluded, the Portuguese Ambassador,
Henrico Sousa Tovares, went for Lisbon, where he arrived on the last day of
September.

The States of Groningen and others, disapprove the Peace with Portugal, and
condemn Schulenbergh.
Not only Guelderland and Zealand, were much dissatisfied with this Agreement,
but also Groningen accused their Deputy Schulenbergh, that contrary to Orders
he had been too forward in concluding the Peace with Portugal, and that he had
consented to that which the States of Groningen had not permitted him; for they
resolved to make Peace on no other account, but that Portugal should pay the
eighty Tun of Gold in ready Money, and that in a short time; whenas on the
contrary, he had allowed of the payment in Merchandise, and that in a long
time. Wherefore the States of Groningen (who for this Fact and several
Accusations brought against Schulenbergh, condemned him to be Beheaded, which
Sentence had been Executed upon him, had he not made his Escape) together with
those of Omeland, and others, who disapproved of the Peace concluded with
Portugal, drew up many Reasons why they dissented, and looked upon it as both
dishonorable and disadvantageous; however, the Articles being Signed, and the
States General, taking into consideration how impossible a Work it would have
been to have gone about to renew a War with the Portuguese in Brasile, being at
that time in firm possession of all, and that for the Interest of a few, in
respect of the whole Commonwealth, they were forced to rest satisfied, and
together with the West India Company, to sit down with the loss of those Places
in Brasile, which had cost so much Blood and Treasure to gain.

The West India Companies Memorial delivered in to the States.
Nevertheless the West India Company put in a Memorial at the Hague, of all that
had been done by them from time to time, wherein they themselves had been great
Sufferers, and the Commonwealth very much advantaged, as namely, That at first
they put in a Stock of seventy four Tun of Gold, sent out diverse Fleets under
the Admirals Willekens, John Dirkszoon Lam, Boudewyn, Henrickszoon, Peter Hein,
Adrian Pater, Henrick Lonk, Dirk Uitgeest, Peter Ita, Loos, Cornelis
Houte-been, Lichthart, Bankert, and others, at several times, which had much
weakened the Spanish Power, to the great advantage of the United Netherlands,
because the Spaniard was not only forced to disperce his Power to defend
America, but also lost great Riches on the Coast thereof, which being the
Sinews of his War, prevented him from oppressing that State; That to their loss
they suffered their Forces to stop the Enemy, when he broke into the Veluwe, at
that time when the United Netherlands seemed to hang by a silken Thread; That it
would probably have been the ruin of Holland, if the mighty Spanish Fleet
which Engaged with Martin Tromp in the Downs, had been assisted by sixty six
Sail, which La Torre was forced to send to the Coast of Brasile, against the
West India Company; That this Companies Concern was so great a Nursery of
Mariners in the Year 1629. that they had above a hundred Ships at Sea, and
fifteen thousand Men in their Service; which the United Netherlands
considering, and judging that Charge too great for the Company to maintain, had
resolved to contribute a certain Sum toward it yearly, which had not yet been
paid; which made them take up Money upon Interest, and put in a Supply of
thirty Tun of Gold for the payment of the same; That the Expedition of Henrick
Brewer to Chili had put them very much behind-hand, because the Enemy having
notice of it, secured himself, yet was often terrified with it; for Brewer
having found out a Way to go from Reciffa to the Province of Chili in two
Months, and accordingly to do great mischief to the Spanish Power, whose
Riches lay bare all along the South Sea; this and many other things forced to
make that honorable Peace with the Netherlands, concluded on in Munster, Anno
1648; That their Losses, computed and delivered in to the States General,
amounted to sixty six Tun of Gold, and forty three thousand two hundred and
ninety Guilders, which forced them to take up Money to pay Interest for what
they had before, yet that they still kept fifty great. Ships at Sea, and were
resolved to prosecute their Trade with fresh vigor, as soon as Satisfaction
should be given from the Portuguese Crown, as was promised them in the Articles
of Agreement, and they could obtain of their Lordships, to have their Patent
prolonged for a considerable time; That they were still indebted to those
Orphans and Widows who furnished them with Money to set out their Forces, which
in the first twelve years did the Spaniard so much hurt, that the Damage is
reckoned to amount to one thousand one hundred and eighty Tun of Gold.

These things being taken into consideration by the States General, they
granted the Company their Request, and gave them a new Patent, by virtue of
which they now Trade to Africa and the Caribbee-Islands, since they were forced
to quit all they had possessed in Brasile.

SECT. XII. The Journey of Rodulphus Baron, with the Description of the Customs
and Manners of the Tapuyans.
ROdulphus Baron, to make a Discovery of the Country, upon the Encouragement
of Grave Maurice, who allowed him to that purpose a yearly Revenue, undertook a
remarkable Journey, accompanied with three Tapuyans; who goings out of the
Village Caneri without any store of Provisions, left the Mountains Cupaeva on
the right hand, and went seventy Leagues into the Country, without meeting
with any People, only he found one Mountain of Fossile Glass; from whence he
went Southward to the Villages of the Waripebares and Caripati, who having
courteously Entertained him, appointed certain Persons to accompany him from
one Village to another, with Orders to Complement Grave Maurice, who sent them
home with several Gifts.

The Waripebares and Caripati inhabit fourteen Villages on the Mountains which
Bound Brasile Westward, live by Hunting and Fishing, eat wild Honey and all
manner of Fruit, and maintain continual Wars against a mighty People which
inhabit the Western Plains.

The Customs and Manners of the Tapuyans.
As for the Tapuyans, they range up and down between the Rivers Grande,
Quoauguho, Ocioro, Upameoma, and Voiroguo, without having any settled Abodes;
they are a strong People, stern of Countenance, and black Hair'd: In stead of
Circumcising their Children, they cut them, which is done after this manner:
The Priests stand on a row, Dancing and Singing, whilst one of them swings the
Child round about his Head before all the Multitude, and then runs away with
it; at last returning, sets it in his Lap, whilst another Priest cutting a
Hole in the Ears and Lips thereof, puts little Bones into the same, and the
Mother cries and howls after a terrible manner. At these Ceremonies, which end
with Dancing and Singing, their King is always present.

The Virgins are kept by their Parents till the Mothers perceive them to have
their. Monthly Courses, which they immediately reveal to the Priests, who
acquaint the King therewith, before whom the Maid, being Painted red, is
brought; whom having smoked with Tobacco, he throws an Arrow at a Garland,
which she wears on her Head, and if he chances to hit it, he gives her his
Benediction, by licking certain parts of her Body, from which she hopes to
receire long Life.

So soon as a Woman is gotten with Child by her Husband, she lies no more with
him, but he is permitted to enjoy his other Wives, whose number is either more
or less, according to every ones pleasure. The Women after Delivery eat their
Afterbirth.

Adultery is free for Men, but if Women be taken in the Act, they are
immediately put to Death.

After they have done Soweing and Planting, the King calls all his People and
Subjects together, and appears to them hung round with Garlands; and all of
them have their Bodies Painted and stuck full of diverse colored Feathers.

Strange kind of Prognostication.
The Priests when they go about to foretell future Events, either Sing or Pipe,
and at the same time hold up their Heads toward the Sky, and stand gazing, as
if they saw some strange Vision in the Air; on some of their Backs hangs a
Bundle of Ostriches Feathers; some throw Feathers in the Air, to see which way
the Wind blows. When the Waters overflowing Brasile did much harm, Anno 1641.
the Priests being Consulted, brought forth the King's Calabash, in which lay
their sacred Stones called Cohuterak and Titscheyouh, and began to Dance and
Sing; next six Priests were placed in a row, which were to Prognosticate:
whereupon the first taking up a Stone, said, The Netherlanders have given
Battle to those in St. Salvador, but are now about an Agreement: The second
held up a Blossom of Indian Wheat, and foretold that there would be plenty of
that Grain: The third holding a white Pebble-stone, promised store of Milk: The
fourth grasped a Stone like Bread, telling them that the Country should
produce much Bread: The fifth holding up a Bow and Arrow hung full of
Feathers, cried aloud, This is a Gift of the Angels, Birds shall fly thicker
than these Feathers hang together: The sixth, having a lump of Wax, foretold
that there would be plenty of Honey made by the Bees that year.

They worship the Constellation Ursa Minor.

They observe a very strange way of Purging; for with a Stick they thrust sharp
Leaves down their Throats into their Stomach, which they turn so long till they
vomit Blood.

Their manner of Wrestling.
In the Summer they have a general Meeting for Wrestling, and other Exercises,
which lasts three days. The Wrestlers are strangely attired; for they are all
over their Bodies beset with diverse sorts of Feathers, and in stead of Boots or
Buskins, wear the Barks of Trees about their Legs; their Hair besmeared with
Honey, and tied in a Tuft, hangs down behind; on their Crowns they wear a Plume
of Feathers, about their Necks a Band or Gorget of Feathers; at their Arms they
tie the Wings of the Birds Kohitub, and on their Backs a green Bough; their
whole Bodies Painted with diverse Colors, and their Hair all Red: Thus
accoutred, they Engage one with another, and if there be an old Grudge between
them, then they Fight in earnest, and often kill one another: The Victor with
strange Actions upbraids, the Vanquished with Cowardice, and ever after enjoys
his Wife and Children.

They eat the Serpent Manuab, being four Yards long, and on the Tail having a
Horn, which with a push it thrusts into Man or Beast, as it lights, then winds
it self about the Body, and sucks till it has sucked the last drop of Blood.

Here are also Serpents which are so poisonous, that the least Wound received
by them is mortal, unless the part bitten be either immediately cut out, or off.

The Priests cut the deceased Bodies into pieces, which are roasted by old
Women; the Bones are taken out, and at the next public Feast are stamped,
mixed with Water, and Drank: But the Bodies of Noblemen are to be eaten by none
but Persons of that Rank.

Their manner Crowning their Kings.
They also Crown their Kings after a strange manner, viz. The Priests, who are
best with Feathers, anoint him with sweet smelling Oil, or Balsam, and put a
Crown of diverse colored Feathers on his Head, after which they all fall a
Singing and Dancing; but if any one happen to speak a word of the deceased
King, they all begin to howl and cry. The Kings Authority consists more in
Advising than Commanding.

Their Opinions concerning the Soul.
They believe that the Souls of those who die a natural Death are immortal; but
those that are killed by their Enemies, devoured by ravenous Beasts, or
poisoned, are totally extinguished both Soul and Body for ever. They say
likewise that Hell is Westward near a dark Pool, where the Devil Examines every
Soul how they lived on Earth, and what Death they died; the Good are Ferry'd
over to a delightful Valley, where there is plenty of Fish, Honey, and Flesh;
but the Wicked are miserably tormented.

The Natives live peaceably amongst themselves, their Law being for those that
have not, to ask, and for those that have, to give.

They never Travel in the Night for fear of Serpents and other ravenous Beasts,
neither do they go any whither till the Sun has dried up the Dew.

King Janduy his u bu le Plot.
King Janduy beforementioned, being above a hundred years of age, desired the
Prince of Juckers fair Daughter to Wife, but being denied, contrived a subtle
Plot, viz. he invited Jucker, with his Courtiers, to a Wrestling; whither he
coming with his whole Train, was earnestly minding the Sport, when a
considerable number of Janduy's Women falling upon Jucker's Men, destroyed a
great many of them, and got the desired Maid for Janduy, who at that time had
fourteen Wives and sixty Children, but had formerly enjoyed fifty Wives and
Concubines.

Their Arm^.
Not only amongst the Tapuyans, but generally amongst the rest of the
Brasilians, their Arms are great Clubs called Tacapes; also sharp Darts, and
strong Bows called Orapares, with Shields, which are made of the Skin of a
Beast called Tapiroussous.

The Women wear long Chains of Snail-shells, which hang down over their
Shoulders; their Faces are Painted with diverse colored Rings, surrounded with
Specks; their Necks and Arms they adorn with Necklaces and Armlets of little
Bones: They carry their Husbands Provisions in time of War.

Their Army they order by blowing on the Horn Inubia; others play on Men's Bones
killed a little before: for going by Water they use Boats made of the Barks of
Trees, each whereof being able to carry fifty Men, go exceeding swift: The
strongest Men always march before, and as many as they take, whether Men,
Women, or Children, they are all killed and roasted in their Boucans.

Their Villages consist of Houses of eighty, ninety, or a hundred Paces long;
those that lie near the Enemy are fenced with Walls and Pallisado's against any
Attempt. Their manner of Fighting.
Their Field-Battels are very terrible; for as soon as they get sight of one
another, they howl like Wolves; which Tone they raise as they approach nearer
and nearer, and with their Horns and Pipes make also a mighty sound; then
shaking their former Enemies Teeth (which they wear about their Necks) at one
another, they cry, That they shall immediately fall into each others hands for
Food: whereupon they throw their Darts at one another, which are adorned with
all sorts of Feathers, and if any one be wounded, he pulls out the Dart, and
bites the same like a mad Dog; next falling to their Clubs, they knock one
another Brains out: which manner of Fighting lasts commonly some hours before
the one or other Party leave the Field. All their Prisoners they fatten, and
eat them at a Merry-meeting; at which when they have Danced seven hours
together, three Men lead the Prisoner, tied with a Rope made of the Bark of a
Tree called Juira, through their Village, whilst the Prisoner looking to and
again, says in a scornful manner thus unto them, You, do ye hear? I have eaten
your Fathers: and to others, I have roasted your Brother; your Nephew also
tasted very well; my Death will be sufficiently revenged: Having carried him
about for some time, they put the Rope so strait about his Middle, that he can
neither stir one way nor other; then they give him Stones in his Hands, and lay
others at his Feet, saying, Now take Revenge for your Death before you die:
then he immediately throws at those who are nearest him; and when Stones are
wanting, he throws with Earth: at last comes the Executioner, adorned with
Feathers, with a black Club in his Hand, and asks, Have not you at several
times eaten of our Relations? to which the Prisoner undauntedly answers, Pache
tan tan, ajouca, atoupave, that is, Yes, I am he that have eaten several of
your Peole, and laying his Hands upon his Head, cries out, O how valiantly did
I behave my self therein! Executioner replies, And therefore shall you be
killed by me, and serve for Food for these Spectators: Then the Prisoner
answers again, What care I, since I know my Death will be revenged: which said,
his Brains are dashed out, and falling on the Ground, he is carried away by his
Wife (for the Conqueror commonly betroths his Sister or Daughter to the
Prisoner,) who seemingly bemoans the Body, of which she has the first Cut when
it is Dressed; then the old Women put the Corpse into scalding Water, in which
they let it lie till the Skin comes off; then the Owner of the Prisoner
quartering the Body, distributes it amongst the Guests; the pieces laid on
their Gridirons called Boucans, are turned by the old Women, who lick up the
Dripping, desiring the Bystanders to bring more such Food, and with the Blood
anoint the Childrens Faces; the Meat being broyl'd every one takes a piece, and
eats it up to the Bones, which are kept as Trophies.

Brasilians molested by an evil Spirit.
The Brasilians do not only thus plague one another, but they are likewise
tormented by an evil Spirit, which they call Aygnan and Caagerrel, if credit
may be given to John Leerius a Burgundian, who relates, that he has often seen
them sweat out of fear, and striking their Hands upon their Thighs, cry out,
Mair autourassap, acequerey, Aygnan atoupave, that is, O my Fool, my Companion,
I fear the Devil above all Evils.

Diseases peculiar to Brasile.
Amongst several Diseases to which Brasile is subject, there is one called
Pians, being as malignant as the French POX, proceeding from libinousness, the
whole Body being full of Carbuncles, each about the bigness of a Man's Thumb.

Strangers in Brasile are also much troubled with a Giddiness, occasioned by
the extreme Cold in the Night; as also with with sore Eyes, which they get by
going abroad before Sunrising, or after Sunsetting.

The Palsy is also very common there, taking People so suddenly, that falling
down stiff on the Ground, they are often in danger of losing their Breath.

Besides these there are several other Distempers that very much infest
Brasile, as the Bloody Flux, Dropsy, Rising of the Gall, Worms, Meazles, and
St. Anthony's Fire.

Brasilians success in curing of several Distempers by their knowledge in Herbs.
The aged Brasilians have for the most part great skill in Herbs, which they
gather in the Woods, and apply them to the Sick both inwardly and outwardly;
and chiefly they know how to expel Poison. None can persuade them against the
Medicines which they have learned from their Predecessors; nay, they will
rather choose to lose their Lives than use any other: and indeed they do not
always succeed amiss, but often manifest that they understand the Virtue of
Herbs better than our European Physicians. The Learned Guilielmus Piso relates,
That he has seen several times in the Army which Grave Maurice sent against
the Portuguese in Brasile, that the Brasilians in a short time cured those
Wounds with fresh Gums and healing Herbs, which the Netherland Surgeons
judging past Cure, presently advised the cutting off either the Arm or Leg of
the wounded Person, Piso adds moreover, That he himself used some of
Hippocrates's and Galen's Prescriptions in Wine, for the curing of Cancers and
Swellings, which the Brasilians have made well only with the Juice of Tobacco.
They also in a moment recovered a Person given over by all European Physicians,
with the Juice of the Root called Jaborandi: wherefore he always desired their
Company when he went to visit sick or wounded Men.

Their manner of curing the Sick, and bewailing the Dead.
The Distempers in America differ much from the European, not only in the Signs
of any Distemper, but also in the Cure; for when a Distemper cannot be cured by
the prescribed Medicines, a Father or Mother sends for the Neighbors, to know
if they can find any means to cure the Disease: which Custom was anciently
observed amongst the Greeks. They also strictly observe a Rule in their Diet,
and take care to keep the Patient out of the Sun in the Day, and cold Winds in
the Night: however, if their Fathers and Mothers be sick, nevertheless they
leave not off their usual Dancing and Singing; but if the sick Person die,
especially a Father, they lament and cry over the Corpse like Wolves, calling to
one another with a quavering Voice, and uttering these Expressions, The strong
Man is deceased, who carried so many Prisoners for a brave Dinner to his House.
Oh what a quick Hunter and subtle Fisher has Death bereaved us of! we shall
see him no more till our Souls are carried beyond the high Mountains, where our
valiant Predecessors Dance in Rings. The Women make the greatest noise, and in
the midst of their howling embrace one another, which lasts six hours, and then
they put the Body upright into a Grave made like a Hogshead, hanging about it
diverse colored Feathers, and other things in which the Deceased delighted most
when living; upon the Grave the nearest Relations place Dishes of Meat, both
Flesh and Fish, and the Liquor Cauou-in, that their evil Spirit called Aygnan,
may be reconciled by these Offerings, and not carry away the Body; but when
they remove from thence they cover the Grave with the Herb Pindo. This Custom
is not observed by all Brasilians, for some eat up their deceased Relations.

Sect. XIII. Grave Maurice his Account of Brasile, so far as it concerned the
West India Company.
BRasile, so far as it concerns the West India Company, extends from the River
Real, which divides Seregippa and the Lordship of St. Salvador, to Maragnan:
Seregippa it self reaches along the Seacoast thirty two Leagues, and was first
brought under the King of Spain's Jurisdiction by Christovan de Barros Cardoso,
who being ordered by the King of Spain to Plant this new Country, invited many
People from St. Salvador, who built four Sugar-Mills, and a Town consisting of
a hundred Houses, and four hundred Sheds for Cattle; but the Town being
destroyed, has nothing left but Heaps of Rubbish; and the Cattle either fell
into the Netherlanders hands, or were devoured by Tigers; the Inhabitants fled
back to St. Salvador: Many troubles have prevented the re-building of it.

The fertility of Pernambuco.
Pernambuco may for its fruitfulness stand in competition with any Place in the
World, except in those parts where the Soil is sandy and stony. The Fields
feed abundance of excellent Cattle; the Woods, Deer and Fowl; the Ocean and
Rivers, all manner of good Fish. It is inhabited but eight Leagues into the
Country, because the nearer the Sea, the more convenient it is for Importing
and Exporting of Goods; neither could the Portuguese, by reason of their small
number, spread themselves farther, as also in regard they found great
resistance from the Brasilians. The Negro's that work in the Sugar-Mills
between the River Grande and Francisco, amount to four thousand. The Cape
Verde, Mina, Angola, Ardra, and Calabaria, generally provide three thousand in
a year, to supply the number of the Sick, or those that run away.

SECT. XIV. The Councellor Dussen's Relation of so much of Brasile as concerns
the West India Company.
THat part of Brasile which the West India Company have subdued by force of
Arms on the Continent of America, is divided into six Counties, viz. Seregippa,
Pernambuco, Itamarica, Parayba, Rio Grande, and Siara.

The Expedition undertaken by Gysseling and Schuppe made Seregippa desolate,
the Inhabitants wheof removed to the Coast Todos los Sanctos.

Also Siara, which the Portuguese formerly possessed, was thinly inhabited, and
had a mean Fortress there, whither some few Brasilians came now and then to the
Netherlanders assistance.

Pernambuco, lying between the Rivers Francisco and Tamarica, excells the other
Country in fruitfulness and pleasantness. The Brasilians compare it to a
hollow Rock, under which fresh Water flows.

Havens of Pern^mbuco.
Moreover, Pernambuco has several Havens, viz. the outermost Road before
Reciffa, which being in the open Sea, is somewhat dangerous, but the innermost
is secure against all Storms; also at the Promontory St. Augustine, where the
Mouth of the Haven is narrow and dangerous, by reason of the Rocks and shallow
Grounds; the Island Alexio is very fit to Crain Ships in; Barra Grande has a
large and safe Inlet, convenient for all manner of Vessels, yet it is inferior
to Cororipa; lastly, the Havens Jaragoa and Franco are very eminent.

Amongst the Rivers, the chief are Jangades, Serinhain, Formosa, Porto Calvo,
Rivers.
Camarigibi, Antonio, Michael, and Francisco.

Pernambuco also is divided into six Jurisdictions; the first and most ancient
is Igarazu; the second and biggest, Olinda; the third, Serinbain; the fourth,
Porto Calvo; the fifth, the Alagoas; and the sixth, Rio Francisco, which is the
Boundary of Pernambuco on the South.

Towns of Pernambuco:
Pernambuco also boasts five Towns, viz. Garasu, Olinda, Maurice-stadt, to
which also belongs Reciffa, Bella Pojuca, and Formosa. The Villages Moribeca,
St. Laurence, Antonio, Amaro, and others are also not inferior to little Towns.

The Country is for the most part Hilly, but is exceeding fruitful in the
Valleys, and near the Rivers, especially in Sugarcanes.

Here are also a hundred and twenty Sugar-Mills, of which a great number stand
still for want of Negro's.

Next Pernambuco lies Tamarica, which has only one Haven, one City, and
twenty three Sugar-Mills, of which thirty are only employed. This Island
produces excellent Grapes and Melons, yet is for the most part barren, by
reason of the Pismires.

The Country Parayba has its Denomination from the River which washes it,
being deep, and without any Rocks or Sands; on the Banks thereof stand twenty
Sugar-Mills, two of which are still standing.

In the Lordship of Rio Grande stands the Town Puntael, whose Buildings were
ruined in the Wars; after which the Inhabitants had leave to build them another
City on a fruitful Soil.

The Country hereabouts used formerly to be very full of Cattle, but was not
only bereaved thereof by the Hollanders and Portuguese, but also for the most
part made desolate.

The River which washes the Castle Ceulen, affords a convenient and safe Harbor
for all sorts of Vessels.

This Lordship of Rio Grande boasts only two Sugar-Mills, of which one is
decayed; so that in all those Parts in Brasile which belong to the West India
Company, are a hundred and sixty Sugar-Mills constantly employed, besides forty
six which are about repairing. It is scarce to be reckoned how much Sugar they
make yearly, in regard, through the alterations of the annual Seasons, as also
the more or less fruitful Fields, they produce one year, and in one place, more
than in another.

The Inhabitants are of two sorts, viz. free People, and Slaves; the Slaves are
African Negro's, and the others, Netherlanders, Portugueses, or Brasilians;
which last came in of their own accords, or else were absolved from their
Oaths, and acquitted from their Martial Offices; yet are ready to venture their
Lives and Estates, and to Serve either on Foot or Horseback for their Freedom
against their Enemies. Those that went from the Netherlands to Brasile on their
own Accounts, drive a Trade, or Serve the Traders, or else keep Inns, and
follow Handicraft Faculties; some of which, when grown rich, buy Parts in
Sugar-Mills; others live on Tilling: by all which several sorts of People
Reciffa is very well inhabited, and full of Houses, which yield great Rents,
and are held at high Prices: wherefore Grave Maurice thought good to mark out
pieces of Ground on the Isle Antonio Vaes, which were sold for a considerable
Sum of Money, insomuch that in a short time a new City called Maurice-stadt was
built on the same, and enclosed within strong Bulwarks; yea, notwithstanding
the Rumor of a great Spanish Fleet in some measure abated the Courage of the
Builders, yet the City was extended down to the Fort Frederick Henrich, and a
brave Bridge laid over the Stream Biberibi, cross which they go from Reciffa to
Antonio Vaes, where no People were in greater esteem than Handicraftsmen, who
could get their ten or twelve Shillings a day. The Labor which is required in
the Sugar-Mills, no Men are able to undergo but the Negro's. Of the Portuguese
some have lived here a considerable time; others lately came hither, being most
of them Jews, of whom there live a great many at Reciffa, and are very diligent
in promoting of Trade: They possess several Sugar-Mills, and are kept very much
under; their whole study and contrivance is for Gain; they conceal their Hatred
against the Christians, as also their Covetousness, yet are mortal Enemies to
the Hollanders. The Brasilians, who are the ancient Inhabitants, live apart
from other People in their Villages, consisting of long Straw Huts, forty or
fifty of them under one Roof sleeping on woven Hammocks; they esteem no
Household Stuff but Nets and Calabashes, using the first to fish with, and the
other to drink out of; about their Huts they plant Mandihoka and Brasile Trees;
when they are not employed in the Wars, they spend most of their time in
Hunting, but many in Idleness; they esteem wild Fruits better than those which
are Planted; they Drink night and day, making their Liquor of the chewed Root
Mandihoka, or the Apples Tajovis; they esteem nothing so much as strong Drink,
and to wear Linen next their Skins; they would not value Money, could they but
get Brandy and Spanish Wine without it; if they are not promised a Reward, they
will not work. Each Village, nay House, has its peculiar Governor; but besides
him there is a Hollander, who stirs up the Idle to work, and takes care that
the Owners of the Sugar-Mills do them no injury: They never suffer themselves
to be Hired for above twenty days, at the end whereof they demand their Wages;
they are commonly employed to chop Wood to boil the Sugar with; but by reason
of the scarcity of Negros, they are often made use of for other Business, which
to avoid they hide themselves; as also when they are to go to Fight; they are
hard to be kept in Ranks, for they will run out of their own Fyle into another
on the least occasion; but if they put their Enemy to flight, they pursue him,
and spare none alive. They little regard the Christian Religion, yet some of
them have learned the Lord's-Prayer and the Creed of the Roman Priests. The
Minister Davil having learned the Brasilian Tongue, Converted very many of
them, and Baptized them in their Villages.

The Brasilian Women and Children usually go to Wars with their Husbands and
Fathers.

The Brasilian Slaves were some years since bought of the Tapuyans, or made
Slaves, because they assisted Boudewyn Henrickszoon, when he Landed in the
Inlet Traluson; but they have since obtained their Freedom of the Portuguese.
The Angolan Slaves can undergo greater Labor than any other.

The Brasile Wood grows generally ten or twelve Leagues up in the Country from
the Sea, not in particular Woods, but amongst other Trees.

The Negro's, when the Sugar-Mills work not, are employed in pulling off the
white Bark, three Fingers thick, from the Tree, which bears dark-green Leaves,
small and prickly at the ends, and hanging on thin Stalks, but bearing neither
Blossoms nor Fruit.

Osnabrig Linen is highly esteemed amongst the Brasilians, as also colored
Wax, Copper, Tin, Wine, Beer, Butter, Cheese, Meal, Stock Fish, Pork,
Hung-beef, and Gammons of Bacon.

The Papists Teach and observe their Religion in public, their Spiritual Men
being divided into Priests and Monks; the Monks consist of Franciscans,
Carmelites, and Benedictines; the Franciscans being the most eminent, possess
six fair Cloisters, besides which they have neither Land nor other Revenues,
but live on what is given them daily; their Cloisters stand in Frederick-stadt,
Iguaraca, Olinda, Pojuca, Serinhain, and Antonio Vaes. But the Carmelites have
three Structures at Parayba, and as many more in Frederick-stadt and Olinda,
where they live plentifully on what they reap from Tillage, Rents of Houses,
and Legacies of deceased Persons. The Benedictins, though they possess only
two Cloisters, one in Frederick-stadt, and the other at Olinda, yet they have
the greatest Income from the Sugar-Mills of Muserapa, and the Country about
Parayba, as also Cattle and Cane-Fields.

Reciffa, the Seat of War, has two Horn-works toward Olinda; the first raised
with Stone, defends the Haven with seven Brass Demi-Culverins; the other lies
opposite to the River Biberi, and has five Brass and two Iron Guns. Reciffa
also has a strong Rail about it, and many Guns placed in good order. Near the
Powder-house stand two Batteries with Guns.

On the Shore toward Olinda, lies the Stone Castle St. Joris, on a Hill
opposite to the Haven, fortified with a Bulwark and thirteen Iron Guns.

The Water-Castle, built round, rises out of the Sea, and stands at the end of
the Stone Cliff, which makes an Inlet, through which the Ships Sail that come
to, and go from Reciffa.

The Fort Bruine has four Points, seven Brass Guns, and Pallisados round about.

Somewhat farther is the Redoubt called The Lady Bruine, which has two Brass
Guns.

The Castle Waerdenbergh, built before the Mouth of the River Capivaribi, in
the Bay made by the River Biberibi, has three Points, each raised square,
because the fourth Bulwark toward Antonio Vaes, cannot be finished, by reason
the Earth is sunk away.

The Fort Ernestus stands on the North-side of Maurice-stadt, on the Island
Antonio Vaez. That part of the City which respects the Fort, lies open, with
five Points and a double Horn-work; it is the more secure from any Invasion,
because the Country round about is overflowed at High Water. On the Horn-work
stand eight Brass Guns; but the four Redoubts along the River Capivaribi are
decayed.

The square Fort Prince William, standing in a low Ground not far from the
River Afogados, has four Bulwarks, and is enclosed with a high Wall and strong
Pallisado's: the Church appearing above all other Houses in the Castle, may be
seen at Olinda.

Description of Mauricestadt.
Maurice-stadt lies pleasantly along the River Biberibi, and is washed behind
by the River Capivaribi; It has a large Wharf, a brave Magazine, a French
Church, and a Guild Hall: The Buildings are not altogether so high as those in
Reciffa, where they are commonly three Stories, because the Ground is very dear.

Grave Maurice's Court lying opposite to Reciffa, on the Shore of Biberibi,
rises from the middle of a Garden with two high Towers.

Not far from the Castle Ernestus is a Potters Kiln, and on the other side,
near the Fort Frederick Henrick seven Wells, and some Morasses, and toward the
Waterside, a Stone Battery.

Forts of Brasile.
The Fort Orange at the Southern Mouth of the Haven, has, by reason of its dry
Moats, a strong Pallisado, four Bulwarks, and twelve Guns. The Bulwarks about
the Church, and the Battery before the Haven, also secures Schuppen-stadt
against the Portuguese. On the Battery stand nine Iron and two Brass Guns. At
the Northern Entrance of the Haven appears a Tower with three Guns.

The Fort Margareta has two Brass and forty Iron Guns.

Restringa, surrounded with Pallisado's, rises near a sandy Point in the middle
of the River.

The Castle Antonio, washed by the Sea, has only one Tower, but that
sufficiently strong to defend it against an Enemy.

The Franciscan Cloister, strengthened by a Wall and Earthen Works, serve in
stead of a Castle to Frederick-stadt, and is the more secure by reason of a
Half Moon, Moats, Rails, and a Battery at the Mouth of the Haven.

The stony Fortification of Ceulen lies near the Sea. All these are the
Fortresses of the Northern Brasile,

To the: Southward of Reciffa appears the Promontory St. Augustine, where the
Haven is secured by the Forts Vander Dussen, Domburgh, and a Stone Battery.

Porto Calvo is fortified by a Castle, built on a steep Hill forty Foot high.

The Fort Maurice Commands the Ferry of Rio Francisco, and is built on a high
and steep Hill, with five Bulwarks; the lowermost Plain is overflowed by the
River in the Summer Season. The Storehouses hereabouts are ill furnished, and
if not suddenly supplied, it is to be feared, that a great Famine will follow,
as already it is begun, and we may thank the faint-heartedness of the Enemy
that it has increased no more.

The Militia is distributed into all the Forts or Villages, that so they may
the better procure their Provisions, watch the approach of the Spaniards, and
prevent all Incroach-ments of the Enemy. In Maurice Castle are five hundred and
forty Men in Garrison; in the Afogados, two hundred ninety three; in Camarigibi
and Porto Calvo, fourhundred and eighty; in Serinhain, seven hundred and
eighty; in Pojuca, twenty five; in the Mills Panterra, ninety seven; at the
Promontory Antonio, two hundred and forty; in the Castle Vander Dussen, a
hundred and seventy; the like number is in Amaro and Moribeca; in the Village
St. Laurence, four hundred and twenty two; in the Fort Prince William, two
hundred and sixty three; in Frederick CASTRUM MAURITIJ AD RIPAM FLUMINIS S.
FRANCISCUM
ARX PRINCIPIS GUIL^IMI

A. Fluvius affgodorum. B. Castrum. C. Civitas olinda a long^.


Henrick, has two hundred and thirty; in Ernestus, two hundred and eighty; in
Reciffa, two hundred and seventy seven; in the Castle Bruine, a hundred and
twenty five; in Olinda, a hundred and ninety three; in Iguaraza, ninety three;
in Orange, a hundred and eighty two; in Goyana, a hundred and sixty five; in
Frederick-stadt, a hundred and one; in the Fort Margareta, three hundred and
sixty; in the Castle Ceulen, eighty eight; in Antonio Vaes lies Grave Maurice's
Guard; Siara is defended by forty; so that the whole Power consists of six
thousand one hundred and eighty Men, too weak a number to resist the Enemy both
by Land and Sea; nay, had he had Courage, the West India Companies Concerns in
Brasile would long since have been in a low Condition; for the Spanish Fleet
which came lately from Cadis, carried three thousand Men, besides seven hundred
which they brought from St. Salvador; the Duke of Bagnola was also ready with
two thousand Portugueses, and a thousand Brasilians, to join with the Seamen,
and expected also as great a number from Parayba, Pernambuco, Seregippa,
Itamarica, Rio Grande, and Siara, contrary to the Oath taken in Reciffa: But
the Spanish Fleet keeping close to the Bay Todos los Sanctos, has hitherto
done nothing, except the sending of several Companies into the Country, to rob
and pillage the Brasilian Villages. Moreover, the Mulatto's and Negro's do
great mischief up and down, and so much the more, because they go and come
along private Ways, through which none can follow them. Most of the Ships being
badly fitted, are scarce able to keep the Sea; and the Soldiers want Clothes
exceedingly. The City St. Salvador keeps the Country in a continual Alarm, so
that five thousand Men are required to conquer it: Eighteen great Ships, and as
many Ketches, besides lesser Vessels, ought to be sent thither, the Sea being
full of Pirates. The common Treasury is so much behind-hand, that none can
receive any Pay. The Owners of the Sugar-Mills will not deliver any Sugar
without ready Money, because of the Netherlanders removal from thence.

This Relation of the Affairs of the Netherland West India Company in Brasile,
was delivered to them in Writing by Vander Dussen.

A Description of the Palace Freyburgh, two Bridges, and a Banqueting House,
all built by Grave Maurice.
GRave Maurice before his coming away from Brasile, built a pleasant Palace
along the River Biberibi, before the Fort Ernestus on Antonio Vaes; the outmost
Work whereof was shaded by a double Row of Coco-Trees, and had a Pond full of
all sorts of Fish; and not far from thence, on one side, a second encompassed a
Coney-Warren, which respected a Pell-mell; near it a Garden, curiously divided
into round Parterres, which led into a long Park of Bakkoven-Trees; and at the
end a great Dove-house. Next the River stood a large Stable, on one side
whereof was a Field to whiten Linen in, and a Kitchin-Garden, wherein was a
large Spot full of Orange Trees, a row of Vines, which bore Grapes every three
Months, and a delightful Walk, beset on each side with Lime-Trees. On the
other side of this Palace stood a Banqueting House, near a row of
Pome-granate-Trees, and another of Fig and Cittron-Trees. Behind the Palace was
a Fish Pond with two Isles, for the Swans. A Dove-house also appeared near the
Fort Ernestus, where the Negro's watched the Horses, and led them to Water in a
Fishpond in a large Wood. Before the Palace appeared a Stone Pallisado, which
like a Half Moon ran into the River. The Palace it self rose with two Towers,
one of which served for a Sea-mark.

Moreover, Grave Maurice extended his new City to the Fort Frederick Henrick,
divided the Morassie Grounds by several Moats, and laid a Bridge cross the
River Biberibi, between Reciffa and the City Maurice, and another cross the
Stream Capivaribi, between the said City Maurice and the Main Land.

In the time when Albuquerque Governed Brasile for the King of Spain, it was
Disputed among the Portuguese, whether it were not requisite to desert the City
Olinda, and causing the Inhabitants to remove to Reciffa, join the same with a
Bridge to the Isle Antonio Vaes, because those Places are almost invincible,
and much more convenient for Ships than Olinda? But the Hollanders surprised
them on a sudden, before they could bring the Business to pass, and after a
while prosecuted the same Design themselves.

Grave Maurice his stately Bridge over the River Biberibi.
Grave Maurice spent twenty four thousand Guilders in laying a Bridge over the
River Biberibi, between Reciffa and Antonio Vaes. Having raised just fifteen
Stone Columns from the Ground, they came to the deepest part of the River
Antonio Vaes, when the Architect began to despair of accomplishing the same,
because the Ground lay deep under Water, and the Stream ran very swift: Those
which dwelt at Reciffa cried, That they had undertaken a Business which was not
in the power of Man to effect, and that there was above ten thousand Pound
already spent in vain on fifteen Pillars: in this sort they began to clamor
against Grave Maurice, especially the Owners of Houses in Reciffa, who foresaw
that many would remove from thence to the pleasant Isle Antonio Vaes, as soon
as the Bridge was finished; after which the Houses in Reciffa would be at low
Rates. But Grave Maurice judging that the Disgrace would fall upon him, if the
Bridge should be left half finished, caused at his own proper Charge, huge
pieces of lasting Timber to be cut, forty and fifty Foot long, and so ramm'd
into the Ground, some straight, others sloaping, to support the rest, and in
two Months finished the same. On the first day after this new Bridge was
completed, there went so many People over it, that the Toll which they paid,
amounted to above 60 l. Sterling. and was after that Farmed for twenty eight
thousand Guilders yearly, a Citizen that passed over the same being to pay 2 d.
and a Negro or Soldier 1 d. but a Horseman paid 4 d. and a Cart or Wayn 7 d.

Another over the River Capivaribi.
Since this Grave Maurice built a second Bridge cross the River Capivaribi,
which joined Antonio Vaez to the Main Continent. This Bridge being eighty six
Rods long of durable Timber, was finished in seven Weeks.

His Pleasure-house Bonovista,
Moreover Grave Maurice built a pleasant Banqueting House, called Bonavista, at
his own Charge before the said Bridge, from whence he could see the Palace
Freyburgh, Olinda, the Fort Ernestus, Maurice-stadt, Reciffa, the French
Church, the Ships in the Harbors, and also the Castle Frederick Henrick. This
Banqueting House has at each corner a Turret, and in the middle thereof a
spacious Room, crowned with a fair Terrace.

view of Boa Vista BOAVISTA.
A. Fluvius Capibaribi B. Domus Boavista, sivi boni visus. C. Pons. D. Palatium
Friburgum. E. Mauritiopolis. F. Templum Gallicum. G. Castrum Ernesti. H.
Castrum Fred. Henrici. I. Reciffa. K. Reciffa lapidosa. L. Naves portu
contentae M. Olinda eminus visa.




map of northern South America

CHAP. VIII. Guiana.
Situation and Description of Guiana.
NOrthward of Brasile, over against Maragnan, lies the Country of Guiana, not
improbably supposed to be so called from the River Wia, one of the principal
Rivers of the Province, which yet is said to have more and fairer than any
other part of America besides: It is by some called The Wild Coast, for what
reason is uncertain, it being found to be a very fruitful and pleasant
Country: It is Bounded on the East, with the Atlantic Ocean, or Mare del
Nordt; on the West, with some undiscovered mountainous Countries, which lie on
that side of the Andes; on the North it has the great River Orenoque; and on
the South, that of the Amazons, or Orellana; which last Name, as we have said
before, it derives from Francisco Orellana, who is said to have first
discovered it in the Year 1543. It was anciently called Tobo, Topoi, and Tapera.

This Country lies on both sides of the Equator, extended from the fourth
Degree of Southern Latitude, to the eighth Degree of Northern, yet enjoys a
temperate and good Air, not oppressed with any excessive Heat; which is chiefly
attributed to the Breezes, or Easterly Winds, almost perpetually about Noon
blowing upon it. Toward the Seaside it is for the most part a flat and level
Country, in the more Inland parts mountainous and swelled with Hills, but in
all it is generally of such a rich and fertile Soil, that for Fruits, or any
outward Commodities of the Earth, it yields not to any other Province of the
New World, but rather far excels the most, having as it were a continual
Summer, without Winter or Autumn, the Trees never unclothed or made bare,
Fruits always ripe, or growing to maturity, the Meadows and Pastures always
verdant and green, and, as we said, so excellently well watered with Rivers,
that no Country in the World seems comparable to it in this respect. But since
the several Occurrences of Orellana's Expedition will give much light to the
more particular knowledge of these Parts, we thought good to insert this
following Relation thereof.

SECT. II. A Relation of the Journey of Francisco Orellana.
Francisco Orellana traveling with Gonsalvo Pizarro from Quito, to find out
the Country Cundirumarca (where the Natives, according to the information of a
strange American, went Armed with Golden Plates) he came after a great deal of
hardship to the River Maranon, where Pizarro building a Brigantine, put all his
sick and maimed Men into the same, as also all his Baggage under the Command of
Orellana, whom he commanded to forage for some Provisions, of which the Army,
that was to follow along the Shore, had great want; but Orellana was in few
days driven down so far, that he saw no hopes of getting up again in a years
time, and Engaged daily with the Indians, which came aboard of him in little
Boats; at last he went ashore and conquered a Village, in which he found
Provisions, some Gold, and Gems of great value: not long after which he was in
great danger, by reason of a River, which with great force fell into the
Channel in which he Sailed, and for the space of two hundred Leagues saw
neither Man nor House: Next Landing at a Village, he was by the Governor
thereof Presented with Turtles, Partridpes, Fish, and other Provisions, and
also forewarned of the valiant Women, the Amazones, which they called
Camapuyara. Going from hence, he met for eighty Leagues together, nothing but
steep and craggy Mountains on each side of the Shore, insomuch that he could
not Land any where for Provisions. Next coming to the inhabited Province
Machiparo, he was fiercely assaulted for two days and two nights, by the
Casique Aomagua, who pursued him with several Boats: Not long after having
conquered a Village, out of which ran several trodden Paths into the Country,
he came to a River, in the Mouth whereof there lying three Isles, he gave it
the Denomination of La Trinidad, which washes a fruitful Coast, along which
Sailed diverse small Vessels. Somewhat farther in the River Trinidad stood a
Village and Banqueting House, where Orellana took abundance of Provisions,
Silver, Gold, and Earthen Ware curiously Glazed and Painted, but judged it very
hazardous to travel far into the Country by the common Highways, in regard of
the multitudes of People that frequented them, to whose Civility he durst not
trust; therefore Sailing from hence a hundred Leagues farther, he came to the
Country belonging to the Lord of Paguana, who civilly Entertained him, and
Presented him with Sheep, not unlike the Peruvians, and all manner of good
Fruit, which the Country affords in great abundance. After this on his
Lar-board side he discovered a River, whose being black like Ink, and
disemboguing into another, discolored the Water thereof for the space of
twenty Leagues; he also saw several Villages, and at last found the Stream to
be so broad, that he could not see from one Shore to the other: he took one of
the Villages without any resistance, there being none but Women in the Huts,
whither the Men came toward the Evening. Near another Village he espied seven
Heads sticking upon Poles, from whence the Province received the Denomination
De las Picotas, from whence ran several paved Ways, on each side planted with
Trees, into the Country; where Landing, he furnished himself with Maiz,
Turtles, Geese, and Parrots, and at Can Island took an American Prisoner, who
informed him, that he was in the Amazones Jurisdiction, and that up in the
Country lived a People not unlike the Spaniards, amongst whom were two white
Women, brought thither up the River by a Lord. Going farther he saw diverse
Villages on each side of him, and at last Landing in a little Town, he found
plenty of Oats, Liquor made of Oats, Cotton, Linen, a Temple hung round about
with Arms, and two Episcopal Miters of diverse colors. Near a Promontory
jutting out into the River, the Tide went so strong, that he was not able to
Land; upon the Point stood several fair Buildings, where were also white Women,
of a big stature, with long Hair, who animated the Men to fight. This Country,
which extends it self a hundred and fifty Leagues along the Shore, with Hills,
Pasture-Grounds, and Champain, and well inhabited, being discovered on St.
John's Day, was called The Province De San Juan; which leaving, he came to
several Isles, the biggest whereof extended fifty Leagues in length, all of
them standing on high Ground, pleasant, and full of People, who in Boats, by
them called Periagues, valiantly Engaged with the Spaniards; but one of them
not long after being taken Prisoner, informed them, that the Amazones dwelt in
Stone Houses, Walled Towns, had plenty of Silver and Gold, and four stately
Temples enriched with Plates, Dedicated to the Sun. But Orellana Sailing a
hundred Leagues farther, along a Coast belonging to the Lord of Caripuna,
according to the Prisoners Relation, the Inhabitants hereabouts shot abundance
of poisoned Arrows at the Spaniards, but they made a shift to escape them, and
Sailing within sight of Land into the Bay view ARX NASSOVII.
of Paria, they came to an Anchor before the Island Cubugua, Anno 1541. after
they had been eight hundred Leagues.

The Expedition of Orellana.
Orellana informing the Spanish Court of his Adventures, desired the chief
Command of the Province of the Amazones, which after earnest Solicitations he
obtained, and accordingly setting Sail from St. Lucar, he went to the Island
Teneriff with three Ships and five hundred Men, where he stayed three Months,
and two on Cape de Verd. On Teneriff several of his Men ran from him, and on
Cape de Verd he buried ninety eight, and left fifty sick behind him; yet he
Steered to Brasile, where, meeting with contrary Winds, he had undoubtedly
perished for lack of Water, if the great Showers of Rain had not supplied his
Wants, one of his Ships carrying seventy Men and eleven Horses, was never heard
of, with the other two he Sailed by Baxos de San Roque, and from thence a
hundred Leagues Northwardly beyond Maragnan, where a great way off at Sea they
found fresh Water, in which Orellano Steering, got between the Isles into the
River De las Amazones, where he Bartered for Provisions, Sailed two Leagues up
the River, and came to an Anchor before a few Huts, but slenderly stored with
Provisions, where he spent three Months in breaking up one of his Ships, and
building a Ketch. In the mean time fifty seven of his Seamen died. Sailing
twenty Leagues farther, he lost his best Ship; whereupon he gave order to build
a Barque of the Wreck. Thus he spent thirty days in vain to find the fore
mentioned Arm of the River Amazones: the Barque being finished in ten Weeks,
and going beyond the Isles Maribique and Contan, found the three great Rivers
to disembogue into the River Amazones, which there was twelve Leagues broad;
but wanting Provisions, and the Men being too weak to go farther, they came
back to the fruitful Island Comao, where a hundred Spaniards settled themselves,
the rest going down with the Barque to find out Orellana, who, as his Wife
informed them, died with Grief. He dies with Grief.


The English and Netherlanders, who Sailed hither after the Spaniards left off,
ascribe a Breadth of fifty or sixty Leagues to the Mouth of the Amazone River,
which discharges its Water with such force into the Northern Ocean, that it
keeps its color and taste above thirty Leagues, according to the ocular
testimony of Captain Harcourt. The Western Point, by the Netherlanders called
The North Cape, runs with a long Slip of low Land into the Sea, into which more
North-Westerly fall the Streams Taponnowyny, Arowary, Arykary, Cassepouri, and
Wiapoca; some of them wash great Wildernesses full of Trees; others glide
between pleasant Meadows.

Eighty Leagues up the Amazone River the Vlussingers have built a Fort called
Nassaw, on the narrow Island Cogemines, which is twenty Leagues long, and
separated from the Shore by a Creek, and seven Leagues farther, on another
Isle, the Fort Orange; from which two Forts they Trade with the Natives,
Arowaccas and Apehous, bartering European Trifles for Tobacco, Cotton, Sugar,
Gums, and several Tinctures.

Sir Walter Raleigh sends Fisher to discover Cooshebery Province.
Sir Walter Raleigh, Anno 1595. sending Captain Fisher from Wiapoco to Leonard
Ragapo, some years before Baptized in England, and then Governor of the
Province Cooshebery, lying between the Amazone River and Wapoco, he received
Fisher very civilly, and conducted him fifty Leagues up into the Country, to
the Mountain Cowob, on whose top is a deep Pool, full of well tasted Fish, and
surrounded with the glittering Stones Topaz; which Raleigh took the more notice
of, because the same Ground in the East Indies where these Stones are found,
incloses also Diamonds. Moreover, the Province Cooshebery rises with pleasant
Hills, but consists most in delightful Fields and Woods.

The River Arocawo, falling into the Inlet Wiapoco, disembogues also with the
same between the Capes Orange and Comariboo, into the Northern Ocean.

Most of the Rivers in Guiana lie full of Isles, and cannot be Navigated far,
by reason of the great Water-falls.

The Yayos.
The Yayos, who inhabit on the Banks of the forementioned River, are People of
a good Disposition, and go naked: they catch Fish after a strange manner; for
they only throw the strong smelling Wood Ayaw in the Water, which works so
upon the Fish, that they suffer themselves to be caught with the Hand. The
well-known American Root Cassavi serves them for Bread, being baked in round
Cakes on hot Stones: of the Cakes they also make the Liquor Perrinoe, which
tastes almost like stale Beer, and is prepared by old Women and little
Children, which chew the Cassavi, and spit the same into a Pot full of Water,
which having stood a while, they strain the same through a Cloth, and set it a
working with Potato-Roots.

They are troubled with no Vermin, not so much as the little Fleas Niquas, by
the Spaniards called Chigos, which creep in between the Nails.

On the Seacoast are many Tortoises, whose Flesh is of a delicious taste, but
heavy to digest.

Sheep and Oxen will not thrive here, but Swine would thrive exceedingly, if
their Dugs were not bit off in the Night by the Bats.

The River Wiapoco has many dangerous Water-falls, the one much higher than
the other; a little way beyond the first of them the Stream Army falls into
Wiapoco.

The Marashewaccas.
Three days Journey Westerly dwell the Marashewaccas, whose Ears hang down on
their Shoulders; they worship for their Deity, an Image representing a Man, who
sitting flat on the Ground, with his Legs stretched out, leans with his Elbows
on his Knees, and holding up his Hands, gapes and stares up toward Heaven.

North-West from Wiapoco rises the Mountain Gomeribo, which produces Maiz,
Tobacco, Cotton-Trees, and Vines.

In the same place the Creek Wainary runs Westwardly with fresh Water a days
Journey into the Country; and from the said Creek a high Mountain, fit for the
production of Sugar and Tobacco, extends it self to the River Apurwaca, where
the Wiopocaries inhabit a great Tract of Land.

The Harrithiahans.
North-West from Wiapoco flows the River Aperwacque, whose mountainous Shores
bear Brasile Wood and wild Cinnamon. The Stream it self takes its original out
of a large Lake, in the middle whereof lies a three-corner'd Isle. South-East
from the Lake dwell the Harrithiahans, beyond whose Country are the Rivers
Cauwo, Wia, and Cajani. On the Banks of the first dwelt, Anno 1596. according
to the Relation of Laurence Keymis, a People called Jaos, driven by the
Spaniards from Moruga, and who formerly possessed the greatest part of Guiana;
they distinguish themselves from other People, by pricking their Faces full of
Holes with the Tooth of a Beast not unlike a Rat: But at present, the Jaos
being departed from hence, the Country lies desolate.

The Wia, which springs a great way up in the Country, has a wide Mouth, and
near several Islands convenient Harbors: The biggest of the Isles, inhabited by
the Shebaios, is full of Provisions, viz. Fowl, Fish, excellent Fruit, wild
Hogs, and other Beasts.

The triangular Isles, lying more Westerly, are also very fruitful, but not
comparable to Gowatery. So far as the Coast extends it self with high
Mountains, it is overgrown with Brasile Wood, but the lower Grounds produce
Cotton, Pepper, Silk, Balsam, and the Root Wiapassa, tasting like Ginger, and
exceeding good against a Lask, or the Headache.

Before the Mouth of Cajani appears the high Island Mattoory, surrounded by the
lesser Isles Sannawony, Epenesari, and Eponeregemerae.

Between the Rivers Cajani and Maccaria, lies the low Island Muccumbro, out of
whose Center rise two Mountains, and which is inhabited, as the Main Coast by
Caribbeeans, whose General Arrawicary showed great friendship to the
Netherlanders: They observe no certain Laws for Government; Adultery and Murder
they punish with Death; they are very tyrannical toward their Wives, who for
the least act of incivility have their Brains beat out; they esteem one another
according to the number of their Wives, the eldest of which performs all
Houshold-Offices.

Caribbeeans the Inhabitants of Guiana.
The Caribbeeans are accounted to have been the first Inhabitants of this
Country, for the Jaos, Sappaios, Arowaccas, and Paragotos, were driven hither
by the Spaniards from Trinidad or Oronoque.

The wild Caribbeeans live farther up into the Country, and often fall with
great rage upon the other; but since the Netherlanders have furnished them with
Arms, they have not been so much molested by them.

Beyond Macavia lies the River Caurora, which is very narrow and deep; Rivers.
and next in order the Rivers Manamonary, Sinamary, Cunanama, Juraca, Mawary,
Amana, and Marawyny, full of Isles, and four Leagues broad at the Mouth; along
the Shore grow little Trees, whose Leaves wither as soon as touched by Mankind,
but revives again within half an hour.

Next follow the Rivers Sorrenam, Sorrenamme, Copanama, Marateca, and Curetiny,
where the Netherlanders, by virtue of a Patent granted by the States General,
drove a Trade for several years.

Somewhat farther the Berbice, Apari, Maycawini, Mabeyca, Mirara and Essekebe,
discharge their Waters into the Ocean, twenty days Journey from their
Springhead, where a great Lake (by the Jaos called The Roponowini, and by the
Caribbeeans, Parime) spreads it self a great way; and on its Northern Shore
has the Town Manoa.

Along the River Essebeke is an excellent sort of Wood, the Dye called
Orellano, and abundance of Cassavi: In the Mouth of the River also lies the
Isle Ottoma.

Lastly, between Essebeke and the great River Orinoque, glide the lesser
Streams Iwapoi, Pauroma, Gayni, Moruga, Ammacoura, and Parima, before which lie
several nameless Isles.

The Discovery of these Parts begun by Columbus.
Christopher Columbus, in his third Voyage to the West Indies, discovered the
great Island Trinidad, where before the Mouth of the Bay Vallena he was in
great danger, as also the Ship Commanded by Alonso de Ojeda, by reason of the
Waves, with which the great River Yuyapar, otherwise called Orinoque, coming
out of the High-lands of Paria, falls into the Sea, which made him call the
said Mouth Bocca del Drago; so that Columbus, Anno 1599. discovered the Main
Coast of America to the Northward of Guiana, as far as the Promontory De la
Vela, before Americus Vesputius; whither Diego de Ordas Steered with three
Ships, Manned with four hundred Castilians, Diego de Ordas his Expedition.
in the Year 1231. and before Guiana took four Caribbeeans Prisoners in a
Canoo, and finding an Emerauld about them as big as a Man's Hand, they informed
him, that up the River was a Rock all of such Stones, and a Mountain on which
grew high Trees, yielding store of Myrrh; but the strong contrary Tides and
Water-falls prevented Ordas from going thither; and being troubled at the loss
of one of his Ships, he ran along the Shore to Paria, and took the Fort which
Antonio Sedenno, Governor of Trinidad, had cast up there, and left the Command
thereof to Juan Gonsalvez, Ordas pretending that Sedenno had built it contrary
to the Emperor's Order, and that he had made Slaves of the Natives. Martin
Jannez Tafur stayed in the conquered Fort according to Ordas his appointment,
who went up the River Orinoque not without great hardship; for his Provisions
were not only short, but he was tormented in the Day by the Muschitoes, and in
the Night by the Bats; at last coming to a Village Commanded by Viapari, he was
kindly Entertained, which made Ordas contrary to the will of his Men, who would
willingly have gone farther into the Country, stay there all the Winter; but
as soon as the rainy Months were over, Ordas went farther up the River
Orinoque, where his Ship was stav'd against a sandy Shelf, which forced him
with two hundred Foot and forty Horse, to travel along the Shore, where he was
much scanted of Provisions, and for forty days together met none but a few poor
wild Fishermen, and at last stopped at an unknown River, which fell into the
Orinoque. The Guianian Guide which Viapari had given Ordas, advised him to go
along the Shore of the new River, because it would lead them to a well Clothed
and rich People: But Ordas went along by the River Oronoque till he came where
the Water falling from the Mountains makes it so terrible rough, that Ordas his
Vessels, which were Toed along, were not able to be got any farther, so that
after two hundred Leagues advance, he was necessitated, by reason of the
forementioned Water-falls, to go aboard and Sail down the Stream: His Men
being wearied with so troublesome a Journey, forsook him on the Island Cubagua,
which made him return over Hispaniola to Spain, where not long after he died
with Grief.

The Expedition of Hieronimo Ortall
This unsuccessful Expedition of Ordas no way daunted Hieronimo Ortall from
prosecuting the same Design; for setting Sail from St. Lucas, Anno 1533. to the
Fort which Ordas had taken from Juan Gonsalves, he Steered from thence over to
Cubagua, to fetch some Men, and sent the Lieutenant Alonso Herrera with five
Ketches, carrying two hundred Men, the same way which Ordas had been. Herrera
coming to the forementioned Water-falls where Ordas returned, caused his
Vessels to be unladen, then Toed them by mere force over the Water-falls, where
he discovered plain Fields without any Inhabitants, extending themselves to the
Mouth of the River Meta, where he quitted his Vessels, and with no small
trouble got over Morasses and Pools to the fruitful Country of the Xaguas, a
People both cruel and valiant; whom after a sharp Conflict vanquishing, he
became Master of their Village, in which he found plenty of Provisions, as also
in another neighboring Town, where his tired, and almost starved Army began to
take Breath, being exceedingly refreshed with the delicious Meat of a sort of
wild Dogs, which were here in great abundance. Having spent the Winter Season
here, they were often set upon by the Caribbeeans, by whose poisoned Arrows
several of them being shot, died Distracted, and amongst the rest Herrera
himself; after which his Successor Alvaro Ordas returned to the Vessels, which
were left at the Mouth of the River Meta, from whence he Sailed back without
any other success, the Design being to find out the Golden City Manoa, on the
Banks of the great Lake Parime.

Is followed by Hermandes and others.
Not long after Peter Hermandez de Serpa undertook the same Work with three
hundred Spaniards, several Brasilians and Negro's; but before he could reach
the River Orinoque, he was destroyed by the salvage People Wikiri, eighteen of
his Men only escaping to bring the news of this sad Disaster.

Peter de Orsua following the footsteps of Gonsalvo Pizarro, went to seek for
Gold in Guiana; but being killed by Lopes Agira near the Amazone River, that
Expedition also proved fruitless.

Berreo's Relation of his Adventures to Sir Walter Raleigh.
With the same desire of finding Gold in Guiana, Antonio Berreo went from New
Granada thither; but being taken by Sir Walter Raleigh, was interrupted in his
Design; however, he gave him an Account of his Adventures, so far as he had
gone, viz. That he went to find out a Way along the River Cassanor, between New
Granada and New Guiana, went from Cassanor to the Stream Meta, and from thence
to Orinoque, where he was in great danger, by reason of sharp Rocks, over which
the Stream flowing, washes several Isles; That he spent a whole year before he
came to the utmost Borders of Amapaia; near which he lost several of his
Barques, and on the Shore, not only diverse Horses, but also many of his Men,
who either died of hardship, or were killed by the Natives with poisonous
Arrows, so that sixty of his Men were killed in the Country of Amapaia, which
extends along the River Orinoque, besides a great many that died there by
drinking the Water, which was full of poisonous Animals, and glided over a
slimy and muddy Ground, which made it thick and troubled: Six Months he stayed
in the Country Amapaia, where he made Peace with the Inhabitants of Anebas,
who gave him ten curious Images of massy Gold. The River Orinoque is about
four Leagues broad here, and about seven hundred Miles long, before it fall
into the Ocean, and is every where enriched with the Waters of many Rivers
which fall into it from the North and South: He added moreover, that he
endeavored to go down Southerly to Guiana, but was prevented by steep
Mountains, and therefore went on Easterly till he came to the Country Emeria,
where he found a courteous People, and plenty of Provisions; that the Governor
of Caripana, being about a hundred years of age, had a long time Conversed with
the Christians on the Islands Trinidad and Margareta, and learned a Form of
Civil Government; that Sailing down the River Orinoque between many Isles lying
at the Mouth of the River to Trinidad, and from thence to Margareta, he took
sixty Men into his Service; but that he himself, being tired with so great a
Journey, and staying to refresh himself at Trinidad, fell into the hands of
another Party of the English; that before he was taken he sent several of his
Men to Caripana, to find the King of Morequito, who three years before had been
with abundance of Gold at Cumana and Margareta, and informed a Spaniard called
Vides so much concerning the Golden Country Guiana, that he obtained a Patent
at the Spanish Court to discover Guiana; but that Vides, jealous that he might
be there before him, had not only incensed Morequito against him, but so
instructed him, that he suffered his Men to pass through the Country to fetch
Gold from the City Manoa, and as they returned, set upon them and slew them on
the Borders of Aromaia, together with a Monk that was in their Company, one Man
only escaping; by whom being informed of the Murder, he immediately sent
diverse Soldiers to take Revenge of Morequito, who flying to the Governor Vides,
was nevertheless, upon his demanding him in the King's Name, delivered, to him;
and notwithstanding he proffered a great Sum of Money for his Ransom, was
cruelly put to Death; but not satisfied with that Revenge, he overrun all the
Country of Aromaia, took Morequito's Uncle, called Topiawari, Prisoner, who
bought his Life for a hundred Plates of Gold, and some Precious Stones; That
Listing many Men in Spain for the Gold which he sent thither, he Rowed with
Barques up the Rivers Barema, Pattroma, and Dessequebe, where he bartered
Trifles for Men, Women, and Children, of whom he made great Sums of Money on
the Island Margareta.

This Information which Sir Walter Raleigh got from his Prisoner Berreo, made
him desirous to make an Expedition to Guiana; to which purpose he sent Captain
George Gifford with a Ketch and a Barque to the River Capuri, where the Water
fell before the Vessels could get beyond the Sands in the Mouth of the River.

John Douglas had better success, being likewise sent out by Sir Walter
Raleigh, for he with his Boats found that Orinoque had nine Arms to the North
Sea, and seven to the South, which embrace diverse Isles, of which those on the
right side are called Pallamos, and those on the left, Horotomaca. The Mouth of
the River gapes a hundred Leagues. On the fore-mention'd-Isles dwell the
Titiriras, a modest People, who speak a bald Language; in the Summer they live
under the open Sky upon the bare Earth, and in the Winter (being there between
May and September) on the tops of the Trees, because during that time the River
Orinoque rising thirty Foot higher, overflows all the Isles thereabouts, which
are very high and mountainous. But Raleigh himself Rowing up the River Amana,
endured great hardship, his Men being most of them sweltred with the Heat, and
great want of Provisions; and had not their Indian Pilot showed them another
Stream much easier to Navigate, he would have been forced to return
successless; but being stored with Provision out of a Village built along the
Shore, he chased four Canoos, of which he took one, and also an Arwaccas, which
in fifteen days time brought him into the River Orinoque, where he saw the high
Mountains of Guiana; afterward Anchoring before a fair sandy Bank, which lay
near the Mouth of three Rivers, he took abundance of Tortoises, and was
furnished with plenty of all sorts of Provisions, sent him from the Governor
Toparimaca, who inhabited the pleasant Village Arowocay, built on a little
Hill, surrounded with delightful Gardens, and Fields tilled by the Negro's; who
accommodating Raleigh with an experienced Pilot, he set Sail with a fresh
Easterly Wind, and Westward saw the Isles Assapana, twenty five Leagues long,
and six broad, and Iwana, of the same bigness. The River Orinoque has here
thirty Leagues in breadth, and receives the Rivers Arrawopana and Europa: He
Sailed next by the Isles Ocaywita and Putayma, opposite to which on the Main
Land appears the Mountain Oecope, whose top reaches the Clouds; on the right
side a Plain Country discovered it self a vast way, which the Pilot said was
called The Plain of Sayma, extending Northerly a hundred and twenty Leagues to
Cumana and Caracas, inhabited by four sorts of People, viz. the Saymas,
Assaways, Wikeries, and Aroras; which last, being a Coal-black People, used
poisoned Arrows. Raleigh passing between the two Mountains Aroami and Aio, came
to an Anchor near the Island Murscolima, and from thence into the Haven
Morequito, where the King Topiawari, a hundred and ten years of age, brought
all sorts of Fruit, Poultrey, Fish and Flesh, and gave him an Account of the
Condition of Guiana, viz. That the whole Country from the Mountains Waccarima
to Emeria, bore the Name of Guiana, the Inhabitants calling themselves Orinoque
Poni; on the other side of the said Mountains lies the spacious Valley
Amariocapana; where the Guianiatas reside. Southerly the Oreiones and Epuremei,
who coming out of a strange Country, have destroyed the ancient Inhabitants,
leaving only the Awaaawaqueri and Cassipagoios. The Epuremei built the stately
City Macurewarai there. But Raleigh going on his Journey saw the Island Caiama,
and came to the Mouth of the River Caroli, whose strong Current he was not able
to stem, wherefore he desired Aid from Wanuretona, Governor of Canuria, who
furnished him with Provisions, and Men to Toe him up the forementioned Stream;
and informed him that the River Caroli, which sprung out of the Lake Cassipa,
was inhabited on one side by the Iwarawakeri, and the Lake Cassipa by three
powerful People, viz. the Cassiapagotos, Eparagotos and Arawogotos, all mortal
Enemies to the Spaniards: whereupon Raleigh sent some of his Men thither, who
returned with great hopes of finding rich Gold-Mines. The forementioned Lake
also produces the Rivers Aroi, Atoica, and Caora, near which dwell the
Ewaipanoma, who have neither Necks nor Chins, but their Mouths just upon their
Shoulders. Toward the North the River Cari falls into the Orinoque, and on the
West the Stream Limo; between both which the Cannibals reside, whose Metropolis
called Acamacari is very famous for their strange way of Trading, for there the
Women are brought to Market, and bought by the Arwaccas: But because great
Showers of Rain fell daily, and the Stream Caroli glided down wards with
extraordinary force, Raleigh returned to Morequito; from whence Putima, King of
Warapana, conducted him to a rich Golden Mountain in his Country, and along
the Rivers Mana, Oiana, and Cumaca, to the place where the Orinoque divides it
self into three excellent Streams, the chiefest whereof, called Cararoopana,
washes the Province Emeria, out of whose Mountains the Rivers Waracayari,
Coirama, Akaniri, and Iparoma, glide to the Northern Ocean; as also the
Araturi, Amacura, Barima, Wana, Morooca, Paroma, and Wyni, all Branches of the
River Orinoque: from whence Raleigh returned home to England.

Not long after he sent Laurence Keymes and Thomas Masham back to Guiana:
Keymes found out all the Rivers between the Amazones and the Orinoque, and
Masham the Stream Wiapoco; from whence both returned without any farther
success.

Sir Walter Raleigh condemu'd for Treason.
After this the Business lay still for a while, in regard Sir Walter Raleigh
being (together with Gray, Cobham, and the Romish Priests, Watson and Clark)
found guilty of High Treason, was Condemned to die; but being Reprieved by the
King, was kept a Prisoner in the Tower for the space of fourteen years; during
which time he wrote a Description of Guiana; which the King perusing, was so
well pleased with it, especially since he undertook to make out by several
Reasons, that England might make it self Master of diverse Gold-Mines there, to
which Spain could lay no manner of Claim, that he discharged him out of Prison,
He is Reprieved and sent again to Guiana.
and permitted him to make a second Expedition: Whereupon with ten Ships, Anno
1617. he set Sail for Guiana again; being tossed with diverse Storms, he at last
came with five Sail to the River Calliana, where he fell dangerously sick, and
therefore sent Captain Keymes with five Sail to the River Orinoque, to conduct
the Men to the Gold-Mines; each Ship carrying fifty Men, and the other Captains
being Parker, North, Thornap, and Sir Walter Raleigh's Son. The Spaniards
having a Garrison at Orinoque, fired very fiercely at the English, who suffered
great damage, and amongst diverse others, Captain Raleigh himself was slain,
whilst the other five Sail lay near the Island Trinidad, under John
Pennington's Command, who daily feared the Spanish Fleet. But Keymes found it
very difficult to Land in Orinoque, by reason of the Banks along the Shore,
which Diego de Palameque from Puerto Rico kept strongly guarded; therefore
going to an even Shore with intention to Land, he was so sharply received by a
Body of Spanish Musquetteers, that diverse of his Men were mortally wounded; yet
breaking in amongst them, he went toward the Gold-Mines, to which the Way led
through a Wood where the Spaniards lay in Ambuscade; but he judged himself too
weak to do any good upon the Mines, one of which belonged to Peter Rodrigo de
Parama, a second to Herviano Frontino, and the third to Francisco Fashardo: The
English also were fearful, by reason of the Spaniards Cruelties, who not long
before had flayed several Merchants alive; Raleigh upon Gundamor's Accusation
Beheaded.
so that Keymes contented himself with pillaging and burning the Town St.
Thomas, which the Spaniards had deserted. Soon after which Captain Whitby ran
away with a Ship from the Fleet, whilst Keymes returned back to Raleigh, who
laid several things to his Charge concerning the unnecessary Expense and shame
of such an unsuccessful Voyage; which so wrought upon Keymes, that he offered
to lay violent hands on himself in his Cabin. At length Raleigh returning to
London, was accused by the Spanish Ambassador Gundamor for the burning St.
Thomas, urging that his Master resented it so ill, that he threatened to wage a
War with England if Raleigh was not Executed; who notwithstanding he alleged,
That the Spaniards showed the first Acts of Hostility against the English, who
only defended themselves; and that St. Thomas was burnt without his knowledge
or Order; and that Keymes had not observed his Command in the discovering of
the Gold-Mines, (which Apologies were generally looked upon as real Truths) yet
the King esteeming the Peace with Spain of more value than one Man's Life,
without taking notice of Gundemor's Accusations, commanded that the Sentence
formerly passed on him for Treason should be Executed, and accordingly in the
sixtieth year of his Age he was Beheaded, discovering himself, by his Christian
Behavior and Profession at his Death, to be a far other kind of Person than
what the World had censured him to be.

Since this last Expedition of Sir Walter Raleigh, we find not that there has
been any great Resort or Trade unto this Country, except by a few Netherland
Merchants, who have yearly sent eight or nine Ships to the River Orinoque for
Tobacco.

The temperature of the Air.
As for the Air or Climate of Guiana, it is very differing, for about the
Amazone River, dry Weather begins about August, and the windy and rainy Season
about February; but Westward toward Orinoque, the Summer takes beginning in
October, and the Winter in April; the Days and Nights are almost of an equal
length, and the difference of Heat and Cold is but little.

Burning-Feavers, Dropsy, and the Jawnes, destroy many People here; which last
is not unlike the POX, and proceeds from carnal Copulation with the Guianian
Women, who are naturally subject to this Disease.

The Nature of the Inhabitants.
The Inhabitants are divided into several sorts, the chiefest whereof being the
Caribbees go naked, covering only their Privities with a Lappet. The Women,
though yellow, are very comely; and both Men and Women paint their Bodies with
Netto, which grows on little Trees in Cods: They make Holes through their
Noses, Lips and Ears, and hang Glass, Bells, pieces of Copper, or any other
Trifles that they get from the English and Netherlanders, in them: About their
Necks, Arms and Legs, they wear Strings of Beads, or Cockle-shells.

Their Houses with low Roofs, serve them only to sleep in the Night upon
Cotton Hammocks, for in the daytime they sit under high Arched open places,
that the Wind may blow full upon them. Their Household Stuff consists of Earthen
Pots and Dishes neatly painted. They live in Tribes or Families together in a
Town, which is Governed by the eldest of them; and their Militia is Commanded
by one that is able to endure most Stripes with Switches without any show of
pain. The chiefest of their Families have commonly three or four Wives, whereas
others are contented with one. The Men seldom do any toilsom Work, but make
their Wives do all, insomuch that as soon as a Woman is Delivered of a Child,
she must immediately go about her usual Employment, whilst her Husband lies
lozelling out his Month on a Hammock.

Their Language sounds not unpleasantly, but is hard to learn, because many
words differ but little in the pronunciation, and yet have quite another
signification.

When they march into the Field against their Enemies, then the General sends a
Stick to all the Villages under his Jurisdiction, on which are cut so many
Notches as there are Days appointed before he intends to set forth, which they
cut out again as the Days expire, and on the last they repair to the appointed
place.

A not much unlike Custom they observe in all Promises and Bargains; for they
give one another as many Sticks as they desire Days to perform the same in, and
so throw away every day one, till they have only one remaining, and then they
begin to think of performing their Promise or Bargain.

They know no word whereby to express any greater number than Ten; Twenty they
express by laying their ten Fingers on their Toes, and all that exceeds Twenty,
they compare to the Hairs of their Head, crying Ounsa awara.

Some of the painted Canoos made of the Trunks of Trees, will carry five or six
Tuns.

Their manner of ^ighting, Re^^gion, etc.
In their Wars they use Bows, poisoned Arrows, short Truncheons of speckled
Wood, and Shields full of carved Images, and Fight without any Order. They go
upon no Design but in the Night, and upon certain advantages. All Women and
Children which they take Prisoners, are sold for Slaves, but the Men are
cruelly put to death.

There is but little of Religion that can be ascribed to these People, only
that some show Reverence to the Sun and Moon, which they believe are both
living Creatures; but they make no Offerings to them.

Their Funeral-Feasts for great Persons are strangely kept, viz. all the Men
making themselves Drunk with the Liquor Parranoro, Dance three or four days one
after another, and he that drinks most, and is worst Drunk, gains the greatest
Honor, whilst the Women lament and mourn for the Deceased.

Their Priests, called Peeaios, are in great esteem amongst them, because they
pretend that they Converse with the Spirits Wattipa and Yarakin, which the
Guianians exceedingly fear, apprehending themselves often beaten black and blue
by them.

The Peeaios also profess themselves to be Surgeons and Doctors, but if they
cure not their Patients, they go in danger of their Lives, unless they speedily
get away.

They burn their dead Bodies, together with those things the Deceased affected
most in his Lifetime. A Prince or Governor also has his Slaves put to to
death at the time when he is burned, that they may serve him in the other World.

Their Bread-Corn.
The Cassavi-Root pressed, boiled with Pepper, dried and baked on hot Stones,
serves the Natives for Bread.

Each Grain that is Sow'n here produces in Harvest above fifteen hundred.

Their Corn makes wholesome and well tasted Beer, called Passiaw, and of their
stamped Cassavi they make the Liquor Parranow.

In hollow Trees, and Caves under Ground, they find abundance of Honey; and
their Vines afford them excellent Grapes twice a year.

No Plant is ever seen here without either Leaf, Blossom, or Fruit, except the
European Apple Tree, which never changes its nature, but blossoms and bears
Fruit at the same time of the year as in Europe.

The wild Hogs Pokkiero, whose Navels grow on their Backs; and the Pangio, not
unlike our Swine, afford the Inhabitants excellent Food.

Here are also Water-hogs, of a very delicious taste; but because they are very
apprehensive, and dive at the least noise, they are seldom taken.

The Woods are full of Baboons and Apes, as also the sloththful Beast Ai.

The Hares here, being of a brown Color, with white Specks, and the red
Rabbets, are accounted great Delicacies.

There is no Country in America, which breeds greater Armadillo's than Guiana,
some of them weighing eighty Pound.

Here are also Bears, which live on nothing but Pismires; they have long hairy
Tails, with which they cover their Bodies in rainy Weather; they put their
Tongues a Foot deep into the Pismires Nests, and so pulls them out.

The Tigers here are either black, spotted, or red; but the black exceed the
other in cruelty, yet are seldom seen near inhabited places; the spotted and
red devour abundance of Cattle, but will seldom set upon a Man, especially in
the daytime.

The Woods are also full of Land-Turtles, which the Inhabitants take, and keep
till they have occasion to make use of their Flesh.

The Eagles that are here with their Claws, Engage with those that go about to
take them.

The Catamountains make such an exceeding noise at a certain hour, both in the
Night and in the Day, that it is heard two Leagues off.

The Marmozets, a little Beast, biting the Catamountains and Apes in the Ears,
forces them to leap from one Tree to another.

The black Beast Quotto has a Face like an old Woman, and hanging by the Tail,
swings from one Tree to another.

The Cuscary is a brown four-footed Creature, about the bigness of a little
Dog, but has the shape of a Lion.

Moreover, Birds.
Guiana produces Teal, Geese, Crains, Phesants, Partridges, Pigeons, Marlins,
Snipes, Falcons, Plovers, and Parrots of all sorts, besides many other strange
Fowls; amongst which the chiefest are a sort whose Feathers glitter like
Scarlet, and walk along in Rank and Fyle like Soldiers.

The Sea produces abundance of Turbots, Fise.
Soals, Thornback, yellow Salmon, Sturgeon, Black-fish, Gurnets, Crabs, and
Oysters.

Amongst other Fishes, the Cassoorwa, which is somewhat bigger than an Eel, is
very strange, having two Sights in each Eye, of which it always holds one
above, and the other underneath the Water when it swims.

Here are also the great Fishes called Manati and Num-eel, by which if any part
of a Man be touched, it immediately becomes stiff.

There are likewise diverse Vermin, Vermin.
which trouble the Country Guiana, among which are Serpents of thirty Foot
long, that come out of the Water and feed on the Land; they do little hurt, as
not being poisonous: but there are many of a lesser size, whose biting is so
venomous, that it causes the Flesh of a Man to rot in twenty four hours time:
others there are which have forked Tails, and Tusks in the Roof of their
Mouths.

The Crocodiles here also devour abundance of Cattle.

Strange kind of Scorpions.
The Scorpions, which are black, and resemble a Lobster, breed under dry Wood or
Corn; their Stings are hid in their Tails, with which if any one be touched, he
is sure to endure an intolerable pain, but without danger of losing his Life
for the present, yet nothing can perfectly cure the same, except the Scorpion
killed and laid on the Wound.

The Bats here are as big as Pigeons, and they suck the Blood of Men and Beasts
so gently, that they seldom perceive the same.

The Pismires also do great mischief, especially in sandy Grounds; and likewise
the Musketo's, whose Stings cause painful Swellings; but these most of all
trouble them that inhabit near the Sea side on low Lands, insomuch that the
Fishermen bury themselves in the Night in Sand, leaving only Holes to breathe
at.

Frogs and Toads also make a terrible noise here, and especially after Rain.

Commodities of the Country.
The Soil is inferior to none in the World, for the production of Sugar; but the
general Commodities of the Country are Flax, Cotton, Hemp, the Berry Annoto,
which Dies an excellent Orange color, another Berry which Dies a deep Blue, a
Tree whose Leaves Dye a Red, and the Wood of another Tree whose Juice Dies a
Purple and Crimson.

Moreover, Guiana produces the Gums Lemnia, Barattu, and Carriman, which being
black and prickly, smells very pleasantly, and cures the Headache, Bruises,
Pains in the Limbs, Gouts, and green Wounds. The same operation has the Gum
Baratta.

Here are also good Sena, Bolus Armenius, Cassia-Fistula, Terra-Lemnia, the
Berry Kelette, very effectual against the Bloody Flux, the Juice of the Leaf
Upee, which cures the Wounds of poisoned Arrows, and a sort of somniferous
Apples, whereof the least bite occasions a deadly Sleep.

There is also a Tree, generally growing about the Houses of the Natives, the
Boughs whereof bruised between two Stones, and thrown into the Creeks of deep
Water full of Fish, cause them to swim above Water upon their Backs.

The Letter-Wood, called Pira timinere, turns also to a good account, much more
the excellent Stones, Jasper and Porphyr.

Nor are there wanting Gold and Silver-Mines, which doubtless would yield great
profit, were they opened.

The Grain of the Country grows on Stalks seven Foot long, on the tops whereof
hang two Ears full of Kernels as big as Pease, which ripens in four Months.

The Sugarcanes, being of the bigness of a Man's Arm, and about six Foot long,
are at the years end cut off, broken and pressed in a Mill; after which the
Juice boiled in Copper Kettles to a certain Substance, is put into wooden
Tunnels, square at the top, and narrow at bottom, with a small Hole, which is
opened as soon as the Sugar is sufficiently hardened, to let out the Syrrup;
after which it is put into Hogsheads, and so Transported.

The Negro's which are brought from Angola and Guinee, are so cruelly used,
that they oftentimes through despair destroy themselves.

The whole Country of Guiana is by several modern Writers methodically divided
into these inferior or lesser Provinces, 1. Rio de las Amazones. 2. Wiapoco, or
Guiana, properly so called. 3. Orenoque; and 4. The Islands of Guiana.

Rio de las Amazones.
Rio de las Amazones, or the Country of the Amazones, contains all that part
of Guiana which lies on both sides of the River Orellano, of a rich and good
Soil, generally, abounding with all sorts of Fruits, and especially with those
which the Americans call Totok, and love it extremely, out of an opinion, they
say, that it excites them to Venery, whereunto they are of themselves but too
much inclined; and another which they call Pita, of a taste far more delicious
and pleasing, and not so hurtful as the other. The Country was first
discovered by the forementioned Francisco Orellana, a Spaniard from Quito, but
it was only by the River Orellana; and though he be credibly reported to have
Sailed no less than eighteen hundred Leagues down the Stream, and to have
discovered a rich and fair Country on both sides the River, well peopled with
Natives, and giving in diverse places no small Arguments of greater Wealth and
Riches more within Land; yet such was the bad success of his second Endeavors,
and likewise of those that followed him, as is evident from what has been
before related, that, as yet, there seems no farther Report to be given, at
least not of any thing special, concerning that part of the Country.

Wiapoco, or Guiana, properly so called
Wiapoco, or Guiana, properly so called, takes up the middle part of this
Province, being divided, as the other, almost into two equal parts, by the
River Wiapoco, which runs through the midst of it. The Country on both sides
of the River is very rich and fertile, and so naturally apt, both for
Sugarcanes, Cotton-Wooll, and Tobacco, that they are said to grow here (all of
them very good) without Planting, or any art of Husbandry. In this Country
likewise should be the famous Dorada, as the Spaniards call it, or City of Gold
(if it could be found) with the reports and hopes whereof some of our own
Nation seem to have been not a little possessed as well as the Spaniards: nor
can we much blame them; for if the Stories of it had proved true, it must have
been one of the goodliest and fairest Cities in the World (not to speak of the
Wealth.) Diego de Ordas, the Spaniard of whom we have lately had occasion to
make frequent mention of, being reported by some to have traveled one whole
day, and half another in it, before he could arrive at the King's Palace; which
yet must be supposed to have stood but in the midst of the City. Places of less
Magnificence, but more Certainty, are 1. Caripo, which was once a Colony of
English, settled there by Captain Robert Harcourt, Anno 1608. upon the Banks of
Wiapoco, and not far from the Mouth of it; being a place, by the advantage of a
Rock, which it has on the one side of it, of great strength and very difficult
access; the Air about it sound, and said to be very agreeable to English
Bodies. 2. Gomaribo, Colony formerly of the Dutch, on the North-West side of
the Bay of Wiapoco, but since deserted by them. 3. Woyemon. 4. Crewinay, both
of them Towns of the Natives, not far distant from the other.

Orinoque, Orinoque,
or the third Division of this Province, comprehends the most Northerly parts
of Guiana, lying upon, or toward the Banks of this famous River: a Country
likewise reported to be very rich, and comparable to Peru it self for hidden
Treasure, which, they say, is not yet discovered, only for want of diligent
and industrious searching. The Places in it already known are only 1.
Coniolaba, as they call it, which seems to be some Town of the Natives, lying a
few Leagues distant from the Orinoque, toward the South. 2. Morequito, a known
Port or Haven-Town upon a Branch of the Orinoque, much frequented, and of great
use to the English when they discovered these Coasts. 3. Wenicapora: and 4. St.
Thomas, the only Town which the Spaniards hold upon this part of the
Continent, situate upon the principal Channel of the Orinoque, and consisting
of two hundred Families, or thereabouts: It is now a fortified Place, and was
taken by Sir Walter Raleigh, in that unfortunate Action of 1617. above related
more at large.

Islands belonging to Guiana.
The Islands that belong to, and are commonly reckoned as parts of Guiana, are
either such as lie scattered about the Shore of the Province, or such as are
found at the Mouth, and sometime far within the Channel of those great Rivers,
which empty themselves at several parts of this Country into the Sea, viz.
Orinoque, Wiapoco, Rio de las Amazones, etc. There are many of them, but of any
great name or esteem, only two, viz. Trinidado and Tabago, the Description
whereof we shall here omit, as having already taken notice of them amongst the
Sotaventi and Caribbee Islands.

CHAP. IX. Paria, or New Andalusia.
Situation and Description of Nova Andalusia.
VVEstward of Guiana lies the Country of Paria, so called from its chief
River: It has also the Denomination of New Andalusia, but for what resemblance
with Andalusia of Old Spain, they do not tell us.

This Country lying as it does, brings us back again by the Eastern Coast to
the Isthmus or Strait, which, as we have often said, joins the two parts of the
Continent of America together, at least to those Countries that lie next upon
it to the South, viz. the Kingdom of Granada, etc. It has on the East Guiana,
and those Islands which lie about the Mouth of Orinoque; on the West, the Gulf
or Bay of Venezuela, with some part of the new Kingdom abovesaid; on the North
it is washed with the Atlantic Ocean; and on the South has some Countries yet
undiscovered, toward the Andes. The whole consists partly of Continent, and
partly of Islands near adjoining to it, and is commonly divided into five
several Precincts or Parts, which are 1. Cumana. 2: Venezuela, being upon the
Continent. 3. Margareta. 4. Cubagua, two Islands abovementioned, famous for
Pearl-fishing; and lastly, some lesser Islands.

SECT. II. Cumana.
Bounds and Description of Cumana.
CUmana is bounded Eastward with the Gulf of Paria and the River Orinoque; on
the West, with Venezuela; Northward it has the Atlantic; and on the South,
those undiscovered Countries above mentioned; extending along the Northern
Ocean, over against Margareta, two hundred Leagues or more, as some say, in
length, and not much less than a hundred in breadth.

The Coast of this Country, as well as of the Islands Margareta and Cabagua,
has formerly been much famed for the rich Trade of Pearls and Pearl-fishing;
which failing, its principal esteem now is for an excellent Vein of Salt, which
they dig here as out of a Mine, and gather it naturally made ready to their
Hands, not half a Mile from the Sea side, on the back side of the Promontory or
Cape, by some called Punto de Araya, and by others for this reason Cape de
Salinas.

Towns and Places of note.
Places of chiefest consideration here, are 1. Cumana it self, a Colony of
Spaniards seated on the Banks of a little River two Miles distant from the Sea,
where it has a good Harbor.

2. St. Jago, a very strong Fortress, which the Spaniards of late years have
built, for the defense and security of the Salt-works against the Dutch, who
began to Trade much that way, and in the Year 1622. had a Design to have made
themselves Masters of the Place.

3. St. Michael de Neveri, another Fortress of theirs, standing upon a River
bearing the same Name.

4. Guaniba, a Town of the Natives.

This Country of Cumana, being generally infested with terrible Crocodiles,
has a large Inlet called Cariaco, which flows fourteen Leagues into the
Country.

Manners and Customs of the People.
The Men of this Country wear Cotton Cloaks, and anointing their Bodies with
Gum, stick the same full of Feathers.

When they go to Wars, or to a general Feast, then they shave their Hair off
above their Ears, pull out their Beards, and black their Teeth with a certain
Herb.

Their Princes and Grandees take as many Wives as they please, and give to
those of their Guests whom they intend most to oblige, their choice of the
fairest of them to lie with.

Whoring is accounted no shame, except amongst Married Women, who generally
live very Chaste, unless their Husbands consent to their Adultery.

The Women also Hunt, Fish, Shoot, and Swim, and are diligent in Tilling their
Lands, and other Household Affairs. Most of them have sore Eyes, occasioned not
so much (as some wrongfully suppose) by their drinking of the Water out of the
Stream Cumana, but proceeding rather from their unwholsom Food, as Spiders, and
the like.

Amongst the several sorts of Trees that grow here, there are some that yield a
white well scented Gum, or delicious Juice like Milk, and produce a Fruit not
unlike a Mulberry, which may be boiled to an excellent Syrrup; the Wood also
strikes Fire: There are others, whose Timber is good for Shipping.

The Soil also produces Cassia-Fistula, Roses, and other strong smelling
Flowers and Herbs.

For Beasts, Beasts.
besides Lions, Tigers, and wild Hogs, there are several strange kinds here, as
the Cappa, which is bigger than an Ass, having shaggy and black Hair; it runs
away from Mankind, but devours whasoever else it meets with.

The Aranata, which has a Goats Beard, and is of the bigness of a Greyhound;
it howls very dreadfully, and feeds on Fruits.

The wild Cats which breed here, leap, though great with Young, from one Tree
to another.

In the Evening a Beast like a lean Dog comes to their Huts, cries like a
Child, and devours all those it meets abroad; wherefore every one that goes out
in the Night carries a lighted Stick with him, for this Beast dreads the sight
of Fire.

The Trees give Harbor to great numbers of Parrots, and other fine Feathered
Birds.

The Bats here are very large and hurtful, sucking the Blood from Men and
Beasts.

The Muschito's also do very much plague and vex the Inhabitants.

The Spiders, much bigger than those of Europe, and of diverse colors, make
very strong Cobwebs.

Along the Seacoast, and in the Rivers is plenty of delicious Fish.

Anno 1513. two Dominican Friars went over from Terra Firma to Cumana, where
the Natives kindly Entertained them, till a Spanish Ship Anchoring there for
the Pearl-Trade, carried away by violence the Governor and seventeen of his
Servants; whereupon the Natives threatened, that unless their Lord was restored,
they would put the two Dominicans to death; the Spaniards promising
restoration of him in four Months time, informed the Council at Hispaniola of
it, who not consenting to his Releasement, the two Monks were, according the
former threatening, presently put to death. Yet after this the Franciscans and
Dominicans built each of them a Cloister in the Province of Chiribichi, where
they kept friendly Correspondence with the Cumana's, till Anno 1520. when
Alonso de Ojeda coming to an Anchor before Maracapana, under pretense of
bartering Maiz for Spanish Goods with the Tagarez, who came about fifty from
the Mountains on which they lived, being three Leagues up in the Country, and
brought Maiz down to the Shore, the Spaniards took thirty six of them
Prisoners, and killed or wounded the rest: Whereupon the Governor Gonzales
being complained unto by the neighboring Prince Maraguey, and his assistance
desired in taking Revenge of the Dominicans and Franciscans, who had urged and
persuaded Ojeda to the forementioned Act, Gonzales hereupon made an Agreement
with Maraguey, that he should destroy the Monks, whilst he himself would kill
Ojeda, which they accordingly performed. The Council in St. Domingo informed
hereof, immediately sent three Ships, Manned with three hundred Men, under the
Command of Gonzalo de Ocampo, who Anchoring in the Haven of Maracapana, feigned
as if he came newly from Spain, and that he knew nothing of the Business
between Ojeda and Gonzales, that so he might entice the Natives into his Ship,
and accordingly when diverse of them came aboard, the Armed Spaniards started
from under the Decks, and hung them up at their Yard-arms, burnt the Village
Maracapana, and ruined the Country far and near with Fire and Sword.

Ocampo also built the Town Toledo, about half a League farther into the
Country, where the Bishop Bartholomew de las Casas, making his Visitation,
commanded Ocampo to forbear his cruelty against the Natives, he having daily
either burnt, hanged, beheaded, or made Slaves of some or other of them. Casas
also caused a little Fort to be built at the Mouth of the River Cumana, to be
near to prevent the inhumane Murders and Oppressions committed by his
Contrymen; but because the Inhabitants of Cubagua bereaved him of his chief
Builder, his Fort was left half unfinished; wherefore Casas leaving the Command
of this Country to Francisco de Soto, went back to Hispaniola, where in St.
Domingo he made his Complaints to the High Court of Justice of the Spaniards
Cruelties; but being little regarded, he went into the Dominicans Cloister,
till he was called out and made Bishop of Chiapa. Mean while Soto, contrary to
Casas his order, had fitted out two Ships to Trade along the Coast of Paria;
but the Expedition proved very unsuccessful, Soto with all his Men destroy^d by
the Indians.
for he and all his Men were destroyed by the Natives; not without just reason,
for the Spaniards (according to the Relation of Casas from an Eyewitness)
destroyed this Country after such a manner, that a Ship Sailed between Lucago
and Hispaniola sixty Leagues without any Compass, finding the Way only by the
floating of dead Bodies, thrown out of the Spanish Ships. Moreover, the
Prisoners fainting, were set ashore on Hispaniola, and divided into Companies,
each Company consisting of twenty; Parents separated from their Children, and
Husbands from their Wives, and Lots cast for them: those that had either sick,
decrepid, or old People fall to their share, used to cry (as Casas testifies he
has often heard,) What do I do with this sick, decrepid old Dog? give him to
the Devil; I will not put my self to the trouble to kill and bury him.

But Soto's Death was not left unrevenged; for not long after Jacob Castellon
setting Sail from St. Domingo, left several Companies on Cubagua, to re-build
the Town Cadiz, and raised a Fort at the Mouth of Cumana, which has ever since
been kept by the Spaniards, who made great slaughter amongst the Natives.

Hieronymo Ortall deserted by his Men
Hieronymo Ortall Sailing up the Stream Negeri, sent his Lieutenant Augustine
Delgado through the populous Provinces Guacharuco and Parimatuotu to the River
Unare, where, not without a sharp Conflict, he took abundance of Provisions in
a Village. In the mean time Ortall traveled to Meta, acting inhumane Cruelties
all the way; but approaching Guiana (where Delgado was killed) he was deserted
by his mutinous Men, who ran over to Nicholas Federman; so that he was forced
to return back to the new Fort Miguel de Neveri, and from thence to St. Domingo
with ten Soldiers, fearing that Antonio Sedenno (who judged himself wronged by
Ortall, because Cumana belonged to his Lordship) would fall upon him.

Sedenno being five hundred Men strong discovered the Seacoast all along to
Patigutaro; where Settling himself, he regarded no Discipline; which the Natives
observing, killed many a Spaniard, and others the Tigers also devoured,
especially in the Night, they being forced to keep lighted Fires about them
against the wild Beasts

About the beginning of the Year 1537. Sedenno traveled to the Country
Anapuya and Orocomay, to the Province Goioguaney, where the Inhabitants
defended themselves very valiantly in a wooden Fort, before which many
Spaniards were killed with poisoned Arrows, and those who were not mortally
wounded, had no way to escape but by burning the Poison out with hot Irons; yet
at last the Defendants were forced to fly with their Wives and Children up to
the Mountains, overgrown with Brambles. Sedenno marching through barren Fields,
and over troublesome Rivers, The Death of Sedenno and Juan Fernandez.
came to the mountainous Country Catapararo, where he found abundance of Maiz,
and some little pieces of Gold, and was advanced about a League and a half in
Cumana, when dying, he made room for his Successor Juan Fernandez, who survived
him not long; yet the Expedition was not left unprosecuted: for Sedenno's Men,
after the Decease of him and Fernandez, went farther, and discovered a low
Land, which in the Winter being overflowed, forced the Inhabitants to remove to
the Mountains: But at last the Spaniards, being weary with traveling, fell out
amongst themselves, and dividing into several Parties, went several ways, some
to Venezuela, others to Maracapana, and the rest to Cubagua.

SECT. III. Venezuela.
Situation and Description of Venezuela.
THe principal part of the Province of Venezuela is bordered on the East with
Cumana; on the West, with a great Gulf or Bay, called The Bay of Venezuela,
with the Lake Maracabo, and some part of New Granada; Northward it has the
Ocean, or Atlantic Sea; Southward, some undiscovered Countries, which, as we
said, lie betwixt the Andes and it. It stretches out in length from East to
West, a hundred and thirty Leagues, or thereabouts, but in breadth little more
than half so much; it was named Venezuela, or Little Venice, by Alonso de
Ojeda, a Spaniard, who at his first discovery of the Country fell upon a Town
of the Natives, which stood like another Venice, all upon the Water, and having
no passage to it but by Boats. It is a Country extraordinary rich in all sorts
of Commodities, affords good Pasture for Cattle, and abundance of fair Herds of
them, Oxen, Sheep, Swine, etc. plenty of Corn, and other Grain, great store of
Venison in the Woods, of Fish in the Rivers, Gold in the Mines, and therefore
not likely but to be well peopled and inhabited, especially by the Spaniards,
whose Towns and Places of chief importance are these, Towns and principal
Places of Venezuela.
1. Venezuela, at the most Westerly Confines of the Country, built upon the
Sea, with the advantage of a double Haven, in a temperate and good Air, and the
Soil round about it the best in the whole Province: It is now a Bishop's See,
who is Suffragan to the Archbishop in Hispaniola, and the ordinary Residence
of the Governor.

2. Caravalleda, called by the Spaniards, Nuestra Sennora de Caravalleda,
fourscore Leagues distant from Venezuela toward the East, upon the Sea.

3. St. Jago de Leon, in the Country of Caracas, four or five Leagues
Southward of Caravalleda, and six or seven distant from the Sea.

4. New Valentia, twenty five Leagues distant from St. Jago.

5. New Xeres, a Town but lately built, fifteen Leagues Southward of New
Valentia.

6. New Segovia, but one League distant from Xeres.

7. Tucuyo, a Place well known and frequented, for the abundance of Sugar that
is made there, and in the Country round about it.

8. Truxillo, or Our Lady de la Paz, eighteen Leagues Southward of the Lake
Maracabo, a Place of great resort, and much frequented for Trade both by
Spaniards and Natives.

9. Laguna, a Town lying more toward the bottom of the Lake, said to be much
haunted with Tigers; and more than this, not much is said of it.

According to the ancient Division of the Natives, this Province contains the
Countries Curiana, Cuycas, Caracas, Bariquicemeto, Tucuyo, and Carora; in which
there are estimated to be about a hundred thousand Inhabitants that pay Taxes;
which Charge, according to a Law made at the Spanish Court, all Men above
fifty, and Youth under eighteen, are freed from: yet this Country had formerly
much more People, great numbers of them being destroyed by the Germans, Anno
1529. for the Bishop Bartholomeus de las Casas relates, That above fifty
hundred thousand map of Venezuela VENEZUELA cum part Australi NOVAE ANDALUSIAE
of the Inhabitants were killed by them; nay, they rooted out whole Countries,
notwithstanding the Natives were ready to Entertain them with all Civility
imaginable; the Particulars of the Story are as follows: The Expedition of
Alfinger and Sayltar to Venezuela.


When the Emperor Charles the Fifth Married with Isabella, Daughter to the King
of Portugal, Anno 1526. the Welsares, being Dutch Gentlemen in Augsburgh, made
an Agreement with him for a Sum of Money, to Conquer Venezuela; whither they
sent Ambrosius Alfinger, and Bartholomeus Sayltar, with four hundred Foot and
eighty Horse: These Forces Landing at Venezuela, drove away Juan de Ampues, who
Sailing from St. Domingo thither, had discovered the Coast along Coriano, and
already made an Agreement with a mighty Prince of that Country, called
Manaure. But Alfinger marching to the Lake Maracabo, Alfinger's horrid
Cruelties upon the Natives.
destroyed all the Inhabitants of the Country Axaguas, though they came to
meet him Dancing, with rich Presents of Gold; which he not regarding, killed
them, drove some into a House, and there cut them in pieces, and burnt those
that were got upon the Roof. From hence going toward the Pocabuyes, who dwelt
on the West side of Maracabo, amongst high Mountains, he was Entertained by
them a considerable time very courteously, and Presented with rich Gifts, for
which at his departure he shut up both Men, Women, and Children, into a high
Walled Park, where they were all to perish, if they did not every one pay a
certain quantity of Gold to be released, which not being able to raise, they
all died for want of Food. After the same manner he dealt with the neighboring
People Alcoholados, of whom he got much Gold, but not without unheard of
Cruelties; for he burnt all their Villages and Houses, ruined the Country with
Fire and Sword from Thamaleque to the River Lebrixa, carried away many of the
Natives coupled together with Chains about their Necks, and each of them loaded
with at least a hundred pound weight of pillaged Goods; and as soon as any of
them began to faint under their Burdens for want of refreshment, their Heads
were immediately cut off. But Alfinger coming to certain cold Mountains, was
resisted by a valiant People; in which Conflict he received a Wound, of which
he died at his return to Coro, Anno 1532. Upon which the Welsares sent John
Aleman to succeed him; but he also dying, made place for George de Espoira, and
Nicholas Federman, of which two Espoira being the chief, spent three years in
ranging up and down the Country, without any remarkable Transactions, being
continually at variance with his Lieutenant Federman.

The afore-mentioned City Venezuela, otherwise called Caro, and by the Natives
Corana, was, Anno 1539. taken and burnt by the English.

The Provinces Paragoana and Bariquicimeto.
Northward from the City, the Promontory St. Roman, in the Province of
Paragoana, runs into the Sea, opposite to the Islands Aruba and Quuracao.

The Country Paragoana is low and full of Venison; out of the middle of it
rises a high Mountain, the Inhabitants whereof are very hospitable and
courteous.

The Lions that breed in this Country run away from Men; but on the contrary,
the Tigers are exceeding cruel.

From Coro there leads a Way up into the Country over the Mountain Xizaezaras,
to the Province Bariquicemeto.

Between both these Provinces very fruitful Valleys, which produce Maiz in
great abundance, are surrounded by woody Mountains, inhabited by Man-eaters,
called Axaguas.

Anno 1552. Juan de Villegas discovering the Province Tucuyo, he found several
rich Gold-Mines near the Mountain Pedro, out of which springs the River Burio.
Near this place he built the Town Segovia, which, by reason of the unwholsom
Air, Segovia built by Juan de Villegas.
was soon after transplanted, and built on the Shore of the River
Bariquicimeto, so called, because the Water when touched, turns to an
Ash Color. The Plain Country round about would be intolerable hot, did not
the cool Winds that blow from the Mountains temper the same.

The Natives of the Province Bariquicemeto, their manner of Living.
The Natives divided into Tribes that understand not one another, live on
Callibashes, Deers flesh, Rabbets, and the Juice of the Cocuy.

In the Rivers Hacarigua and Boraute, they throw the stamped Root Barbasco,
which causes the Fish to appear above the Water, and suffer themselves to be
caught with the Hand.

In the Summer they all store themselves with Venison, which they catch after
this manner: They set the dry Bushes and Brambles on fire, which makes the wild
Hogs, Goats, Deer, Armadillo's, Tigers, the great Serpents Bobas, and other
wild Creatures, to leap forth from their Holes and Receptacles to shun the
same, whilst the Hunters standing ready with their Bows and Arrows, seldom
miss one of them.

In the hollow Trees near the Rivers, the Bees make abundance of Honey for them.

Most of the Rivers here fall into the Stream Huriapari, which glides from the
Peruvian Mountains to the Northern Ocean.

The Province Chioas produces plenty of Gold.

Also of the Natives about Segovia
The Natives about Segovia go naked, are very ignorant, and much addicted to
Drunkenness; in which humor they kill one another: They live without care,
feeding on Roots till their Maiz is ripe, which in some places comes to its
full maturity in forty days time, and in others in three Months.

Close by Segovia glides the Rivulet Claro, whosse clear Water goes but a small
Course from its Fountain Head, before it sinks into the Ground; in the Summer
it is very high, and in the Winter almost destitute of Water.

The Commodities of the Country hereabouts.
This Country breeds all sorts of Fowls, but especially Quails and Turtle-Doves.

Cattle, Sheep, Goats and Hogs, increase wonderfully here, insomuch that many
of them are driven to be sold at New Granada.

The Cotton-Clothes that are woven here, also turn to a good account.

From Segovia runs a Way through a Valley twelve Leagues long, to the Town
Tucuyo, which stands low, but in a healthful Climate, and surrounded with
Mountains.

The Country hereabouts produces plenty of Corn, Pot Herbs, Sugar, and Cotton;
and feeds Oxen, Cowes, Horses, Sheep, Deer, and Goats, to which the Tigers and
Lions do great mischief.

Here are Gold-Mines, but they are not opened by reason of the great want of
Men.

There is likewise plenty of the Bezoar-Stones to be had here.

The Cuycas, in whose Country stands the Town Truxillo, are a valiant, but
very cruel People.

The Lake Maracabo, running forty Leagues up into the Country, is ten Leagues
broad, Ebbs and Flows, and feeds the great Fish Manati.

Westward dwell the Pocabuyes, and Alcoholados, both quiet and rich People.

The Province Xuruara.
The Province Xuruara lies toward the South behind high Mountains, inhabited by
the valiant Coromochos; and toward the North from Xuruara, the Bobures, hard
by the City Merida; the Country about which is unhealthful and Morassy, and
the Inhabitants exceedingly plagued by the Muschito's.

Havens of Venezuela.
The Haven Maracapana is the best in Venezuela, and lies in the Eastern part of
the Province, where the Mountains are inhabited by the wild Chiugotos, who kill
and eat all the Spaniards they can get.

The other Havens Westward, not comparable to Maracapana, are Flechado,
Sardinas, and Burburute, where some Spanish Families have a Salt-pit.

Islands and Promontories.
Six Leagues up in the Country you come to the fresh Lake Tocarigua, full of
little inhabited Isles; the People whereof live quietly, and barter Gold.

Toward the North-West the Ocean makes the great Inlet Triste, before which
lies the Island Bonaire, very full of Cattle, and on each side appear the Aves
and Quaraco, which abound with Fowl.

The Promontory St. Roman runs twenty Leagues into the Sea, and the Cape
Coquibocoa extends farther. Between both these runs the Channel of Venezuela,
which touches the Lake Maracapabo.

Before Coquibocoa are seen the four low Islands Monjes, with white sandy
Creeks, and full of Trees: out of the middlemost rises a high Mountain.

On the Main Continent also the Mountains De Azieyto appear with scraggy tops
beyond the Point: And the Bay Honda affords a safe Road.

The Cape De la Vela has on one side the Inlet Portete, and on the other, the
Villages Rancheria and Nostra Sennora de los Remedios; between both which runs
the Stream La Hacha.

The German Commander, Nicholas Federman, intended to have built a City on Cape
Vela, Anno 1535. but finding the Ground too low and unfruitful, the Pearls
hereabouts very small, and the Natives living only on Fish and wild Herbs, he
changed his Resolution.

SECT. IV. The Islands Margareta, Cubagua, and Coche.
NOtwithstanding we have already spoken something of the Islands Margareta, and
Cubagua, in regard they are by some reckoned amongst the Isles of Northern
America; yet because they are by many accounted to make up a part of the
Division of New Andalusia, we shall add in this place what we have found most
worthy of Re-mention, though much to the same purpose as before.

The Island Margareta, discovered by Christopher Columbus, Anno 1498. contains
thirty two Leagues in circumference, has many Woods and Pastures, yet little
fresh Water. To the Eastward of it lie the Cliffs Testigos, where it is very
mountainous, as also on the East. Round about the same are delicious Fish,
without which the Natives could not live, because the brackish Soil produces
but little Provision.

The Pearl-Fishing of Margareta.
The chiefest thing for which this Island Margareta is famous, is the
Pearl-Fishing, for which in times past a great Trade was driven, though of late
it is come to little or nothing. The Spaniards, with inhumane cruelty, taught
the Negro's to Dive for the Pearls, for those that were not nimble or dextrous
enough, they beat unmercifully, dropped scalding Wax or scalding Oil upon them,
or stigmatized them with hot Irons. The Pearl-Banks were covered with five,
six, seven, or eight Fathom Water; from whence the Negro's pulled the Oysters
with such force, that the Blood gushed out of their Mouths and Noses when they
came above Water to breath; after which, to refresh them, they received a Glass
of Wine and a Pipe of Tobacco. The Spanish Kiay received a fifth part of the
best Pearls that were taken here; but whether the Oysters have forsaken this
Place, or their growth hindered by often Fishing for them, we know not, but
however it is, few Pearls are found here of late years, which makes Margareta
to be more and more deserted.

The Nature of the Island of Cubagua.
Between the Main Continent of Paria lie the Islands Cubagua and Coche; the
first whereof has an unfruitful and sultry Soil, without either Trees, Birds,
and fourfooted Beasts, except Pock Wood, Sea-Fowls, or Parrots; and Castilian
Hogs being carried thither, change their Nature strangely; for in a short time
their Claws grow long and crooked.

The King of Spain used formerly to receive fifteen thousand Ducats yearly for
his fifth part of the Pearls chat were taken; which Gain invited many thither,
who built the Town Nova Cadiz on Cabugua in the Year 1521. but when the Arayans
demolished the Monks Cloister on Paria, The City Nova Cadiz built there, but at
length totally deserted.
the Spaniards, being three hundred in number, fled from Nova Cadiz to
Hispaniola, where the High Court, displeased at their cowardly deserting the
Place, gave them but cool Entertainment, and sent five Ships under the Command
of Jacomo de Castellan to Cubagua, to build new Storehouses in Nova Cadiz,
which was afterward re-inhabited; but when the Pearl-Fishing ceased, the
Island and Town was at once deserted.

Opposite to Margareta lies the Promontory Araya, behind which lies a salt
Lake, in which is found abundance of Salt, not only above, but under the
Water; with which the English, Spanish, and Dutch Ships are fraighted.

Da Vern's Description of the Saltpans on Araya.
Isaac du Verne describes the Salt-pans on Araya thus: Round about the same
(says he) the Ground is craggy, barren, and of a brackish taste, and destitute
of fresh Water, which is therefore fetched three Leagues farther out of a
Brook, flowing from the Mountain Bordones into the Bay of Comena; likewise all
manner of Provisions are brought from other Parts. Westward from the Point
Araya there is a convenient Harbor where the Ships take in their Salt. Three
hundred Paces from the Shore lies a great Salt-pan, where the Salt being first
beat in pices, is carried in Wheel-barrows to the Ships. The little Salt-pan
produces less Salt, and lies also out of the way, which makes few Ships take in
their Lading from thence.

The Country is every where overgrown with Brambles and Bushes, in which breed
Tigers and very poisonous Serpents. There are likewise abundance of Stags,
Bucks, Hares, and Coneys, besides other strange Beasts.

The Netherlanders beaten out of their Salt-Trade here by the Spaniards.
Till Anno 1605. the Netherlanders came hither unmolested for Salt, when eight
Spanish Gallions falling unawares upon them, strangely misused their Seamen;
but afterward the United Netherlands having made an Agreement with Spain for a
certain time, renewed their Trade to Araya, till the King of Spain, having for
the better security of the Place, built the Fort St. Jago, which Commanded the
great Saltpan, forbad the Netherlanders from lading any more Salt; who
thereupon Stormed the Fort, though to their cost, for several of them were
killed, and the rest returned home empty.

SECT. V. Of the Islands of Southern America.
THe chiefest Islands of note in the Southern part of America, that is to say,
those that lie remote from the Continent in Mare del Zur, are Los Ladrones, and
the Islands Fernandinas; for the rest being, as we may call them, Mediterranean
Islands, fall naturally under the Description of the Continent.

The Isles Los Ladrones.
1. Los Ladrones, in English, The Islands of Thieves, lie as it were in the
midway betwixt the Main Land of America and the Philippine Islands, but some
hundreds of Leagues distant from either, in the fourth Degree of Northern
Latitude; so named by Ferdinand Magellan, from the pilfering disposition he
observed in the Natives, when he Sailed that way for the Moluccae Islands. They
were a nimble and active sort of People, yet light-finger'd, tall of stature,
and going for the most part naked, excellent Swimmers and Diverse, and have not
much more to be said in their commendation.

The Isles Fernandinae.
2. The Fernandinae are only two Islands of no great bigness, lying over
against the Coast of Chile, in the three and thirtieth Degree of Southern
Latitude, and about a hundred Leagues, or three hundred English Miles from the
Continent, yet well stored with some lesser sorts of Cattle, as Goats, etc.
good plenty likewise of Venison in the Woods, and Fish upon the Coasts; for
which reason, though lying at some distance, yet are they not a little
frequented by the Spaniards of Peru, who find many good Harbors and Roads for
Shipping belonging to, and about these Islands.

An Appendix, CONTAINING Partly a farther prosecution of the Descriptions of
some Provinces already treated of in the foregoing Book, partly an Account of
some other Discoveries than what have hitherto been delivered in any
Description of the NEW WORLD.
CHAP. I. Rio de la Plata.
THe River De la Plata, by the Natives called Paranaguazu, is next to the River
of the Amaszones, the greatest in the World, and falls into the Northern Ocean
between the Capes Antonio and Maria, lying thirty Leagues one from another: It
receives from East and West diverse Rivers as far as the Lake Xarays, lying
three hundred Leagues up in the Country from the Mouth of La Plata. Also into
the forementioned Lake fall several Streams, which spring out of the Peruvian
Mountains Andes.

The first that Sailed into this great River, Anno 1515. to an Island lying in
the middle of it, was John Dias de Solis, who rashly going ashore, was killed
and eaten, together with several Portugueses.

Sebastian Gabottus his Expedition.
Eleven years after this Accident, Sebastian Gabottus set Sail from Spain to go
to the Spicy Islands through the Straights of Magellan, but was forced, for
want of Provisions, and the unwillingness of his Seamen, to put into the River
La Plata; in which being advanced thirty Leagues, he Anchored near an Island,
which he called St. Gabriel: from whence going seven farther, he discovered a
Stream which fell into La Plata. This River he called St. Salvador, and cast up
a Fort at the Mouth of it, where an Inlet afforded a convenient Harbor for
Shipping; he found the River La Plata to be generally ten Leagues broad, and
full of Isles; and to the Westward of it, the River Zaracaranna, inhabited on
the South side by a subtle People called Diagnitas. At the place where
Zaracaranna disembogues into La Plata he built a Castle, and calling the same
Castello di Santo Spirito, went up farther, leaving on the West side the People
Tenbues, Mequaretas, Mepenes, and Aigais; to the Eastward, the Quiloacas and
Santana, and struck up out of the River La Plata, North-East into the Stream
Parana, in which he had gone two hundred Leagues, and passed by many Isles,
when he went out of the same into the Stream Paraguay; where being set upon by
the Country People, who were busy in Tilling the Ground, he lost so many of
his Men, that he was forced, without any farther Exploit, to return with the
Portuguese Pilot, Diego Garcia, who Sailing up the same River, had met with
Gabottus in Paria; and because both had gotten some Silver, they called the
River, from that Metal, De la Plata. The farther Discovery whereof lay
neglected nine years after, when Peter Mendoza Sailing with eleven Ships,
carrying eight hundred Men, to the Island Gabriel, built the Fort Buenos Airs,
on the South side of it, where many People dying of Hunger, little was done.

Alvares Cabeca not long after following Mendoza's footsteps, discovered and
peopled the Province Rio de la Plata. The Mouth of the River La Plata Laurence
Bikker describes thus:

Laurence Bikker 's Description of Rio de la Plata.
Beyond the Cape Santa Maria (says he) lies the flat Island. Castilhos, having
scarce a Tree upon it; but on the North side a Rock, not unlike a decayed
Castle; to the Southward of which appear two other Cliffs; directly before the
Mouth lies the stony Island De Lobos, on which nothing is to be found but
Sea-Wolves; toward the East a stony Bank runs a good way into the River,
known by the breaking of the Water upon the same.

The Promontory Maria is low and barren, but within the same the Land rises
high before the Isles Flores and Maldonado, which last has a good sandy Shore,
Harbor, and fresh Water between the Rocks; but Flores rising with two Hills,
produces nothing but Brambles.

The Stream Soli^ also discharges its Waters in La Plata, near the Place where
the Mountain Seredo lies.

The left Shore of La Plata begins at the Promontory Antonio, and is cut
through by the Rivers Ortis and Los Sanctos, where the Town Buenos Airs is
built on a smooth Shore.

Martin del Barco's Description of the same.
Martin del Barco proceeding in the Description of La Plata, says that it is
dangerous, by reason of the many Shelves that are in the same. The Isles in the
River are as follows: those that bear the Name of St. Gabriel are five in
number; Garcia Isle is full of Trees, and for its fertility was peopled by
Peter de Mendoza, and afterward by Juan Ortiz Carate: But less fruitful are
the Isles De Lazaro, where the River Vrayg unites with La Plata, being before
filled with the Waters of Salvador, which receives the black Stream Negro,
which gliding slowly from Morasses, is very full of Fish. Moreover, La Plata
has eleven Arms, each very deep and full of Isles, inhabited by the Guaranins.

About a hundred Leagues farther the Cherandies have settled themselves on
pleasant Isles, lying not far from the City St. Fe, built on the Point which
makes the River Bermeio, where it falls into La Plata.

Farther up lies the Province Ana, partly well inhabited for its fertility, and
partly overflowed.

Next appears the Rock Pennapobre, and not far from the Town Guayra, La Plata
falls very high from the Rocks.

The several People of this Country.
But as concerning the Natives of this Country, it is inhabited by diverse
sorts of People, differing from one another both in Customs and Language. On
the South side of the forementioned River, from the Promontory Antonio to
Buenos Airs, dwell the Quirandies, a stout, but cruel People, who with the
Flesh of many a Spaniard oftentimes keep a merry Feast. Farther into the
Country run the Juries and Diagnitas. Along La Plata lie also scattered the
Tenbues, a civil People, who live by Fishing. Near the River Paraguay the
Ameguaes observe the same manner of Life; But the Carioes keep Cattle, and Till
their Lands. A hundred Leagues farther dwell the Payaguaes; and yet farther
into the Country the Chames and Carcares possess much Gold and Silver, with
which Juan d' Ayola having enriched himself here, was destroyed with all his
Men by the Chames, Anno 1541.

Nunnez Cabeca his Journey.
Alvarez Nunnez Cabeca came from Spain to be Governor here, but was not able,
by reason or contrary Winds and Tides to reach La Plata; wherefore Landing at
the River Itabucu, and spending nine days in cutting a Way through thick
Brambles, he came to the Jurisdiction of Armiriri, and a days Journey farther
to Cipoyay; and not long after to Tocanguazu, where the Guaranies, who are the
Natives, have two Harvests every year of Maiz and Cassavi, and breed and keep
Geese, Hens and Parrots in their Houses: They are Man-eaters, and very
revengeful. Cabeca having given this Country the Name of Vera, he proceeded on
his Journey over the Rivers Ignazu, Tibagi, and Taquari, on whose Shore appears
the Village Abangobi, and somewhat farther Tocanguzir. The Country hereabouts
is very fruitful, and has many delightful Plains, pleasant Rivers, and Woods;
but beyond appear Hills, Mountains, deep Morasses, dangerous Cane-Fields,
Receptacles for wild Beasts, and great Wildernesses. Cabeca having passed
through them all, came into the fruitful Country of the Guaranies, who are a
wild People, and possess many large Fields of Maiz and Potato's, also several
Silver Mines. From hence traveling Westwardly over the River Piqueri, he spent
eighteen days before he came to the Stream Ignazu, which falls into the Parana,
and at last came to the River Paraguay; along whose, Shore he found a People of
a gigantick Stature, called The Agazes, who regarded no manner of Husbandry,
but went out continually a robbing in their Canoos. These People, as Martin del
Barco relates, were not long after all destroyed by the Spaniards.

Not far from the Agazes dwell the Guaycurues, a valiant People; and somewhat
farther the Cacoves, whose Country produces Gold and Silver; and yet farther
in the Country reside the Guaxarapos, who remove yearly to the Paraguay to
Fish there when the Water is low; for in the beginning of January the River
swells so exceedingly, that the Country about it being overflowed, is covered
with above six Fathom Water. The Paraguay discharges its Waters into the great
Lake Xarayes, full of Islands.

Amongst other Rivers that spring out of the Mountains Andes, the Ignazu, along
whose Shore the People Xacoaes, Xaquesses, and Chanesses dwell, falls also into
the forementioned Lake. Somewhat farther lies a great piece of drowned Land,
beyond which the Xarayes have convenient Habitations, plant Maiz, and spin
Cotton: Their Country borders a great Wilderness, which ends about the
Province Tapuaguazu, the Inhabitants whereof, called Tarapecocies, are
furnished with plenty of all sorts of Provisions. The Payzunoes, dwelling on
one side of them, are not well known as yet.

Beyond the Town Assumption dwell the Mayaes, in the Way to Peru, and border at
he Tamacoaes, both which possess Silver-Mines.

Between Buenos Airs and Corduba lies the Plain-Countrey Despoplado, ninety
Leagues long, without Trees or Houses, but is most Pasture-Ground, which feed
many thousands of wild Horses. From hence glide the Streams Luchan, Los
Arrechivos, Arreca, Zaracaranna, and others, into La Plata. It is very
dangerous for a small Company to travel through this Country, because the
ranging Juries spare none alive they meet with.

Moreover, the River Grande flows with a wide Mouth into the Sea, and spreads
it self within against the Country Patos. Also the Rivers Tamandabug,
Ararungo, and the Lake Alagoa, disembogue into the Ocean.

North-East beyond Alagoa lie the Islands Catharina and Gale; and in the Bay
Tojuqua appear several Isles.

The Streams Tajahu and Ytabuca spring out of high Mountains, inhabited by the
People Anniriri and Cipopoy.

Lastly, the Country washed by the Stream Ararapira, produces all sorts of
Provisions.

CHAP. II. Chili.
THere are in this Country both tame and wild Sheep; The Cammel-Sheep.
the tame ones are called Cammel-Sheep, being covered with long fine Wool,
having Necks four Foot long, their fore Feet cloven into four parts, their
hindermost into two, their Mouths very wide, which they open at those that vex
them, and make such a stink, that no body is able to abide near them; when
tired, they fall under their Burdens, and will not rise, though beaten never so
much: Their Flesh is tough like that of Horses. The wild Mountain-Sheep are
red, and have soft glossy Wool, which makes a Stuff like that of a Chamlet:
These Sheep run swifter than a Horse; the Chileses lead them by a Rope put
through their Ears.

The Grain Teca
This Country of Chili not only produces Wheat, Barley, Maiz, and all manner
of Fruit, but also the Teca, which growing half a Yard high, is not unlike
Barley; the Grain thereof being dried in the Sun, is thresh'd, and parched in
hot Sand, then ground on a square flat Stone with a round Rowler. This Meal,
which is both exceeding wholesome and very nourishing (for a small Measure
thereof suffices a Man a whole Week,) serves also both for Meat and Drink: for
being infused in a greater quantity of Water, it becomes a pleasant Drink, and
kneaded with a lesser proportion, it is made into Cakes or Loaves.

The Fruit Vnni.
The Fruit Unni, by the Spaniards called Murtilla, is like a little red Grape,
and has a tart taste. The Wine pressed out of this Fruit is clear to the Eye,
pleasing to the Palate, and good for the Stomach, never causing any Headache:
It also makes good Vinegar.

But the chiefest Benefit of Chili is the rich Gold-Mines. The Country for the
most part lies desolate, occasioned by the continual Wars which the valiant
People Arauco maintained against the Spaniards after such a manner, that in no
place of America they met with such resistance, or sustained such Losses. They
speak an elegant Language, according to the testimony of Elias Herkmans, who
having committed to Wirting all the most significant Words thereof which were
taught him by the Chileses, it will not be altogether amiss to set down some of
them, which are these following:

A View of the Chilesian Language.
TEpanto, A Year. Tien, A Month, or the Moon. Toninco, A Week. Ante, The Day,
or Sun. Paun, The Night. Tabuyo, The Evening. Eppoun, The Morning. Rangiante,
Noon. Eppoe, The next Day after to Morrow. Vya, Yesterday. Putey, The Day
before Yesterday. Buchiante, To Day. Mintay, Now. Weytiva, At that time.
Wantarulei, In the Morning betimes. Biliante, Always. Chumel, When. Chemchuem,
Also. Hueno, The Heavens. Quereb, The Air or Wind. Tomo, The Clouds. Wangelen,
The Stars. Pillan, Thunder. Gualio, Lightning. Puta que quereb, A Storm. Maoni,
Rain. Piren, Snow. Veaquumao, Dew. Pillingei, Ice. Quetal, Fire. Ko, Water.
Tue, The Earth. Mappo, The Land. Pele, Clay. Cura, Stone. Maviel, Wood. Aluven,
Timber. Millia, Gold. Lien, Silver. Paila, Brass. Titi, Tin. Pavillue, Iron.
Quatal-cura, A Pebble-stone. Chadi, Salt. Lyl, A Rock. Milla-mappen, A Golden
Vein. Aliquen, A Tree. Cahu, Herbs. Nebo, Nuts. Pino, Grass. Cayron, Hay.
Wento, A Man. Domo, A Wife. Quiduugen, A Youth. Yecho, A Maiden Penien, A Boy.
Domo-penien, A Girl. Chou, A Father. Nenque, A Mother. Cheche, A Grandfather.
Domo-cheche, A Grandmother. Wenco, Mothers Brother. Mama, Mothers Sister.
Pelchuchan, A Stepfather. Caulla, A Stepmother. Botum, A Son. Neaque, A
Daughter. Penu, A Brother. Lamoen, A Sister. Guempo, A Father-in-law. Vilca, A
Mother-in-law. Choupa, A Son-in-law. Weuro-pencho, A Kinsman. Buytha, An old
Man. Cude, An old Woman. Cunewa, An Hospital Child. Peneinboe, A Guardian.
Apo-curaca, A Governor. Curaca, A Lord. Apo, A supreme Commander. Nentoque, A
Ruler. Ulmen, A Person of Quality. Pulmen, A Gentleman. Machi, A Surgeon.
Cona, A Soldier. Retave-caman, A Smith. Guito-wok, A Weaver. Challo-acaman, A
Fisherman. Nilla-caboe, A Merchant. Turnitave, A Dyer. Chumpiro-caman, A
Cap-maker. Tultunca-caman, A Drummer. Inchetaniweni, A Servant. Voerquin, A
Messenger. Langamcheboe, A Murderer. Chiquiboe, A Thief. Illuiboe, A Beggar.
Alvee, The Devil. Ruca, A House. Ullin, A Door. Chaquana, A pair of Stairs.
Pylca, A Wall. Wana-ruca, The Roof. Pithe-ruca, A Hut. Colcura, A Cupboard.
Cawyto, A Bedstead. Depotuarica, A Prison. Weltelve, A Gibbet. Pengal, A Grave.
Lonquen, The Sea. Leva, The River. Buta-wampo, A Ship. Aliwen, A Mast. Mou,
Ropes. Dolio, A Canoo. Wampo, A Boat. Vela, Sails. Wyta, An Oar. Tubquen,
Ashes. Cuju, A dead Coal. Ale, The Flame. Aypel, A burning Coal. Wietum, Smoke.
Catila, a Candle. Wyno, A Knife. Witi, A Spoon. Guidi, A Pot. Lepoboruwe, A
Tooth-picker. Pavilla-lonco, An Helmet. Waiqui, A Pike. Pylqui, A Dart.
Pulque-tuboi, A Bow. Tultunca, A Trumpet. Mecane, An Iron Club. Cachal, An
Awl. Wita, A Spade. Juisue, A Sieve. Chilca, A Letter. Charavilla, A pair of
Breeches. Icha, A Woman's Garment. Domo-ruida, A Coat. Couchon, A Bag.
Pino-chompiro, A Straw Cap. Congi, Food. Cobque, Bread. Nul-cobque, The Crumb.
Liquangue, Light. Dumingei, Darkness. Quemeiquen, Dainties. Medda, Pap. Core,
Broth. Ilon, Flesh. Cuichalon, Mutton. Wara-ilon, Beef. Chuchi-ilon, Pork.
Chuchi-chain, A Gammon of Bacon. Chaditues-ilon, Salt. Caucan, Roast-meat.
Avaun, Boyl'd-meat. Puytscha, The Guts. Curam, An Egg. Quecuram, The Yolk of an
Egg. Lycuram, The White of an Egg. Iwyn, Butter. Ylu, Milk. Puuloo, Drink.
Vino, Wine. Chiche, Beer. Cutan, Pain or Sickness. Aren-cutan, A Fever.
Towongen, The Head. Cancocultano, The Headache. Veno-aren, Scabs. Albungien, A
Wound. Molbuen, Blood. Touma, A blind Man. Cawinto, A Meal. Colchou, The
Smallpox. Wocubu, A wild Beast. Pangy, A Lion. Naguel, A Tiger. Cuchy, A
Swine. Michun, A Calf. Dew, A Mouse. Waren, A Rat. Twe-dewe, A Mole. Tewa, A
Dog. Pulpeo, A Fox. Guetaltuange, A Hare. Noquen, A She-bear. Lame, A Sea-Dog.
Lemo-cuchi, A wild Swine. Chumam, A Bear. Puedo, A Sea-Goat. Quelen, A Tail.
Chiliweki, A Sheep. Zuneu, a Bird. Lyppe, A Plume. Mepoiinem, A Wing.
Dani-inem, A Nest. Achaival, a Hen. Alchahawal, a Cock. Pylken, A Duck. Jeca, A
Raven. Guereo, A Magpye. Cogo, A Cuckoo. Nullyn, A Be. Pulli, A Fly.
Vulgumusky, The King of Bees. Petar, A Louse. Perem, A Flea. Piro, A Worm.
Vilo, A Serpent. Bylcum, A Hedghog. Ponono, A Toad. Challua, A Fish. Cawel, A
Dolphin. Iene, A Whale. Vouqui, A Grigg. Vilochalva, An Eel. Chadituel-chalva,
Salt-fish. Anquen-chalva, Dry'd-fish. Quinpilon, Oysters. Chapes, Mussles.
Coinow, A Crab. Quichiquinchio, a Falcon. Manco, A Crane. Choroi, A Parrot.
Pilo, Dead. Hilca, A one-ey'd Person. Topilgen, To squint. Topil, Lame. Poo, A
Bough. Kempomamel, Dry Wood. Bopemamel, Withered Wood. Nobue, An Acorn.
Nido-iwas, A Vineyard. Nidu, A Pole. Vanguen, Straw-berries. Couchow,
Black-berries. Litue, Toad-stools. Pilun-proque, Plantain. Calicai,
Clover-grass. Curi, Stinking Nettles. Pragyn, Flowers. Manen, Seed. Methen,
Meal. Chiquelen, To gather. Gueli-vanca, Coral. Kispi, Glass. Cudi, Millstone.
Pel, Mud or Dirt. Tassaquido, A Treasure. Guengu, A Marriage-Portion.
Deren-culyn, A Debt. Culyn, A Reward. Willawyn, Single-money. Guyn, One. Eppo,
Two. Quila, Three. Meli, Four. Quechu, Five. Cuyn, Six. Regli, Seven. Pura,
Eight. Culla, Nine. Maripataco, A hundred. Marama, A thousand. Guiltui, A
Kernel. Tapel, Leaves. Nil, The Bark. Pelli, The Smell. Oaliel, The Body.
Lai-calel, A dead Corpse. Ven, Flesh. Molvin, Blood. Boro, A Leg. Telqui, The
Skin. Vel, The Sinews. Ven-molvin, A Vein. Congo, The Head. Tol, The Forehead.
Lenglen, The Scull. Lonco, The Hair. Teren-lonco, Gray. Lolo, The Brain. Angen,
The Face. Taun, The Jaws. Ne, The Eyes. Tacune, The Members. Denen, The
Eyebrows. Ju, The Nose. Peloju, The Nostrils. Merum, Snot. Pilum, The Ears.
Oun, A Mouth. Adem, Sweat. Quewen, The Tongue. Melbue, The Lips. Boru, The
Teeth. Ilga, The Gums. Bida-bida, The Roof of the Mouth. Cain, Spittle. Mewe,
The Throat. Neen, The Breath. Quette, The Chin. Paion, The Beard. Pel, The
Neck. Lipan, The Shoulders. Puilpa, An Arm. Cue, A Hand. Mancue, The
Right Hand. Melecoe, The Left Hand. Puley-cue, The Palm of the Hand.
Changel-cue, The Fingers. Buta-changel, The Thumb. Wili, The Nails. Zevo, The
Breast. Moju, The Nipples. Pue, The Belly. Weddo, The Navel. Cadi, The Ribs.
Buri, The Back. Anca, The Sides. Quichio, The Buttocks. Penem, A Man's Genital
Parts. Metu, A Woman's. Chan, The Thighs. Lucu, The Knees. Metunthoy, The
Knee-Bone. Hemum, The Calves. Kamon, The Feet. Pinque, The Heart. Mocun, The
Lungs. Que, The Maw. Curique, The Liver. Vaca, The Milt. Quelche, The Guts.
Villin, The Bladder. Momay, To Stink. Pelengsley, A Spider. Inche, I. Tubei,
He. Eimi, You. Inchen, We. Tecengen-eimen, You People. Liengen, Those People.
Emma, So. Muh, No. Pichumei, Hard by. Averlugei, Far. Taymen, Against. Woecun,
Without. Compay, Within. Pulon, Below. Wono, Above. Buri, Behind. Junengen,
Before. Quelleb, Near. Munai, Enough. Alengei, Too much. Munalai, Too little.
Chemibla, Wherefore. Venibla, Therefore. Vei-mai, Let it be so. Wei, These.
Temunei, Fair. Woranei, Ugly. Newonei, Strong. Leptungei, Swift. Chouwo Lazy.
Alilonconei, Very wise. Wentannei, Valiant. Queunei, Proud. Culenei, Rich.
Cunewal, Poor. Toucou, Foolish. Molgei, Naked. Ilungei, Clothed. Queten,
Narrow. Anqueu, Dry. Prequin, Bountiful. Buta, Great. Pichi, Little. Montingei,
Fat. Toutau, Lean. Pettun, Colored. Queli, Red. Calbu, Blue. Carel, Green.
Choot, Yellow. Curi, Black. Lie, White. Nilla-caju, To change. Illawyn, Giving.
Tuignei, To be merry. Umatum, Sleeping. Limen, To wake but of Sleep. Bemgne, To
Build. Plain, To find. Vangen-lyn, To lose. Necul, To run. Amon, To go.
Utalegen, To stand. Jucheleyn, To lie down. Tecanen, To dance. Padenatum, To
fall. Utalenen, To rise. Avinge, To sit. Dimgne, To speak. Temelenge, To be
silent, Puronge, To Sing. Pylcunge, To call. Quipay To come. Ien, To eat.
Butum, To drink. Mepai, To go to Stool. Willam, To Urine. Cudepain, To play.
Locatum, To scold. Mecowyn, To carry. Chuquin, To steal. Guallulueno, To
restore. Pelteney, To pay. Lay, To die. Rengalgei, To be buried. Quedau capay,
Working. Intunge millo, To dig for Gold. Nilla-teubyn, To sell. Nilla-vin, To
buy. Quimli wi tami piel, I cannot understand you. Chu pipaimi, What do you?
Champaila, Nothing. Juei pingeimi, What is your Name? Juan pingen, I am called
John. Cheo ruaimi, Whither do you go? Moppo muruam, I go into the Country.
Cheo tui mi, From whence came you? Miro comotoun, I came from home. Chumel
quipai, tuai mi, When shall you come? Chumel pratuai mi, When shall you go? Ale
prungi tamruca, Is your Habitation far from hence? Picherungei, It is hard by.
Aleprungei, It is farther. Inchi quiparum camappumu, I intend to go into
another Country. Chemnibla qui parui cammappumu, Why will you go into another
Country? Merelya tiva mappumu, Here is no Provision. Aleiblay twachi tipanto,
benebliaale geniep ayn, The year has been unfruitful, and therefore we want.
Cheo mappungen tamichau, In what Province dwells your Father? Alu ei ei, The
Devil has fetched him away. At eimi ruaju inchio, Will you keep him company?
Ailan, No, I will not. Bien, I will. Chuben quecken neieimi tania, Have you any
thing to give us to eat? Cancan achawal, Yes, I have roasted Hens. Mu wy, How
many? Munalei enchintavia, There will be enough for us. Chuben putuayn, Where
shall we Drink? Aile Mangunmeinis, I thank you. Chuben domo trivo, What Woman
is this? Inchi tan curi, It is my Wife. Ni nave, My Daughter. Ni domo, My
Concubine. Alei teminigei vei domo, It is a handsome Woman. Qui pangnei, Come
hither. Amotunge, Run away. Umatuayn, Let us go to Bed. Utajuca, Let us rise.
Wira cuchai compay tan mappumu, The Spniards are fallen into this Country.
Quipa waicha laimi, Shall we Fight together? Waiquenagelan, I have no Arms. Ima
en pea in Waiqui, Follow me, and I will get Arms. Ali teum inche, I am
contented.


The Seamen who went under Hendrick Brewer's Command, Anno 1643. from Brasile
to Chili, brought the forementioned Vocabulary along with them.

Chili is looked upon as no way inferior to any Country in America, enjoying a
wholesome Air, fruitful Soil, and abundance of Inhabitants, who often furnish
Peru with Provisions; which are the speedier conveyed thither, because the
South-Winds always blow along the Coast.

The Peruvian Viceroy keeps a Deputy to Govern here. It has two Bishoprics,
viz. St. Jago and L' Imperial.

The Nature, Customs, and Manners of the Chileses.
Some of the Chileses are under the Spaniards Jurisdiction, and live in Huts;
others being wilder, defend their Freedom with the Sword. They have great Heads
and flat Noses: The Men continually pull out the Hair on their Faces and
Privities with Shells, which they carry about their Necks for that purpose,
having beforehand rubbed the Hair with warm Ashes; the Hair of their Heads
hanging downwards is cut close as far as their Ears, the rest growing long, is
tied with the Ribbon Tariwelonco, to which Persons of Quality fix Silver Plates
and Turkoises: Some also cover their Heads with the Skins of Weazels, or the
like Beasts, putting the Head over their Foreheads, and the Tail down their
Neck; which kind of Covering they call Maniewelonco: Others wear Caps made
after some strange manner or other.

The Chileses are not the tallest, but strong and well set, betwixt a white and
sallow color: Those that are in the Spaniards Service, wear long Hair, by
which they are distinguished from the shorn Ucais, who do the Spaniards all the
mischief imaginable. The Women are for the most part low of stature, but of a
strong Constitution; they go bare-headed, letting their Hair hang loose over
their Shoulders, except when they are indisposed, and then they tie it up: But
those that dwell about Castro wear Locks like our English Ladies. In Coquimbo
and Loquimbo they go after the same manner as the Peruvian Women: All of them
have thick black Hair.

Their Apparel, though mean, is neat: The Men wear wide Breeches girt about
their Wastes, and a piece of woollen Cloth, three Yards long and two broad,
which having a Hole in the middle, they put over their Heads, and so let it
hang on their Shoulders, leaving their Arms and Legs bare; but on Festival Days
they wear curious embroidered Stockings. The Women likewise cover themselves
with the same piece of Cloth, but after another manner, tying it first about
their Middle, then let it down to the Ground, pinned before with Silver or
Golden Pins; their Heads, Breasts and Legs are uncovered; the Cloth it self is
stripped with red, white, blue, and yellow, and fringed at the edges. For an
Example of their quick and easy Labor, Hendrick Brewer relates, That a Woman
being Delivered in his Ship, within an hour after walked up and down the Deck,
and gave the Child suck. Some of them have such great Breasts, that throwing
them over their Shoulders they suckle their Children, being tied at their Backs.

Their Huts being low, are made of Straw, Canes, and Boughs, and not built for
one single Family; for often thirty, fifty, a hundred, or a hundred and twenty
dwell under one Roof, and have a Governor, by them called Caruca.

Their Housholdstuff is little and mean, viz. two or three Cans to keep their
Liquor Chica in, Horn Cups, a Stone whereon they grind their Corn, and one or
two wooden Stools: The chiefest of them also use Sheepskins, which they
spread on the Ground before their Guests. They live without care, for they
neither Sow nor Plant any more than will serve them a Year.

Their Riches consist in Cattle, of which they have no great plenty.

About the beginning of October a whole Town meets together to Plough and to
Sow, which the Men perform in two days time, the rest of the Work being left
to the care of the Women; for the Men never meddle with Reaping or Harvest.

They eat and drink from Morning to Evening, when they do not travel, for then
they eat at set-times. Their Liquor is made of Barley-Meal, or Wheat boiled in
Water. On Festival Days they drink Chica, Brewed of Maiz chewed by the Teeth of
old Women. They likewise make a Liquor of the Fruit Unni, which tastes like
Madera Wine.

Every Man Marries as many Wives as he can buy and maintain, Their Marriages.
for Maids and Widows must be sold by the Parents, who set not a Price upon
them according to their Beauty or Quality, but their skill in managing Household
Affairs. Their Marriages are performed after a strange manner: A Son having no
Inheritance, lives on the Charity of his nearest Relations, who Present him,
one with a Hog, another with a Cow, a third with a Sheep, and a fourth with
somewhat else: thus enriched, he goes to his Mistresses Father, and hangs some
Turkoises and Plates of Silver about his Neck, and acquainting him with what
Estate he can make his Wife, he agrees as well as he can with his intended
Father-in-law, to whom he gives ten, fifty, or a hundred Sheep, Oxen, Cows,
Hogs, Horses, Poultrey, a Coat, and some Vessels full of Chica; which done, the
Father leads his Daughter to the Bridegroom's House, where he is Entertained
with Meat, but finds the Drink at his own Cost. Some days after the Celebration
of the Wedding, the nearest Relations come to congratulate the young Married
Woman, and at Dinner sing an Epithalamium to their Nuptial Deity Maruapeante,
all of them sitting on the Ground on Sheepskins. The Allies often take away a
Woman from her Husband, especially when he misuses her; and if a Man kill his
Wife, her Death is revenged by her Relations. Persons of Quality build a Hut
for every one of their Wives, sending word to her whom they have a mind to
enjoy: They respect one above the rest, who are in a manner but Slavesses,
being forced to do all the Drudgery. The Men are exceeding jealous and
chollerick, cruelly beating their Wives, if they chance but to look on another
Man; and if they take them in the Act of Adultery, they immediately kill them;
yet for all this they are not Chaste, but very Libidinous. As soon as a Woman
is Delivered of a Child, she washes her self and the Child in cold Water; then
kills a Lamb called Chiluraque, and makes a Feast; at which she her self eats
and drinks freely amongst the rest, and the next day goes about her usual
Employment.

The Spaniards tell us, that their Women, if they continue long in this
Country, are more and more hardened by the Air, and are as little concerned at
the Birth of a Child as the Natives.

A Widow has free leave to Marry again, provided she has given to her
Children part of what she has; but if she Marry not, but return to her
Parents, then she is highly esteemed of.

Both Men and Women wash themselves in the Rivers in the coldest Weather.

They adore chiefly their Deity Pillan, and the Devil, who does them much hurt.
They acknowledge no Resurrection, Their Religion, and manner of burying their
Dead.
accounting long Life in this World the greatest Good; wherefore when any one
dies, the Friends and Relations make a doleful Cry, and suffer the dead Body to
lie three, nay, four Months before they bury them, stuffing them full of
strong smelling Herbs, to keep them from putrefying: Three days before their
Interrment the nearest Allies meet, kill a Sheep, make Merry, and throw the
Body into a Hole near the Hut in which the Deceased dwelt, putting also a piece
of the slain Sheep, and a Jug full of the Liquor Chica, into the Grave.

Concerning their Idol Pillan, to whom with strange Gestures they Sing diverse
Songs, they believe that he is a Spirit of the Air, and Governs all things on
Earth. Some suppose him to be Thunder, and therefore they worship him in a most
particular manner when they hear it Thunder; for then they stick an Arrow and
Stone Ax into the Ground, and take Arms into their Hands, putting themselves
into a posture as if they should suddenly be set upon by a mighty Enemy, and
looked upon it heretofore as a fore-running of the Spaniards approach, whose
Cruelties they exceedingly dreaded.

They call all their Hero's Pillans, and ascribe Divine powers to them.

They take very much strong Tobacco, the Smoke whereof puffing in the Air with
strange Gestures, they cry, Receive this, O Pillan.

Their cruel usage of Prisoners.
When they return home Conquerors from any Victory, they put a Stone Ax into the
Ground, and standing Armed round about the same, Drink exceedingly, and sing a
Song in honor of Pillan. They use their Prisoners very cruelly, for forcing
them to Dance and make Merry amongst them, they on a sudden cleave their Heads
with an Ax, pull their Hearts out of their Bodies, and bite the same with their
Teeth. After the same manner they punish their Robbers and Traitors; but those
that have good store of Chica to Present the Governors with, escape the
Execution: Yet this cannot buy off Sorcerers or Witches, who are without mercy
burnt alive, with all they enjoyed.

They have no Priests, nor any that pretend to any religious Function; only
those that can Sing the Pawary well, are in great esteem amongst them.

Their second Deity Maruapeante (they say) informs them in a Dream when they
must Marry; but he does not do them this kindness before they have made
themselves Drunk, and sung Sonnets to his praise.

This Country is Governed by prime Persons, called Ulmen, or peculiar Lords,
called Curacen. The Ulmens and Curacens Command twenty five, sometimes fifty, a
hundred Families: Their Power consists in calling all the People together, and
consulting with them about State Affairs, which they dare not do with any
particular Person, nor Levy any Tax without extraordinary occasion. They are
bound to march in the Front of their Subjects against an Enemy, and are under a
Governor-General called Apocurace, or under a Nentoque. Other lesser Offices
are disposed of by the Curaces, or Pulmes; but their Netonques are chosen after
this manner, viz. The manner of choosing the Nentoque.
When that honorable Place is vacant, then whoever aims at it, computes with
himself whether his Means will extend so far as to treat the Curaces and
Pulmenes with a noble Treat; which if he is able to do, then he sends for them
to an appointed place, whither they all go Armed, and whilst they are eating
and drinking, he that desires the Place begins to tell them of his noble
Extract, valiant Exploits, Riches, and eminent Relations, and therefore desires
the Place of the deceased Nentoque: then the Curace rising, the intended
Nentoque hangs a Chain of Turkoises, or Cockleshells about his Neck; whereupon
the Curace moves the rest to the Election, without any Articles, the new
Nentoque only promising to Govern all things for the best advantage and
benefit of the common State: which done, the Curace takes the Chain of
Turkoises, and distributes them amongst the primest Persons of Quality, and so
they end the Day in Drinking, Dancing and Singing.

After the same manner they choose an Apocurace, or prime Governor; which of
late the Uca's, that they may enjoy the more Privilege themselves, have not
elected.

The Chileses Arms consist of Lances as long again as the Europeans, Their Arms.
made sharp at the Points. They also use Clubs plated with Iron, and Spanish
Swords. The Pulches, who dwell behind the high Mountains Cordilbra, use
poisoned Arrows, make Helmets and Breastplates of Ox-hides, which neither Sword
nor Arrow can enter: they all know how to manage a Horse, and the use of a
Lance, but are very much afraid of Muskets or Firelocks.

Because they can neither write nor read, the Governor by a faithful Messenger
sends to his inferior Officers such Commands as he judges may tend to the most
advantage of the Public both in Peace and War. This Messenger carries an Arrow
with a Ribbon, as a Sign of his Employment; the Arrow is held in the
Right Hand, and if he who receives it will answer the Message, then he sends
back the same Arrow with another; but if he judges it convenient to acquaint
any other Curaces and Pulmenes with the same Message, then he sends one of his
own Servants to them with the same Arrow.

A particular Account of Chili.
As touching the Climate and Production of Chili, this Account is given by an
Eyewitness: The Winter Season (says he) is so tempestuous, that sometimes the
Trees are not only blown up by the Roots, but the Earth it self is rent
asunder; some Valleys being filled with Snow, swell the Rivers exceedingly when
it melts, which overflowing part of the Country, makes the same very fruitful.
It is also extreme cold here, because such sharp Winds blow from the Mountains,
that they pierce through the Skin and Flesh of a Man: and indeed these Winds
would make the whole Country desolate, were not the Mountains overgrown with
great Oaken Trees, against which the Wind breaks. Moreover, the Valleys produce
Coals, which serve the Inhabitants for Fuel. The Winter bereaves the Trees of
Leaves; but not those which grow in the Wildernesses. In March the Fields are
full of innumerable sorts of sweet smelling Flowers; out of some whereof are
boiled the Angel-Water, so called for its smell and wholesome taste. The Grass
grows in November and December as high as our standing Corn. Turnips, Mint,
Clover, and Mustard Seed, grow naturally for several Leagues together. Likewise
excellent Physical Herbs grow here, whose power and operation their Doctors,
called Maci, keep from the Spaniards. These Maci are in great esteem, not only
amongst the Chileses, but also the Spaniards, for their great skill in Physic.
Amongst these Herbs the chiefest is called Quincia-mali which grows but half a
hands-breadth above the Ground, and spreads into several Stalks like a Nosegay;
and on each Stalk is a Saffron-colour'd Flower. This Herb pulled up with the
Root, and boiled, and the Decoction given to any one that is bruised within,
works most wonderfully, for it draws out the putrifi'd. Blood, though sunk
never so deep in the Wound. Moreover the Juice of Culen is also very healing,
if used for an Ointment, or poured on any Wound. This Herb, by the Spaniards
called Albaciga, has sweet smelling Leaves, and a tall Body. In some places
also grows an Herb, not unlike Grass, which boiled in Water, immediately cures
the Fever and Spleen, and cleanses the Blood. There are likewise Medicines
here, which dissolving the Stone in the Bladder or Kidneys, cause it to be
urin'd forth. The Plant Luce, which grows out of rented Rocks which are often
overflowed by the Sea, makes a sort of well tasted Bread.

The Wilderness Atacama, which makes a Boundary betwixt Peru and Chili, extends
Northward ninety Leagues, is dry and barren in Summer, and in the Winter
exceeding cold, and covered with Snow. No Provision is to be found upon it,
except a few wild Sheep, called Guanacos. About the middle thereof the Brook La
Sal rising in the Eastern Mountains, flows Westward through a deep Valley to
the Southern Ocean.

Troublesome Passage from Peru to Chili.
The Water of the forementioned Brook put into any Vessel, immediately turns to
Salt, and all along the Shore lie greater or lesser pieces of Salt; so that the
Way from Peru to Chili through Atacama is very troublesome: but that which leads
thither over the snowy Mountains Andes, is much worse, because it is farther
about, and threatens the Traveller with Destruction, if he observe not the
right Season of the Year; for in the Winter there blows such a cold Wind on
these Mountains, that a Man, being suddenly benumbed, falls down dead on the
Ground, and grows stiff against all putrefaction. Joseph de Acosta tells us,
that Bodies have been found there as firm and sound, as if they had been
living, which had some years before breathed their last on the said Mountains.

But Diego Almagro, who first discovered Chili, Anno 1536. went thither with
two Companies of Horse, and five hundred Foot, through the Countries Charcas,
Chicas, Xuxayes, and Chaquana, and having passed over a craggy Soil and the
snowy Mountains Andes, he entered into the first Chilean Valley Capayapo, having
lost no small number of Men and Horses with Hardship and Cold; the
inconvenience therefore of both the forementioned Ways between Peru and Chili,
forced Travelers to go along the Shore washed by the Southern Ocean. The
Valley Copayapo.
Copayapo bears that Denomination from the Turkoises which a Mountain produces
there in great abundance. The Valley it self is the fruitfullest of all Chili;
for in no place the Maiz grows better, and in greater abundance than here, the
Ears being half a Yard long, and the Stalks the length of a Lance; each Grain
that is Sow'n, yields at least three hundred in Harvest. All Spanish Fruits
grow better here than in Spain.

Through the midst of Copayapo runs a River of the same Denomination, and
twenty Leagues in length from the Andes, and at its Mouth has a convenient
Harbor before the South Sea.

The South part of Copayapa borders the Valley Guasco, which is less fruitful
than the first, but has a convenient Haven, into which falls a fresh River,
penned in by Sluices for the watering of the Cane-Fields. Moreover, there are
plenty of Partridges; also wild Sheep and gray Squirrel-skins are of a great
value. To the Southward flow also the Rivers Maypo, Chacha Pool, Loro, and
Moule.

Beyond these Streams Eastward, the Promonca's dwell near the Mountains Andes.

In the Valley Chili, which gives Denomination to the whole Country, were
formerly the famous Gold-Mines Quillatas, from whence Valdivia, Anno 1544,
carried an invaluable Treasure. The South Sea makes here a large and convenient
Harbor for all manner of Vessels, built two Leagues below the City Serena, at a
little River, which so moistens the low Country, that it produces all manner
of Plants. It rains here not above three times ayear.

From the Entertainment which Sir Francis Drake met withal here, may
sufficiently be conjectured the Power of Serena; for when the English Landed
here for Water, they were driven away not without great loss by three hundred
Castilian Horse, and two hundred Foot that Sallied out of the City. The Mines,
though they enclose much Gold, yet they produce but little, because the
Spaniards, according to the testimony of a Chilean Pilot, whom Oliver van Noort
took Prisoner, destroyed all the ancient Inhabitants that should have helped
them to dig the Gold.

The City St. Jago, lying near the Stream Topocalma, receives great benefit by
the Haven Valparayso, which makes the forementioned River, because in that
Haven all Goods that come from Lima are unladen, and the Goods shipped aboard.
The Country about the same produces plenty of Wines, Apples, Corn, and all
sorts of Cattle, and especially Horses in such abundance, that thousands of
them run wild.

In Valparayso Sir Francis Drake took a Ship from Valdivia, laden with two
thousand five hundred Bars of fine Gold. But the Netherland Admiral, Joris
Spilbergen, had not such good success, who Sailing thither with five Ships,
Anno 1615. discovered a Spanish Ship in the Harbor; where sending his Boats
well Manned to fetch off a Vessel that lay haled on the Shore, they found it
burning, and thereupon Steered their Course into a little Inlet full of Rocks,
which served the Spaniards in stead of Breast-works; for lying behind them,
they fired continually on the Hollanders; yet Spilbergen Landing with two
hundred Men, met a considerable number of Spanish Soldiers, and Horses drawn
out on the Shore, from whom they soon fled.

Before the City La Conception lies the Island Quiriquyna, whose Straw Huts
Spilbergen laid in Ashes.

At the time when Oliver van Noort came to an Anchor here, the Governor
Franciscus de Quinones Commanded seven hundred Spanish Soldiers to reduce the
revolted Chileses.

Four Leagues from Conception lie the rich Gold-Mines Quilacoya, which formerly
produced great Riches.

Over against the Valley Arauco, which rises out of the Sea, lies the Island
Maria, in a large Inlet made by the force of the Waves.

Here grows abundance of Wheat and Barley. The Rivers also afford plenty of
Fish, amongst which there is one called The Lake-Spider, in whose Eyes are to
be seen little Specks, which would exceed Pearl, if they were but hard enough.

Two Spaniards Command forty Natives on Maria, and keep them in such slavery,
that they may neither eat Apples, Pears, Grapes, Poultrey, or Sheep, though
they are there in great abundance.

Elias Herkmans was once in probability to have taken possession of this Island
for the Netherland State, had he not been prevented by an extraordinary
occasion.

Between the Towns Conception and Imperial lie the Provinces Arauco, Tucapel,
and Puren, inhabited by a valiant People, that often alarm the Spaniards. In
each Province Valdivia built a Fort in the Year 1551. eight Leagues distant
from one another. He also discovered the rich Gold-Mines De Ongol, and built
the Fort Confines there.

The Natives hereabouts being exceedingly oppressed by the Spaniards, fell upon
the Fort in Puren, where those in the Garrison, unable to defend themselves,
went to Tucapel, Valdivia taken Prisoner, and cruelly put to death by the
Indians
and from thence to Arauco, to Settle there. Valdivia marching with three
hundred Men to the Castle in Tucapel, was so fiercely assaulted at the River
Leto, that all his Men were killed, and he himself being taken Prisoner, had
melted Gold poured down his Throat: One Boy only escaping, brought the news to
those in Garrison in the Fort Arauco, who fled to La Conception, as those from
Puren to Imperial. Not long after the Lieutenant Francisco de Villagra went
with a hundred and sixty Soldiers to Raquetta, a Promontory against the South
Sea in Arauco, to take Revenge for the Death of his General Valdivia; but he
also had like to have followed the same fate, for he left ninety six Men behind
him, and with much ado recovered La Conception: By which means the victorious
Chileses came to be so much feared, that the Spaniards forsook the Towns Rica,
St. Jago, and Confines, and fortified themselves strongly in Imperial.

Description of Arauco.
Concerning Arauco, it is a small County, twenty Leagues long and seven broad.
The Inhabitants thereof are strangely valiant; those that inhabit the Mountains
are called Pulches, and are generally of a duller Spirit than those that dwell
in the Valleys; all of them use long Pikes, Halberds, Bows and Arrows,
Helmets, and Breastplates of Deer-skins, in the Wars; they know when to close
and open their Ranks, and stand in good order according to Martial Discipline,
which makes the Spanish King receive little benefit from Arauco, though it is
full of rich Mines, because those in Garrison being five hundred in number,
dare not come out of their Fort.

To Arauco belongs the Island La Mocha, low on the North side, and rocky on the
South; against which the Ocean breaks its Billows: in the middle of it rises a
split Mountain, out of whose Gap flows a fresh Brook; the fruitful Soil
produces abundance of Pumpeons, Maiz, Potato's, and all manner of delicious
Fruit; as also Oxen, Sheep, and other Cattle, which go grazing up and down in
great Herds; the Village that is upon it boasts about fifty Huts, built long of
Straw, with a Door in the middle, and round like an Arch on the top.

Sir Francis Drake and Candish were formerly somewhat roughly Entertained here
by the Inhabitants: but they showed themselves somewhat more civil to the Dutch
Admirals, Van Noort's and Spilbergen's Entertainment in Mocha.
Oliver van Noort and Joris Spilbergen: The first coming to an Anchor here Anno
1600. put one John Claeszoon (Condemned for some great Crime to be Landed on
some strange Place) ashore on La Mocha, with a few Trifles; for which being
kindly Entertained, the Seamen resolved to go ashore the next day, who were
likewise civilly Treated. The Governor of Mocha coming aboard, Lodged a Night
in the Ship, and afterward conducted the Admiral through the Village, but
forbad the Seamen from entering any of the Huts; out of which the Women upon the
hearing of a sudden noise, came running out, and kneeled down on the Ground in
three Parties, whilst an old Matron came forth with a Pitcher full of Chica,
and gave each of the Netherlanders a Cup full to drink, sitting on Blocks in
the Fields.

A Man Marries as many Wives here as he can maintain. They all live peaceably
one with another, and go Clothed with a pair of Breeches, and Frock without
Sleeves. The Women tie their Hair in Braids about their Heads, but the Men let
it hang down carelessly.

Fifteen years after Spilbergen Landing here with four well Manned Boats, found
the Shore full of People, who had brought all manner of Provisions to barter
against Axes and Knives. The Islanders going aboard, wondered to see the
Soldiers drawn out in order, and much more when a Gun was fired: They furnished
the Hollanders with a hundred Sheep, amongst which was one with an
extraordinary long Neck, and Legs, Hair, Mouth, and Back like a Cammel.

The Netherland Admiral, Hendrick Brewer, coming to an Anchor on the Coast of
Guadalanquen, Anno 1643. was informed by the Chileses, that about four years
before they had burnt Baldivia, murdered the Spaniards that were in Garrison,
and poured melted Gold down the Governor's Throat and into his Ears, and made a
Drinking-Cup of his Scull, and Trumpets of his Shin-bones. Brewer also found
some Ruins of the City, which formerly boasted four hundred and fifty Houses,
and was not yet so utterly defaced, but that the two Markets and cross Streets
were plainly to be seen, and the Walls gave sufficient testimony of its ancient
luster. The Country round about produces Wheat and Barley; neither are there
any Mines to be found that produce finer Gold than those which are hereabouts.
In the Mouth of the River which runs to Baldivia, lies a small Isle, the Men
whereof are gross and fat, and spend their time in Drinking and Dancing,
whilst the Women do all the Work.

About the City Osorno, though lying under a cold Climate, is a Soil full of
Gold-Mines, where above two thousand Chileses are under the subjection of the
Spaniards.

Since Teunis Swarte-Teun conquered and ruined this Place with small Forces
under Spilbergen's Command, it has not yet repaired its Losses: The Ruins of
great Buildings are sufficient testimonies of its former splendour.

On the utmost Point of the Island, on which Osorno is built, lies the Village
Carel-Mappo, burnt by H. Brewer, An. 1643. for he Landing sixty six Men here,
under the Command of the Ensign Blauewenhaen, they Engaged with ninety
Spaniards, who betook themselves to the Woods, leaving six Men and fifteen
Horses behind them. Description of the Seacoast of Chile.


The Seacoast of Chile lies as follows: It begins on the North with the
Valley Copayapo, runs Southerly to the Haven Coquimba, and makes the large
Inlet Atongayo; the convenient Harbor Quintero, at the Mouth of the River
Concagua, is also to the Southward.

Next Quintero follow the Havens Valparaysa, Topocalma, and Penco, known by
several Mountains covered with Snow.

The Stream Labapi disembogues also in the Bay Arauco, where the Sea washing
over the Shore, makes good Salt.

On the Shore of the River Lebo, Garcias Mendoza built the Town Canete, which
not long after was deserted, by reason of the Wars with the Chileses.

From the Haven Carnero a Channel runs to the City Confines: also the River
Cauten makes a convenient Harbor before the City Imperial.

Next appear the Streams Tolten, Queule, Valdivia, Chabin, and Bueno; and near
the Promontory Gallego, Chili ends to the South.

The Province Tucuman.
Eastward up into the Country lies the great Province Tucuman, inhabited by
three sorts of People, viz. Juries, Diagnitas, and Tucumans, from whom the
Country receives its Denomination, and juts Northward against the Chicas,
belonging to the rich Plate-Countrey Potosi, Eastward toward the Province La
Plata, and Westward toward the South Sea.

The Ground about the City St. Jago del Estero, formerly called Vares, being
the Bishop's See, and Residence of the Governors, is brackish and sandy. The
Citizens are most of them Weavers; the Natives go Clothed, and are of an
affable Temper and Disposition.

The River Estera yearly overflows the Country, which being dung'd with Mud,
produces abundance of Maiz, Barley, Wheat, and all manner of Fruits.

The Stream Salado runs the same Course as the Estera, from the West to the
East through a Plain-Countrey, but has brackish Water, and abundance of Fish.
Between(...)

The Expedition of Garcias Loaysa, Alcazova, and others.
Magaglianus was followed, Anno 1525. by Garcias Loaysa, who Sailing into the
Straights near the Promontory Virgins, endured great Colds; in the Haven St.
George he found store of green Cinnamon: The People he reported to be of so
monstrous a stature, that they might well be accounted Giants; some of whom
went naked, others wore a Net of Feathers made fast about their Wastes, and
others a loose Garment all over their Bodies. Loaysa gave this Country,
inhabited by Giants, the Denomination of Terra del Patagoni. He judged the
Straights of Magellan to be a hundred and ten Spanish Miles long between the
two Promontories, Virgins at the North Sea, and Deseado at the Southern Ocean.
Within lie three Inlets, which have seven Leagues in breadth.

Simon Alcazova Sailing hither nine years after Loaysa, shunned the Land on the
left-side of the Straights, because it lay most under Water, and was forced by
his Men to return to the Haven Leones, where he and all his Seamen were put to
death.

Not long after the Bishop of Placentia fitted out three Sail, which entering
the Straights, Anno 1540. lost their Admiral; the Vice Admiral Wintering at the
Inlet Las Zorras, (so called, because they took many Foxes on a Champain
Country without Trees) returned to Spain without any farther success: the
third Ship with much ado arrived also at Arequipa.

The Voyages of Hawkins, Drake, and Candish.
The English Captain, Richard Hawkins, also Sailing hither, found the Land on
the South side of the Straights, most broken, and in some places a few Huts.

Anno 1578. Sir Francis Drake Sailing hither along the Coast of Brasile,
Landing on an Island in the Mouth of the Straights, killed above three thousand
Birds. Sailing from hence he was miserably tossed in the South Sea, and
discovered about the middle of the Straights, that the Current out of the
Southern and Northern Ocean met at the place where a great Bay bends
Southwardly: To three Isles he gave the Name of Elizabeth, Bartholomew, and
George, and drove three Weeks without making any Sail, in snowy, misty, and
rainy Weather, falling amongst dangerous Rocks, and at last Anchored in the
Haven Health, which he so called, because his sick and wearied Men being
refreshed there, he set Sail from thence and returned home.

Captain Thomas Candish following Sir Francis Drake eight years after, found
near a Creek within the City Philip-stadt, built there by the Spaniards, to
secure the Passage out of the Northern to the Southern Ocean for themselves; to
which purpose they held four hundred Men in Garrison in the said City, which
lying near a pleasant Wood, was defended by four Bulwarks, each fortified with
a Brass Gun: But the Spaniards not being able to endure the Cold, nor get in
their Harvest, which was continually spoiled by the Natives, were so pinched
with Hunger, that after three years stay many of them died in their Houses,
which caused a filthy Stink, and consequently a vile Distemper, not unlike the
Smallpox; at last twenty three of them, amongst whom were two Women, judged it
convenient to bury their great Guns, and march away with their Muskets; a
whole Year they traveled in great want, feeding on the Leaves of Trees, wild
Roots, and Fowls which they now and then killed; at last they resolved to
travel by Land to Rio de la Plata, but never any news was heard what became of
them, only one Spaniard, called Ferdinand, being strayed from the rest, was
taken by Candish, to whom he gave the forementioned Relation. Candish entering
Philip-stadt, found a Gibbet, on which hung a Malefactor in Chains, a Church,
the Houses full of famished Bodies, and four Brass Guns, which he dug out of
the Ground. From hence he ran to a freshwater River (which disembogues into the
Straights,) whose Banks are inhabited by cruel Cannibals, and the Country all
about plain Pasture Grounds, whereas most part of the Shore in the Straights is
very mountainous. Candish Landing, found Spanish Knives and Stilletto's amongst
the Man-eaters, and lay a whole Month at Anchor in the western Mouth of
Magellanica, by reason of great Storms, feeding on Mussles, Cockles, and Fowl;
and from thence Sailed about the World, returning home at last with a Booty of
twenty Tun of Gold.

Anno 1599. Simon de Cords Commanding five Netherland Vessels, entering the
Straights of Magellan, found in the green Bay, Mussles of a Span long,
abundance of Ducks and Geese, and a great many Trees not unlike Laurel, they
being only bigger, and had a sharp biting Shell. The Wind blew exceeding hard
here over the Rocks, insomuch that they were sometimes driven from four Anchors.

A few Months after Oliver van Noord followed Cords, and Anchored near the
Pinguyn Isles, the biggest whereof is calll'd Castemme, and the least Talk;
the Inhabitants thereof dwell in Caverns under Ground, and feed on the Birds
Pinguyns; of whose Skins they make Mantles. These Birds weigh generally fifteen
or sixteen Pound, have black Backs, white Bellies, very thick Skins, long Bills
like Ravens, The Bird Pinguyn.
short thick Necks, two plumed Fins in stead of Wings, black Feet like a Goose,
and delicate Flesh, notwithstanding they feed on Fish, after which they swim
very swift with the forementioned Fins, which hang down on each side along
their Bodies when they walk upright on the Shore; they sit generally four
together in their Holes, made after such a manner, that a Man which knows not
of them, may ere he be aware, sink up to the Knees in the same, and be bitten
terribly by the Legs. Cords his Seamen got in two hours time above nine
hundred of these Birds, whilst he discovered the salvage People Enoo, which
inhabit the Country Cossi, and are divided into the Families Kemenetes,
Kennekas, and Caraike; the first inhabited the Territory Carray; the second
Caramay; and the third, Morine: all of them Paint their Cheeks and Forehead.
Farther into the Country dwell the Trimenes, a gigantick sort of People,
eleven Foot high, who maintain continual Wars with their Neighbors.

Great Discoveries of Netherlanders about the Magellan Straights.
Moreover, Noord discovered several Inlets full of Ice and fresh Water in the
Straights of Magellan, whither the United Netherlands have since sent the
Admirals William Schouten, Joris Spilbergen, and Jaques le Heremite. The common
opinion, that the Country on the South side of Magellan is of the Main
Continent, Experience has manifested; for Schouten found the same, Anno 1616.
who Sailing from Porto Desire, left the Straights of Magellan on the
right hand, and Sailed Southerly through whitish Water, and in fifty four
Degrees discovered a Channel eight Leagues broad, through which ran a strong
Current. The Coast rose with high Mountains, whose tops were covered with Snow.
The utmost Point was called Mauritius, from the Prince of Orange; the broken
Coast on the other side, The States-Island; and the Straights it self, Le
Maire, upon the Request of the Merchant Jacob Le Maire, whose Father Isaac was
chief owner of the two Ships of which Schouten was Commander, who found so many
Whales here, that he could scarce Steer clear of them, they swimming by
hundreds in a Shoal. The Sea-pies, much bigger than Swans, suffered themselves
to be caught by the Hands of the Seamen. Moreover he called the barren gray
Rocks, and others lesser, lying North-East from the Promontory Hoorn,
Barnevields Isles. Sailing beyond the Point Hoorn, he was tossed by the vast
Billows that came rolling out of the West.

It was no sooner noised abroad, that the Netherlanders had found the Straights
Le Maire, but the Spanish King Philip immediately sent two Carvels thither,
under the Command of Garcias de Nodal, who took an exact Account of the Heads,
Roads, and Inlets belonging to the forementioned Straights, and returned
without performing any other Exploits.



Diego Flores his unsuccessful Voyage to the Straigts of Magellan.
Diego Flores Steered four years before Candish to the Straights of Magellan
with twenty three Sail of Ships, Manned with three thousand five hundred
Seamen, besides five hundred old Netherland Soldiers, with which he unhappily
weighed Anchor from Cales; for before he got out of sight of the Spanish Coast,
he lost five of his Ships and eight hundred Men; yet prosecuting his Voyage, he
stayed during the Winter Season on the Coast of Brasile, and was surprised by
so vehement a Storm, near the Island Catalina, that a company of Women, sent
under the Charge of Peter Sarmiento to Settle in the Straights of Magellan,
were all cast away, with the greatest part of the Ammunition and Provisions.
The English Admiral Fenton took three Ships of this Fleet from Flores, two were
cast away in the River La Plata, and one ran back to Spain, whilst Flores came
into the Straights of Magellan on the last day of March, at which time the
whole Country lay covered with Snow; wherefore seeing no hopes of finding out
any place to Settle Sarmiento upon, he stood back with eight Sail to Brasile,
and in his Return burnt three French Ships, took two more, and Sailed home. But
his Lieutenant Diego Ribera, and the Governor Peter Sarmiento, Landed the Year
after Flores his departure, with four hundred Men, thirty Women, and Provisions
for eight Months, in the Straights of Magellan; from whence Ribera Sailed
back, whilst Sarmiento built on the North side of the Mouth of the Straights,
the Town Nombre de Jesus; and fifty Leagues farther in the narrowest place,
Philip-stadt, with four Bulwarks; the Inhabitants of which (as is before
related) were destroyed by Famine.

Description of Terra del Fugo.
Terra del Fuego, already mentioned, opposite to the Country of the Patagones,
lyin the South between the Straights of Magellan, is a broken Country, with
high Mountains full of Trees, and washed by pleasant Rivulets: four Foot deep
in the Ground it begins to be all Rocky. The Air is troubled with exceeding
great Winds out of the West. The Inhabitants are pale Countenanced, but Paint
their Bodies with diverse Colors; they have long, thick, and black Hair, and
very sharp Teeth; the Men go stark naked; the Women cover their secret Parts
with a piece of Leather, and wear Strings full of Shells about their Necks;
some also Mantle themselves with the Skins of wild Beasts, which affords but
little warmth against the Cold that is here in Winter. Their Huts consist of
Trees, and are made round at bottom, and sharp on the top like a Tent, having
only a Hole for the Smoke to go out at; they are dug three Foot deep into
the Ground, and also heaped round with Earth; within the Huts nothing is to be
found but Baskets with Fishing Utensils and Stone Hooks. Their offensive Arms
the Men always carry about with them, because they always maintain Wars with
their Neighbors. They handle a Quarter-staff very dexterously, are good
Slingers and Bowemen; they also use Lances with sharp Stone Points. Moreover
they make Boats of the Bark of Trees, which they first cut out into a Form,
then sewing it together, bow the same after the manner of a Boat, which rises
before and behind, and being fifteen or sixteen Foot long, can carry eight Men,
going exceeding swift. These People are not only beastial in their Practices,
but also Murderers.

Lastly, besides the Straights of Le Maire, Henrick Brewer has found a new
Passage to the Eastward above the States-Island, out of the Northern Ocean to
the South Sea.

CHAP. IV. The unknown South-Land.
THe unknown South-Land extends with several Points to the Southern Ocean,
which have been more seen than discovered by diverse Nations.

Opposite to the East India Island Gilolo, lies Terra des Papous, to which
Jacob Le Maire gave the Denomination of New Guinee.

The English Commander, Richard Hawkins, Sailing to the Southward behind Papou,
found the Inhabitants black like Negro's: round about appear several Isles and
convenient Harbors. Herrera places here on the East, the Country Agnada, the
Road St. Jago, the Island Los Crespos, the Haven Andreas, the River Virginum,
and the little Isle La Vellena, before the Mouth of the Stream Augustine. Next
you meet Easterly with the Rivers St. Peter and St. Paul, the Havens
Hieronymus, the Isles Punta Salida, Abrigo, Malagente, and Maure de Dios,
inhabited by white People.

Discoveries in Terra Australis Incogn^a.
The first that discovered New Guinee, Anno 1529. was Alvares de Savedra, who,
as also several others besides him, supposed that some of the Islands Solomon's
border New Guinee.

Eighteen of the many Solomon Isles exceed the rest, of which some are three
hundred Leagues in circumference, some two hundred, others one hundred, and
some fifty: All that are inhabited have a fruitful Soil, producing all manner
of Provisions, particularly Hogs and Poultrey. The Natives differ very much one
from another, for some are black, others white or tawny.

The forementioned Hawkins in his Voyage toward the Straights of Magellan,
supposing it by estimation to be fifty Leagues from the Main Coast of America,
discovered forty Degrees to the Southward of the Equinoctial Line, with a
Westerly Wind, the unknown South-Land; which he found to consist of low Land,
and to be inhabited, by reason of the many Fires which he saw ashore in the
Night.

The Spanish Commander, Peter Fernandes de Quiro, and the Admiral Lodowick Paes
de Torres, have made a farther Discovery of this Country; for Landing on the
South-Land, they met with several People, some whereof were brown, others
white, and others sallow; some had long and lank, others short and curled Hair:
They acknowledged no King or supreme Governor, nor were Governed by any Laws,
neither had they any Walled Towns or Forts; but being divided amongst
themselves, they continually Encountered one another with Darts, Clubs, and
Staves. Their Houses built of Wood, were covered with the Leaves of Palm Trees.
Their Housholdstuff consisted in Earthen Dishes, Pots, Ropes, Fish-nets,
Flutes, Drums, and varnished Spoons. Their Gardens were neatly kept. Near their
Temples were Burying-places. They Rowed very swift in little Boats. Their
Bread, well tasted, was made of long thick Roots, either roasted or boiled.

Fertility, Plenty, and Riches of the Country.
Here also grow six sorts of Platano's, great abundance of Almonds, Oranges,
Cittrons, thick Sugarcanes, Palm Trees, which yield Wine, Cocoa's, and Obos,
in taste not much unlike Quinces; but the greatest benefit which they receive,
is from the Cocoa Nuts, the Pulp whereof is delicious Meat and Drink; the
outermost Shells whereof serve for Cups or Dishes, the inner for Ropes and
Cordage; of the Leaves they make Sails and Mats, and cover their Houses with
the same; of the Body, Oars, Clubs, Pikes, and Props for their Houses.

Besides several sorts of Pot Herbs, here grow very high Coleworts and Bledo's.

The Country also abounds with Pigeons, Partridges, Ducks, Goats, Hogs, and
other ordinary Cattle and Fowls.

The Rivers afford them Souls, Salmon, Thornback, Sea-Cocks, Eels, Gurnets, and
several other unknown Fishes, very delicate and wholesome.

This Country also produces Nutmegs, Mastick, Peppers, Ginger, Cinnamon, Gold,
Silver, Pearls, Silk, Sugar, Anniseed, Honey, Wax, Ebony-wood, Turpentine,
Lime-pits, and Marble.

Philips-Bay bends twenty Leagues into the Country, has a safe Harbor, and
excellent Ground, consisting of black Sand. Two great Rivers discharge their
Waters into the said Bay, round about which are pleasant Woods, full of Quails,
Parrakito's, Parrots, Nightingales, and Bulfinches, which Sing very sweetly.
The Blossoms, especially of Orange Trees, and the Herb Alvaca, yield an
odoriferous smell. The wholesome Air adds vigor to aged People.

Fernandes de Quir delivering the forementioned Account to Philip the Second,
King of Spain, moved him to Plant the unknown South-Land, and the rather,
because he had not found any snowy Mountains, drowned Land, Crocodiles,
Muschito's, or any hurtful Creature, yet was not regarded; so that no Spaniard
has since that time set Foot on the unknown South-Land. Abel Tasman 's
Expedition to Terra Australis Incognita.
But the East India Company undertaking the Design with great eagerness, sent
thither two Ships, viz. the Hemskerk and Sea-Cock, under the Command of Abel
Tasman, to make a farther Discovery of the said South-Land: Anno 1642. on the
twelfth of August, they weighed Anchor from Batavia, Sailed through the
Straights of Sunda to Maurice-Island, where they Anchored in the North-West
Haven before the Castle Frederick-Henrick, on the fifth of September in the
forementioned Year. On the eighth of October. Tasman stood over to the
South-Land, near which he was surprised by a violent Storm; afterward, on the
twenty fifth of November, he discovered a barren Shore, against which the Sea
beat very furiously; and Steering along this Coast, he found a convenient
Inlet, but was forced by the hard Weather to stand off to Sea again; yet not
long after approaching the Shore, he saw great hollow Trees, and round about
them abundance of Mussle-shells, and from the Wood heard a shrill noise of
People Singing: Going to the same place again, he put the Orange Flag on a
Pole, Carved with the East India Companies Arms, and called the Inlet
Frederick-Henrick,(...) the whole Coast, Anthony van Diemen. Sailing from
thence Eastward, he on the eighteenth of December discovered a convenient
Haven, where sending his Sloop to discover the Shore, he came back in the
Evening, being followed by a Boat, which approached nearer and nearer, but
Night coming upon him, he could not well discern what they were that pursued
him, but heard the cry of hoarse Voices, and a shrill noise like that of a
Trumpet, which the Netherland Seamen answered by hollowing, and blowing on
their Trumpets, and at last firing a Gun, the Southlanders made a hideous
noise, and blowing their Horns, returned ashore. Tasman hereupon called his
Watch, laid Hangers, Pikes, and Muskets ready Charged, upon the Decks. The
next day the Southlanders came in several Boats, two and two tied together, and
covered with Planks, toward the Ships; The Southlanders desperate Attemp upon
Tasman's Ships.
the Gunner of the Hemskerk going with six Men in a Boat to help mount some
Guns in the Sea-Cock, were betwixt both Ships set upon by the Southlanders, who
approacht with a hideous noise, killed four of the Hollanders with long Poles,
and forced the other three to save themselves by swimming; which they had no
sooner done, but they Rowed with incredible swiftness toward the Shore,
insomuch that they were out of the reach of their Guns before they could make
ready to fire at them. Tasman finding that there was no good to be done here,
since he hazarded the Lives of his Seamen against a company of wild People, he
set Sail, but was followed by diverse Boats, at which he fired his After-Guns
with pieces of Iron and Stones, which killing some of them, made the rest
return. In the midst of the Boats, which were tied two and two together, sat
the Commander, who encouraged the Rowers; they all used Clubs without Points.

These People were gross of Body, undaunted, strong, and of a tawny color; the
Hair of their Heads stroak'd up round, was tied up on their Crown, on which
stuck a stiff white Feather; about their Necks hung a square Plate; they wore
in stead of Cloaks, square pieces of Cloth, made fast before on their Breasts.

Tasman, by reason of his rough Entertainment called this Harbor,
Murderers-Bay, and afterward Sailed along the Shore till the fifth of January
1643. on which Day he dropped Anchor near a little Rocky Island, from which fell
two Streams, with a great noise into the Sea. The Inhabitants, a strong People,
beckned to the Seamen to come on Shore; some leaned on thick Clubs, others
Fenced one with another. Tasman sending his Sloop ashore for Water with two
Drakes, returned without any, not being able to Land, by reason of the hollow
Sea near the Shore; wherefore Sailing from thence he discovered two low Isles,
which were full of Woods of very tall Trees; from the biggest whereof came a
little Boat, sharp before and behind, in which three sallow Men, sitting behind
one another, Rowed with great swiftness toward the Hemskerk; whereupon Tasman
commanded all his Men to go under the Hatches, that the three Southlanders
might not be afraid to come aboard; he also threw a piece of Linen out of his
Cabin Window, which one of them, leaping into the Sea, took up, and as a sign
of thankfulness, laid the same on his Head, and being hereby emboldned, they
came nearer the Rudder, where they took up a Knife, tied to a piece of Wood,
out of the Water, and returned the Seamen a Fishhook of Mother-of-Pearl, tied
to a Cotton Line. Approaching the Shore, they saw abundance of People running
along, with two little Flags on Sticks. Some of the Natives came in their Boats
close up with Tasman's Ship; and one more bold than the rest entering the same,
was found to be a tall Man with a broad black Beard, and green Leaves about his
Neck, who sat down on the Deck with his Legs under him, and bowed down his Head
oftentimes very low: Tasman returning his Civility, took him by the Hand to
Treat him in his Cabin, but a Dog which was in the Ship Barking, he grew
fearful, and went into his Boat again. Several other Southlanders swam aboard,
and others brought Pisang and Clappes in their Boats. Against the Evening a
great Vessel, surrounded with lesser Boats, came Rowing toward the Hemskerk,
the Men making a great noise; the Seamen fearing some Design, ran all to their
Arms, but were convinced of their Friendship by the Gifts they Presented them
with from the Governor of the Island. The next day a strange Boat came near the
Sea-Cock, viz. two Sloops, which being tied together, and covered with Boards,
carried several Men, Commanded by a Captain, by them called Orangkay: On the
midst of the Boards which covered the two Boats, stood a Hut made of Rushes,
and covered over with Pisang Leaves; the Sails being made of Mats, caused it to
Sail very swiftly. Round about this Sloop Rowed lesser Boats, out of which loud
Acclamations were heard, every one crying out, Hael, Hael: during which noise,
those Southlanders which were already come aboard, sat still on the Decks,
which made Tasman think that their King himself was coming to give him a Visit,
which accordingly fell out, for he came and Presented him with several Hogs,
Poultrey, Clappes and Pisang, all covered with white Cloths.

Interview between Tasman and the Southlandish King.
This Southlandish King was Habited in a Suit, the Stuff whereof resembled
Chinese Paper, doubled and pasted together, and was attended by a great Train
of Men, Women, and Children, all of them as black as a Coal; some of them swam
after, and others followed him in Boats.

These Southlanders bartered their Clothes and Necklaces, which consisted of
Mother-of-Pearl and white Cockles, and Fishhooks made also of Mother-of-Pearl,
against Nails, Knives, and the like Trifles.

Tasman caused a Shirt, Breeches, Doublet, and Hat, to be put on an old
Orangkay; who being thus Clothed, stood a considerable time admiring of
himself, and was also much wondered at by his Subjects; but going into the
Country, he came back without his Clothes.

Another Orangkay being Presented with a Rummer of Wine, poured out the Wine,
and setting the Rummer on his Head, went away with great joy.

Some of the Governors viewed the Ships, not only above, but also below the
Decks, and being brought to the Guns, they desired to know the use of them;
whereupon one being Discharged, it so affrighted them, that had they not been
held, they had all leaped overboard.

Provisions were daily brought by the Southlanders to the Hollanders in great
Vessels, surrounded by many lesser; still as they put their Oars into the
Water, they made a hideous noise.

Tasman bringing some empty Vessels upon the Deck, thereby to make them
understand that he wanted fresh Water, the Orangkays pointed to the Shore;
whither they went with two Boats, which returned without Water, the Inhabitants
themselves being forced to dig Pits to get the same.

Mean while other Southlanders coming aboard, the Pilot and Boatswain's Boy
blowed on their Trumpets, another played on a Flute, and a fourth on a Violin
whilst some of the the Seamen Dancing, so amazed the Natives, that they stood
like senseless Creature, gaping with open Mouth upon them.

Tasman looking into a Grammar which contained the Language of the Solomon's
Isles, found that many words which were used by these People, had a great
similitude with those of that Language.

Besides these Men, there came likewise a great many Women aboard, all of them
extraordinary tall, especially two, who might justly be styled Giantesses;
(...) one whereof had Mustacho's; both ran, and embracing the Surgeon
Henrick Haelbos, desired carnal Copulation with him, and seemed to quarrel one
with another about him: Others confidently put their Hands into the Hollanders
Breeches, their Husbands giving consent thereunto: All of them had thick,
curled, black Hair, which they colored red, and combed with ten little round
Sticks tied together on the top, and left wide like Teeth at the bottom; yet
some of them let their Hair hang down in long braided Locks; they shave their
upper Lips, but keep a square Beard on their Chin; yet amongst the old People
there were some whose Cheeks were overgrown with Hair: Their manner of shaving
is with the Teeth of certain Fish made fast to a Stick; they all went
bare-headed, except some few, who tied a square piece of Stuff, wrought of
Leaves or Feathers, above their Eyes against the Sun; the upper parts of their
Bodies were all naked, but about their Middle some wore a Girdle, others a Mat
of Clappes Leaves, others a Cloth not unlike Chinese Paper, about the lower
parts of their Bodies. The Women's Apparel differed little from the Men's,
excepting that their Aprons reached farther down, viz. to their Knees. They
bartered their Clothes against Nails. Some of the Orangkays, being Entertained
in the Cabin, wondered to see a Bullet that was Discharged from the
Quarter Deck, fall into the Water at so great a distance. They wore about their
Necks Mother-of-Pearl, white Cockles, sweet smelling Flowers, green Leaves, or
the Nails which they had gotten of the Hollanders: Some of the aged Women
wanted both their little Fingers, and the young ones the upper Joints of them,
which the old Men also wanted: Haelbos pointing at the Stump, asked the reason
of it, but one of them laying his Hand under his Chin, made strange Signs, out
of which he could apprehend nothing.

On the twenty third of January, a second time Tasman went ashore for Water,
carrying Spades and Pick-axes with him, to dig Pits with. Two of the Hollanders
Boats going close together, in each of which were three Southlanders, Tasman
called to his Rowers to pull stoutly; which the Southlanders in Tasman's Boat
observing to tend to their Rowing the swifter, laughed and hooted at their
Contrymen that were in the Sea-Cocks Boat, when they chanced to get beyond
them. Tasman in his going ashore discovered several Isles at a distance, was
kindly Entertained, and toward the Evening carried by four Men through the
Water, on a Mat made fast betwixt two Poles, to his Sloop, whither they also
brought nine Hogs, and fresh Water dug out of Pits.

Tasman being got about the Point of the Island, saw the Hemskerk under Sail;
wherefore Rowing aboard the Sea-Cock, he was informed that she had slipped her
Anchor; whereupon following her, he got sight of another green Island the next
day, along the Shore whereof ran several People with Sticks, on which hung
white Cloths: some of them came aboard, and brought with them what Provisions
the Island afforded. The Inhabitants bartered Clappes, Pisang, Fowls, Hogs,
Mother-of-Pearl Fish-hooks, Stone Axes, little Stools, great Clubs, with a
black Point as long as a Man's Arm, and hooked, against Trifles. The Hollanders
were also stored here with fresh Water. The People both in Language, Habit, rud
Customs, were very like those of the first Island, but were not altogether so
courteous. One of the Southlanders stealing a Half-pike out of the Boat was
forced by his Companions to restore the same.

The forementioned Haelbos relates, That going ashore with some Soldiers, he
saw their Houses, which he found to be built after a strange manner, viz. some
of them were round like Towers, Wider at top than at bottom, and without any
Holes for Air, but all built close of Canes, which were stuck in the Ground;
other Huts were covered with a long Roof of Pisang or Clappes Leaves, resting
on Posts; under which kind of Building Haelbos sheltered himself against a
mighty Shower of Rain, found diverse young Men and Women sitting on Mats, and an
old Woman, blind through Age, lying by them on the Ground, and Fanning her self
with Pisang Leaves: The Men going away, signified thereby a kind of Invitation
to the Hollanders to go to the Women, who not receiving the Entertainment they
expected, rose altogether on a sudden, and Singing, Danced about the
Hollanders. The Men had on their Shoulders and Breasts, Scars of half an Inch
deep, and an Inch long; upon some of which, being fresh and bleeding, the Flies
sat. They eat after a strange manner, for stripping off the outmost Rinds of
the Clappes with their Teeth, and breaking the hard Shell against their Elbows,
they pull out the Kernel, and eat the same. Whatever Flesh-meat they eat, they
never thoroughly boil or roast it, but make it only just warm. They sleep on
the Ground upon Mats, and lay their Heads on a little wooden Cricket with four
Feet. They take great pride in their Hair, and those that have not long Hair of
their own, use Perukes.

Tasman steering his Course toward the high Coast that lay before this Island,
was followed by several small Vessels from the adjacent Shore, of which some
carried a Bough of Clappes or Pisang, with white Veins at the ends; but seeing
the Ships Sail from them, they threw the same overboard. Tasman standing
Westerly, discovered three Isles, near the last whereof the Sea broke
exceedingly, which the Hollanders not without great danger had approached in
the Night: after which they discovered to Leeward of them, a high Coast, which
extended it self a great way, but the Sea went so rough, that they durst not
venture near the Land; besides, the Sea went very high on a Bank, first ten,
then five, three and a half, and again ten, fourteen, and seven Fathom deep;
and oftentimes a Man might see the Ground, insomuch that they kept out the
Boats belonging to the Hemskerk, which was in most danger, to carry them aboard
of the Sea-Cock, if the first should chance to split. Lastly, getting over the
Bank, they saw very high Land to Windward, and many hilly Isles to Leeward; the
Sea also was full of blind Rocks and Shelves, so that they were in danger every
hour, and the rather, because the Wind blew hard every day; yet at last losing
sight of Land, they steered their Course Westerly in five Degrees Southward of
the Line, toward New Guinee. On the two and twentieth of March they discovered
low Land full of Woods of tall Trees, surrounded with a company of Isles,
against some of which the Sea brake with great violence, insomuch that they
were again in great danger, especially when they were got amongst eighteen
Isles, between which the Water being shallow, and the Current running very
strongly, drove the Ships toward the Shore: Whilst they were Tacking to and
again to get beyond the Shelves, a little Vessel, carrying a great Weathercock
on her Star-board, came from the Shore, Rowed by seven Men, who sat on Boards
which lay over the same; they were of a brown Complexion, only girt about with
a hairy Girdle, made fast on the top of their Heads; under their Feet they also
wore something in stead of Shoes, about their Necks hung Flowers, and their
Bodies were Painted black: Among the seven, one who was very fat, and whose
Head was adorned with two Feathers, stood up and proffered the Seamen two
Clappes, in return whereof Tasman gave them a Box of Nails and a piece of
Sail-cloth, which sinking under Water, an aged Man dived for the same, and
bringing it up, gave it to his six Companions, who made no show of
thankfulness. Their Arms consisted in Bows and Arrows. Their Clappes they
called Anieuw, as the other Islanders had done.

Sailing from hence, they discovered two low Islands full of Trees; and three
Leagues from them, on their Star-board, a high Coast, and on the other side a
great Island, whither they drove with a small Gale; approaching the same, two
very small Boats came toward the Hemskerk; the biggest of the two carried six
Men, and the least three, all of them very deformed; they went stark naked,
only their Yards were tied up with a String on their Bellies, and about their
Arms hung Chains of Mother-of-Pearl; they were Coal-black, only red about the
Mouth, which redness was occasioned by the chewing of Pisang; in their Hair
stuck wooden Combs, and on their Foreheads green Leaves; but in each Boat was
one who had a bruised Reed made fast in his Neck like a Plume; the biggest
Vessel was Painted with strange Shapes of Men and Beasts; they used red Bows
and Arrows, and having called to the Seamen, they Rowed back again to the
Shore; which Tasman left a Stern of him* and ran between the Main Coast (by all
supposed to be New Guinee) and several great Islands, that lay scattered along
before the Main Coast; from whence came four small Boats, adorned with Imagery
like Serpents, but kept without Gunshot from the Ships; at last one leaping
overboard, swam to the smallest Boat, out of which one swam back in his stead
to the other, and afterward came to the Hemskerks side; he was a black Man,
wore Leaves before his Privities, and Armlets about his Elbows; through the
Gristle of his Nose stuck a white Bone Bodkin, sharp at the ends, and of a
Fingers length, and about his Neck a String full of Cockle-shells.

Tasman Sailing on along the Main Coast, met with eighteen Boats more, the
Rowers whereof laid their Oars upon their Heads, and not without strange
Gestures called aloud, and invited the Hollanders to come ashore: On the Sterns
and Heads of these Boats were likewise diverse Shapes Painted, upon a white
Ground; in some were two, and in others three, four, and five Men; eight of
them going into the Hollanders Boats, were made Drunk with Arrack. These
Southlanders went stark naked, some only covering their secret Parts with
Leaves; their Skins were black, only on their Foreheads they drew a red
Stroke, which reached to their Ears; their brown curled Hair was by some
colored gray, by some red, some let it hang loose over their Sholdiers, others
tied the same in a Tuft on their Crown, covered with a Cap of Pisang Leaves,
others wore their Hair scarce two Fingers long, and through the Gristle of
their Nose, a piece of Cane or Quill, and a broad Beard without Mustacho's;
they had nothing to barter but large Snail-shells, on which they made a strange
noise; and whatsoever they received, they first smelled on it like Dogs: they
fancied not Nails, as all the other Southlanders had done. Their manner of
Fishing was thus: They tied several half Clappes-shells, made fast like a
Chain, to a long Reed, shook the same to and again on the Water, to gather the
Fish together. In the Boats lay Planks of an oval fashion, which by Ropes tied
in the middle they held before them in stead of Shields. When these
Southlanders went from the Ships, one of them threatened to beat the Seamen,
shaking his great Club at them; whereupon they all Rowed with great speed to
the Shore, whilst one in every Boat knocked with a Staff against the sides,
just as if they had beat an Alarm. Amongst them one had bartered for an old
Doublet, with which he showed many antic Tricks, putting it on the wrong way,
sometimes on his Head, then his Feet into the two Arm-holes, and anon the
Button-holes behind on his Back.

The Ships Sailing from hence, ran along a broken Coast, and on the twelfth of
April were so terribly shaken by an Earthquake, which lasted an hour and a
half, that they seemed shivering to pieces in the Water, as if they had ran
against a Rock, notwithstanding they could not fathom Ground with their longest
Line. Somewhat farther they discovered a burning Mountain on an Island, between
which and the Main (on which stood also a very high Mountain) they steering
their Course, came into a white Water, moved by a strong River from the
Continent; and coming to an Anchor before the Island Jamna, they saw the Isles
Moa and Arimoa before them. The Jamneans calling New Guinee by the Name of
Belah, informed the Hollanders, that they Warred continually with the
Inhabitants thereof. These People being also Coal-black, some of them had loose
curled Hair, hanging down over their Shoulders in long Braids, and others had
only two thick Locks, which covered their Ears; all of them wore four Feathers
on their Heads: the Men pulled out their Beards, and hung a great Bone Ring
through their Ears, at which also hung a Shell like a Spur; most of them had
red Roses tied about their Heads, and a Necklace of Hogs Teeth about their
Necks; under their Navels they wore Girdles, a handful and a half broad, and
about their Wastes Strings full of Shells, or Sea-Cockles, to which a small
Lappet was tied, and hung down before their Privities; but because it was but
two Fingers broad, and moy'd to an again by the Wind, their Nakedness appeared
to those that took notice thereof; through the Gristle of their Noses they wore
a Hogs Tooth, or the Splinter of a Cane. Upon the Stern of their small Boats
was the Shape of a little Lion. One of these Islanders imitated the Hollanders
when they spoke, endeavoring to repeat their words after them, and therefore
was called Parrot.

Tasman Sailing from hence to Moa, came to an Anchor before the Coast, ten
Leagues beyond Jamna, where a great Boat, carrying seventeen Men, coming near
the Ship, let fly a great many Arrows at the Seamen; but the next Morning
being better reconciled, they came aboard, where the Surgeon of the Ship
gave a Cap to one of ^he Jamneans, who, as a testimony of his thankfulness for
the Present, requested him to sit down; which done, he began to braid his Hair
from his Forehead to his Neck, tying the same with a String.

Tasman weighing Anchor, Sailed between New Guinee and the Island Insou, having
got nothing but a few Jamnean words from the Islanders, who called a Bone,
Vertilia; a Hog, Paro; a Knife, Sapera; Beads, Sassera; a Nail, Tortor; Sleep,
Moeni; and a Rat, Asphoo. So steering his Course along Arimoa, which is both
higher and larger than the neighboring Amoa, and resembles a Seaman's Cap, he
left New Guinee a Stern of him, and Steering on Northerly, Sailed by
Schoutes-Island, where eight large Boats came within Gunshot of him, each of
which had on each side a Wing, under which sat four Rowers, two and two
together, with their Feet hanging in the Water; at their approaching near the
Ship they put out a long Pole, with a white Flag upon it; whereupon Tasman also
commanded his white Ensign to be put forth, and threw a String of Beads, tied
to a piece of Wood, out of his Cabin Window; which the Southlanders had no
sooner taken up, but in testimony of thankfulness they all broke their Arrows
over their Heads, and kept near the sides of the Ship, till such time as the
Boatswain thereof sounded a Trumpet, upon the hearing of which thep all Rowed
away with as much speed as they could possibly. These People were of a sallow
Complexion; they broke their Arrows with great Ceremony; for first they pointed
with them toward the Sky, then put them into the Water, and breaking each
Arrow in two pieces on their Heads, they threw one over the Larboard, and the
other over the Starboard; he that broke the Arrow, made a long Speech to the
Hollanders, who took the same for an Oath of their Fidelity toward them. In
every one of these Boats were twenty eight or thirty Men.

Tasman's farther Voyag into New Guinee.
Tasman prosecuting his Voyage farther, discovered the following day another
Island, and a crooked Arm of New Guinee, near which he judged might be an
Opening betwixt New Guinee and Gilolo; then leaving on his Starboard a great
many blind Cliffs, dangerous Shelves, and uneven Grounds, he cast Anchor near a
Rock, which at high Water was overflowed. A Boat coming near the Ship, in which
were six Men, whose long Hair hung down their Backs, one of them amongst the
rest standing up, called to the Hollanders in the Ternaren Language, saying,
What People? to which a Seaman, who understood and spoke the said Language,
answered, Spaniards: whereupon he asked, From what Country, and whither bound?
to which he was answered, From Moa to Ternata: The Southlander hereupon
replied, You are Deceivers, the Ship is not Spanish, but Holland make;
whereupon Tasman caused the Prince of Orange's Flag to be put out, which the
Southlanders no sooner saw, but he cried, It appears by your Flags that you are
Hollanders, who are always more welcome to us than Spaniards: However, though
the Seaman acknowledged his mistake, in saying they were Spaniards; yet the
Southlanders would not stay within shot of them, but at their Rowing away cried
aloud, Here is abundance of Pisang, Clappes, Potato's, Sugarcanes, and other
Fruits on Shore.

From hence Tasman Sailed Northerly between many Isles, and a Channel that
separates New Guinee from Gilolo, by Cerani, Manipe, Bolao, and Burro, to a
narrow Opening, where Pangesane being on his Larboard, rose with exceeding high
Rocks, as Botton on the Starboard. These Rocks are most of them overgrown with
Trees and Brambles. In the middle of this Channel also lies a Rock, for its
shape called A Galley, by which Tasman Sailing, bent his Course homeward, and
at last, on the fifteenth of June, Anno 1643. cast Anchor before Batavia.

CHAP. V. Terra Borealis, or The Artick Region.
HAving spoken something of the Terra Australis Incognita, or Unkown
South-Land, there remains something to be said of the opposite part, namely,
the Terra Borealis, or the Artick Region; which is called Incognita in like
manner as the Terra Australis, in regard, though very much, as well of the one
as of the other, has been searched into, and in part discovered by several
Voyagers, yet doubtless there is a very vast Tract of Land, in the Artick
Region especially (if it be not rather Sea,) which is altogether unknown, and
those parts which have been discovered, as Groenland, Iseland, Nova Zembla,
Spilbergen, Hudson's Straights and Bay, etc. so imperfectly known, that they
may well deserve the Title of Unknown.

The several parts of this Artick Region are, 1. Terra Subpolaris Incognita, or
that part which lies directly under the Pole, and is otherwise called Orbis
Arcticus. 2. Groenland. 3. Spilbergen, or Nieuland. 5. Iseland. 6. Nova Zembla.

A Description of Terra Subpolaris.
The Terra Subpolaris is described by a certain Seaman of Bosleduc, to be a
great black Rock, about thirty five Leagues in compass, and of an extraordinary
height; through the Land adjoining to which the Sea violently breaking, makes
four great and violent Euripi, or Whirlpools, whose Waters driving Northward
with so forcible a Stream, that no Ship, though carried by nexer so strong a
Gale, is able to stem the Current, are at last swallowed up in the Earth. It is
also reported, that between two of these Euripi, namely that made by the
Scythick Ocean, and that on the back side of Groenland, there lies an Island
Northward of Lappia and Biarmia, inhabited by Pygmies. Much more to this
purpose is related of the Subpolar Region, but since it is very improbable that
any one could come so near as to make any discovery thereof, to say more of
this Matter, would be but to insist upon things savoring more of Fables than
Reality.

Bounds and Situation of Groenland.
Groenland is that part of Terra Septentrionalis, which winds about from South
to East, and decline Northward from Cape Faruel, in the Deucaledonian Sea;
however, Groenland has been generally taken for an Island; yet many late
Navigators think it joins with the Continent of Tartary, and others leave it in
doubt whether it be Island or Continent: It is bounded toward the East with
the Deucaledonian Ocean; toward the West, with Hudson's Straights and Bay,
which separate it from America; toward the North its Bounds are altogether
unknown, and is not without reason supposed to be the utmost part of the World
toward the North Pole. There are who believe it to be one Continent with
America, and that upon this ground, because several who have attempted to pass
through the Straight commonly called The Straight of Davis, into the
East Indies, affirm, that they found it to be a Gulf; but one Captain John
Monk, who was also a great Undertaker in the North-West Passage through this
Straight, or Gulf of Davis, alleges great Probabilities of this Lands being
divided by Sea from the Continent of America.

The Topography of Groenland from the Danish and Iseland Chronicles.
This Country has anciently been divided into two Regions, East-Groenland and
West-Groenland; answerable to which Division Errick, surnamed The Ruddy, the
Son of Torvalde, is reported by the Danish Chronicle to have built two Forts or
Lodges, Ostrebug and Westrebug, in the Eastern part. The first Planters of
Christianity built the City Guard, which became, as the said Chronicle
mentions, a City of great Repute and Traffic, and not long after, the Town
Albe, and toward the Seacoast, a Monastery, dedicated to St. Thomas. The City
Guard was a Bishop's See, to which belonged a Cathedral Church, by the Title of
St. Nicholas, built in the same City, though a certain Iseland Chronicle makes
mention of the Church of Strosnes, as the chief Metropolitan and Bishop's See
of Groenland. The Bishop assisted oftentimes in the Assembly of the Estates of
Denmark, and held of the Bishop of Nidrosia or Drunthen in Norway, as the
Temporal Estates of Groenland held of the Crown of Norway, the Norwegians being
the only known Planters of this Country, deriving their Original from the
aforesaid Errick, according to the testimony of Mr. Vormius, and also of
Angrimus Jonas, in his Specimen Islandicum, and the Viceroy of Norway, the
Nomophylax (as the said Angrimus calls him,) or Sovereign Judge of the
Country. The Inhabitants of Westreburg, or the Western Coast of Groenland, are
by some called Skreglinguers. According to the Iseland Chronicle, the Towns and
Places of chief note are Skageford, in the most Eastern part; a little farther
West, the Port of Funchebuder, so called from a Page of St. Olaus King of
Norway, who together with several others were cast away upon that place; a
little higher, the Roansen, full of white Bears, and other wild Beasts. In the
Western Coast, Kindelfiord, an Arm of the Sea, on the right Shore whereof
stands Korsekirk, i. e. a Church built crossways; also the Town Vandalebug, and
not far off a Monastery, dedicated to St. Olaus and St. Augustine; the next
Place is Rumpesinfiord, where there is a religious Convent, and diverse little
Islands, in which are Springs of Water, warm in the Winter, and temperate in
the Summer, which are accounted Medicinal, and of great Virtue in the curing of
diverse Maladies; upon the same Coast lies Etsnatsfiord; between which and
Rupesinfiord is the Palace Fos, and a great Church, dedicated to St. Nicholas;
near the Promontory Clining is another great House called Daller, and beyond
Eynatsfiord, a great Island denominated Reynatsen, from the abundance of
Reindeer which breed there: In the same Island is a Quarry of the Stone
Talguestin, not consumable by Fire, and yet soft enough to be cut into any
form, insomuch that Vessels have been made of it, containing twelve Tun. More
Westerly lies the Island Langen, and another Royal House called Hellestad, then
Erricksfford, another Arm of the Sea, and at the Entrance thereof, the Island
Herrieven, part whereof belongs to the Dome, or Cathedral, and the other part
to the Church of Dunes, the principal Church of Groenland, next to the
Cathedral. North-West from Erricksfiord is Midfiord, and farther Northward,
Bondeford; near which are several little Isles and Ports. Between Ostrebug and
Westrebug is a large Desert, altogether uninhabited.

This Description of the Country, Extracted from the Iseland Chronicle, is
looked upon by a late French Writer of note, as the most particular and
faithful; however, the Danish Chronicle differs in many things, and amongst
others in this, that not the hundredth part of Groenland is possessed by the
Norwegians, but that there inhabit several different sorts of People, of
different Fashions and Governments, altogether unknown to the Norwegians.

Temperature of Groenland.
Groenland, notwithstanding its Northerly Situation, is reported to be a
Country not unfertile of Corn, and other Productions of the Earth; and in
respect of its verdant Aspect at some Seasons of the Year, above the rest of
those Septentrional Regions, it is concluded to have merited the Name of
Groenland, i. e. Greenland; nay, so great is the Heat that is said to be there
during the Months of June, July, and August, by reason of the reverberation of
the Sunbeams from the Rocks, that many times there is but six Weeks space
betwixt Seed-time and Harvest.

What sort of Animals breed there.
The Beasts, which are said to breed here in great numbers, are Horses, Deer,
Foxes, Hares, Bears, both black and white, common Wolves, and a sort of Beast
between a Deer and a Wolf, besides great store of Beavers and Martins, as the
Iseland Chronicle testifies, whose Furr in fineness may compare with the Sables
of Russia. There are also Gerfalcons in abundance, both white and gray, of so
delicate a kind, that they were in ancient times sent to the Kings of Denmark
as Presents of great rarity.

The Seas about Greenland abound in very many sorts of Fish, as Sea-Wolves,
Sea-Dogs, Sea-Calves, and above all, incredible numbers of Whales of a vast
bigness.

Strange kind of Horn found there.
But the most remarkable Commodity of this Country, is a kind of Horn, commonly
called the Licornes, or Unicorns-Horn, which is found there in great
quantities, and great store of it is to be seen in Denmark, some whole, some in
great pieces, sometimes only the Ends or Stumps; but since it appears very
different from all other kind of Horn, there is great Question made amongst
Naturalists, whether it be Horn or Tooth? and if Horn, whether the Horn of a
Beast or Fish? but it is discovered of late to be the Horn, or rather Tusk of a
certain Fish, which the Islanders call Narhual, being indeed a kind of Whale,
as the Name seems to imply, signifying a Whale which feeds upon Carcases.

The chief Voyagers thither.
This Country is called by the Natives, Secanunga; who was the first Discoverer
thereof is not certainly known, but the first chief Voyagers thither were, of
the Dutch, William Barents, or Barentson, of Amsterdam, who set forth toward
those Parts in the Year 1594. and before him, Dithmar Blefkens, in the Year
1563. of the English, Mr. James Hall, who set out from Copenhagen in Denmark,
Anno 1605. and in a second Voyage was slain by a Salvage of the Country.

The Coastings, Havens, and Creeks of Groenland
The Coastings, Courses, Havens and Creeks of Groenland, according as Barentson
received an Account of them from Iver Boty, a Groenlander, written in the Norsh
Language, as it is called, are as follows: From Stad in Norway, to Hornness,
the East part of Groenland, it is seven days Sailing. Between Iseland and
Groenland lies a Riff called Gombornse-skare, the Ice lying upon which,
hinders the Passage. Those that Sail from Bergen in Norway South of Rokeness
in Iseland, come under Swafster, a Promontory, or high Land in the East part of
Groenland, and within sight of the high Mount Whitsark; between which and
Groenland lies a Headland, called Hernoldus Hook, not far from Sound-Haven,
formerly much frequented by the Norway Merchants. Those that Sail from Iseland
to Groenland, Steer to Snoffness, West of Rokeness, and after South-West. East
of Hernoldus Hook lies the Village of Skagenford, the most Easterly Village of
the Island; East of Skagenford, the Haven Bearford, inaccessible by Ships, by
reason of a great Riff lying at the Mouth thereof. This Place is chiefly
remarkable for the Whale-fishing, the Whales upon the going back of the Tide
running into a great Swalth, as they call it, which is in the Haven. East of
Bearford is the Haven called Allabong-Sound, full of little Isles. East from
the Icy Mountain, the aforementioned Haven Fendobothes. Farther East is the
Highland Corse Hought, where they Hunt white Bears. West from Hernoldus Hook is
the Village Codosford, and hard by the Seacoast, a fair Church, which we
conceive to be the same with Korsekirk above spoken of, as Codosford may also
probably be the same with Kindelfiord. A little farther West lies the Boy, or
Town of Wartsdale (for in the Norsh Language Boy signifies a Town,) belonging
to Petresuik, or Peterswike Church: Near this Boy or Town stands a Cloister,
or Abbey of Canons Regular, dedicated to St. Olafe and St. Augustine. Next to
Codosford is Rompnesford, the same questionless with the abovementioned
Rumpesinfiord, where there is a Cloister of Nuns of the Order of St. Benedict:
In this Ford lie many small Isles. Between Rompness and the next Sound lies a
great Garden called Vose, belonging to the King of the Country, as also St.
Nicholas Church before mentioned. At the entrance into Emnestnesford is the
Inlet Southwoderswike, and somewhat higher on the same side, the little Cape
Bloming, beyond the Inlet Granwike; above that, the Garden called Daleth,
belonging to the Cathedral Church; and on the right hand to those that Sail out
of the said Sound, a great Wood belonging to the same Church, where they feed
their Oxen, Kine, and Horses. The Highland lying by Emestnesford, is called The
Ramas Hayth, from the Rain-Deer which use to be there Hunted: And hereabouts is
that sort of Stone of which they make large Fats or Cisterns, as has been
before intimated; it is by some called the Zevell-Stone, being a sort of
Marble, or (as some will have it) Lodestone, of all colors. West from this
lies another Highland, called Long-Highland. The next Sound is called
Swalterford, having a Church belongining to it of the same Name, and where
there is also a Garden belonging to the King, called St. Hentelstad. Next to
that lies Erricksford, and at the entrance thereof the Highland Erricks
Hought, belonging to Deverskirk, the first Parochial Church in Groenland.
North-West from Erricksford, is Megdenford. Farther out is a Church called
Scogelkirk; and farther in the Sound, Leadenkirk. Beyond Erricksford is another
Ford or Sound, by the Name of Fossa, belonging to the Cathedral Church; and to
the North of it, two Villages, Ever-boy and Forther-boy- From thence farther
North lies Bredaford; and after that Lormontford; and from thence Westward,
Icedeep. To the North of the Westland lies a spacious Wilderness, called Hemel
Hatsfelt, and Edged with massy Rocks and Cliffs toward the Sea side; beyond
which the Sea is innavigable, by reason of the many Swalgen, or Whirlpools
thereabouts.

In Groenland there are diverse Hills, wherein are Silver-Mines, multitudes of
white Bears, with red Patches on their Heads; also white Hawks, and all sorts
of Fish. There are moreover in the Country diverse Rivers, frozen up for the
most part of the Year, and covered with Ice; yet it is generally affirmed, that
it is not so cold there as in Norway or Iseland. On the Hills are said to grow
Acorns and Nuts, very well tasted, and as big as Apples; also as good Wheat as
is commonly produced in other Parts.

An Account of Groenland from Dithmar Blefkens his Journal.
In the Journal of Dithmar Blefkens's Voyage, mention is made of a certain blind
Monk, brought up in the Monastery of St. Thomas, who reported several memorable
things concerning this Country, as that it was called Groenland
antiphrastically, or by contrariety of Speech, as appearing seldom or never
green; and that it abounded with Bears and white Foxes, and was not without
Pygmies and Unicorns, which never appeared till after the Sun was entered into
Aries; that in the said Monastery of St. Thomas there was a Fountain of
scalding Water, which was conveyed through Pipes of Stones to the Monks several
Cells, and served them not only for Stoves, but for the dressing of their
Meat, which was as well boiled by means of this Water, as if it had been over a
real Fire, and that the Walls of the Monastery were made of a kind of
Pumice-stone, upon which if Water were poured, it would produce a slimy Matter,
commonly used in stead of Lime for Mortar, like the Stone of Mount Hecla in
Iseland; that two of these Pygmies, a Male and a Female, were kept by the
Abbot, and were both endu'd with perfect humane Shape, and overgrown with Hair,
even to the outermost Joints of their Fingers, the Male especially, who had a
Beard reaching down to his Knees, but that they seemed wholly devoid of Reason
and Understanding, nor had any distinct use of Speech, only made a semblance
of Hissing of the manner of Geese; lastly, he reported the duration of the
Lives of these Creatures to be answerable to the shortness of their Stature;
but that concerning their Wars with the Cranes, he had no other knowledge than
by Tradition.

From Mr. James Hall's Description.
The Description of Groenland left by Mr. James Hall, renders it a high,
mountainous, and craggy Region, sufficiently watered with Rivers, and provided
with good Harbors, of a Soil not unfertile in all places where he came, having
between the Mountains fruitful Valleys and pleasant Plains, abounding with
several sorts of Fowl, as Partridges, Pheasants, Sea-mews, Gulls, Crows, etc.
but of Beasts, chiefly black Foxes, and (as was conjectured by the plenty of
Harts-horns found about their Tents) Reindeer, yet not destitute of other
Beasts, the Vestigium of one whereof was found to be not less than eight Inches
over.

As for the Manners and Customs of the Natives, they are by the said
Description represented to be a kind of Samoid, or wandering People, still
moving from place to place, warlike and active, using Slings and Darts with
mavelous dexterity, of a brown Complexion for the most part, and of an
indifferent Stature, eating their Meat either quite raw, or only a little
parboyl'd, Clothing themselves with the Skins of such Beasts, or other
Creatures, as they kill, especially Seals, or some of the largest size of
Fowls, which they Dress very smooth and soft, turning the Feather or Hair side
outward in Summer, and inward in Winter. Their Weapons Bows, Slings, and Bone
or Iron-headed Darts; their Religion Idolatrous, but chiefly Sun-Worship, as
was gathered from their manner of Accost, when any of the English first
approached them, for they used to point up to the Sun, as chief Author of
their, felicity, and then beat their Breasts, crying, Iliont, which seemed to
signify as much as I mean no harm, and would not come near till those that met
them did the like. Their Houses built of Whales Bones, and the Baulks thereof
with Whales Ribs, and covered with Earth, but the best sort with Seal-Skins,
having Vaults or Rooms under Ground, apiece, and two Yards deep in the
Earth. Their manner of Burial, a Pile of Stones thrown over the Corpse, being
first wrapped up in Seal-Skins.

First Discovery of Spilbergia, or Greenland.
Spilbergia, so called by the Hollanders, from Spilbergen, whom probably they
reckon to have been the first Discoverer of it, is the same that we vulgarly
call Greenland, and which Sir Hugh Willoughby (if not the first of all, yet at
least the first of the English that discovered any thing of these Parts) named
King James's New-Land. The said Sir Hugh Willoughby set forth Anno 1553. in the
Bona Esperanza, accompanied with two Ships more, viz. the Bonaventure, Richard
Challoner Captain, and the Bona Confidentia, and after some time of Coasting up
and down those Northern Seas, he Landed with his Company upon the Place, where
staying a few days, he sent three Men three days Journey into the Country
South-West, and three more as far full West, who all, after much hardship in
their Traveling, returned without having met any People by the Way, or seen
the least appearance of any Habitation. Sailing hence back for Lapland, they
were all frozen to death in the Haven Arzina.

Fotherby's Description of Greenland.
A Description of Greenland by one Mr. Robert Fotherby, represents the Nature of
this Place contradictory to its Name, as before was observed of Groenland: For
certainly (says he) no part of the World, yet known and discovered, is less
Green than this, both the Mountains and Low-lands being covered with Snow till
the beginning of June. The Country, which is for the most part mountainous,
bearing neither Grass nor Tree, save only Heath or Ling, as it is called in
the North parts of England, which grows upon the Moors or Heathy Grounds when
the Snow begins to melt, and on which in Summer the Deer feed themselves fat in
one Month; but how they live in the Winter, is a thing beyond any Man's skill
to comprehend, especially during the Sun's absence under the Horizon, which in
the Latitude of seventy seven Degrees continues from the eighteenth of October
to the fourth of February.

This Country is by many supposed never to have been inhabited by Men, yet not
altogether incapable of affording Habitation to such as would bring with them
sufficient defensive Weapons against Hunger and Cold: For other Animals, it is
found, by the testimony of those that have been upon the Place, not to be
destitute; for besides Deer before mentioned, there have been seen Bears and
Foxes; and of wild Fowl, Cuthbert Ducks, Willocks, Stints, Sea-Pigeons,
Sea-Parrots, Gulls, Noddies, etc.

The Southermost part of Greenland, called Point Look-out, stands in seventy
six Degrees and thirty Minutes. The West side of the Land was discovered by the
first Voyagers Northward as far as eighty Degrees and odd Minutes, and in that
compass six or eight good Harbors for the Whale-fishing; the East side as far
as seventy eight Degrees, with diverse Islands, both great and small, yielding
good Harbors, and store of Whales and Sea-Horses.

The Voyages of Jonas Pool and others to Greenland.
In the Year 1610. Jonas Pool, Master of the Amity fell in with this Land in
May, and continued upon the Coast, discovering of Harbors, and killing of
Morses, till June following: and he is said to have been the first that gave
this Country the Name of Greenland. The next year he set out again,
accompanied with Thomas Edge, Commander of the Mary Margaret; And since many
other Voyages have been made as to a Place known, and a great Trade driven in
catching of Whales, not without several Contests with the Dutch and Danes, but
nothing of late discovered considerable more than in the first Voyages. The
Harbors, Sounds and Coastings most taken notice of, are Fair Foreland, Cape
Cold, Black-Point, Horn-Sound, Knotty-Point, Bell-Sound, Lowness, Cross-Road,
Deer-Sound, Fowl-Sound, Close-Cove, Gurnet-Nose, Ice-Sound, and Green-Haven.

There are few that have Sailed to Greenland, Cherry-Island.
but make great mention of Cherry Island, so called, as having been first
discovered at the Charges of Sir Francis Cherry, an eminent Merchant; by others
Bear-Island, from the multitude of Bears found there; it lies in the Latitude
of seventy four Degrees, and is noted for store of Fowl, Foxes like Dogs, and
upon the Coasts great store of Whales, Sea-Horses, and Morses: It is also said
to be furnished with Lead-Mines, and Pits of Sea-Coal.

Situation and first Discovery of Iseland.
Iseland, so called from the continual Ice which is upon it, is a craggy
mountainous Country; and not only the Hills, but a great part of the Low-land
covered with perpetual Snow: It is of a Form somewhat oblong, lying between the
fifty fourth and fifty ninth Degree of Northern Latitude, having Norway on the
East, the Orcades and Scotland on the South, Grenland on the West, and the
Hyperborean, or frozen Sea on the North. It is by Olaus Magnus supposed to be
twice as big as Sicily, that is to say, about a hundred Leagues in length. It
is the most known, and most througly discovered of all the Countries of the
Artick Region, and is said to have been first found out and peopled in the Year
of our Lord 900. by certain of the Nobility of East-Frisia in the Country of
Breme, in the time of Alebrand, Bishop of that Country; but whether or no
utterly unpeopled till that time, is a Question not easy to be determined,
though in all probability so obvious a Place to be found out, could not lie so
long totally uninhabited. Not long after several Colonies of Norwegians Settled
themselves, some in Hitland, some in Ferow, others (following the Example of
these Bremers) in Iseland. The Country is full of Rocks and Stones, and (as is
credibly reported) not a cultivated Field or Garden in the whole Island, and by
consequence no sort of Corn, yet the People living without either Bread or
Salt, are very strong, and of a good Complexion: Neither is there a Tree to be
seen, except the Birch, which likewise grows but in one place, and exceeds not
the height of a Man, by reason of the violence of the Winds; yet there is said
to be great plenty of Butter, the Grass being so fat, that the Oxen are not
suffered to stay long at a time in the Pastures for fear of bursting. Till of
late there was neither Town, nor any thing that could be called a Village, in
the whole Island, but straggling Cottages here and there, not above three or
four together in a place, most by the Sea side for the convenience of Fishing;
they were built pretty deep in the Ground, but artificially framed of Whales
Bones, with Seats, Benches, and other Utensils of the same; now sometimes they
use Fir to the same purpose, which is cast upon the Coast by the force of the
Sea from Tartary or elsewhere. For want of Vessels, they lay their Butter in
Heaps in the Corners of their Houses like Mortar. In the Winter, wanting
Fodder, they feed their Cattle with Fish. Besides these Cattle, which are Kine
without Horns, Horses only fit for carrying of Burdens, and very large Sheep,
there are store of white Foxes, and huge Bears of the same color, and a sort
of rough Dogs, very well known, and frequent amongst us by the Name of Shocks,
which the Islanders esteem not a little, and will part with their Children at a
far easier rate: They keep neither Hogs nor Poultrey, for want of Grain to feed
them.

Many Rivers in Iseland.
The Rivers belonging to this Island are many, and those not unpleasant,
affording to the Inhabitants plenty of Fish, especially Sturgeon, Trouts, and
Salmons; and one is especially remarkable for a Bridge made over it, which
being the only Bridge of the Country, is made of the great Bones of a Whale.
The whole Island is one continued Desert, without any trodden Path or Road from
one end to the other; so that all that have occasion to travel to any part
thereof by Land, make use of the Compass, as if they were Voyaging by Sea.

Strange Fish on the Coast of Iseland.
The Coast of Iseland has many strange and monstrous Fish worth observation, as
first the Orca, which though nothing near so big as the Whale, yet is able to
be the death of it; for being of the shape of a Ship turned upside-down, and
having sharp long Fins on its Back, it pricks the Belly of the Whale therewith
till it kills.

The next is the Hackfall, which is very fat, and about twelve Inches long.

Then the Dog-Fish, which lifting up its Head out of the Sea, Barks, and
letting forth its young ones, receives them into her Belly again, when they
have sported a while in the Sea.

Lastly, another Monster, of a most frightful shape, mentioned by Olaus Magnus,
but not by any particular Name.

Strange Fountains.
In diverse parts of the Island are Fountains of scalding Water, which as soon as
taken from the Fountain begins to cool, and when cold, has a sulphury
Substance swimming on the top.

At the West end is a smoaky Fountain, very cold, and turning all that is cast
into it into Stone.

At the place upon the Sea called Turlocks Haven, are two Fountains of
different quality, the one hot, the other cold, which by Pipes being brought
together into one place, make a Bath of an excellent temperature, and of a
medicinal Virtue.

Not far from Haven Halneford is a Cliff in a Rock of an unknown depth, and no
Water to be discerned by those that look down into it, but if a Stone be cast
in, it shall make a noise for half an hour together, as if it were striking
against a Brazen Vessel, and all this while the Water will be rising till it
comes up to the brim, and then will be so long sinking again as the Stone was
falling.

Mountains of Iseland.
There are also three Mountains in Iseland not to be left unmention'd, the
Mountain of the Cross, the Moutain Snenelstockel, and the Mountain Hecla; the
two first are chiefly considerable for their wonderful height, and for the
dreadful noise of Thunder which is heard on the top of them, when in the
adjacent parts below, the Air is calm and clear; the third lying in the North
of the Island, and not very high, is one of the most prodigious Vulcans in the
World, for the casting forth of Flames, black Ashes, and Pumice-Stones,
insomuch that there is no possibility of Habitation within six Miles of it
round about; and it is a received Opinion of the Inhabitants, that it is the
place of Torment for the Souls of the Damned; from whence there has risen such
a company of strange Stories and Fables, that it would make up a Volume of it
self to relate them. The occasion of the great Eruption of this Mountain is not
without much reason imputed to the inflammation of the Sulphur, of which there
are several Mines or Pits in the Country, though none of any sort of Metal.

First planting of Christian Religion here.
Waldemarus, King of Denmark and Norway, being consequently Master of this
amongst the other Norwegian Colonies, Planted the Christian Religion in this
Island in the Year of Christ 1398. and Ordained two Bishops, one in
Schalholden, in the East part, another in Hollen, in the West; and after the
Reformation was begun, Christianus, King of Denmark, took care to propagate the
Reformed Doctrine there, as well as in other parts of his Dominions; and to
that end sent over a PRINTER thither, that the BIBLE, together with the Works
of Philip Melancthon and Urbanus Regius, might be published in the Vulgar
Tongue of the Country. But these Proceedings were mainly opposed by the Bishop
of Schalholden, who animating the People to Rebellion, they slew the King's
Lieutenant: Whereupon the next Year Paul Holfelt, a Knight of the Danish Order,
being sent over with an Army, overthrew the Rebels, and taking off the chief
Heads of the Rebellion, committed the Charge of the Government to another
Nobleman of Denmark, whom he left upon the Place. But one Tadde Bond, a great
Man of the Country, meditating a Revolt, drew diverse Persons of principal note
into Conspiracy with him, and was advancing to a formidable Power, had not the
Bishop given continual Intelligence of their Proceedings to the King's
Lieutenant, who thereupon employed Agents to the chief Accomplices of the
Faction, and what with fair Means and threatenings so wrought with them, that
they returned to their Obedience, and forsook Todde, insomuch that he flying
with a small Party, betook himself to a fastness at the Foot of Heckelveld,
where being hemmed in, those about him were slain, and he himself taken
Prisoner; and because no Man to whose safe custody he was offered durst receive
him, so much dreaded was his Power, one Jonas, a bold courageous Fellow, slew
him with his own Hand, and thereby put an end to all farther Tumults and
Seditions.

The People of Iseland addicted to Sorcery and Superstition.
So much have the People of this Island been ever addicted to Sorcerie and
Superstition, that notwithstanding the Profession of Christianity, and the
frequent Preaching against those Sins, especially since the Reformation, the
generality of them are still wedded to many of those old diabolical Customs,
which were practiced there in time of Paganism; and amongst other things they
are said to be served, many of them, by Spirits, which constantly attend them,
and (as Olaus Magnus writes of the Finlanders, they are oftentimes dealt with
by Strangers, to sell them prosperous Winds for Money, and (doubtless by the
help of the Devil) perform the same; as also on the contrary, they are said by
their Enchantments to stop the Course of a Ship, and make it as it were
immovable, though in the Stream of never so prosperous a Gale. They are a
proud, haughty People, and for the most part endu'd with vast strength of Body;
their Habit so promiscuous, that neither Sex can be distinguished by it. They
are not only forward to prostitute their Daughters to those Germans that Trade
with them at Hafnefords, but that Virgin who has had to do with a German,
shall be sure to be so much the more esteemed and Courted.

Towns and Places of note.
The only Towns and Buildings of note here, and those erected but of late Ages,
are 1. Hafnefords, a Haven Town, chiefly frequented by Dutch Merchants for
Traffic with the Natives.

2. Bedstede, the Residence of the Lord Lieutenant or Governor for the King of
Denmark.

3. The Bishops See of Halsar, having four Monasteries belonging to it, viz.
Pingore, Remestede, Modor, and Monkeniere.

4. The Bishops See of Schalholt, to which also does belong four Monasteries,
viz. Vedey, Pernebar, Kirkebar, and Schirde.

Their Place and manner of Judicature
The Nobles of Iseland are called Bonden; their Justiciaries or Judges, being
twelve in number, Lochmaders, that is, Men of Law or Justice, who are said to
meet once a year on the twenty ninth of June, to administer Justice in a place
ordained for that purpose in the midst of the Island, appearing like some
feigned Paradise, so pleasant a place it is represented to be at that time of
the year, being (as the Tradition goes) from a high burning Mountain like
Hecla; consumed to a Plain, and so environed with Rocks, that there was left
but a small Passage for one at a time to enter. Here the Governor having first
given the Charge, leaves the Trial of all Matters to the Lochmaders, who having
diligently heard every Cause argued on both sides, withdraw for a while to
Consult together, and then proceed to Sentence, the same Persons being both
Jury and Judge; but if any Case of difficulty or scruple arise, they consult
the Governor.

Angrimus Jonas's Relation of Iseland.
Angrimus Jonas's Relation of Iseland differing much from what has been
delivered by Blefkens, is not to be omitted. He says it was first discovered
by one Naddecus, a Pyrate, who going toward the Farensian Islands, was cast by
Tempest upon the Shore of East-Iseland, near the Mountain Reidarfial; and as he
departed from the Coast, perceiving the tops of the highest Mountains covered
with a very deep Snow, called the Island Snaelandia, that is, Snowy Country.

Gardarus's Voyage to Iseland.
Upon the fame of Naddocus's Discovery, one Gardarus, the Son of Suavarus, a
Swede, was desirous to make a Voyage thither, and arriving near the Eastern
Shore, Wintered in the Bay of Skialfanda, or North-Island, in the Year of our
Lord 864. and called the Haven Huscawick, from the Houses or Wintering-places
built there, as the next Haven to it was called Nartarawick, from Natrare, an
eminent Mariner in this Expedition. Gardarus returning home about the beginning
of the Spring, called the Country from his own Name Gardarsholm.

Flocco's Voyage to the same Place.
The next that followed his Example, was one Flocco, a famous Pyrate, whose
Daughter Geirhilda being drowned upon the Coast of Schetland (anciently
Hietland,) gave the Name of Geirhildarwata to the Sea thereabouts: Not having
the use of the Mariners Compass, he made use of Ravens for the steering of his
Course, and having sent forth two without success, by the guidance of the third
he had sight of the Eastern side of the Island; and Steering Southward, he
found a very wide Bay, between the Promontories Renkanes and Snaefesness; which
Bay, from Faxa a Scottish Mariner that accompanied him, he named Faxaos, that
is, The Mouth of Faxa, though from its many Havens it came afterward to be
termed Hafnafiordur. Sailing along the West side of the Island, he entered the
Bay Bredafiord, and took up his Quarters at Watnesfiordur, a Haven in the
Province Bardostraund (for by these Names these Places came afterward to be
known:) Having stayed here two Winters, he returned back into Norway, and is
said to have been the first that gave this Country the Name of Iseland, from
the great quantities of Ice which filled the Seas thereabouts, he also gave it
the Name of Rafnaftock, from the Ravens which served him in stead of a Compass.

A Plantation settled in Ise. by Ingulphus and Hiorleifus
The last and most considerable Adventurer was Ingulfus, the Son of Orn, Duke of
Fyrdafilace in Norway, who, together with his Cousin Hiorleifus, that Married
his Sister Helca, being adjudg'd to Banishment by Halsten (to the Award of
whose Judgment they had submitted themselves) upon the slaughter of his two
Brethren, Holmsten and Hersten, (these three Brethren were the Sons of Atlas,
one of the prime Noblemen of Norway) in a Quarrel, wherein Halsten was chosen
Umpire; and also detesting the Tyranny of Haraldus Pulchricomus, King of
Norway, went over Gonfaloniere, or chief Leader of a great Colony of People,
whom he raised for the settling of a Plantation in some foreign Country:
Accompanied with his Cousin Hiorleifus, he took Shipping for Iseland in the
Year of our Lord 854. having been over to visit it about four years before; he
Landed at a Promontory on the South Shore, which from him took the Name of
Ingulfholde, and Reicharwick settled his Habitation, while Hiorleifus seated
himself at the Promontory by him called Hiorleifholda, where he built two very
large Houses, each being about a hundred and thirty Foot long; then he set
himself to Manure and Till the Ground, employing in that Work ten Slaves, whom
he brought with him for that purpose out of Norway; but it was not long ere
they traitorously set upon him and slew him by an Ambuscade which they had laid
for him; after which they betook themselves to certain little Isles, which were
named Westmafyar, where before they had well nestled themselves, the whole Race
of them were rooted out by Ingulphus, in revenge of his Kinsman's Death. After
this the Island grew daily more and more populous by the coming over of new
Families from Norway; so that at this day it is a Place not the least
considerable belonging to the Kings of Denmark.

The ancient Inhabitants of this Place (for it is to be supposed that there
were People here before the coming over of Ingulfus) were called Papae or
Pappae, and the East side of the Island, Papey, which agrees very well with the
Names of two little Islands on the Coast of Scotland, Pappa and Westrepappa,
from which many conjecture, as also from several Crosses and Bells found upon
the Place, that there has been in former Ages a resort of the Irish, and of
the People of the North-West parts of Scotland.

The Division of Iseland.
The Eastern Bound of Iseland is called Austurborn; the Western, Randesandur;
the Northern, Langanes; and the Southern, Reicranes. The Island being divided
according to the four Quarters of the World, North-Island is severed from
East-Island by the aforesaid Promontory of Langanes; from West-Island by
Rutafiordur Bay; from South-Island, by vast and unpassable Deserts. Between
South-Island and East-Island runs the River Jocolsu, through the Deserts of
Solseimasande. Between South-Island and West-Island a famous River named Albis,
which emptieth it self into the Bay of Bargarfiord.

Schetland the Thule of the Ancients.
It Is a vulgar Opinion, that this Island is the same which the Ancients called
Thule; but upon consideration it will appear, that by the Ultima Thule taken
notice of by Virgil, Claudian, Statius, Pythias Massiliensis, Pliny, Seneca,
Solinus, Tacitus, and others, is meant one of the British Isles, amongst which
were comprehended the Isles on the North of Scotland, as the Orcades, and some
others, the utmost of which we call Schetland, and is very probable to be this
Ultima Thule of the Ancients.

Nova Zembla, when first discovered.
Nova Zembla, lying under seventy six Degrees of Northern Latitude, and a
hundred and twelve Degrees and twenty five Minutes of Longitude, and being
reckoned above two hundred Miles in length, was, together with the River Puora,
and Straights of Weygats, discovered, (and, as it is thought, first of all) by
Stephen Borough, who was sent out by the Muscovia Company in the Year 1556. to
find out a Way to Cathay by the North-East.

Afterward one Oliver Burel, a Dutchman, moved with the hope of Gain, went
from Enkhuissen to Pecora; where (having first discovered Costinfarca in Nova
Zembla) he lost all by Shipwreck.

The States General nothing discouraged with the little success of these two
Voyagers, sent forth two Ships under the Command of Hugo Linschot, to the
Straights of Weygats, and two others under William Barrents, who were to go
directly Northwards for Nova Zembla: Linschot went fifty Miles beyond the
Straights, but the Northerly Winds and late Season of the year forced him to
hasten back with all possible speed. William Barents and his Company were
necessitated in the Year 1596. being not able to get off, in regard the Ice
increased upon them more and more, to take up their Winter Quarters there in a
Cottage, which they made a shift to cast up for their present necessity, having
much ado to defend themselves against the Bears, that continually assaulted
them.

D^scription of the Country.
This Country is generally delivered to be a barren and desert Country, full
of Wood indeed, but the Boughs as bare of Leaves, as the Ground of Grass; also
very incommodious to be traveled through, by reason of its desartness, and the
danger of Bears, great fierce Foxes, and such like ravenous Beasts, which feed
only upon Flesh, and which are the only Beasts this Country harbors.

In a Journal of Mr. Henry Hudson, there is to be found a much more favorable
Description of the Country: Generally (says he) the Land of Nova Zembla that
we have seen, is to a Man's Eye a pleasant Land, much Main High-land with no
Snow on it, looking in some places green, and Deer feeding thereon, and the
Hills partly covered with Snow, and partly bare.

It should seem to have beery a received Opinion from the first Discovery of
Nova Zembla, that it was inhabited by Pygmies, it being several times, in the
Journals of some Voyages, mentioned particularly by the Name of The Land of
Pygmies, but upon what certain Ground cannot in the least be discovered; for we
find not from the Russians (to whom the Place, by reason of its Vicinity, is
probable to have been first known) any other Account of the Inhabitants, but
that they are a People wholly destitute of civil Manners, and unlimited by Law
or Religion, saving that they seem to give some kind of Adoration to the Sun,
Moon, and North-star, and have some Qualities which speak them national
Creatures; whereas the Pygmies (if there be any such Creatures) are thought to
have nothing of Humane but their Shape only.

Willoughby-Island.
Besides Nova Zembla there is not far from it another Island, known by the Name
of Willoughby-Island, from Sir Hugh Willoughby, the first Discoverer; they both
are of the Dominions of the Czar of Russia.

Several Attempts for the discovery of the North-West Passage.
WHat has been discovered of Sea in the North or South parts of the World, is
of no less Consequence than what has been discovered of Land, and the Straight
of Hudson Northward, is no less considerable than the Straight of Magellan
South; we shall therefore complete this Discourse of the Artick Region with a
brief Mention of what Capes, Bays, Sounds, etc. have been found out by those
that have attempted to find a Passage by the North-West to the East Indies.

Not to insist upon the fabulous Stories of King Arthur's first conquering
Ireland, and then Sailing into the Northern Seas, and subduing Scantia,
Iseland, Groenland, and (as the Story says) many other Islands beyond Norway
even under the Pole, or of Malgo's subduing Ireland, Iseland, the Orcades and
Norway, or Octher's Reports to King Alfred of his Voyages to the North-East
parts beyond Norway, or the Voyages of the two famous Venetian Brethren, Nicolo
and Antonio Zeni, or of Marcus Paulus Venetus, Odoricus and Vertomannus; the
first Englishman we hear of, that made an Expedition into those Northern Seas,
was Sir Hugh Willoughby, before taken notice of for the Discovery of King
James's Newland and Willoughby-Island, in the Year of our Lord 1553.

Stephen Buroughs (as has been intimated) discovered amongst other Places,
about the Year 1556. the Straight of Vaigats.

In the Year 1576. Sir Martin Forbisher setting forth with two Barques, after
he had been out about five Weeks, had sight of a High-land, which he named
Queen Elizabeth's Foreland: Queen Elizabeth's Foreland
Thence Sailing more Northerly to the height of about sixty two Degrees, he
descried a great Sea or Inlet, which he entered, and thence it took the
Appellation of Forbisher's Straight. Forbister's Straight.
About two years after proceeding to a farther discovery of it, he entered a
good way into it, and took possession of the utmost Place he went to for Queen
Elizabeth, who thereupon gave it the Name of Meta Incognita.

Anno 1580. Arthur Pett and Charles Jackman were sent out by the Russian
Company, to make a Discovery of the River Ob, and passing the Straight of
Waigats, took particular observation of the Islands and Places there, but not
being able to pass much farther, by reason of the Ice, toward the latter end
of the year they returned.

In prosecution of this Discovery to the North-West, Captain John Davis of
Sandruge in Devonshire, made three Voyages; his first Anno 1585. his second,
1587. in which he met with many strange Adventures; but the main thing that
accru'd from these Voyages, was finding of a mighty Through-let between vast
and desert Islands, to which his Name gave the Appellation of Fretum Davis,
Davis's Straight.
or Davis's Straight.

The next that went upon this Design was Captain George Weymouth, who from the
Year 1585 to 1602 made several Expeditions, which produced large Relations of
strange Accidents that befell them, but little of Discovery farther than what
had been made before.

Mr. James Hall, very noted for his Voyages to Groenland, (which before was by
Captain Davis called Desolation) at his falling in with that Place named a
Head-land from then King of Denmark, Cape Christianus, Cape Christianus.
which some think to be no other than Cape Farewell.

Anno 1606. Mr. John Knight was set out by the King of Denmark, of the Passages
of whose Voyage little or nothing memorable is recorded.

The next and most famous Attempter in the discovery of the North-Wast Passage,
was Henry Hudson, who is said to have discovered farther Northward to the Pole
than any before him. From the Year 1607 to 1610 he made several Voyages, being
set out by Sir Thomas Smith, Sir Dudley Diggs, and Mr. John Wostenholm, with
others that were his great Friends, and Advancers of such public Designs. In
his last Voyage the Isles of Gods Mercy, Prince Henry's Foreland, King James's
Cape, Queen Annes Cape, Digg's Island, Cape Wostenholm, The King's Foreland,
Mount Charles, Cape Salisbury, etc. were first taken notice of and named, and,
which were his principal Discoveries, and therefore worthily retaining his
Name, Hudson's Straight and Bay.
Hudson's Straight and Bay; but in his return homeward he was set upon in his
Cabin by one Green, Wilson, and others of their Conspiracy, and together with
his Son John Hudson, Tho. Widows. Arn. Ludlow, Sidrach Faner, and two or three
more, was put over into a small Shallop, in which they were forced to seek
their Fortune, and in all likelihood perished, for they were never heard of
after. Nor long after Green going on Shore upon a strange Island, was shot from
an Ambuscade of Salvages into the Heart; the like End has Wilson, and three
more of the Conspirators died of their mortal Wounds, the rest with much ado
got home in a very sick and weak Condition, through the Hardships the had
sustained, and want of Provisions.

There was also another Hudson, who Anno 1608. went to the height of eighty one
Degrees, and gave Names to certain Places, which continue to this day, as
Whale-Bay, Hackluit's Headland, and Hudson's Touches.

By the Assistance of Prince Henry, and those other Noble Persons above
mentioned, Captain Thomas Button set out in the Year 1612. and is said to have
passed Hudson's Straight, and leaving Hudson's Bay to the South, to have Sailed
two hundred Leagues South-Westward over a Sea above eighty Fathoms deep, which
at length he discovered to be another great Bay, since called Button's Bay:
Button's Bay.
He is said also to have discovered a great Continent, which he called New
Wales.

Several other Voyagers there were in this great Attempt of the North-West
Passage, as Captain Gibbons, Robert Bylot, William Baffins, and Captain William
Hawkridge, who though they all came short of the main Enterprise, yet every one
found out some new Cape, Bay, or Promontory, or opened a farther Passage than
had been before, as Bylot made known Cape Comfort; Baffin, Baffin's Bay.
the Inlet called from him Baffins Bay, as also Sir James Lancaster's Sound;
Hawkridge, a farther Passage into Lumly's Inlet.

From the Year 1616. to 1631. the Business slept, and then a Voyage was
undertaken by Captain Luke Fox, who at his Return gave very good hopes and
encouragement, that the Work, so long in prosecution, was not impossible to
effected; nevertheless, by reason of the late troublesome Times i^ (...) wholly
laid aside for almost forty years; but in the Year 1668. several Persons of
Honor undertook to revive the Work, and to that purpose furnished out two
Ships, which set forth in June, and returned about the beginning of October the
Year following, giving so satisfactory an Account of their Voyage, that in the
Year 1670. the same Adventurers thought fit to send out two Ships more, so
furnished, as to endure a Wintering there, which they did, with greater hopes
than ever of finding out the North-West Passage, besides a handsome Ca^go of
rich Furrs, which made it more than a saving Voyage; so that it is supposed this
will not be the last Attempt, but that another will suddenly follow. And it may
well be observed, that nothing considerable has been done, in this grand
Enterprise, but by the English.

A brief View of what Places are possessed at this day in the West Indies by the
English, Spaniards, French, Portuguese, and Dutch.
THe English possess in Northern Amerrica, New England, the Bay of Trinity,
Chincet, and a part of Terra Nova, or Newfound Land; Virginia, part of
Florida, now called Carolina, the Bermudas, or Summer-Islands, New Holland,
which they took from the Dutch An. 1664. with New Amsterdam and Fort Orange
Terra Mariae, or Maryland, part of the Isles called Lucaies; among the
Antillae or Caribbee-Islands, Barbados, Anguilla, part of St. Christophers,
Montserrat, Nieves or Mevis, Antego, Dominico, and St. Vincent; the Isle of St.
Catherine, otherwise called Providence, Jamaica, the Isles of Curacao and
Trinity, several Colonies at Surinam and Sinamari, with several Forts upon the
Coast of Guiana; and lastly, the Haven Porto Bello, once the Spaniards.

The Spaniards possess the greatest and best part of America, wherein they have
a vast number of very considerable Towns. In Northern America they have 1. New
Spain, in which are the Audiences of Mexico, Guadalajara, and Guatimala. 2. The
Islands Cuba and Hispaniola (excepting some parts toward the West, which are
in possession of the French) Boriquen, etc. also St. Augustine and St. Matthew
in Florida, and a part of New Mexico. In Southern America, Castilla d' Oro or
Golden Castile, otherwise called Terra Firma, in which are the Audiences of
Quito, Lima, and La Plata; lastly, Chili and Paraguay, which comprehends the
Countries of Tucuman and La Plata.

The French have in Canada, or Nova Francia, Montreal, the Rivers Quebeck,
Tadousack, and some Places upon the great River of St. Lawrence; also Accadie,
or Nova Scotia, the Isle of Cape Breton, with the Fort St. Peter, from whence
they Traffic to Nepigiquit, with the Salvages of that Coast; part of the Isle
of Terre-Neuve, Pemptagoet, St. Jean, Port Royal, and other Fortresses. Among
the Caribbee-Islands, part of St. Christophers, St. Bartholomew, St. Crux, St.
Martin, Guadalupe, Deseado, Marigalante, Todos los Sanctos, Martinico, St.
Alousie and Granada; likewise some Colonies on the West of Hispaniola. Upon the
Continent of Southern America, on the Coast of Guiana, the Isle Cayene, where
stands the Fort of St. Michael de Ceperoux, now Fort Louis; also the Colonies
of Mathouri and Armire, Courrou, Coonama and Comaribo.

The Portuguese possess all the Coast of Brasile in Southern America, with the
several Capitania's or Praefectures thereof.

The Dutch have only the Isles of St. Eustace and Saba, the Town of Coro in
Terra Firma, the Colonies Boron, Esquib, Berebie, Aperwaque, and others, on the
Coast of Guiana.

FINIS.
Directions for placing the Whole-sheet Prints in this Volume of America.
TItle The general Map of America Fol. 1 Christoffel Colonus Fol. 43 Angra op
Tercera Fol. 52 Americus Vesputius Fol. 60 Ferdinand Magellanus Fol. 79 Vetus
Mexico Fol. 87 Athabaliba Fol. 97 Novum Belgium quod nunc Nov. Jorck vocatur.
Fol. 168 Maryland Fol. 183 Nova Virginiae Tabula, Fol. 192 Arx Carolina Fol.
205 Virginiae pars Australis and Florida Fol. 213 Pagus Hispanorum in Florida
Fol. 218 Yucatan and Guatimala Fol. 222 Francisco de Campeche Fol. 223 Truxillo
Fol. 231 Nova Hispania, Nova Gallicia and Guatimala, Fol. 238 Nova Mexico Fol.
243 Muteczuma Fol. 253 Portus Acapulco Fol. 260 Viztlipuztli Fol. 297 Insulae
Americanae in Oceano Septentrionali Fol. 304 Mappa AEstivarum Insularum alias
Barmudes. Fol. 311 Urbs Domingo in Hispaniola Fol. 318 Porto Rico Fol. 327
Havana Fol. 333 Jamaica Fol. 337 Urbs Martini 365 Carthagena Fol. 401 Terra
Firma, Regnum Granatense and Popayan Fol. 408 Peru Fol. 412 Franciscus Pizarrus
Fol. 429 Cusco Fol. 456 Potosi Fol. 463 Callao de Lima Fol. 466 Chili Fol. 470
Magellanica Fol. 472 Paraquaria Fol. 474 Brasile Fol. 477 Sinus omnium
Sanctorum Fol. 502 Olinda Fol. 505 Ostium fluminis Paraybae Fol. 508 Itamaraca
Fol. 517 Fluvius Grandis Fol. 517 Siara Fol. 517 Urbs Salvador Fol. 519 Obsidio
and expugnatio Portus Calvi Fol. 554 Alagoa del Zul Fol. 556 Serinhaim Fol. 580
Mauritio-Polis Fol. 604 Castrum Mauritii ad ripam Francisci Fol. 605 Arax
Principis Guilielmi Fol. 605 Bonavista Fol. 606 Guiana sive Amazonum regio Fol.
607 Arx Nassovii Fol. 608 Venezuela cum part Australi novae Andalusiae Fol.
624

