THE KINGS CORONATION: Being an Exact Account of the CAVALCADE, WITH A
Description of the Triumphal Arches, and Speeches prepared by the CITY of
LONDON For His late Majesty Charles the Second, In His Passage from the Tower
to Whitehall.

ALSO THE NARRATIVE Of his Majesty's Coronation, with his magnificent
proceeding, And Feast in Westminster Hall, April the 23th. As it was Published
by his Majesty's Order, with the Approbation and License of Sir Edward Walker,
Garter Principal King at Arms.

By John Ogilly Esquire.

Published by William Morgan his Majesty's Cosmographer.

Edinburgh, Reprinted by the Heir of Andrew Anderson, Printer to His most
Sacred Majesty, Anno DOM 1685.

I have perused a brief Narrative of his Majesty's Solemn Coronation, Printed
by Mr. Ogilby, together with his Description of his Majesty's Entertainment
passing through the City of London to his Coronation, etc. and in Pursuance of
his Majesty's Order unto me directed, have examined, and do approve thereof, so
as the said Mr. Ogilby may freely publish the same.

EDWARD WALKER Garter Principal King at Arms.
From the Heralds College this thirteenth of June 1662.
An Advertisement.
1. THe four Triumphal Arches built by the City of London, for the
entertainment of our late most gracious Sovereign Charles the Second, in his
passage from the Tower to Whitehall on the 22th of April, 1661. being the Day
before his Coronation. 2. The Inside of Westminster Abbey, Describing the places
of the Nobility and great Officers, with the manner of the Kings Coronation, on
St GEORGES Day April the 23th.
Done on Copper; and proper to be added to this Book, sold by William Morgan at
his House, next the Blew-Boar in Ludgate Street.

THE CAVALCADE; Or His Majesty's passing through the City of London to His
Coronation.
April the 22th. 1661.
THe City of London having built four Triumphal Arches, and adorned the Streets
in the best manner they could, to entertain His Majesty in his passage from the
Tower to Whitehall. About ten of the Clock, being all mounted on stately Horses
with very rich Trapping, the Cavalcade began in the following Order.

After several led Horses followed with Kettle Drums and Trumpets, the Duke of
Yorks Horse Guard, next the Messengers of the Chamber, then the Esquires to the
Knights of the Bath, the Knight Harbinger, and Sergeant Porter, the Sewers of
the Chamber, and Gentlemen ^^shers, Quarter Waiters, the Clerks of the
Chancery, Clerks of the Signet, Clerks of the Privy Seal, Clerks of the
Council, Clerks of the Parliament, and Clerks of the Crown-Next the Chaplains
having dignities, the Kings Advocate and Remembrancer, the Masters of the
Chancery, the Kings Learned Council at Law, the Kings Puisne Sergeants, the
Kings Attorney and Solicitor, the Kings eldest Sergeants, the Secretarys of the
French and Latin Tongues, the Gentlemen Ushers, daily Waiters, Sewers,
Caryers, and Cupbearers in Ordinary, Esquires of the Body, Masters of standing
Offices (vizs) Tents, Revels; and Ceremonies, Armory, Wardrobe and Ordinance,
Masters of the Requests, Chamberlains of the Exchequer, Gentlemen of the Privy
Chamber, Knights of the Bath sixty eight, the Knight Marshal, the Master of the
Jewel House, and the Treasurer of the Chamber, then Barons youngest Sons,
Vicounts youngest Sons, then the three Barons of the Exchequer, the six
Justices of the Kings Bench and Common Pleas, the Lord Chief Justice of the
Common Pleas, and Lord Chief Baron of the Exchequer, the Lord Chief Justice of
the Kings Bench and Master of the Rolls, then Barons eldest Sons, Earls younger
Sons, Vicounts eldest Sons, then a Kettle Drum, and two Sets of the Kings
Trumpets, and the Sergeant Trumpeter with his Mace, then two Pursuivants at
Arms before the Barons two and two, being (as all the Train was, especially the
Nobility) attended by Gentlemen, Pages, and Footmen in rich habits going before
those to whom they did belong,

Then Marquesses younger Sons, Earls eldest Sons, and two Pursuivants at Arms
before the Viscounts, then Dukes younger Sons, Marquesses eldest Sons, then two
Heralds before the Earls, then the Lord Chamberlain of the Kings Household, then
Dukes eldest Sons, and two Heralds before the Marquess of Worcester, and the
Marquess of Dorchester, then two Heralds before the Duke of Buckingham, and
here the Attendants began to be more numerous and uncovered, then Clarenceux
and Norroy the two Kings at Arms, the Lord Chancellor, the Lord Treasurer, the
Lord High Steward, and sour Sergeants at Arms with their Maces, before two
persons representing the Dukes of Normandy and Aquitain, then Garter Principal
King at Arms, the Gentleman Usher with the black Rod, and the Lord Mayor of
London, followed by the Gentlemen, Pages and Footmen that attended his Royal
Highness the Duke of York, (our now most gracious Sovereign,) who was followed
by about twenty Sergeants at Arms with their Maces; after whom came the Earl of
Linds^y, Lord great Chamberlain of England, the Earl Northumberland, Lord High
Constable of England, and the Earl of Suffolk, Earl Marshal of England, then
the Kings Footmen, and Pages, and the King in the midst of the Gentlemen
Pensioners and Equirees, followed by the Yeomen of the Guard, then the Duke of
Albemarle, Mastes of the Horse, on Horseback, leading a Horse of Estate, the
Vice-Chamberlain, The Captain of the Pensioners, and Captain of the Guard,
followed by the Kings Horse Guards, etc.

In this Order they marched through Croutched Friars to Algate, and so through
the City to White Hall.

In Croutched Friars, on a Stage was placed a Band of eight Wa^ts, and near
Algate another Band of the like Music entertained them from a Balcony built
for that purpose.

A Description of the Triumphal Arches.
IN Leadenhal-Street, near Lime-Street, was erected the first Triumphal Arch
after the Dorick Order: On the North side, on a Pedestal before the Arch, was a
Woman personating Rebellion, mounted on an Hydra, in a Crimson Robe, torn
Snakes crawling thereon, and begirt with Serpents, her Hair snaky, a Crown of
Fire on her Head, a bloody Sword in one hand, a charming Rod in the other, Her
Attendant, Confusion, in a deformed shape, being a Garment of several ill
matched Colors, and put on the wrong way, on her Head ruins of Castles, torn
Crowns, and broken Scepters in each hand.

On the South Pedestal was a Representation of Britains Monarchy, supported by
Loyalty, both Women, Monarchy in a large purple-Robe, adorned with Diadems and
Scepters, over which she had a loose mantle edged with blue and Silver Fringe,
resembling Water, on her Mantle the Map of great Britain, on her Head London,
in her right Hand Edinburgh, in her left Dublin. Loyalty was all in white with
three Scepters in her right Hand, and three Crowns in her left.

The first painting on the South side was a prospect of his Majesty's Landing
at Dover Castle, Ships at Sea, great Guns going off, one kneeling and kissing
the Kings Hand, Soldiers Horse and Foot, with many people attending and gazing.
The painting on the North side opposite to this was a Trophy with decollated
Heads.

The painting over the middle Arch represented the King mounted, in calm
motion, Usurpation flying before him, being a Figure with many Ill-favored
Heads, some bigger, some lesser, and one shooting our of his shoulder like
Cromwell, another Head upon his Rump or Tail, two Harpies with a Crown, chased
by an Angel into Hells mouth.

Above the Arch, on two Pedestials Southward and North ward, stood the Statues
of King James and King Charles the First, in the middle and somewhat higher,
(just over the Arch) the Statue of his Sacred Majesty Charles the Second.

Behind the Figure of Charles the Second, in a large Table was Deciphered the
Royal Oa^^ bearing Crowns and Scepters.

The upper Paintings on the East Side were ruinous, representing the Disorder
the Kingdom was in, during his Majesty's absence, but on the West side they
were finished, to represent the Rest^uration of our happiness by His Majesty's
Arrival.

The Painting on the South-West side represented the Lord Mayor delivering the
Keys of the City to the King, in the Niches were four figures; the first on the
South side. a Woman in pleasant colors, the emblem on her shield a Terrestial
Glob, the Sun Rising, B^ts and Owls flying to the shadow. The second Had on her
Escutcheon, a swarm of Bees whetting their stings. The third on the North side
had on her shield a mountain burning, Cities and Vine-Yards destroyed. The
fourth had on her Escutcheon an Arm, as it were thrust out of the Clouds, and
in the hand a naked sword.

Eight Mutes above were on pedestals, four in white, and four in Crimson.

The Music of this Fabric is ten Drums flanking Rebellion, and twelve
Trumpets flanking Mon^rcoy, aloft under the two Devastations twelve Trumpets
and four Drums. Within the Arch, on two Balconies, six Trumpets and four Drums,
while the Train passed along, the Drums beat the Marches of several Countries,
and the Trumpets sound several Levers, but His Majesty drawing near, the Drums
turn their March to a Battle, the Trumpets sound a Charge, and on a sudden
Rebellion rowseth up her self; at which Drums and Trumpets ceasing, Rebellion
addresses to His Majesty the following Speech.

Stand! stand! who e're you are, this stage is ours,
The Names of Princes are inscribed on Flowers
And wither with them! stand! you must we know
To Kings and Monarchy a deadly foe;
Me, who dare bid you, midst your triumphs stand,
In the great City of your native Land.
I am Hells Daughter, Satan's eldest Child,
When I first Cried the Power of Darkness smiled,
And my glad Father, thundering at my Birth,
Unhinged the Poles, and shook the sixed Earth.
My dear Rebellion (that shall be thy Name
Said he) thou Emperors and Kings shall Tame,
No Right so good, Succession none so long,
But thou shall vanquish by thy popular throng,
Those Legions, which to enlarge our power we send
Throughout the World, shall thee (my Dear) attend,
Our mighty Champions, the seven deadly Sins,
By Malice, Profit, Pleasure all their Gins,
Bring to our Kingdom some few spotted Souls;
Thou shall by Treason h^rry them in shoals.
Would you now know what interest I have here
Hydra I ride, great Cities are my Sphere:
I Sorc'ry use, and Hag Men in their Bed^,
With Commonwealths and Rota's sill their heads;
Making the Vulgar Fanatique Swarms,
Court Civil War, and dote on Horrid Arms.
'Twas I, who in the late unnatural Broi^s,
Engaged three Kingdoms and two Wealthy Isles.
I hope at last to march with Flags unfurled,
And tread down Monarchy through all the World.
At which Words Monarchy and Loyalty unve^ling themselves, Rebellion starts as
affrighted, but recollecting her self concludes her speech thus,

Ah Britain, Ah! stand'st thou Triumphant there,
Monarchick Isle, I shake with horrid fear.
Are thy Wounds whole, upon thy Cheek fresh smiles?
Is joy restored to these late mournful Isles?
Ah, must he enter, and a King be Crowned,
Then, as he rises, sink me under ground.
Rebellion having ended her Speech. Monarchy entertains His Majesty with the
following, Sinks.

To Hell soul Fiend shrink from this glorious Light,
And hide thy Head in everlasting Night.
Enter in safety, Royal Sir, this Arch;
And through your joyful Streets In Triumph March;
Enter, our Sun, our Comfort, and our Life;
No more these Walls shall breed Intestine strise.
Henceforth your People only shall content,
In Loyalty each other to transcend,
May your great Actions and immortal Name
Be the whole business and delight of Fame;
May you and yours in a perpetual Calm
Be Crowned with Laurel and Triumphal Palm,
And all confess, whilst they in you are blessed
I Monarchy,, of Governments am best.
Monarchy having ended her speech the Trumpets sound pleasant Levets, and the
Drums heat a losty English March whilst his Majesty, the Nobility, and the
Rear Guard pass on.

The next Entertainment was at Cornhill Condult, on the top of which stood
eight Nymphs clad in white, each having an Escutcheon in one hand, and a
Pe^dant or Banner in the other. On the Tower of the said Conduit a Noise of
seven Trumpets.

The second Arch.
NEar the Exchange in Cornhill was erected a Naval Arch. On the East side were
two Stages. On each side of the Street one. In that on the South side was a
Person representing the River Thames; his Garment loose and flowing, Color
Blew and White waved like Water; a Mantle over like a Sail, his Head Crowned
with London Bridge, Flags and Osiers like long hair falling over his
Shouldiers, his beard long, Sea Green, and White, an O^r in his right hand, the
Model of a Ship in his left, an U^n beside hi^, out of which issued Water, four
Attendants in White, representing the four fresh streams which fall into the
River Thames, (viz.) Charwel, Lea, Coln, and Medway.

In the Stage on the North side, made like the upper Deck of a Ship, were three
Seamen, whereof one was habited like a Boat swain:

The first Painting on the North side over the City Arms, represents Neptune
with his Trident advanced. On the South side opposite was Mars, with his Spear
inverced, his shield charged with a Gorgon, over the Arch the Marriage of
Thames and Isis. The Painting on the North side over Neptune represents the
Exchange. The Painting on the South side over Mars shows the Tower of London.
The Pedestals in the upper Story were adorned with living Figures, representing
Europe, Asia, Africa, and America, with Escutcheons and Pendents, bearing the
Arms of the Companies Trading into those parts. Europe a Woman armed
al'antique, on her Shield a Woman riding on a Bull, and at her Foot a Cony.
Asia, on her head a Glory, her Stole of Silk, with several forms of Wild Beasts
wrought on it. Africa, a Woman, in her Hand a Pomegranate, on her Head a Crown
of Ivory and Ears of Wheat, at her Feet two Ships laden with Corn. America,
Crowned with Feathers of diverse Colors; on her Stole a Golden R ver, and in
her hand a Silver Mountain. The uppermost Table in the fore Ground represents
King Charles the First, with the Prince, Charles the Second, in his hand
viewing the Sovereign of the Sea, the Prince leaning on a Cannon, above over
the Cornish between the two Celestial Hemispheres an Atlas bearing a Terrestial
Glob, and on it a Ship under Sail. The great Painting on the West side
represented the Duke of York, habited al'antique, like Neptune, standing on a
Shell drawn by Sea Horses, before which is a Triton sounding, the Duke holding
in one hand a Trident, and the Reins in the other: In the four Niches within
the Arch, were living Figures, with Escutcheons and Pendents, representing
Arithmetic, Geometry, Astronomy, and Navigation.

Arithmetic, a Woman habited al'antique with her Fingers, erect upon her
Vestmentliues with Music Notes: in her Escutcheon a Book opened, with a hand
pointing to the Figures, I.V.X.L.C.D.M.

Geometry, a Woman in a pleasant Green, in her Shield a Compass and a Reed.

Astronomy, a Woman in an azure and loose Vestment, wrought with Stars of Gold,
she looking up to Heaven, in her Shield a Table where are diverse Astronomical
Figures.

Navigation, a Woman in a Sea Green habit, in her Escutcheon an Anchor with a
Cable about it. Whilst the Nobility passed by, the three Seamen entertaln'd
them with a Song.

Besides the three Seamen who sang the Song, there were in the like habit six
Persons with Wind-musick.

The Music in the other Stage consisted of three Drums and six Trumpets. On
two Balconies within the Arch was Wind-musick consisting of twelve Persons. On
the West Gallery were placed six Trumpets, and all of them performed their Duty
till such time as his Majesty fronted the Figure which represented Thames, and
then ceased; upon which Thames made the ensuing Speech.

Ten Moons great Sir, their Silver Crescenis filled
Since, mounted on a Billow, I beheld
You on the Bridge, but louder joys there were,
That barred my Welcomes from your Sacred Ear.
Now I. above my Highest bound have Reared
My head, to say what could not then be heard,
Hall Mighty Monarch! whose Imperial Hand
Qulets the Ocean and secures the Land.
This City whom I serve with Neighboring Floods
Exporting yours, Importing Foreign Goods,
With anxious Grief did long your absence mourn,
Now with full joy she welcom's your Return,
Your Blessed Return! by which she is Restored,
To all the Wealth remotest Lands afford.
At your approach I hast'ned to the Downs,
To see your moving Forts, your floating Towns,
Your Sovereigns big with Thunder plow the Main,
And swimming Armies in their Womb contain.
You are our Neptune, every Port and Bay,
Your Chambers: The whole Sea is your Highway,
Though several Nations boast these strength on Land,
Yet you alone the Watery World Command.
Pardon great Sir, fair Cynthia checks my stay,
But to your Royal Palace twice a day
I will repair, there my proud Waves shall wait,
To bear our Caesar and his Conquering ^ate.
The River Thames having ended his Speech, the three Seamen entertained His
Majesty with a Song, which being ended, the several sorts of Music performed
their Duty whilst His Majesty passed on toward Cheap side, at the Stocks was
placed on a Balcony, six Trumpets and three Drums, the Fountain there, being
after the Thuscan Order, venting Wine and Water. On the Top of the great
Conduit at the Entrance of Cheap side was another Fountain, out of which issued
both Wine and Water. And on the eight Towers of that Conduit were Persons
habited like Nymphs with Escutcheons in one hand, and Pendents or Banners in
the other, and between each of them Wind Music.

And on the Standard in Cheap side was a Band of Waits.

The Third Arch.
THe third Triumphant Arch stood in Cheap Side near Wood-street, being an
Artificial Building of two Storles; one after the Corinthian way of
Architecture, the other after the Composite, representing the Temple of
Concord: In the Spandrels of the Arch there were two Figures in Female habits:
One representing Peace, the other Truth. That of Peace had her Shield charged
with an Helmer, and Bees going in and our: Truth, on the other side, in a thin
habit, on her Shield, Time bringing Truth out of a Cave; over the great
Painting upon the Arch of the Cupula was represented a large Gorgon with three
Heads Crowned, in his three right Hands, a Lance, a Sword, and a Scepter; in
his three left hands, the three Escutcheons of England, Scotland, and Ireland,
before him the Kings Arms with three Imperial Crowns.

On the top of the Cupula, Concord, a Woman, in her right hand holding her
Mantle; in her left a Caduceus; under her feet a Serpent struggling. On the West
side, a Woman standing at the Helm of a Ship; in her left hand a Cornucopia:
Alost were living Figures with Pennons and Shields, representing the four
Cardinal Verthes, each with an Attendant; Prudence, on her Shield, Bellerophon
on a Pegesus, running his Javelin into the mouth of a Chimera: Justice, on her
Shield, a Woman, holding a Sword in one hand, a Dallance in the other;
Temperance, a Viol in her left hand, and a Bridle in her right. Fortitude, with
a Lion, having the Arms of England in an Escutcheon.

The internal part of this Triumph or Temple, was round the upper part
enlightened by artificial Lights; below it was divided into teu^parts, by
Pillars and Pedestals: Within the Temple were twelve living Figures, three
placed above the rest: The first the Goddess of the Temple in rich habit, with
a Caduceus in her hand, and a Serpent at her seet: Behind the Goddess a Man in
a Purple Gown, like a Citizen of London, presenting the King with an Oken
Garland.

Of the Nine lesser Figures: the first bear on a Shield the King of Bees flying
alone: and a Swarm following at some distance. The second, on his shield a
Testu^^o, advancing against a Wall. The third, a Shield charged with Hears. The
fourth, like a spread Eagle with two Heads, one of an Eagle, the other of an
Edrich; in the mouth of the Edtrich an Horse-shoe, in the Talent of the Eagle a
Thunderbolt. The fifth, a bundle of Javelins. The sixth, two hands joined
athwart the Escutcheon, as from the Clouds holding a Caduceus with a Crown. The
seventh, Arms ^^d down, as Guns, Pikes, Ensigns, and Swords. The eight, a
Caduceus, with a winged Hat above, and wings beneath, two Cornucopia's coming
out of the middle, supported by a Garland. The ninth, a bright Star, striking a
Gleam through the midst of an Escutcheon.

With these Figures is intermingled a Band of twenty sour Violins. The Basis
and Capitals within this Triumph are as Brass, and the Pillars Steel. The
Temple thus adorned, and the Music playing, till His Majesty came to the
middle of the Temple, Concord, Love, and Truth, who till than had not been
seen, were by the drawing of a Curtain discovered, and entertained Hit Majesty
with a Song.

The Song ended, Concord addressed her self to His Majesty in these words,

Welcome, great Sir, to Concord's ^ane
Which your return built up again.
You have her Fabric Reared so high,
That the proud Turrets kiss the Sky.
Tumult by you, and Civil War,
In Janus Gates imprisoned are:
By you, the King of Truth and Peace,
May all divisions ever cease.
Your Sacred Brow, the blushing Rose,
And Virgin Lilly twined enclose:
The Caledonian Thistle down
Combine with these to adorn your Crown:
No discord in the Hibernian Harp,
Naught in our Duty ^lat, or Sharp.
But all couspire that you as best,
May 'bove all other Kings be blesk
The Speech ended, His Majesty at His going off was entertained with another
Song.

On the little Conduit, at the upper end of Cheapside, were four Nymphs, each
of them having an Escutcheon in one hand, and a Pendant in the other. In a
Balcony at the Entrance of Pater Hoster Row, were placed His Majesty's Drums
and Fife. Between that and Ludgate there were two other Balconies erected, in
one was placed a Band of six Waits, in the other six Drums: On the top of
Ludgate six Trumpets: At Fleet-bridg; a Band of six Waits. On Fleet Conduit
were six Nymphs clad in white, each with an Escutcheon in one hand, and a
Pendant in the other, as also a Band of six Waits, and on the Canthorn of the
Conduit was the Figure of Temperance mixing Water and Wine.

The Fourth Arch.
IN Fleet Street near White-Friers stood the fourth Triumphal Arch,
representing the Garden of Plenty, being of two Stories, one of the Dorick
Order, the other of the Ionick. Over the Postern on the South Side of the
Entrance was Bacchus, a Youth in a Charlot drawn by Tigers, the Reins
Vine-branches, his Mantle a Panthers Skin, his Crown of Grapes and Ivy, a
Thyrsus in his left hand, a Cup in his right. The painting over this represents
Silenus ou his Ass, with S^^yrs dancing in drunken and antic postures, the
Prospect a Vineyard.

On the North side opposite was Ceres drawn in a Chariot by winged Dragons, and
crowned with Ears of Corn: In her left hand Poppey, in her right hand a blazing
Torch, the painting over her being a description of Harvest.

On the West side of the Arch over the South Postern, was the Goddess Flora in
a various colored habit, in one hand Red and White Roses, in the other
Lillies, on her head a Garland of several flowers; the painting over this a
Garden with Walls, Statues, Fountains, Flowers, and Figures of Men and Women
walking.

Opposite to this on the North side was the Goddess Pomona crowned with a
Garland of several Fruits, in her right hand a Prunning Hook, in her left hand
the Sun, at her feet all sorts of G^^ssing and Gardening Tools.

The great Figure on the top of all represents Plenty, crowned, a Branch of
Palm in her right hand, a Carnucopia in her left.

The M^sick aloft on both sides, and on the two Balconies within, were twelve
Waits, six Trumpets, and three Drums.

At a convenient distance before this structure were two Stages erected,
divided, planted, and adorned like Gardens* each of them eight Yards in length,
five in breadth, upon that on the North side sat a Woman representing Plenty,
crowned with a Garland of diverse Flowers, Clad in Green Vestment Embroidered
with Gold, holding a Cornucopia, her Attendants two Virgins, at His Majesty's
approach the Person representing Plenty made address to him in these Words,

Great Sir, the Star which at your happy Birth,
Joy'd with his Beams (at Noon) the wondering Earth;
Did with auspicious Luster then presage,
The glittering plenty of this Golden Age,
The Clouds blown over, which long our Joys o'recast;
And the sad Winter of your absence past:
See the three smiling seasons of the year,
Agree at once to bid you welcome here:
Her Homage Dutious Flora comes to pay,
With her Enameld Treasure strows the way,
Ceres and Pales, with a bounteous hand,
Diffuse their plenty over all your Land,
And Bacchus is so lavish of his Store,
That Wine flows now where Water ran before,
Thus Seasons, Men, and Gods, their joy express,
To see your Triumph and our Happiness.
His Majesty having passed the four Triumphal Arches was at Temple Bar
entertained with the view of a delightful Boscage full of several Beasts both
Tame and Savage, as also several living Figures, and the Music of eight Wales:
But this being the Limit of the Cities Liberty must be so likewise of our
Description.

THE NARRATIVE OF His Majesty's Coronation, With his Magnificent Proceeding and
Feast, in Westminster Hall
April the 23th. 1661.
UPon the 23th of April, being S. Georges day, about seven in the morning, the
King took Water from the privy Stairs at Whitehall, and landed at the
Parliament Stairs, from whence he went up to the Princes Lodgings; where, after
he had reposed himself, he was arrayed in Royal Robes of Crimsom velvet, furred
with E^mine, by which time the Nobility, being come together, Robed themselves
in the Lords House and painted Chamber.

The Judges also with those of the long Robe, the Knigh's of the Bath (then in
their Robes of purple Sar^in lined with white Tassity) and Gentlemen of the
privy Chamber, met in the Court of Requests, and being drawn down into
Westminster Hall, where this great solemnity (ordered by the Officers at Arms)
began. The Nobility, in their proper Robes carrying their Cornets in their
Hands, proceeded according to their several dignities and degrees, before his
Majesty up to his Throne of State, which was raised at the West end of the
Hall, placing themselves upon each side thereof.

The K ng being set in a rich Chair, under a glorious Cloth of State, Sir
Gilbert Talbot Knight, Master of the Jewel-house, presented the Sword of State,
as also the Sword called C^rtan^, and two other Swords, to the Lord high
Constable, who took and delivered them to the Lord high Chamberlain, and he
laid them upon the Table before the King, and in the like manner the Spurs.

Immediately after, the Dean and prebends of Westminster, by whom the Regalia
had been brought in procession from the Abbey to Westminster Hall, being vested
in rich Copes, came up from the lower end thereof in manner following.

First, The Sergeant of the Vestry in a scarlet Mantle. Then the Children of
the Kings Chapel in scarlet Maniles. Then the quire of Westminster in
surplices. Then the Gentlemen of the Kings Chapel in scarlet Mantles Next the
^ursulvants, Heralds, and provincial Kings of Arms. Then the Dean carrying
Saint Edwards Crown. And after him five of the Prebends of that Church, The
first carrying the Scepter with the Cross. The second the Scepter with the
Dove. The third the Orb with the Cross. The fourth King Edwards Staff. The
fifth the Chalice and Patena.
Who passing thus through the Hall, and making their due Reverences in three
places, and toward the upper end, the Quires and Officers at Arms falling off
on each side, the Dean and Prehends ascended the Steps, at the top whereof,
Garter Principal, King of Arms standing, conducted them to the Table placed
before the Throne, where making their last Reverence, the Dean first presented
the Crown, which was by the Lord high Constable, and Lord ^^^at Chamberlain,
set upon the Table, who likewise received from the Prebends the Regalia, which
they carried, and laid them also by the Crown.

Then the Lord Great Chamberlain presenting the Regalia severally to the King,
His Majesty disposed of them to the Noblemen which carried them in the
proceeding viz. Saint Edwards Staff to the Earl of Sandwich.

The Spurs to the Earl of Pembroke and Montgomery. The Scepter with the Cross
to the Earl of Bedford. The poluted Sword (born on the left Hand of Cartana) to
the Earl of Darby. The pointed Sword (born on the right Hand thereof) to the
Earl of Shrewsbury The Sword called Curtana to the Earl of Oxford. The Sword of
State to the Earl of Manchester. The Scepter with the Dove to the Duke of
Albemarle. The Orb with the Cross, to the Duke of Buckingham. ^aint Edwards
Crown to the Duke of Ormond. The Patena to the Bishop of Exeter. And lastly,
The Challce to the Bishop of London,
All things being thus prepared about ten a Clock, the proceeding began, from
the Hall into the Palace Yard, through the Gate House, along the great
Sanctuary, to the West end of the Abbey, upon blew Cloth, which was spread upon
the Ground, from the Throne in Westminster hall, to the great Steps in the
Church, by Sir George Carteret Knight, his Majesty's Vice Chamberlain, as
Almoner that day by special appointment.

The Proceeding to the Coronation was in this following Order.
THe Drums four, the Trumpets sixteen in four classes. The Six Clerks of the
Chancery. Ten of the Kings Chaplains having dignitler. The Aldermen of London.
The Kings learned Council at Law. The Kings Solicitour, and the Kings
Attorney. The Esquires of the Body. The Masters of Request. The Gentlemen of
the Privy Chamber. The Knights of the Bath in their Purple Robes. The Barons of
the Exchequer, and Justices of both Benches: The Lord chief Baron, and the Lord
chief Justice of the common Pleas. The Master of the Rolls* and the Lord chief
Justice of the Kings Bench. The Sergeant Porter, and the Sergeant of the
Vestry. The Children and Gentlemen of the Kings Chapel. The Prebends of
Westminster. The Master of the Jewel-house. The Knights of the Privy Council:
Portcullis Pursulvant at Arms. The Barons in their Robes two and two, carrying
their Caps of Crimson Velvet turned up with Minever in their hands. The Bishops
two and two according to their dignities and Consecrations. Rogue Croix, blew
Mantle. Pursulvants. The Viscounts two and two in their Robes with their
Coronets in their hands. So^erset, Chester. Heralds.
The Earls two and two in their Robes, holding their Coronets in their hands,
Richmond, Windsor. Heralds.
The Marquess of Dorchester. The Marquess of Worcester. In their Robes with
their Cornets in their hands, Lanca^ter, York. Heralds.
Norroy, Clarecieu^^, Provincial Kings, carrying their Coronets in their Hands,
The Lord high Treasurer, The Lord high Chancellor. St. Edwards Staff born by
the Harl of Sandwich. The Spurs born by the I^arl of Pembroke and Montgomery.
St. Edwards Scepter born by the Earl of Bedford.
The third Sword drawn, and born by the Earl of Derby. The Sword called
Curtana, drawn, and born by the Earl of Oxfo^d. The Pointed Sword drawn, and
born by the Earl of Shrewsou^y. The Lord Mayor of London. Garter Principal King
at Arms. The Gentleman Usher of the Back R^d. The Earl of Lindsey, Lord great
Chamberlain of England.
Arms The Earl of Suffolk, Earl Marshal for this present occasion. The Sword of
State in the Scabbard, born by the Earl of Ma^chester, Lord Chamber ^ain of the
Household. The Earl of Nor^humbe^land, Lord Constable of England for this
present occasion.
Sergeants

His Royal Highness the Duke of York,
The KING Supported by the Bishop of Bath and Wells, and Bishop of Daresnt His
Train born by the Lords Mandevile, Cavendish, Ossory, and Percy, Assisted by
the Lord Mansfield Master of the Robes The ^arl of Landerdale One of the
Gentlemen of the Bedchamber. Mr. Seamour, and Mr. Ashburnham Both Grooms of
the Bedchamber. The Captain of the Guard. The Captain of the Pensioners. The
Yeomen of the Guard in their Coats.


The Pensioners with their Pole Axes.

Barons of the Cinque Ports, their whole number xvi. Habited in dou blets of
Crimson Satin Scarlet Hose, Scarlet Gowns, lined with Crimson Satin, black
Velvet Capes, and black Velvet Shoes, carrying the Ca^opy.

Sergeants at The Scepter (...) with the Dove ^orn by the Duke of Albemarle.
St. Edwards Crown born by the Duke of Ormond, Lord High Steward for this
present occasion. The Ord ^^r^ by the Duke of Buckingham. The Patena, born by
the Bishop of Exeter in his Cope. The Regale or Chalice, born by the Bishop of
London in his Cope
at Arms

Barons of the Cinque Ports, their whole number xvi. Habited in dou blets of
Crimson Satin Scarlet Hose, Scarlet Gowns, lined with Crimson Satin, black
Velvet Caps, and black Velvet Shoes, carrying the Canopy.

The Pensioners with their Pole Axes.

The proceeding pasting through the Quire went up the Stairs toward the great
Theater, and as they came to the top thereof were disposed by the Heralds into
two Gallerles built on either side the upper end of the Quire. On the North
side the Aldermen of London, title Judges, and others of the long Robe, as also
the Quire of Westminister, with the Gentlemen and Children of the Kings
Chapel; and on the South side the Knight of the Bath, and Gentlemen of the
privy Chamber.

Near the Pulpit stood the Master of the Jewel house, and the Lord Mayor of
London.

The Nobility were seated on Forms round about the inside of the Theater: On
the corner whereof, nearest to the Altar, stood the Provincial Kings, Heranlds,
and Pursuivants at Arms.

Within the Rails, on either side of the F^^rance of the Theater from the
Quire, stood the Sergeants at Arms, with their Mices, and over the Door, at the
West end of the Quire, stood the Drums and Trumpets.

The King, being entered the West Door of the Church, was received with an
Anchem: and here his Majesty kneeled down, and after some short Ejaculations,
he proceeded to the Theater, between the Quire and the Altar; on which the
Throne of State was placed; on the cast side whereof was set a Chair, Footstood
and Cushion, covered with Cloth of Gold, whereon for a while he reposed
himself. Immediately after, the Bishop of London (who was appointed to officiar,
in part, for the Archbishop of Canterbury) with the Lord High Coustable, the
Earl Marshal, the Lord great Chamberlain, the Lord High Chancellor, and Lord
Chamberlain of the Household, went to the South, the West, and North sides of
the Theater, and acquainted the people, that he presented to them King Charles
the Rightful inheritor of the Crown of this Realm; and asked them if they were
willing to do their Homage, Service, and bounden Duty to him. As this was doing
the King rose up, looking toward the people, to whom the Bishop spoke: Who, by
their shouts signified their Consent, the like question was put to the Nobility.

And while an Anthem was sung by the Gentlemen of the Kings Chapel, a Carpet
was spread by the Officers of the removing Wardrobe, and over that was laid,
by the ^^her of the Black Rod, assisted by the Yeamen of the Wardrobe, a Silk
Carpet and Cushion, and then the Bishop of London went and placed himself on
the North side of the Altar.

Then the King descending from his Throne, proceeded toward the Altar,
supported by the Bishops of D^^^s^^, and Bath and Wells; the four Swords, and
grand Officers, and the N ble Men, and Bishops that car^led the Regali^, going
before him. At the steps of the Altar he kneeled down, and offered a Cloth of
Gold Pall, and an Ingor of Gold of a pound weight and retired to his Chair of
State, on the South Side of the Altar, and the Bishop of London receiving the
Regalia, and placing them on the Altar, the Bishops and Noble Men, that carried
them, retired to their Seats, and the King kneeled at a said stool on the right
side of the Chair of State, whil^st the Bishop of London said the Prayer. O God
that do visit those that are humble, etc. which ended, the Bishop of
Worchester preached, on the 2 ver. of the 28. of Proverbs. On the Kings right
hand stood the Bishop of ^^^esne, and beyond him, the Noble Men with the Swords
naked and erect, the Duke of York sat on his left hand, and by him stood the
Bishops of Bath and Wells, and the Lord great Chamberlain. On ^^om behind the
Duke, sat the Lord High Chamcellor, and Lord High Treas^^er, and in a Gall^^y
the Duchess of York, where were also placed the Amba^^^dours and Foreign
Ministers. The Bishop of London sa^e in the Archbishops Chair, on the
North-side of the Altar, and the rest of the Bishops on Forms behind him, and
toward St. Edwards Chapel stood Ga^^er principle King at Arms, the Ordicers
of the Wardrobe in Scarlet Gowns, the Sergeant of the Vestery and Vergers,
with some of the Grooms and Pages of the Bed, Chamber to do service, as
occasion required. Opposite to these on the South Side stood the Beau and
Prebends of westminster Between the Kings Chair of State and the Pulpit, but
more to the North-side, was placed St. Edwards Chair, covered with Cloth of
Go^.

Sermon ended, the Bishop of London came ^eer, and asked the King, if he would
take the Oath of his Progenitors, to confirm the Laws, to the People, and
Is^anchises to the Clergy, granted by St. Edward the Confessor, to maintain the
Gosp^l es^ablished in the Kingdom, etc. The Bishop of Rochester also reading
the Bishops Petition, praying, that they and the Churches under their
Government might be protected, etc. all which his Majesty promised to perform,
and assisted by the Bishops of Duresos, and Bath, and wells with the Sword of
State born before him, and the Lord great Chamberlain attending, went to the
Altar, and took an Oath to perform what he had promised, and in like manner
returned to his Chair of State, where kneeling at the Fald-stool, while the
Bishop of London, and the Bishops of Peter-borough, and Gloucester, performed
divine service, toward the end whereof, the Archbishop of Canterbury came out
of St. Edwards Chapel concluding the service. Then the King arose, and
assisted by the Bishops Dureson, and Bath, and wells, went to the Altar, His
Royal Robes being taken off by the Lord great Chamberlain, and carried into St.
Edwards Chapel, mean while the Chair was removed from the entrance of the
Theater, and set on the North-side, betwixt the Altar and St. Edwards Chair,
where the King sitting (the Dean of Westminster holding the Ampulla, and
pouring out the Oil) he was anointed by the Archbishop, his Grace saying the
Prayers, and the Quire singing the Anthem, appointed for that Solemn occasion.
The Dukes of Buckingham and Albeinarle, with the Earls of Berks and Sandwich,
holding a Cloth of Gold pall over the Kings head. The anointing being dried
up, the Dean of Westminster closed the Loops of his Shire, and the Archbishop
received the Colse from the Lord great Chamberlain, put it on the Kings Head.
The Dean of Westminster having put on the Surplice, the Tissue Hose and
Sandals, and the close Pall, (being Cloth of Gold) fetched the Spurs from the
Altar, delivering them to the Lord Great Chamberlain, who having with them
touched the Kings Heels, sent them back.

Then the Archbishop receiving the Sword of State from the Lord Chamberlain of
the Household laid it upon the Altar, and having said the Prayers, delivered it
to the King, which was girded on by the Lord great Chamberlain.

Then the Dean of Westminster put on the Armil made of Cloth of Tissue, and
next the Mantle or open Pall, being made of Cloth of Gold lined with red
Taffaty.

In this time St. Edwards Chair was set in the middle of the Isle right against
the Altar, wherein the King being set, the Archbishop brought St. Edwards
Crown from the Altar, and put it on the Kings Head, whereupon all the People
cried, God save the King, and the Bishop said, God Crown thee with a Crown of
Glory, etc. and several Prayers proper to this Great Solemulty, and an Authem
being sung by the Quires; the Dukes, Marquesses, Earls, and Viscounts put on
their Coronets, the Barons their Caps, and the Kings at Arms their Coronets,

Then the Master of the Jewel House delivered the Ring to the Archbishop, who
put it on the fourth singer of the Kings right hand, and after the Prayers, the
Linen Gloves were delivered to the King, by the Lord great Chamberlain, then
the King went to the Altar, and offered His Sword, which being redeemed by the
Lord Chamberlain of the Household, was by him drawn, and so carried by him all
the rest of the Solemnity. -- Then the Arch Bishop took the Scepter with the
Cross from the Altar, and Mr. Henry Howard (Brother to Thomas Duke of Norfolk)
by virtue of the tenure of his Manor of Wirksop, in the County of Norfolk,
delivered to the King a rich Glove for his right hand, which the King having
put on received the Seepter from the Archbishop, and during the Prayer, the
said Mr. Howard performed the service of supporting the Kings right Arm, --
Next the Archbishop delivered to the King, the Scepter with the Dove, who then
kneeled, with both the Scepters in his hands, whilst the Archbishop pronounced
the blessing. Then the King arose and late in St. Edwards Chair whilst the
Archbishop, and Bishops kneeled, and were kissed by him, after which the King
returned to the Chair placed on the Theater behind his Throne, where he reposed
himself, while Prayers were said, and Te Deum sung, which ended, the King
ascended his Throne, in the midst of the Theater, the Swords, great Officers,
and Bishops, standing on each side, while a Prayer was said. After which the
Bishops, and Nobility did their Homage. First, the Archbishop kneeling before
the King, said, I William Archbishop of Canterbury, shall, be faithful and
true, and faith and truth bear unto you, our Sovereign Lord, and your Heirs,
Kings of England, and shall do, and truly acknowledge the Service of the Land,
which I claim to hold of you, in right of the Church, So help me God; after
which he, and all the Bishops kissed the Kings left C^e^k.

Then came up the Duke of York with Garter principal King at Arms before him,
and his Train born by two Gentlemen, when being come to the Throne, he kneeled
down, put off his Coronet, and did Homage in th^se words, I James Duke of York
become your Liegt man, of life and limb, and of earthly Worship: and Faith and
Truth I shall bear unto you, to live and die against all manner of Folk, So
help me God; At which the Drums beat, the Trumpets sounded, and the Prople
shouted. The like did the Dakes of Buckingham and Alberma^le for themselves,
and the rest of the Dukes.

Then the Marquisses of Worchester and Dorchester, next the Earl of Oxford
ascended by the ^est of the Earls, to signify their Consents. Then Viscount
Hereford for the Viscounts, and then the Drums beat, Trumpets sounded, and the
People shouted. Lastly, the Baron Audly ^^^d the like Homage, being attended by
the rest of the Barons, which was followed with bearing of Drums, sounding of
Trumpets, and the Peoples shouts, after which the Duke of York, ^^^dal the
Nobility singly ascended the Throne, and touched the Kings Crown, p^omlsing
thereby to be always ready with all their power to support it. During which
Solemn Ceremony, the Lord High Chancellor went to the South, West, and
North-sides of the Stage, and proclaimed to the People the Kings General
pardon, being attended by Mr. Garter to the South side, and by a Gentleman
Usher, and two Heralds to the other two sides, the Lord Cornwallis Treasurer of
the Household, at the same time throwing amongst the people, Medals of Gold and
Silver.

The King being thus enthroned, the Gentlemen of the Chapel sung the Anthem,
Behold (...) Yord our Defender, and look upon the face of thine anointed, etc.
at the end whereof the Drums and Trumpets beat and sounded. After which the
Bishop of London begun the Communions a drives, which being ended, the King
descended from his Throne with his Crown on his I lead and the Scepters in his
Hands, (the rest of the Regalia being carried before him,) and the^^: proceeded
into St. Edwards Chapel, where he tock off St. Edwards Crown, alid delivered
it to the Bishop of London, who placed it on St. Edwards Altar, the rest of the
Regalia being given to the Death of Westminster, and by him laid there also^.
Then he retired Into a Traverse, where he was ^^^^^hed of the (...) he was
Crowned in (which were delivered to the Dean of Westminster to be laid up with
the rest of the Regalla) and being in^ested with his Royal Robes of Puryle
Velver, he came near to St. Edwards Altar, where the Bishop of London standling
ready with the Imperial Crown in his hands set that upon his Head, after which
he took the two Scepters, and proceeded to Westminster Hall, the same way that
he came, and attended after the same manner, saving that the Noble men and
Bishops, that strongst the Regalia to the Abbay, (...) not now immediately
before him as they did then, but went according to their degrees: All the
Noblemen having their Coronets and Caps on their heads, and the Kings at Arm^
their Coroners.

The proceeding being entered the Hall, the Nobility, and others, who had
places assigned them, went and placed themselves, but the King, attended with
the Great Officers, withdrew into the inner Court of wards, and in the mean
(...) all the Tables in the body of the Hall were ^ervce.

On the Right hand were set two Tables, one beneath the other, at the upper end
of the first sat the Bishops, and below them the Judges, with the rest of the
long Rob.

At the second Table sat the Masters of the Chancery, and the six Clerks, at
which likewise the Barons of the Cinque Ports were then necessitated to sit,
(by reason of a Disturbance which some of the Kings Foot men made in offering
to take the Canopy from them) although the upper end of the first Table was
appointed for them.

On the other side of the Hall was placed likewise along Table, which reached
down near to the Common-Pleas-Court whereat the Nobility dined, and behind this
close to the wall, sat the Lord Mayor, Ald^^men, Recorder, and twelve chief
Citizens of London.

Lastly, within the Court of Common Pleas was a Table-set for the Officers at
Arms, each Table being furnished with three Comses answerable to that of the
Kings, besides the Banquet.

At the upper end of the Hall (where upon an Ascent of steps, a Theater was
raised for His Majesty's Royal Seat at this great Solemnity) a large Table
being placed, the Sergeant of the Ewry, two Sergeants at Arms, with their Maces
going before them, brought up the Covering, which was spread by the Gentlemen
Ushers, and Sergeants of the Ewry.

This being done, the Officers of the Pantry, with two Sergeants at Arms also
before them, brought up the Salt of State and Caddinet.

A little before the King returned to dinner, two Esquires of the Body took
their Seats upon two little Foot-stools on either side of the foot of the Kings
Chair (placed opposite to the middle of the Table) and there sat until the King
came into Dinner, when Rising and pe^forming their Duty, in placing the Kings
Robes for his better convenlency of sitting, they sat down again at the Kings
feet, until the King gave them leave to ^ise.

On the right side of the Throne was erected a Gallery for the Officers at
Arms, and opposite^ to that on the other side, another for the Music, and
below on the old Se^ffold, ne^^ the Court of Common Pleas, stood the Kings
Trumpeters.

The proceeding at the carrying up of the first Course to the Kings Table.
THe two Clerks Comptrollers. The two Clerks of the Green Cloth. And the C^ of
His Majesty's Household. All in Black Velvet Gowns trimmed with black Silk and
Gold ^^ce, with Velvet Caps raised in the head. Six Serjeanes at Arms. two and
two. The Earl Marshal on the left hand. The Lord High-Steward. The Lord High
Conslable on the Right.

All three mounted on Horseback in their Robes, and with their Coronets on
their Head^^ having their Horses richly trapped.

Six Sergeants at Arms, two and two The Comptroller of the Household, The
Treasurer of the Household, with their white (...) The Earl of Dorsit Sewer. The
Earl of Chi^terfield his assistant.
The Knights of the Bath carrying up the Service, two and two to a Dish, which
was se^ upon the Table by the Earl of Lincoln Carver, assisted by the Earls
Sewers.

In the Bear came up the three Clerks of His Majesty's Kitchen, all suited in
Black Figu^^^ ^a^in Gowns, and Velvet Caps, in fashion like those worn by the
Clerks Comptrollers.

Dinner being set on the Table, the King came sorth from the Inner. Court of
Wards, in his ^ayal Robes, with the Crown on His Head, and Scepter in his hand,
having the three Swords born naked before him, and having washed, sat down to
Dinner, the Bishop of London saying Grace.

On the Kings Right hand stood the Noble-^^n that carried the three Swords,
holding them naked, and erected all the Dinner while; at his left hand stood
the Lord high Chamberlain, to whom the King had given the Scepter to hold, at
the Tables end, on the Kings left hand sat the Duke of York in his Robes and
Coroner.

Soon after Dinner was begun, the Lord Allington, by virtue of his Tenure of
the Manor of ^^^^^dley in the County of Hertford, served the King of his first
Cup, (which was of Silver Gilt) and after the King had drank, he had the Cup
for his Fee.

Next Thomas Leigh Esquire was brought up to the Table, with a Mess of Pottage
called De^^^^^^, by reason of his T^n^^e of the Manor of Addington in the
County of Surrey.

Afterward a little before the second Course was ready, Sir Edward Dynock
Knight (being the Kings Champion, as being seized of the Manor of Serivels^y in
the County of Lincoln) en^ar'd the ^all, on a goodly white Courser, a^^ed at
all points, and there having made a stand for some time, advanced in manner
following.

First two Trumpets. Then the Sergeant Trumpeter with his Mace. After him two
Sergeants at Arms with the^^ Maces. Then one Esquire carrying his Target,
having his Arms depicted thereon. And another Esquire carrying the Champions
Lance upright.
After them York Herald at Arms.
The Earl Marshal on his left hand on Horse ^ack. The Champion. The Lord High
Constable (...) Right Hand on Horseback.
Being come some few steps, he made a stand, whereupon the said Herald
proclaimed his Chall^nge, in the following words.

If any person of what degree soever high or low, shall deny, or gain say our
Sovereign Lord KING CHARLES the Second, King of England, Scotland, France and
Ireland, Defender of the Faith, Son and next Heir to our Sovereign Lord CHARLES
the first, the last King deceased, to be Right Heir to the Imperial Crown of
this Realm of England, or that he ought not to enjoy the some, here is his
Champion, who says that he lies, and is a false Traitor, being ready in
person ^o Combat with him, and in this quarrel will adventure his life against
him, on what day soever he shall be appointed.

Whereupon the Champion threw down his Gantlet, which lying some small time, and
no body taking it up, it was delivered to him again by the same Herald, then he
advanced further forward till he came to the raiddle of the Hall. And lastly to
the foot of the Steps going up to the Throne of ^^^^^.

This being done, the Earl of Pembroke and Montgomery (assisted as before)
prese^^ed, on the knee to the King, a Gilt Cup. (with a ^^ver) full of Wine,
who drank to the Champion, and by the said Earl sent him the Cup, which having
received, he after three reverences drank it all off, went a little backward,
and so departed out of the Hall, taking the said Cup for his Fee.

After which Garter principle King of Arms, with the two provincial Kings;
having their Corona^^^, with the Heralds and Pursuivants at Arms, come down
from the Gallery, and went ^o the lower and of the Tabler, where they first
made their obeisance to his Majesty, then advancing up to the midst of the
Hall, they did the like, and afterward at the foot of the steps to His
Majesty's Throne, where Garter being ascended, proclaimed his Majesty's Style
in Latin, French, and English, according to (...) usage, crying Largess
thrice, which done, they all retired into the midst of the Hall, and thereafter
crying, Largess again thrice, he proclaimed the Kings Style as before. And
lastly, they went to the end of the Noblemens Table, and did the same again,
and from th^^ce into the Common Pleas Court to Dinner.

Immediately after this, the second Course was brought up by the Gentlemen
Pensioners, (...) the former Solemnity, the last dish being carried up by
Erasmus Smith Esquire, who then presented the King with three Maple Cups, on
the behalf of Robert Barnham Esquire, in respect of his Tenure of the Manor of
Nether ^i^sington, in the County of Kent.

Lastly, The Lord Mayor of London then presented the King with Wine in a Golden
Cup, having a Cover, of which the King having drank, the said Lord Mayor
received it for his Fee.

By this time the day being far spent, the King (having water brought him by
the Earl of Pembroke and his assistants) washed, and rose from Dinner before
the third Course war brought in, and retiring into the Inner-Court of wards, he
there disrobed himself, and from thence went privately to his Barge, which
waited for him at the Parliament Stairs, and so to the Privy Stairs at
White Hall, where he landed.

FINIS.
The Coronation Oath.
Archbishop, Sir, will you grant and keep, and by your Oath confirm to the
people of England the Laws and Customs to them granted by the Kings of
England, your lawful and Religious Predecessors, and namely the Laws, Customs,
and Franchises gra^^ed to the Clergy, Vid. Rushworths Col. part. 1. Fol. 200.
by the Glorious King, S^. Edward your Predecossor according to the Laws of
God, the true profession of the Gospel established in this Kingdom agreeable to
the prerogative of the Kings thereof; and the Ancient Customs of the Realm.

KING, I grant and promise to keep them.

Archbishop, Sir, will you keep peace and godly agreement (according to your
power) both (...) God, the Holy Church, the Clergy, and the People.

KING, I will keep i^^

Archbishop, Sir, will you to your power cause Law, Justice, and Discretion in
Mercy and Truth to be executed to your judgment.

KING, I will.

Archbishop, Sir, will you grant to hold and keep the Laws and rightful
Customs, which the Commonalty of this your Kingdoms have, and will you defend
and uphold them to the Honor of God ^o much as in you lies.

KING, I grant and promise so to (...)*


