OLD NEVVES NEWLY REVIVED:

OR, The discovery of all occurrences happened since the beginning of the
Parliament: As, the confusion of Patents, the Deputies death, Canterburies
imprisonment, Secretary Windebank. L. Finch, Doctor Roane, Sir John Sucklin and
his associates flight the fall of Wines, the desolation of Doctors Commons, the
misery of the Papists, Judge Barckleyes imprisonment, and the ruin of Alderman
Abels Monopoly.

Most exactly compiled in a short discourse between Mr. Inquisitive, a country
Gentleman, and Master Intelligencer, a News monger.



Printed in the year 1641.

OLD NEVVES Newly Revived.
Inquisitive HOnest Jack Intelligencer, thou art welcome home, I woonot lose so
much time to ask thee how thou do, because thy face has already told me
thou wantst money: so do I, it is a general want, and be fitting a Gentleman;
but let that pass, tell me what news is stirring in or near London, news is
all that I seek: you know my humor I hope.


Intelligencer. I do Sir, and find it most correspondent to your name; and
because I am desirous to satisfy your humor, I leave off and abandon all
superfluous salutations, and fall roundly to the matter. The first enormity the
Parliament took into its hands, was Patents in general.


Inquis. It was very likely that it would fall to particulars in time: but what
befell those Patents?


Intell. Faith though it was in the Winter, yet the owners of them were forced
to leave them off, though they hazarded going over shoes, in grief whereof
they were all utterly confounded.


Inquis. What? all Patents, of what nature soever?


Intel. Yes, that were pretended for the common good, but aimed at particular
men's profits, as the Patents for Cards, Dice, Pins, Soap, Leather, and such
like were utterly damned?


Inquis. I marry Sir, the Parliament began well, heaven bless their
proceedings: how went they forward?


Intel. Then to particular persons. The next that was found a delinquent, was
no l^sse a man then the Earl of Strafford, he that set three Kingdoms at
variance.


Inquis. What, he that as he went through our Town into Ireland, had the
streets swept, and made neat for his coming, he that paid all the Officers so
bountifully? By this hand he was a most liberal man, and many say understanding.


Intel. That Is certain; yet for all his wit, he could not easily understand
his own head. Alas! he was intrapt in his policy, and constrained to lay his
ambitious neck on the Traitors block. On my conscience young Gregory is the
most famous man in all England.


Inquis. What, he that had the reversion of his fathers place, the young
Soule-sender, he that filled the Dungmans Cart with Dogs which he had headed,
the better to enable him to effect the real matter; why is he so famous?


Intell. I Will tell you Sir, if the glorious acts that Hector d^d, made his
conq^est the more honorable, and Achilles by slaying him ingrost all his
heroicke deeds, why should not young Brandon be as famou^ for the death of him
that shook three Ki^gdomes?


Inquis. Come, thou art merry: but how escaped his Compeere the Archbishop of
Canterbury? it was thought that he was as deep as the other, it would be a
wonder if he should come off with as you were, as they do in the Artillery
Garden.


Intell. Truly Sir, I am of your opinion, take my word if ever be come into
his Metropolitan house again, and sit there his Maj^sties high Commissioner,
discharging the new Canons, he will go near to blow up the little Levite that
writ Lambeth Fair. B^t he, good man, being his life was so irregular before
has now betaken himself to a private lodging, and in a stronger house then
that of re the water; he is not now much troubled with signing paper
Petitions, and referring them to Sir John Lamb, although he keep house
continu^lly, and never s^irres abroad, not so far as into Saint Georges
fields to take the air.


Inquis. I heard say, he never durst come into those fields since the u^-^oare
at the dissolution of the last Parliament, he was afraid of the Ghost of him
he set upon the City gates to keep watch.


Intell. I cannot tell whether that be the reason or no, but on my conscience I
think that honorable young Brandon will have the honor to ship his soul
into Charons boat, for all his father was a Clothier of Reading. As soon as
ever this man of Grace was laid in Limbo Patrum, his most dear friend, and the
Papists most favorable compounder, and his Majesty's Secretary Sir Francis
Windebank, with much providence took a voyage into France.


Inquis. Then I hope we shall p^y no more Ship Money: that same Sir Francis
has been prayed for the wrong way most heartily; the Ship-mo^ey was never
mentioned, but a devout imprecation was offered up for him, much good do him
with it.


Intell. Alas! he never had hand in it, it was my Lord Finch, the Lord Keeper
of England, that dealt with Ship Money, and 'twas done with a most provident
eye: for he knew he should have occasion to use ships before he died, and so
he had: for he went after Mr. Secretary. I Will tell you Sir, he was so woary
with determining controversies upon the Bench, that he resolved hereafter to
end them with the sword: he became a brother of the blade, and with a tilting
feather, a flaunting periwig, Buff^ doublet, scarlet hose, and sword as broad
as a lath, he looked as like a Dammee newly come out of the North, as could be
imagined; and under that disguise fled most swiftly into France.


Inquis. But under your favor, he was but a Coward to fly as soon as ever
he was accouterd in his marshall habiliments.


Intell. But I think him most valiant: for wisdom was ever held the better
part of v^lour; and none but desperate fool^s will run themselves upon certain
death: and though some such there are, yet he is none of those. I am su^e, that
valiant men and brave Command^rs followed his example, and no worse men then
Sir John Sucklin, the discontented Colonel, and his associates.


Inquis. Sir John Sucklin, what he that writ admired Aglaura? the Black
Friars Actors have a foul loss of him, And lest the Pl^yers should grow poor,
Send them Aglauros more and more.


What he that gave the King a hundred horse against the Scotch Pedlers? is he
fled for Religion too?


Intell. As sure as he fled from the Pedlers, his coat of Male would not keep
out their Bullets, though it would Sir John Digbies Rapier in the Playhouse,


Inquis. I heard that he was for Portugal, and to that purpose had two or
three hundred Cap and Feather men in pay, did he mistake France for Portugal?


Intell. You may see the fortune of the dice, they run what chance they please,
Sir John knows it, but there is a greater man then he gone by far.


Inquis. None of the other Judges? Judge Barkley is not gone, i^ he?


Intell. No faith, he is safe enough, he is a most fast and substantial
friend, he and Davenant the Queens Poet do keep their chambers, as if they
mourned for the iniquity of the times, but he that I mean is greater then any
of these in bulk, it is Doctor Roane.


Inquis. Why if he be gone, how fares the Civil Law, for he was the body of it.


Intell. In good faith Master Inquisitive they droope extremely, you may walk
in the Commons and be offended with no confused noise of the Proctors that
prated only for the the other fee, they will now without grudging take a ten
groats fee and thank you; theyl only sigh out, O quantum mutatus ab illo --
Termino, etc. Their Clerks, although they are not troubled with much
employment, cannot be at leisure to redeem the gowns which they pawned in Lent
Vacation: and Doctors Commons himself for fear lest be should dye intestate,
has made his will, and bequeathed all his goods most equally.


Inquis. Then I may presume that the High Commission is down; the Papists I
know rejoice at it, they have paid many a fat fine, have they not?


Intell. Faith I think that they have rather cause to grieve, for their sines
were very easy compositions, but now the Parliament has taken them in hand,
and uses them far more ruggedly then the chief Commissioner would.


Inquis. If the Parliament has taken them in hand, I prognosticate that they
wear Lent in their cheeks, their Ave Mary's, Creeds, Paternosters, the
dropping of their Beads, their sprinkling themselves with Holy water, will
scarce be of force to entreat the Virgin Mary to command her Son to pity them
they must visit Rome, must they not?


Intell. Or Tyburne, choose them whether, as the ballad says, they have a very
bad time of it now I can assure you.


Inquis. Well, let them be hanged and they will, thou and I will go drink a
pint of Canary.


Intell. As I live, I had almost forgot, Canary is now at six pence a pint in
London.


Inquis. At six pence a pint, how comes that to pass?


Intell. This blessed Parliament has pryed into Alderman Abels knavery, and has
found his politic projects out, has made a confusion of his ticket office,
and laid him and his brother Kilvert in a house of stone, who shall be made
exemplary.


Inquis. Why then honest Jack Intelligencer I pronounce thee welcome home,
we will to the Tavern and drink pottles in healths to this most happy Parliament.


The Deputy is dead, the Archbishop sure,
(I do not say to dye) Judge Barkleyes cure,
If any be is casting of his coin,
Abell and Kilvert too, that did purloine
A penny to 'em from each pint of Sack,
If money help them not, their necks must crack;
And witty Davenant, their miseries
To terminate will write their Elegies,
And so he will his own; they that sled
Int' other Countries, and so saved their heads,
From a sore aching cannot merry be,
Whilst thou and I laugh at their misery:
We can be jocound and think no man ha^me,
With joviall Sack our duller spirits warm.
Away with sorrow, welcome sweet conteut,
This health I Will drink to the blessed Parliament.
FINIS.

