Licensed, According to Order.

AN ODE UPON THE GLORIOUS and SUCCESSFUL EXPEDITION Of His HIGHNESS the Prince
of Orange, NOW KING OF ENGLAND. Who Landed November. 5. 1688.

LONDON: Printed, and are to be Sold by Randal Tailor, near Stationers' Hall.
MDCLXXXIX.

AN ODE UPON THE GLORIOUS and SUCCESSFUL EXPEDITION Of His HIGHNESS the Prince
of Orange, etc.
I.
THe little Poets of the Town
Could scarce of late,
A Ballad or a plain Song make;
Their Wits were frozen, and their Hearts were down.
They scarce could furnish out the Fairs
With such light Country Airs,
As use to entertain the harmless Crowd,
And help to lighten ordinary cares:
Such as the merry Milk-maid sings unto her Cow;
Or such wherewith the Country Swain
Does use to enter^ain
Old Bayard at the Plow.
II.
That was no time for Verse, the Furies reigned,
Hell was let loose, and Joy was driven from men:
But now the Goblins flee, old Cerberus is chained;
And now the Muses and the Graces reign again:
Now every Muse that could but creep before,
Is fit to mount and soar;
Now I my self could mount and sing:
Methinks I could an Ode or Iliad make,
This year December is the Muses Spring.
It should an Iliad be, for why
Achilles and his Myrmidons are come:
They shake the mighty Walls of Rome;
Rome, that of old was called New Troy.
That mighty man, with Princes of renown,
In Ten years time is said to take the Town;
But this Immortal Hero has outdone
All former times in Expedition;
In half ten Weeks he gained (and may he long enjoy)
A City far more worth than ten such Towns as Troy.
III.
Gained did I say? It was an Easy gain;
England was glad to lose herself to Him,
Who came her Laws and Just Rights to maintain,
And her enslaved people to redeem.
Of all the Sons of Mars, sure this is He
That must to War a Reputation bring;
That shows it is not what it is said to be,
But a good-natured useful thing.
Sure such a Conquest never was before,
That made the Conquered rejoice more than the Conqueror.
IV.
England if ever, here might see
A truly loving Enemy;
Who by relieving the oppressed,
And helping the distressed,
Has realliz'd the old Knight Errantry.
No Seas, no Storms,
No frowns, no scorns,
His Zeal and Resolution could abate.
Land and Sea Monsters nothing were to him,
He was resolved he would redeem
The poor oppressed at any Rate.
His Prowess and his Chivalry
Among the Great his Name enrols;
But his kind Zeal and Charity
Exalts his Name above the Sky:
By this he conquers Souls.
V.
This was the sweet and powerful Art
Whereby he did the people win;
He took them gently by the Heart,
And made them bend to Heavens design.
They presently with ready mind,
Their Towns, themselves and their affairs,
Into his Princely hand resigned;
Resolving that his Fortune should be theirs.
Love conquered all, toward him their Zeal and their Affections burned,
And even the hardy men of Steel to him their Magnet turned.
VI.
First Cornbury seemed to mistake his way;
That Brave and Noble Soul:
He would not fight against his God for pay:
At which the Fiends below began to howl.
'Twas he led up the Dance,
And showed the others what they ought to do;
Which made all shake from England over to France,
And broke their measures like to Threads of Tow.
Down go the Trinkets, and down fall
The Images and House of Baal;
To Baal they cry aloud, and to their Goddess call,
But neither would regard, nor hear nor help at all.
The Vermin flee; the Shavelings have away;
As Evil Spirits are said to do at break of day.
VII.
O blessed Deliverance! O blessed Prince!
Secret Reserve of Providence,
To save three sinking Kingdoms from the bloody doom
And Tyranny of Hell and Rome.
Our Moses and our David too;
Whose Sling and Stone,
(For 'twas not much more in Comparison)
Directed by the Almighty's hand,
Has made the Giants fall and saved our Land.
O had we David's Harp and Moses Song,
And hearts accordingly to sing
The praises of the Eternal King,
Who his beloved Deputy sent hither,
Of his Almighty Love
Once more to prove
If we can happy be and good together.
VIII.
My Verse may not unthankfully forget
With honor and respect to treat
The Gallantry of Noble Devonshire,
And Valiant De la Mere,
And many another Noble Peer,
Who, with true English honor, did agree
To venture all, rather than not to free
Their Country and themselves from Slavery.
Nor may we silently pass by,
The Sacred Seven,
Those Stars of Heaven;
Who with undaunted light
Did check, and overruled the Darkness of our Night;
Let Heaven reward their Zeal and Piety.
The rest we name not; their Names entered are
In Fame's indelible perpetual Register.
IX.
Yet Muse forget not to insert a line
Of her, whose Princely name will make thy Verses shine*
She like some Glorious Star,
Whose Influences Secret are,
Does light and Life Dispense from far;
And Sure must help to govern this, it was so sweet a War*
Or rather like the Sun
(For yet she thinks not that her day is come:)
That does it is Benefits disclose,
To all the World, and knows not what it does:
In her, and in her Royal Sisters Veins,
The Royal Matyrs Blood runs pure, free from the Fathers Stains;
In them the Virtues and the Graces all
Enjoy their Crown Imperial.
Such exemplary Piety,
And such unshaken Constancy,
An Earnest is,
Of future and of greater bliss.
And Britain still may hope, in them
Some footsteps of the Golden Age may yet appear again.
Then, if propitious Heaven permit, my Muse may mount it higher,
Mean while into some private Grove she hastens to retire.
FINIS.

