SINCERITY OR The Upright Man's Walk to Heaven. In Two PARTS, showing, I. That
Sincerity is the true way to Happiness. II. That the keeping our selves from
our own Iniquity, is the true way to sincerity. Delivered in several Sermons in
the Parish Church of St. Michael in Long-stratton Norfolk, by James Oldfield,
late Minister there. He being dead yet speaks. 11. Heb. 4.

Psalm. 119. 80. Let my heart be sound in thy statutes, that I be not ashamed.
The Carnal Man's Motto. Ede, Bibe, Lude; post mortem nulla voluptas. The
Spiritual Man's Motto. Creed, Vive, Stude; post mortem sola voluptas.

LONDON, Printed for Edward Giles Bookseller in Norwich, near the Marketplace.
1687.

THE AUTHORS Preface TO THE READER.
I Have chosen no Patron for this little Book, because every one is a Patron of
this sin. Courteous Reader, thou shall find nothing here but what is thine own,
i. e. thine own Iniquity, God who is thy Judge will lay no claim to it, for
it is none of his Creatures, he never made it, neither is it to be found in the
whole Inventory of the Creation; the Devil thy Accuser will lay it at thy door,
as thy proper own, for though he have acted the part of a Midwife to help thee
to bring it forth into the World alive, yet will he accuse thee for it, as the
spawn that was first engendered in thy wicked and corrupt nature, after thy
fall and defection from thy God; and thine own Conscience thy witness will also
testify that it is thine own. I know it is an hard matter in this old and hold
fast age of the World, to persuade any man to part with what is his own; Men
being generally as covetous of sin as they are of riches, desiring rather to
partake of other men's sins, than to part with their own. And as it is a
difficult task that I have undertaken, so also a task that will bring much
hatred upon me, for none love that others should tell them of the faults of
their own Children; so must I expect to be censured by others for censuring
other men's sins; and perhaps proceeded against as an Eves dropper, for standing
so near to every man's heart, and listening what is said or done in the private
Closet of every Man's Conscience. But Reader I would have thee know, that I come
not to Father any Child upon thee, but what I will prove, even from the
Testimony of Scripture to be thine own; if thou be ashamed of it, why do thou
still keep it; if thou be not ashamed of it, be not angry with me for
discovering it. Again, though I tell the whole World of it, it is only to
affright thee out of it. The discovery of a man's secret sin, is half way
toward the recovery of his perishing Soul: Seeing therefore what I do is only
for thy good, be persuaded to take it in good part. Besides, whatever thou
find to be thy own in my Book, I give thee free leave to challenge it. He
that concealeth another man's goods from him is a Thief; but he that reveals
another man's sin to him is his best friend. If thou be one that will but spare
the time and take the pains to study thine own heart, thou will find all that
is in this Book, and much more written there in a larger Volume, and thine own
Conscience like Joseph (if thou will but hearken to it) will tell thee far
worse tales of this thine Iniquity, than I am able to report unto thee. It is
the Lords Candle wherewith I have searched thy dark heart, else I could never
have made this discovery, and though perhaps I have told thee here more than
ever thou knew before, yet have I told thee no more than thou thy self by
searching thine own heart shall find to be true, nay thou thy self after such a
diligent search, shall be able with the Queen of Sheba to tell me that I have
not told thee one half of thine own Iniquity, the wickedness of it so far
exceeds the fame and report that goes abroad in the world of it. Thus much good
Reader, I thought to let thee understand concerning my discovery of this thine
own Iniquity, I will only add a word of counsel to advise thee what thou shall
do toward thy Recovery, and so I will leave thee to God the searcher of all
hearts.

1. Own this thy own Iniquity. In the Court of Heaven confession always goes
before pardon, 32. Psalm. 5.

2. Disown it, after thou have confessed it, and humbled thy self for it, then
with Abraham turn this Ishmael (though thine own) out of doors, and let it not
grieve thee to part with it, 11. Job. 14, 15. 28. Prove. 13. The only way to
keep thy self from sorrow in the other World is to keep thy self from sin in
this World. These two receipts (which I have taken out of Gods own
dispensatory) I present to thee, which that thou may put in practice for thy
Eternal good, is the Prayer of,

Thy Servant in the Work of the Lord, J. O.

THE Publishers Preface TO THE READER.
Courteous READER,
THou have here presented to thy view, certain Sermons of that Reverend Divine
now with God, Mr. James Oldfield, whose very Name will make way for their
welcome, to as many as well knew him; for such could not but know, that he was
a painful, diligent, and faithful Minister of Christ; Acts 18. 24. a mighty
Apollos in the sacred Scriptures, that according to his great Knowledge
therein, Acts 20. 27. did not shun to declare the whole Counsel of God to his
People, 1 Cor. 4. 1, 2. being a faithful steward of those Mysteries of God,
that are contained therein, 2 Timothy 2. 15. ^ Workman that needed not to be
ashamed, because he divided the word of truth aright, an^ gave to every one
that portion that did o^ right belong unto him; he could not so Ezekiel* 13. 10,
11. daub with untempered mortar* as to say peace, peace to such Souls who ha^
nothing to do with peace, Is. 3. 10, 11. the he would tell the righteous it
should go wel^ with them, yet he was not afraid to tell the wicked it should go
ill with them, and tha^ they Acts 8. 23. were in the gall of bitterness, and in
the bond of iniquity; as he wa^ to the former, Acts 4. 36. a Barnabas, ^ Son of
Consolation; so he was to the latter* Mark 10. a Boanerges, a Son of Thunder*
who Is. 58. 1. cried aloud, and spared not* lifted up his Voice like a Trumpet,
and showed the wicked their transgression and sins* Ezekiel. 3. 17, 18, 19. and
like a faithfu^ Watchman warned them from their wicked ways, Jer. 3. 15. A
Pastor he was according to Gods own heart, which fed his Flock with knowledge
and understanding, and 1 Pet. 5. 3. was an example thereunto, for he did (...)
not only Preach well, but also Live well; verba vertebat in opera, he turned
his Words into Works, what he Preached to others, he practiced himself, he did
not ^enelopes telam texere do and undo, build ^ith one hand and pull down with
the other, ^ut his life was sweetly consonant to the tenor ^f his teaching, in
a word, he was one, to whom, if ever to any, God had given the Art ^f winning
Souls, the first Text that ever he ^reached to that Flock, over the which the
Holy Ghost had made him so long an Overseer, ^as that in the 11. Prove. 30. he
that win^eth Souls is wise, and this was his design all ^long his Ministry, for
this he Preached, for ^his he Prayed; for this he Studied, yea with ^esires
that many Souls might be brought in^ Christ, he dyed. What entertainment the
^ollowing Sermons of this Blessed Saint will ^eet withal in the World, I can
easily foresee, ^o such poor Souls, as are burdened with sin, and would fain
be rid of it, they cannot I ^hink be unacceptable; If others censure them, it is
no more than what I looked for in ^he publication of them; it will be no wonder
^f those condemn them, that are guilty of the ^ns they condemn, it would be a
greater won^er if they did not; for Men love not to hear their sins spoken
against* such Treatises as ^his, the purport of which is, to persuade Men to
part with what they so dearly love; viz. their beloved sin, their own iniquity*
and to show them the inevitable, unavoidable danger that their poor Souls are
in of perishing eternally, if they do not, must need^ be ungrateful and
unpleasant to such, as have taken up a resolution not to depart from Iniquity.
If any curious Reader, shall find an^ Errata's either in word or phrase, or an^
thing that seems imperfect, I desire him n^ to impute it to the Reverend and
Learned A^thor, but to the Transcriber or Printer, the so he may not be
condemned for our faults; ^ must indeed confess, I took what care an^ pains I
could, in the transcribing of the^ from the Authors own Notes, that there mig^
be no mistakes, yet his Notes being written no otherways, than for his own use
in the Pu^pit, I may have made some, especially in t^ beginning, where some
things (I suppose (...) they occurred) were in his Notes set before* which
should have followed after, and I h^ no way to reduce them to their proper
place* but as the sense led me, the pages not bei^ figured, therefore if there
be not in the e^plication of the Text, that coherence and d^pendence of one
thing upon another (...) the^ ought to be, or that you might expect from so
able a Divine, you see the reason; wit^ out doubt, if he had lived to have
transcribed them himself, they had come out in a better Method than now they do
and more polite. One thing more I think fit to acquaint the Reader with,
namely, that these Sermons were the Fruit of his younger years in the Ministry,
he being not long called to that great Work before the time of the last great
Plague, which occasioned his Preaching of them upon certain Fast days, set
apart to seek the Lord upon that account, without doubt he much improved
himself by Preaching, and therefore the Sermons of his latter years, would
better discover to the World the singular gift of Preaching, that God had blessed
him with above others; yet I chose rather to publish these, and that upon a
double account, first because he designed these for the Press, as appears by
the Preface and the Contents, which he drew up with his own hand, and the Title
page, which he had writ over very fair, tho he had not proceeded so far as to
transcribe the Sermons. 2. Because Treatises on such a Subject as this can
never be more seasonable than in these days, wherein iniquity so abound, I
pray* (...) it may be for the suppressing thereof, if thou would profit by
these Sermons, then 1. read them with attention, 2. take thy Bible, (...) (as
thou read) turn to those Proofs which for brevity sake are only noted, the
words not recited, and 3. be sure thou forget not to beg of God (both before
and after thy reading) to set home the truths thou read upon thy heart. I
assure the Reader, I have no other end in publishing these Sermons, than what I
dare say was the Authors in Preaching them, viz. Gods glory and the good of
Souls, which that they may be serviceable to this end, shall be my daily
Prayers to him, who while Paul plants, and Apollos waters alone give the
increase,

Vale.
THE CONTENTS
Obs. in two parts. 1. Doctrinal where three things. 1. what is our own sin. 1.
In respect of constitution. 2. In resp. of habitation. 3. In resp. of
provision. 4. In resp. of protection. 5. In resp. of love. 6. In resp. of
delight. 7. In resp. of trade and calling. 8. In resp. of unwillingness to part
with it.
2 what we must do to keep our selves from this sin. 1. Labor to see the evil
of it. 1. This is very hard. 1. bec. we love it. 2. be. we love the evils in
it. 3. b. unwilling to hear an evil report of it. 4. be. angry with those that
repr. it.
2. This must be done in the 1st. pla.
2. Give it no entertainment. 3. Choose another love. 4. Dispute not the case
with flesh and blood. 5. Deny our selves. 6. Search in the Scripture what we
shall gain by parting with it. 7. Be much in Gospel duties. 8. Labor as much as
we can to thwart it. 9. Beg of God to do it for us.
3. Why we should do this. 1. Because we love it. 2. Because of its great power
over us. 3. This is the way to keep out other sins. 4. This stands most in
competition with Christ for the heart. 5. Because it continually besets us. 6.
This sin will damn us as well as 10000 7. This will be our great comfort in all
afflictions. 8. This is the surest sign of our sincerity.

Application 4 fold. 1a. Information in 6 things. 1. Discovers the reason why
so many go to Hell; because their beloved sins carry them thither. 2. Discovers
the reason why so few are converted to the Gospel; because it bids them part
with their own sins. 3. Discovers the folly of sinners who for a beloved sin
will venture on damnation. 4. Discovers the reason why People are so in love
with sin; because their own. 5. Discovers the chief work and duty of Ministers,
to persuade People against their own sins. 6. Discovers the righteousness of
Gods judgments against us, bec. we own sin.
2a. Reproof to 4 sorts. 1. Those who instead of keeping themselves from their
iniquities, keep close and hide their iniquities. 2. Those who instead of
keeping themselves from their iniquities, boast of them and glory in them. 3.
Those who instead of forsaking their own sins, partake of others sins. 4. Those
who instead of keeping themselves from their own sins, draw others into them.
3a. Consolation in 2 parts. 1. The grounds of their comfort in 5 things. 1.
There is nothing to hinder their Union and Marriage with Christ. 2. No sin
shall be laid to their charge. 3. All things shall work together for their
good. 4. They have this privilege to have their Prayers heard and answered. 5.
These persons are only fit to dye.
2. Characters of such persons in 8 things. 1. He is one that has felt the
smart and burden of sin. 2. He has duly considered the danger of sin. 3. He
will endeavor to keep others from their sins also. 4. He will be much in
aggravating and speaking against his sin. 5. He will live ever after in a quite
opposite course to that sin. 6. He will be less in censuring others for their
sins. 7. He will part with every sin. 8. He will never return to that sin more.

4ta. Exhortation it consist of these 3 branches. 1. The great Mystery of this
iniquity laid down where 3 things. 1. The Mystery of it 2. fold. 1. working
into the heart in 12. particulars. 1. It works altogether with our natures. 2.
It comes with fair words at the first. 3. It bribes the senses to get into the
heart. 4. It pretends a reformation. 5. It endeavors to work God out of the
heart. 6. It outbids God in his promises. 7. It urges the common practice of
most Men. 8. It has a small beginning, blusheth at first at great sins. 9. It
urges moderation in holiness. 10. It Is importunate will take no denial. 11. It
gets in sometimes insensibly. 12. It tells us of Gods mercy and the power of
Repentance. Answ. to this last particular in 4 things. 1. It Is folly to sin
that you may repent. 2. True Repen. no easy nor pleasant work. 3. It Is
abominable to sin on this account. 4. God never promised Rep. to willful
sinners.


^Working in the heart in 2 particulars. 1. It will endeavor to win upon the
heart what it can. 2. It will build strong Castles there and lay in ammunition.
1. The castles or forts 3 1. a blind mind this fort is raised 3 ways 1. Sin
keeps the soul ignorant of Christ and his ways. 2. Keeps the soul ignorant of
the nature and danger of sin. 3. Keeps the soul ignorant of its estate and
condition.
2. An hard heart. 3. A seared Conscience.
2. Ammunition in 4 thin. 1. Carnal desires and affections. 2. Wicked arguments
to plead for sin. 3. Prejudices against the People and ways of God. 4. Curious
and pleasant fancies of the pleasures and happiness in sin.

3. It bolts all doors, and stops all passages whence it may be thrust out. 4.
It is always very pleasing and observant to the heart. 5. When it is in it keeps
the heart abroad as much as it can. 6. It keeps as close as it can, that others
may not take notice of it. 7. It persuades a Man of the necessity of keeping
one sin or other about him. 8. It objects the Saints examples that each of them
had their sins, Answer in 5 things. 1. Though they did commit them yet they did
not love them. 2. A vain Argument for me to sin because of others sins. 3. We
should follow their Repentance not their sins. 4. This spoils all our hopes for
mercy at death. 5. They got their pardon with great difficulty.
9. It keeps the soul formal in duties. 10. It tells us all our happiness is
gone if we part with it answ. in 3 th. 1. If you do not cast it out God will
hate you. 2. It Is to reject God to do as others do. 3. You would not willingly
partake with the wicked in their torments, why then in their sins.
11. Sin will promise to be gone of its own accord here 3 considerations. 1.
You may think your sin is gone when it is not, 3 instances. 1. Some think so
because they have not been tempted to it as formerly. 2. Others because they
have not committed it a great while. 3. Others because turned professors.
2. Some Men's sins do really leave them, yet they do not leave their sins. 3.
If you leave it to sin to be gone when it will you will never get rid of it.


2. The deceitfulness of the heart in joining with this sin in 8 particulars.
1. Our hearts persuade us that we have done enough already, this answered in 4
things. 1. One sin may damn the soul, as one wound kill the body. 2. Christ
dyed for every sin therefore we must kill every sin. 3. If ever you outlive
this sin, you must repent of it at last. 4. When ever you do repent this will
be your burden as long as you live.
2. They tell us they are against this sin and abhor it, yet endeavor not to
rid it. 3. They will set us to duties and yet keep this sin close. 4. When the
heart only loves the sin, but does not commit the outward Act. 5. When we do
commit it, and yet pretend that our hearts dislike it. 6. Our hearts will
persuade us from the commission of sin to the continuance in it. 7. Our hearts
will plead Election, that the sins of the Elect shall not be laid to their
charge. 8. Our hearts will tell us that others think well enough of such and
such sins. Here are 3 Corollaries. 1. How little we are beholding to our own
hearts. 2. How little we ought to trust our own hearts. 3. How needful it is to
have our hearts renewed.

3. Our great danger we are in from the two foregoing particulars, viz. the
Mystery of sin and the deceits of our hearts in 8 particulars. 1. Here is odds,
two against one. A subtle sin and a deceitful heart. 2. We must subdue both
together, else not out of danger. 3. These two Enemies will revive again after
they are slain, there must be a continued War. 4. The danger the greater,
because naturally we greatly love these two Enemies. 5. Our corrupt hearts will
be always drawing us into occasions of this sin. 6. Our best weapon, viz. our
hearts is in our Enemies hand. 7. While our hearts and sin are agreed we can
never repent. 8. The danger great in respect of temptations, desertions and
afflictions our hearts against us which should bear us up.

2. Several Cases concerning this Sin Answered these are of two sorts. 1.
Scruples and objections of the godly against themselves, that this sin is not
out when it is these are 6 1. Scruple, because they are sensible of their
hypocrisy answered in 4 things. 1. We are all Hypocrites by nature, yet not
all in a state of Hypocrisy. 2. It Is a good sign of sincerity for a Man to
complain of his Hypocrisy. 3. The best rule to judge of our Hypocrisy is by
our love to sin. 4. This is a Temptation of the Devil, who envies the joy and
peace of a good Conscience.
2. Scruple, bec. they have fallen again and again into the same sin answ. 2
ways. 1. Some propositions laid down. 1. Even the saints themselves are subject
to this falling sickness. 2. The Scripture does no where tell us that such a
sin again committed shall not be pardoned. 1. God will forgive us as much as he
commands us to forgive others, we must till seventy seven times. 2. No sin but
the sin against the Holy Ghost unpardonable, because we cannot repent of it.
3. A Man may commit the same sin again and again, and yet be in Christ and a
state of grace as David, Peter, etc. 4. A Man may commit the same sin often,
yet not be his own beloved sin.
2. Some Cautions added. 1. Take heed of this falling sickness, relapse
dangerous. 2. Presume not on the examples of the saints of falling again. 3.
Take heed of relying too much on your own strength. 4. Make use of the means to
keep from relapsing. 1. Keep a tender heart. 2. Repent to the purpose. 3. Our
Saviors receipt, 26. Mat. 41.


3. Scruple, because they find not the influences of the ordinances. Answered 2
ways. 1. By concession. This sin if it be still in us, and we do countenance it
will hinder the power and virtues of the Ordinances. 2. By caution in 2 words.
1. Take heed that this be not false, that you say not you find no influence
when you do, to state the Question aright consider 2 things. 1. What are the
influences of the Ordinances they are 4. 1. Pricking, wounding. 2. Humbling. 3.
Strengthening. 4 comforting
2. Examine your selves whether you have felt none of these, perhaps some though
not all.
2. Take heed this be not true, it is a dangerous case, the means to get
influences. 1. Go not to the Ordinances in your own strength. 2. Look beyond
all duties and ordinances they are but means eye the end. 3. Be much in prayer
to god for an influence on your Souls.


4. Scruple, because they see more sin in them now than before answered in 4
things. 1. Consider the work of conversion, it is to open the eyes to see sin
which we saw not before. 2. After conversion there is a contrary principle of
grace, and sin, and that fights, and that makes us think sin stronger than
before. 3. The Devil will trouble us now more than before by laying sin to our
charge. 4. It Is a sign of a state of grace for any Man to be in this condition.
5. Scruple, because they think their Repentance not good enough ans. two ways.
1. It Is a good sign that person has truly repented, who is troubled he has
repented no better. 2. By direction to know true Repentan. two ways. 1. By its
root. Humiliation the deeper the surer 2 fold. 1. In respect of what is past.
2. Fearful and careful for the futu.
2. By its fruits 2 sorts. 1. Turning from sin, loathing it as much as formerly
loving it. 2. Turning to God and godliness.


6. Scruple, because they are afraid to dye answ. 4. ways. 1. By concession in
2 particulars. 1. That there is nothing in all the World so terrible as Death
is. 2. Sin as it is the only thing that brought in death, so it makes it
terrible.
2. By distinction, between a natural and a sinful fear of death. 3. By
consolation, a true saint if he fear death it is without a cause. 4. By
exhortation to seek after assurance that will expel all fears of death.

2. Pleas of the wicked for themselves, that this sin is out when it is not
these are 7. 1. Plea bec. no body can charge them with sin ans. 3. ways. 1.
It Is the policy of this sin to lie so close that others cannot perceive it. 2.
Perhaps others may see it and yet not tell thee of it. 3. If God condemn thee
what advantage is it, that the whole World acquit thee.
2. Plea bec. Conscience does not check them answered in 4 things. 1. Though
Conscience does not accuse you it does not follow that it cannot. 2. It does
not follow that therefore conscience will never accuse you. 3. You say
conscience does not accuse you, but does conscience excuse you there is the
Question. 4. Take heed of such bad quiet Consciences as never smite for sin.
3. Plea, because conscience does smite them ans. 3. ways. 1. Trust not too
much to troubles of Conscience. 2. Rules to judge of troubles of conscience. 1.
when a Man is never the better for them. 1. Look to the fountain of these
troubles is it only for fear of punishment. 2. Examine what sins thou art
troubled for? only open gross sins. 3. Whether does this trouble drive thee. 4.
Consider the effects, is it reformation?
2. When a Man is the better for them. 1. When the soul is more troubled for
the sin than for the punishment. 2. When the soul takes more care to be washed
from the filth than freed from the guilt. 3. When the soul carefully avoids sin
ever after.


4. Plea, bec. they perform duties and frequent ordinances ans. in 5 things. 1.
Even the very Hypocrites do the same. 1. That they may have whereof to boast.
2. By outward duties to cloak their inward lusts. 3. That they may have whereon
to rest and trust to.
2. A Man may do all duties, and yet live under the power of sin. 3. Duties
performed where the life is not reformed do the more harden the heart in sin.
4. Get the power of godliness into your hearts, and use these duties as helps
to it. 5. If many that do these duties shall go to Hell, what will become of
those that do nothing.
5. Plea, be. they have left many sins answ. in 2 particulars. 1. It Is a good
beginning but it is not enough. 1. There is no sinner in the world but abstains
from, yea, hates some sins. 2. The Scripture character of a Saint, is not the
leaving of such or such particular sins but sin in the general. 3. Unless we
repent and turn from all sins, there is no mercy.
Partial 2. A particular reformation is not true examine it by 2 Quest. 1.
Quest. what are the sins reformed. 1. Are they not only small petty sins? or 2.
Sins that cross and hinder preferment, or 3. Gross iniquities that all the
Country cries shame on, or 4. Such sins as have first left you.
2. Question what kind of reformation. 1. Only an outward of life and not of
heart? 2. Only of passion and not of Reason and Judgment? 3. Only a leaving of
sin and not an hating? 4. Only a turning from sin, and not a turning to God.


6. Plea, be. they cannot endure sin in others answered 3 ways. 1. Censuring and
judging others will not make a true Saint. 2. It Is the sign of an Hypocrite to
hate sin in others and not in himself. 3. Follow the Gospel rules in this case.
1. In judging and censuring our work lies only at home. 2. In reproving and
reforming we must first begin at home and then go abroad.

7. Plea be. they are not only professors their good works are to be seen
answered 2 ways. 1. Even Hypocrites may imitate the Saints in these, therefore
no trusting to them. 2. Look to the Qualifications of them. 1. They must
proceed from a good heart. 2. The tree must belong to Christ else he will not own
the fruit. 3. The fruit must 1. Be done in faith. 2. In Charity. 3. In
Proportion. 1. to our former bad fr. 2. to the soil we are pl. in.

4. The aim and end of them must be good.



3. Motives with Means and Directions. 1. Motives 12. 1. Because it is a beloved
sin 3 branches. 1. To love sin is to have communion with the Devil. 2. If we
love any sin we cannot love Christ. 3. We cannot honor Christ better than by
parting with a beloved sin.
2. It Is the only sin that hinders our union with Christ. Reason Scripture
Conscience
these 3 judges give sentence against it. 3. Consider how long God and Christ
have waited on us for the mortifying of this sin. 4. Consider the gracious
offers the Lord makes to us if we will part with this sin. 5. Consider the
several aggravations of this sin, they are 10. 1. It Is a sin against light. 2.
It Is a willful sin. 3. It Is a deliberate sin. 4. It Is an heart hardening sin. 5.
It Is a judgment contemning sin. 6. It Is a sin of custom. 7. It Is a sin of great
delight. 8. It Is a ruling sin. 9. It Is a sin maintained at an high rate. 10.
Comes near the sin against the Holy Ghost.
6. Consider the dreadful effects of it. 1. It takes away all our spiritual
strength. 2. It defiles all our holy duties. 3. It withers all our pleasures.
1. Takes away the cause of all comfort. 2. Its sweetness makes our comforts. --
1. Empty. 2. Dangerous. 3. Very short.
3. Damps us in the midst of our comforts. 4. Makes all our comforts end in
sorrow.
4. It robs us of all our spiritual beauty. 5. By degrees steals away our
hearts from Christ. 6. At last 'twill fill the soul with horror.
7. Consider the blessings and benefits that accrue to us for casting this sin
out. 1. Such have true cause of mirth. 2. The match concluded between Christ
and the soul. 3. The Dev. cannot hurt them. 4. They may trample on miseries and
afflictions. 5. They are fit for death.
8. Consider the many loud calls to leave this sin. 1. The voice of Gods word.
2. The voice of Gods rod. 3. The voice of the blood of Christ.
9. Consider your profession of Christianity you make, and herein look. 1.
Backward to your Baptism. 2. On your Prayers. 3. On your Promises. 4. On your
coming to the Lords Table.
10. Consider what you loose by keeping this sin. 1. The things themselves
great. 1. Gods favor 2. Gods protection. 3. Assurance of Salvation. 4. Thy part
in Chr. and place (in paradise.
2. It Is an irreparable loss all the world cannot make thee amends for it.
11. This is an unquestionable truth on all hands and all sides. 12. This is
the power of godliness and power of Religion.
2 Means 7 1. Act but according to your own judgment and reason in your sober
mood. 2. Go to the Scriptures and get particular receipts against particular
sins. 3. Have an eye to the promises of God in Scripture. 4. Labor to cast out
this world out of your hearts. 5. Take not up a profession at large, be strict.
6. Avoid the company of the wicked that live under the power of sin. 7. Be much
in soul sanctifying meditations.
3. Directions of 2 sorts. 1. In getting out this sin. 1. Be not overhasty in
this work. 2. Do not set a time to this work, begin presently. 1. Else it is a
means to wast our time to tarry. 2. It Is a despising of God to leave his Work
till last. 3. The sooner the easier. 4. The sooner the more pleasant. 5. If you
stay too long it may prove too late.
3. Examine all you do here by Scripture. 4. Be sure you go not forth in your
own strength.
2. After it is out. 1. Pray much against it. 2. Be watchful against it.







Psalm 18. 23. And I kept my self from mine Iniquity.
The Introduction.
I Have often showed you, since we have had both cause and opportunities to keep
these days of Humiliation, both the excellency and virtue of Fasting and
Prayer: I have likewise showed you the Reasons, why God, after so many Fasts
and Prayers, that have been put up to him in this Nation, is not yet entreated
for us, but rather his anger is not turned away, and also his hand is stretched
out still; the maine Reason is because we perform not this duty according to
his appointment: I have likewise showed you what such a Fast is as God
respects, and as God has appointed, you may hear it again, 58. Isaiah 6. The
true Fast is to depart from sin and wickedness, for every one of us to amend
our ways and lives: I have likewise pressed upon you Reformation as a necessary
duty, that ought to accompany all our Humiliations, and without which all our
Fasts are no better than sins, and our Prayers than profaneness, yea, let me
add further, that it is a most horrible profaning of Gods Name to mix our
Prayers and our Sins together, and may not God for this justly mix our blood
with our sacrifices: Till we do that which God in his word calls upon us to do
for him, we must never expect that God will do that which we in our Prayers
call upon him to do for us. Read 26. Leviticus 23, 24. I come now as an
addition to what I have formerly spoken, to show you the way and means to a
right Reformation, and that is, every one of us must follow David's example in
the Text, to keep himself from his own Iniquity i. e. every one must amend one,
and then we shall the sooner amend all. These Sermon. were Preach. presently
after the great fire in Land.
As now in London, that ruinous place, upon which God has lately sent such a
signal token of his wrath in laying it in Ashes, before they can begin to build
again, the Foundation must be cleared from all the heaps of ashes and rubbish
that lays upon it, and the speediest way to do this, is for every man to clear
his own ground; so is it in respect of us and the whole Nation, sin lies so
close to every man's heart one sin or other, like so much rubbish upon the
Foundation, that God cannot build us up again an holy Nation, a peculiar People
to himself, and beautify and adorn us again with his former mercies, now the
speediest course that we can take herein, unless we are in love with our
misery, is for every man to clear his own heart of his own particular sins.
Thus David a man after God's own heart, has set us himself as our Copy in the
Text -- And I kept my self from mine iniquity.

Methinks I see the multitudes in this Nation running from one place to
another, shifting every man for himself to escape the sickness that God sends
among us, The great plague which raged so fiercely in all parts of this Nation.
but where are the Persons that seek to avoid the sins that are committed among
us: Alas poor creatures, we are afraid of Infected Houses, but we are not
afraid of our own Infected Hearts, while we carry our sins about with us, we
carry the Plague and the Wrath of God continually about us, hear what God says
to Cain, when he calls him to his Arraignment, 4. Genesis 7. Sin lies at our doors
wherever we live, nay sin lies in our hearts wherever we are, and what favor
then can we expect from God when we carry sin about with us. And therefore,
once more let us look upon David in the Text, and see what he did -- And I kept
my self, etc. The Text is the lively picture of a sincere and upright heart, in
it we have, 1. The Agent. I 2. The Act. kept 3. The Subject. my self 4. The
Object. Iniquity. 5. The particularity of the Object, mine Iniquity.


Or we may divide it into 2 parts, and then we have, 1. The Act. I kept my
self, 2. The Object, from mine Iniquity.


David in the first part of this verse, tells us that he was upright, and in
the Text proves it to us. I was upright says he before God, and that you may
believe me, I Will tell you how, viz. in this thing, that I kept my self from
mine Iniquity. Junius and Tremellius render the words thus, and caveo mihi ne
quid inique agam. But our English Translation is exact according to the
Original (...) And I kept etc. both words have their Emphasis.

The first is (...) it signifies to preserve, most properly to prevent or keep
away that which is like to fall upon us, and that before it has happened. It
teaches us the right way of keeping our selves from sin, viz. by preventing it
beforehand, avoiding all occasions, Prove. 22. 3. A Noun coming from this Verb
signifies a Watchtower, a place to descry a danger for preventing it. It
signifies to observe and keep our ways by taking heed to them, so it is used 1
Kings 2. 4. A Metaphor from a Watchman in a City, or the Garrison in a
Fortress. Leighs Critica Sacra, so should we keep a Garrison against sin, and
be as Soldiers in a Watchtower, if we would keep our selves from it.

(...) from mine Iniquity, verbatim. (...) it signifies that which is unright,
unequal, crooked and perverse, and so fitly by a Metaphor used to signify
Iniquity or Sin, for that is crookedness, Psalm. 125. 5. 18. Ezekiel. 25. Here you
see the true nature of sin, it is a crooked, unequal, perverse thing. But
further this word notes the vitiosity and crookedness of our nature, and so
sets forth Original sin Psalm. 51. 5. Behold I was shapen in Iniquity, (...)
hen-begnavon cholalti, the same word in the Text, which is the Iniquity David
calls his Iniquity, even that Iniquity wherein he was formed and born, this he
kept himself from. Here Is the root of all sin, look to the corruption of
Nature, dry up the Fountain look especially to this sin. Thus you see the
Emphasis of the Text, and Junius Translation may well serve for a good Comment
upon it, he that keeps himself from this, keeps himself from all sin; all other
endeavors against other sins, to wit actual are nothing unless you look to
your Natures. To suffer this sin, namely, original corruption to escape and
strive against other sins, is no better than for a Magistrate to give Licenses
to set up many Alehouses, the causes of drunkenness, and then be strict to
punish those that are drunk.

This is the continual running issue in the Soul, the sin that lies always in
our bosoms and is continually with us, this is the Iniquity of the Soul,
against which we ought especially to watch and be upon our guard, as Sentinels
in a Watchtower, that are always looking when the Enemy comes, that they may
not be unprepared for him, so let us preserve our selves from this sin, and
strive to make right and straight these our crooked Natures, and then shall we
be preserved from all danger of sin, and show our uprightness and sincerity in
the sight of God, and walk in the straight paths of his Commandments.

We ought to take care of other men's sins, but above all we ought to have a
care of our own sins. I will explain the Text by a similitude, Sampson was very
careful to avoid the Philistines, he always eyed and watched the Philistines,
and they could do him no hurt; oh but Sampson had a Philistin, a Dalilah that
lay in his bosom, Sampson was not careful of her, and she at last ruined him.
The World is full of sins, as the Country where Sampson lived was full of
Philistines, these sins beset us every day, and lie in wait to catch us, as the
Philistines did Sampson, now some men are so wary, that they will avoid all
companies and occasions, that may bring them into these sins, and seem to be
like Sampson strong Christians. Oh but friends, every one of us has a Dalilah,
some sin or other of our own in our own bosoms, which we carry about
continually with us, and unless we beware of this sin, though perhaps we may
keep our selves free from all other sins, yet this at last will ruin us. Again,
suppose a man in a Consumption, this man is very careful of all other
sicknesses, will not enter into any house where the Small pox is, will not go
near any that are Infected with the plague, keeps himself from all other
Infectious Diseases, why, you will say this man is likely to live; Oh no, he
carries his own disease about with him and within him, and the Consumpsion lies
in his breast i^ rotting his lungs, if he have no care of this, this is enough
without any other disease speedily to make away with him. Thus is it the duty
of every man, that regards the Health and Salvation of his Soul, not only to
keep himself from sins without, but from the sin within him, not only from the
sins of the times, but from his own sins. This is the sin the Goliath, unless
this be slain, we shall never conquer the whole Army of these Philistines;
conquer this sin, and you shall the more easily conquer all other sins, while
you keep your selves from all other sins, you only show your selves upright in
the sight of men, but he that keeps himself from this sin, his own sin, shows
that he is like David, sincere in the sight of God.

And thus you see as plainly as I can express my self; the force and meaning of
these words,

I know now you expect that I should give you the Doctrine or Observation
contained in them, and to give you it in as plain words as I can; it is this,

Doct. That every true and sincere hearted Christian, will above all other
things endeavor to keep himself from his own sin, his own Iniquity.

It Is a most plain truth, but if I may speak without comparison, the most
profitable truth in all the Bible. Here you see the nearest cut to Heaven, the
shortest path to Glory, the surest way to be secure from all other sins. If a
man should keep a Thief in his house, and this man should have his pockets
picked every night, and finding himself grieved as it should to prevent it, buy
new locks and bars to his doors, and make all the Walls of his house strong,
that no Thief might enter in; why (you would say) this man does very simply, he
may loose all his money though his house be never broken up, and further (you
would say) it were his only way to examine the Thief that dwells with him, and
put him out of doors: If any of you should have your own houses on fire, you
would not be so foolish, as to carry buckets of water and fling them on your
Neighbors houses, for fear they should be set on fire and neglect your own,
why as Nathan said to David you are the men, People now adays, do wonderfully
complain of other men and their sins, as if they should fear the worse for
them, but look not into their own hearts, and see sin lying and gnawing there,
every man should begin at home: If a man has a Son at home, that is an idle
and unhappy Boy, and should break all his Glass-windows, you would say, this
were a strange course for this man to go to his Neighbors and complain to them
of their idle Children, that do always fling stones, and never correct his
Child at home, that did him all the mischief. Friends, I pray let me persuade
you to look into your own hearts, and you shall see that you have some sin or
other there, that does you all the mischief, you will see then, that the only
way for you to get peace and comfort is with David, to keep your selves from
your own Iniquities. David had many Enemies abroad, as his Father-in-Law Saul,
who sought his Life; his own Son Absalom, who sought his Kingdom, but none so
great as his sin within him. Saul banished him from his Court, Absalom banished
him from his Kingdom, but none brought him so much trouble as his sin within
him. 51. Psalm. 1, 2, 3. oh this was that which broke his bones, nothing grieved
him and vexed him so much as this; and therefore it is worth the while to
observe the Title of this Psalm, and when David penned it. To the chief
Musician a Psalm of David the Servant of the Lord; who spoke to the Lord the
words of this Song, in the day that the Lord delivered him from the hand of all
his enemies, and from the hand of Saul. David could never say thus before,
before he had cleansed himself from his Iniquity within him, he always found
one Enemy or other, one trouble or other without him, but when once he had
turned his sin out of doors, then came peace and comfort to dwell with him,
sincerity is the highest pitch that a Christian is able to attain unto in this
life, and this is the nearest way to sincerity, for a man to keep himself from
his Iniquity. In the prosecution of this truth, I will lay you down and treat
of these following particulars. I will show you, 1. What that sin is which a
man may call his own sin, or his own Iniquity. 2. What we must do when we have
found out our own sins to keep our selves from it. 3. Why, we should above all
things keep our selves from our own sin.


1. What is that sin, which a man may call his own sin?

Answ. I gave you a hint of it in the explication, that it is Original sin, the
sin of our Natures.

1. The word it self signifies so much.

2. This sin is that which may be most properly called ours as first formed
with us. 2. No Temptation or occasion to it as to other sins, and so none in
the fault with us but our selves, as in other sins. This in the general.

2. But more particularly to describe that sin, which is as the Reuben the
first born and strength of it.

1. In respect of constitution, that sin is a man's own sin, which is the sin of
his Nature, with which he was born or bred, that sin to which a man is carried
out by his own Nature, though he had no temptation at all to it, as for
example, the sin of swearing is so natural to some men, that they will swear
though no man hurt them, anger them, or provoke them to it; they cannot speak
without an Oath, some men are naturally angry and touchy, they will be angry
without a cause, some men are naturally covetous, though they have no Children
nor Heirs, nor any in the World that they care for, yet they love to be
scraping up of money and hoarding it up, they love to be hard and gripple in
their dealings; some men's very Natures carry them to the sin of lust and
uncleaness, though they have Wives which for Beauty are Rachels, for bearing
Children are Leah's, yet they must hunt Bawdy-houses and follow strange Women,
the Apostle Jude describes such Persons, v. the 10 th. he compares such men to
bruit beasts, every beast has his particular quality, so every man his
particular sin, the Lion by nature is fierce, the Goat lustful, the Sow
naturally loves to wallow in the mire, the Fox to steal; and so every one of us
in this sense are like beasts till we be renewed, we have some sin or other,
which even our very natures carry us out unto, though the Devil should never
tempt us, we have all in us till grace come and sanctify nature, some sparks
of some sins in our own breasts that are of our own kindling. Now this is our
own sin.

2. In respect of Habitation; that sin is a man's own sin which he suffers to
dwell in him. A man may lodge a stranger for a night or two, but none but his
own family will he suffer to dwell with him: A man may invite many Women to a
dinner or a banquet, but he will suffer none but his own Wife to lie with him,
11. Luke 7. so that sin that lies down with thee and rises up with thee, that
goes to Church with thee, that dines and sups with thee, that is with thee in
thy trading and calling, that is most properly thy own sin. Saul's malice
against David went with him wherever he went, 4. Jer. 14. they are thy vain
thoughts if they lodge in thee, so that is thy sin, whatever it is, if thou
give it house room and heart room.

3. In respect of provision; that is a man's own sin that he makes provision
for. A man will provide for his own Children, and provide the best for them; so
you may know which is a man's own sin, which he takes all the pains that he can
for it, labors hard to provide for it, some men will labor hard and fare
hard, that they may but their Children fine clothes and dress them up, and give
them great portions; though they see other Children naked and starved, they
will not relieve them.

Now observe this, that sin which fare^ best, that is thy sin, 13. Romans 14.
what does the drunkard do, why all the money that he can earn, beg, or borrow
it goes to the Alehouse; the Whore-master thinks nothing too much or too good
to spend on his Whore; the proud man is all for his back, sell away whole Farms
to buy fine clothes, the glutton is all for his belly, the envious man is still
endeavoring to satisfy his malice, and some men will spend all their Estates
at Law, only to undo their Neighbors that they grudge, so every man has his
particular sin that he maintains at an high rate, and is continually providing
for it, more than for his Soul, 4. Jam. 3.

4. In respect of protection; as a man will provide for his own, so will he
protect his own. Now that sin is a man's own sin, which he will be still
pleading for, and protecting and defending, will rage if any man speak against
it. 6. Judge. 28-31. begin. so will men be furious and outrageous in pleading
for their own sins, as if they were their Gods, as if they could not live
without them; tell a swearer of his swearing, you had as good thrust a pin into
his eye; or a drunkard of his drunkenness, what says he here is such ado, it is
but good fellowship, Jud. 8. what was the reason that those (you read of there)
spoke evil of their Governors, why, because they punished them for their sins,
curbed their sins, like galled Horses you may touch them in any place till you
come to touch the sore, and then will they kick at you; so speak against any
other sins besides a man's own sin, and he is not moved, but have a care of that
least he fly in your face; John the Baptist could say any thing to Herod, and
Herod was well pleased with him, but when he came to reprove his Herodias, then
he must be presently sent to prison, his mittimus is quickly made, so every man
has his Herodias his particular sin, that he will maintain and defend as much
as his life.

5. In respect of love, thy beloved sin is thine own sin, their is in every man
a dilectum delictum, some sin that he is so dainty of, that no wind must blow
upon it, 1 Kin. 3. 25, 26. Oh is it not so with us? is not their some sin or
other in us that we do all that we can to keep it alive, and do not our bowels
yearn toward it? is not their such a sin that we dare not displease for all
the World, 2 Pet. 2. 15. Balaam chose rather to displease God, than to
displease his lust; so many men love some sins so well, that they will rather
go to Hell with them then part.

6. In respect of delight; peccatum in deliciis, that is, a man's own sin. It
may be this sin in the Text, which David calls his own sin, was his delightful
sin, viz. his revenging himself against Saul, revenge is the most pleasing and
delightful sin to corrupt nature, 2 These. 2. 12. You may easily know the sin
that a man takes pleasure and delight in, he is continually acting of it; that
which pleases us best we think we can never have too much of it; as soon as the
Apple pleased Eve, she stood no longer to dispute God's Authority or Command,
but presently eat it, so that sin which is a man's most pleasing and delightful
sin, let God say what he will or his Ministers, they will keep it still.

7. That sin which a man is most loath of all to part with, that is his own
sin, 1 King. 21. 2, 3. so tell some sinners that if they will leave their sins,
they shall have better things from God; Heaven and Happiness, oh nothing will
do it; a man will not sell away his own sin upon any terms, you may sooner cut
of some men's necks, then part them from their sins, our Savior compares these
sins to right hands and right eyes, which men are most loath to part withal;
these sins are like Micahs Images, 18. Judge. 23, 24. like Rachels Children, she
mourned for them and would not be comforted, because they were not. O friends,
pray search your hearts, look out the sin which you have been so often told
off, and yet you will not leave it, this, this is the sin, your own sin, the
sin which does you all the mischief, which will hazard if not prevented
speedily to ruin your Souls.

And thus you see in these seven particulars, what is that sin which a man may
call his own sin, having found it out which it is, the next thing is to find
out the way how to be rid of it, and this leads me to the second particular,
which is.

2. What we must do every one of us to keep our selves from our own sins.

Answer, we must proceed by these steps.

1. The first thing that is to be done is this, we must labor to see and know
the evil of them. If a man has a Child, though he be the rudest, idlest varlet
in all the Country, yet till he know him to be so, he will own him, love and
embrace him, as well as any of the rest of his Children; if a man has a
Servant that is a Thief, or one that is a waster of his time and his Masters
goods, yet if he think him to be a good and a faithful Servant, he will keep
him for all that; so is it here as long as we think well of our sins, we shall
never part from them. Oh this is our first work and great work, to labor to
see the evil of our own Iniquities, and here I shall show you two things. 1.
That this is a very hard work, for any man truly and rightly to be informed of
the evil of his own sin. 2. That this must first be done before we can keep our
selves from it.


1. That it is an hard work, etc.

1. Because it is our own, that which we love: Men love to wink at the faults of
those they love; as the Apostle says, charity covers a multitude of sins, so
love to any sin will blind our eyes, that we cannot see the evils, the
multitude of evils that are in it; it is like Solomon's love to his Wives, it was
so great, that he could not see the Evils in them, though he were a man of such
excellent Wisdom, but suffered them to draw away his heart from God.

2. Because we not only fall in love with our own sins, but even love the evils
of them. As men not only love their own Children, but love the very blemishes
that are in them. Solomon has an expression to this purpose, 8. Prove. 36.
Death, that is one of the evils and mischiefs, that our own sins will bring
upon us, or rather it comprehends in it all the evils of sin, 2. Genesis 17. and
do you think that any man loves death, no, men love not a natural much less an
Eternal Death, and yet sin will draw them to it, their own sins will make them
in love with their own destructions.

3. Because we are unwilling to take up any report against our own sins, we
will never believe what is told us of them, 40. Jer. from the 12 th verse to
the end of the Chapter; and the 41. Chapter verse the second; so is it here,
tell men of their own sins, they will not believe us, tell them their swearing,
or drinking, or rioting, or profaneness will bring damnation on them, they will
but scoff at us for our pains; they hope, they will say, to be saved for all
this, and tell us there is not so much harm in this thing as men account.

4. Because we are ready to be angry with those that reprove our own sins, 4.
Gal. 16. so, many Persons think we love them not, because we love not their
sins; and are enemies to them, because we are enemies to their sins, oh they
hate us for reproving their sins, 2 Cor. 12. 15. so Ahab he hated Micaiah, I
hate him says he, I cannot abide him, and why so, he never Prophesies good
concerning me but evil. Micaiah showed him the evil of his sin, and therefore
Ahab was so hot against him. Thus lay these things together, and you will see
that it is a very hard work, for any man to be truly and rightly informed of the
evil of his own sin.

2. Yet, secondly this must be done; we must first see the evil of our sins
before we can cast them off, no wise man will cast off his old friend and
acquaintance for no cause, no man in his right mind will cut of his right Arm,
while it is sound and well before he is sure it is gangrened, nay let me tell you
we must see a great deal of evil in our own sins, before we can keep our selves
from them. What an hard matter was it for Eli though a good man, to cast of his
Sons after he heard of all their wickedness, at last he reproves them but
faintly. Oh when men come to see this, then how willingly will they part with
all their sins, when they see that sin will bring them to Hell, then away with
it 16. Luke 1, 2. so shall we deal with our best beloved sins, which have been
like the stewards of our hearts, when we once come to see the evil of them,
that they seek to ruin us. O Brethren, for your Souls sake do not shut your
eyes against this, be willing to hear all that you can hear of your own sins,
do not mince the matter, the evil will else fall on your own heads, and you
will smart for it another day.

2. Give this sin no entertainment, and you shall quickly be rid of it. As we
say of the Gout it goes to rich men, because it there fares best; know this,
sin where it fares best there it will stay longest: It Is like a Beggar, give
him a bountiful Alms and you shall have him at your door again the sooner, 1
Cor. 9. 27. I keep under my body i. e. my body of sin, the best way to keep sin
away is to keep it under, for it is of a ruling and domineering nature; and
therefore the Saints that have got the mastery of their sins, they can thrust
them away easily.

3. Choose another love whom you may set your affections and all your delight
upon, and that is Jesus Christ, postquam nos Amaryllis habet Galatea reliquit,
love Christ and you shall not love any sin more; you will see that in Christ
that deserves all, and more than all your love and affections, 1 Thessalonians. 1 9.
when they turned to God, they turned from Idols; so when we turn our affections
to Christ, we shall turn them from sin; we shall never have list to sin more:
Old friends we say are like old clothes, we give them away when we have new
ones; so here, though sin be thy old friend, yet for Christ's sake thou will
part with it, 4 Ephesians. 22, 24. the best way to cast off the old man is to put on
the new man; O sinners, I know that your sins are dear unto you, and you think
them best; but come and see Christ, and you shall see that in him, which will
be far better to you than all your sins; when you have once put on Christ, or
the new man, you will for ever after cast off the old man.

4. You must not dispute the case at the bar of flesh and blood, whether you
shall part with your own sins or no. Flesh and sin are sworn Brothers, like
Herod and Pilate both agree against Christ; flesh will plead for sin, because
flesh knows no other happiness but in sin, hence is that of the Apostle, 1 Cor.
15. 50. you must away with flesh, when you would consult for the good of your
Souls; always flesh will hinder us in whatever is good, I Gal. 15, 16. had Paul
consulted with flesh, he had never been a Preacher, flesh would have said to
him as Peter to Christ, Master save thy self: It Is a dangerous time now to
renounce thy sin, it will breed thee a great deal of trouble, if thou turn from
sin, thou will have all the World about thy ears; therefore dispute not the
case with flesh.

5. Deny self; self denial is as a deadly wound given to sin, that it cannot
lift up its head any more, 16. Mat. 24. selfdenyal, I will tell you what it is,
it is the giving up the Keys, and the sole command of the whole man unto
Christ: Then Christ is the Lord Lieutenant of thy heart, and nothing can be
done without leave from Christ; now put Christ in office, and Christ will
quickly put sin out of office. Oh! it is this self that keeps in sin; when grace
like Joab goes out to fight against sin, then self like David calls out, deal
kindly with the young man Absalom, oh spare my sin, my beloved sin, my only
sin. O Brethren, have a care of bringing self to Church with you; all the
Sermons you hear will do you no good, self will hinder you in all your duties,
because it will not suffer your own Iniquities to be touched; self it is like
Jehu, down with Ahab and all his Family, down with Baal and all his Priests,
but the Calves at Dan and Bethel must stand still; zeal cast down the first,
but self made the other to stand; self will suffer any sin but our own sin, our
own Iniquity to be killed.

6. Look into the Scriptures, and there you shall see, that you shall be no
losers but gainers by parting with your sins, 2 Chronicles. 25. from the 6 th to the
10 th verse, so many will say what shall we do to live, we live by our sins, we
gain by our sins, (19. Acts. 24, 25. so some say we must cozen now and then, or
we cannot live by our trade, we must to the Ale house now and then, or we
cannot get a good bargain) do you so, the Devil may take such gain if he will;
but know this, that God is able to do more for you than sin can do, 2 Kings 1.
2, 3. what, is there not a God in Heaven to provide for you, that you must go
to sin, and the Devil to get a livelihood. Saul, he never went to the Devil
before God had left him, and answered him no more; but alas, how many run to
the Devil before God has left them; what, is there never a promise in the
whole Bible, to comfort your hearts, but you must go to sin for comfort? is not
Heaven rich enough and glorious enough to make you happy, but you must have sin
also to lie in the scales? O remember this if you part with your best sins, you
shall be no losers.

7. Be much in spiritual duties, pray much against this sin, this thine own
sin; read much, hear much, meditate of Christ and Grace, of God and Heaven
much; perform these duties with a desire to be revenged on thy own sin. As
Sampson when he prayed to God for strength, it was that he might be avenged on
the Philistines. Brethren, we Pray to God for grace, but it is not with this
intent that it might kill this sin, and therefore we pray amiss; when we hear a
Sermon it is not with intent to get knowledge how to mortify this sin, and
therefore we hear in vain; and mark this, whatever spiritual duty we perform,
if we do it not with an intent especially against this sin, it is to no
purpose. David when he chose out five flint stones, it was with an intent to
kill Goliath with them, and when the slung them, he aimed at his head; so let us
do in all our spiritual duties, level them so that we may take aim at this sin
especially, and then we shall prosper, 1 Kings 22. 31. Alas what is it to kill
a Thousand common Soldiers in an Army of Twenty Thousand, kill the General and
you have won the Field; we Fight in vain, unless we Fight against this King of
sins in us.

8. Labor as much as you can to thwart this particular sin; we use to say one
contrary will expel another; look you what is contrary to thy corruption,
exercise thy self in that grace or virtue; the way to make a crooked stick
strait, is to bend it as much the contrary way. Is Covetousness thy sin, then
be much in giving Alms, be much in meditating of the riches of Heaven; follow
our Saviors Counsel in the 19 th of Mat. 21. Is Drunkenness thy sin, Pray for
the Spirit of God, 5. Ephesians. 18. Art thou given to Pride, labor for Humility,
and think meanly of thy self, think the best of others; drive in grace as much
as you can into the heart, and that will drive out sin, especially that
particular grace that is opposite to this sin, to cure a Wound, you must get a
suitable Plaster for that Wound, so for the cure of this sin you must get a
suitable grace.

9. If after all this that you have done, you cannot yet work out this sin,
then go to God and beg of him, beg earnestly of him to do it for you, 2 Chronicles.
20. Chap. 1, 4, 12. so if thou art afraid of this sin, and do seek the Lord
with all thine heart God will assuredly help: But the truth is, we have no
heart to Pray against this sin, and therefore the Lord does not hear our
Prayers; we deal with our sins as Pharaoh with his Frogs in the 8 th. of Ex. 8,
9, 10. so we would fain be rid of this sin many of us but not yet, why not
before we come to dye, when we are leaving the World, then we could be content
to leave this sin; O this is a sign that we do not desire to part with it, and
if we will not part with it now, we shall never part with it. O of all things
let us have a care of such a frame of spirit as this is, least God in judgment
give us over to dye in this sin, as we have desired all our days to live in it.

3. Why we should above all things keep our selves from our own sins.

David in the Text tells us, that he kept himself from his Iniquity (...) the
word (as I showed you in the beginning) signifies to prevent a danger that is
likely to fall on us, there is a Noun comes from this Verb, which signifies a
Watchtower, as sentinels in a Garrison that stand in the Watchtower, espy the
Enemy afar off coming to them before he seizes upon them, and so prevents his
design, so David though he fell into other sins, and was surprised as it were
by other sins, yet this sin which he calls his own sin, he had a special eye
unto, was always upon his guard, his Watchtower to prevent it; certainly there
was something in it, David saw good reason for it, that made him more careful
of this sin than of all others.

Now I will show you some Reasons, why we ought to be so careful against our
own Iniquities.

1. Because we love it so much, this sin is the Souls darling, the Souls
beloved, look into your hearts and search them well, and you shall find a sin
there, that you love better than God, or Christ, or Heaven, or your Souls. It
is said of Ahab, that he sold himself to do wickedly, oh this was an high
prized sin, what sell himself for a sin? and are there not many Ahabs among us,
that will sell themselves for some sin or other: A man's self is the highest
price that he can set upon any sin, that which we love best we prize most, be
it an horse, or a dog, I will not take an Hundred Pound for it: But for a man
to sell his Soul to the Devil, nay Soul and Body to Hell to be tormented in the
Fiery Lake of Brimstone Eternally for a Sin, you will say that man pays dear
enough for it. O Friends, here you see the force of the Reason, keep your
selves from this sin, your love and affections from it, because this is the sin
that will take up all your love, will take off your heart from God and Christ
and your Salvation. A man while he is suiting, and has deeply set his love
upon a Woman, will neglect all his other business that he may gain her for a
Wife; is it so with you in reference to any sin? Brethren I desire to deal
plainly and faithfully with your Souls and mine own, have a care of that sin,
have a care of loving of it, least you hate your Souls and hate God and Christ.
I will explain this by a comparison, this sin is like Absalom, Absalom you know
was David's beloved Son, and Absalom strives to take away David's Kingdom and
also his Life, well for all this David loves him still, and was too fond over
him for all this, and was loath to part with him, and when he was killed, see
how he mourns for him in the 2 Samuel 18. 33. so here this sin is your Absalom,
the sin you are so fond off, the sin you love so well, and do you not know that
this sin will take from you, like Absalom, the Kingdom of Heaven, and the life
of your Souls, and yet all this will not take off your love from it, as David
said of Absalom, would to God I had dyed for thee, so you are willing to dye
Eternally and go to Hell, rather than part with it. O Friends, if you love your
Souls, have a care of that sin which you love most, and keep yonr selves from
it.

2. Because this sin has the more power over us, and can do with us what it
pleases. If a man love his Wife too much he makes her his Mistress, so if a
man love any one sin too much, he makes that sin his Mistress, the Queen regent
of the Soul; and when it comes once to this he cannot leave that sin, no if he
would give a World; all the Sermons in the World can do such a man no good; you
hear a good Sermon, telling you, if you desire to be saved you must do so and
so, oh, but first of all you must ask leave of this sin, whether you may do it
or no, if this sin forbid you to Pray, you must not Pray, nay when a man is at
Prayers and would confess such and such miscarriages of his life, this sin,
this Master sin, often forbids him so much as to name them. This sin will not
let a man repent, nor turn to Christ, like Dalilah it binds the strongest
Sampson, and keeps many a great professor from turning a true real Christian
mark, the Apostles exhortation in the 6 th of the Romans 12. (...). O let not sin
be King in your Souls; O therefore have a care of this sin, it will be aut
Caesar, aut nullus; if you let it alone to get the upper hand of you, you will
hardly ever get rid of it. Methinks the Apostle in that 6 th of the Romans 12.
alludes to a forreigner that has got to a Kingdom; he displaceth all the
native Inhabitants from all places of honor and trust, brings in his own
Countrymen, makes them Lords and Governors of the Land, so if sin comes to be
King in the Soul, down goes every good thought, every good word, all goodness
in that Soul, sin sets up new lusts and corruptions to reign and command there;
so the Apostle, if sin be King you must look then to obey all its lusts.

3. If we can but keep our selves from this sin, we shall with ease keep our
selves from all other sins, 1 Samuel 17. 51. So here, kill but this Goliath and
you may easily conquer all the multitude of other sins; and therefore the best
way to endeavor to convert a man, is to mark what is his own sin, his own
Iniquity; kill that and you may save his Soul alive, show him but the evil of
this sin, and he will never like sin any more. And therefore Junius and
Tremellius render the words of the Text thus, caveo mihi ne quid inique agam;
tho they be not an exact Translation according to the Original, yet may serve
for a good comment upon the Text; he that keeps himself from this sin, will
keep himself from all sins; when Christ converted Paul he begins with his great
sin, shows him the evil of that; Paul tells us what his great sin was in the 1
of the Cor. 15. 9. And every where Paul bemoans himself for this sin, this was
the sin that Paul was most proud off, and was never well, but when he was
committing and acting of it, 8. Acts 3. 9. Acts 1. Well Christ, he begins with
this sin, 9. Acts 4, 5. As Soon as Paul saw the evil of this sin, he presently
forsook every sin. Brethren, I know this if Ministers would deal faithfully
with you, they must tell you of your own sins, but then you will fly in their
faces, this is no pleasing Doctrine; we may Preach before a company of Drunkards
against Covetousness, against Deceit, against Fornication, against Bribery and
Injustice, why all is well, but if we come to speak against Drunkenness, there
we drive the nail to the quick, it will not be endured: O but Friends if you
love your Souls, be willing to hear the evil of your own sins as well as other
men's sins, till you leave this you will leave none, if you can but keep your
selves from this, you may keep your selves from all others.

4. Because this sin stands most in competition with Christ for the heart.
Other sins will be content with a mean entertainment, but this sin must have
the best, this sin must be served before Christ; look upon a man whose sin is
Covetousness, any little thing as a cold morning will keep him from a Sermon,
but rain, snow or blow, he will to the Market, Covetousness, that must be
served or else he is sick, though Christ he thinks may be contented with once a
month. O Friends, do not you cry out upon the Jews, and be worse than the Jews
your selves, 18. John 39, 40. do you not deal worse with Christ for a lust, or
you that can part with Christ for a pleasure; do you think that sin deserves
your hearts better than Christ, why then can you not be persuaded to leave sin
and follow Christ, but you choose to follow your sins and leave Christ; every
one that loves this sin, cries up Barabbas and denies Christ, you bid Christ be
gone, as the Jews, away with this Fellow. As the Jews could not save Christ and
Barabbas both together, so neither can we keep this sin and Christ both in one
heart; all that entertain this sin, shut Christ out of their hearts.

5. Because this sin continually besets us, it is the sin as I told you, that
lies down with you, that rises up with you, that keeps at home with you, that
goes abroad with you; as the Covetous man is Covetous at all times and in all
places, even when he is at Church, then his heart is set on his Covetousness, a
Drunkard is so at all times, thinking of it at Church, and continuing it a bed.
Now if it be so, we had need be the more careful of it: A man that is subject
upon the taking of any little cold to get an ague, had need always to keep
himself very warm: In dangerous times when men lie at the catch for any word, a
man had need consider well before he speak: O Brethren, sin is the greatest
trapanner in all the World, it lies at the catch continually to deceive our
Souls, oh we had need be careful and watchful over our Souls, a man may be
undone by sin before he is aware of it; and therefore the Apostle upon this
account gives us a special charge against this sin and calls it (...) the sin
which does so easily beset us, 12. Heb. 1.

6. This one sin will damn thy Soul as well as Thousands, though we should
leave all other sins but this, yet this will carry us to Hell. We do not read
of Judas that ever he was guilty of any sin but one, and that was Covetousness,
it was his Master sin, and yet that one sin brought both Hell into his Soul,
and also carried his Soul to Hell. O how happy might Judas have been, had he
but kept himself from this his own Iniquity. Friends do not deceive your Souls,
you have but a few days to live before you shall go either to Heaven or Hell,
do not boast that you are not Drunkards, or Swearers, or Liars, etc. as others,
if there be but one sin that you love, it will make God to hate you for ever;
cries the Pharisee: in the 18 th of Luke 11, 12. God I thank thee, that I am
not as other men are, Extortioners, Unjust, Adulterers, etc. O, but this
Pharisee had a sin for all this, that would carry him to Hell. A Prisoner that
is Arraigned for murder, may plead that he never cut a purse, broke open an
house, robbed on the High way, committed Treason against his Prince, but all
this will not serve his turn, Murder will hang him. O think of this, and this
one sin will bring you to Torments enough, 2 James 10, 11, 12. A seventh Reason
we have in this very Psalm. and it is this, when afflictions and tribulations
come upon us, this will be our great comfort, that we have kept our selves from
our own Iniquities. David tells us his own experience in this Psalm, that God
was with him to stand by him in all his troubles, because he kept himself from
his Iniquity, read but v. 16, 17, 18, 19, 20. and the Reason in the 21, 22, and
23. verses. Beloved, would you have God to stand by you in all your troubles,
then cast away your sin, 55. Psalm. 22. a man under afflictions that has this
sin about him, is like a man cast into the Sea with a Millstone about his neck,
he is sure to sink to the bottom; sin venom's the wound of every affliction. O
Brethren, cast out this sin, that God may not cast you off in the day of your
adversity, Summer will not always last, Winter must come, and what will you do
if God will not own you; let me tell you further, when under afflictions you
would be willing to be rid of this sin, but then you shall not; as you have
kept it in spite of God, it shall then be always with you to torment you. O
think upon it, before God lays troubles and afflictions upon you, you cannot
but expect them, for your sins have deserved them, therefore I say think upon
it before hand which you will choose, God to be your comforter in your miseries,
or keep this sin to add sorrows to all your afflictions, 5. Lam. 15, 16. the
joy of our heart is ceased, our dance is turned into mourning, the Crown is
fallen from our head, woe unto us that we have sinned: But every true Saint may
rejoice with David under his afflictions, I have kept my self from my sin, and
now will my God keep me under all my sorrows.

8. The last Reason is in the Text. This is the surest testimony of our
Sincerity and Uprightness before God, read the Text, and the 22 th of Genesis 12.
So may God say to us, now I know that you love me, seeing for my sake you have
parted with your most beloved sin. This is the only pleasing and delightful
sacrifice to God, 1 Cor. 13. 1, 2, 3. all without love to God is nothing; and
sure that man loves God but a little, that will not part with one sin for his
sake. God showed his love to us in giving us his own Son, O let us show our
love to God in parting with our own sin: In a word, here is totum Legis and
Evangelii the sum and compendium of Christianity, to keep your selves from
your own Iniquities. Unless you do this, you may as good do nothing at all; you
can never say that you have kept Gods Commandments, as long as you keep this
sin in your hearts and bosoms. Nay, this sin will make all that you do sinful
and odious in the sight of God; you may pray your selves dumb, kneel your
selves lame, read your selves blind, hear Sermons till you be deaf, give alms
so long till you be poor, and yet all is nothing in the sight of God, while you
keep this Iniquity in your hearts; you may be great professors, and yet if you
have this sin, you must to Hell for all that. Brethren, deceive not your
selves, it is not the hating of Ceremonies in the Church, but the hating this
sin in your hearts, that will be acceptable in the sight of God. Hell is the
place that God has prepared on purpose for Hypocrites, and all those (be they
what they will of this or that opinion of this or that Sect, Conformists or
Nonconformists) that have not kept themselves from their own Iniquities, this
great sin are but Hypocrites in the sight of God.

Application.
1. Use shall be a use of Information in diverse particulars.

1. Here we may see the Reason why so many go to Hell; it is their best beloved
sins that carry them thither. Those sins which we account our greatest
happiness here, are they which bring men to their Everlasting Torments. Every
natural man like Jacob has his Benjamin, his darling sin, and as Jacob, had
rather he and his whole Family should starve than part with his Benjamin, so
the most of us had rather lie Eternally in Hell, than part with this Benjamin
our own Iniquity. O what a desperate hazard do every one of us run into, by
keeping and maintaining this one sin in our hearts, if a man might be permitted
to go to Hell and talk with the damned there; and ask them all there severally,
wherefore came you hither, and wherefore came you hither, they would all make
this Answer; oh, we were loath to part with our own Iniquities, one would say I
loved such a sin too much, another, O I loved such a sin too much etc. else we
had not been here. Brethren, we see what it is that will bring us to
destruction, that will ruin our Souls, it is that which we now love so well, the
sin that lies in our bosoms. These sins, like the Israelites dainty Quails,
which they lusted so much after, will assuredly bring down the wrath of God
upon us.

2. Here we see the Reason likewise, why so few are converted by the Gospel,
because the Gospel bids us cut off right hands, and pluck out right eyes, part
with that which is most dear unto us; the Gospel bids the Drunkard leave his
drunkenness, the Swearer leave his swearing, the Covetous man to leave his Gold
and Silver, the Proud man to despise honor and embrace humility; in a word, it
bids every man to leave his own Iniquity, O this is an hard saying, who can
bear it, flesh and blood can never endure it. Away with such a Gospel as this
is, cry men, this will turn the World upside down. Let John Baptist Preach what
he will before Herod, he can like his Doctrine well enough, but when he comes to
tell him he must part with his beloved Herodias, away with him to Prison, it is
not fit such a man should live upon the earth. Paul may Preach as long as he
please at Ephesus, till he come to Preach down Diana, then will Demetrius
presently raise a tumult against him; so the Young Man in the 19 th Chap. of
St. Matthews Gospel, what Christ said to him from the 16 to the 20 verse was
all well, Christ had not as yet touched his sore place, he spoke nothing of his
beloved sin, well but you shall see what follows verses 21, 22. here the shoe
pincht him, when Christ comes once to tell him of his beloved sin, to touch
that he had enough, away he goes: Sinners turn their backs on Christ, as soon as
Christ bids them turn their backs upon their own Iniquities. We are all of us
like Naaman, in the 2 Kings 5. 17, 18. God must bate us an ace if he expects us
to be his Servants; we make our terms with God to have our liberty in one sin
or other, which we like best. O we think that God is a very hard Master, and
that he is too strict and severe with us to debar us of every sin; like
Agrippa, we are contented to meet Christ above half ways, to be almost
Christians, i. e. Christians in every thing save in one thing, i. e. in keeping
still our own sin, but that we can by no means part withal. Now I hope you see
the Reason why so few are converted, and why all our Preaching proves no more
profitable unto you, blame not us but blame your selves for it, we may say as
David said, these Sons of Zerviah are too hard for us, as to other things we
may persuade you and prevail somewhat, but when we come to speak against this
sin, your own sin, there is little or no hope to prevail with you. This sin is
the Beelzebub the Prince of Devils, and it is not all the Apostles of Christ,
unless Christ himself come powerfully into your hearts can cast him out.

3. Here we see the folly of sinners, who for the short pleasure of some
beloved sin or other, will venture to undergo the pains of the damned, the
torments of Hell and the Wrath of an Almighty God, 21. Ex. 1, 2, 5, 6, verses,
the case is the same here; the Gospel is nothing else but a proclamation of
liberty to the Captives, all that will leave their sins may come to Christ and
be made free, well, but their are some like the Israelites servants, that will
say I love my sin, which is my Master, and as dear to me as Wife and Children;
I will not go out free, oh these are the Persons that have their ear boared,
never shall Sermon do them good, never shall ordinance do them good, they shall
serve sin for ever, God will fulfill their desires, as they are unwilling to
part with sin, so shall they never part with sin, they and their sins shall
live and dye and go to Hell together. O the folly and fondness of sinners, that
are so unwilling to part with their sins, let such know this before sin and
they part, they shall have enough of it; you that taste the sweet of sin,
remember that you must taste the sour also, sin like St. John's Book, though it
seem to you as sweet as honey in the mouth, yet it will be as bitter as gall
and wormwood in the Bowels. O let us remember this, that our Souls are our own
as well as our sins, and one of them we must part withal; here is the trial,
which we love best our own Sins or our own Souls, that which we love best we
will not part withal, 3. Acts 19. No sin shall be blotted out at the day of
Judgment, but those sins that are cast out here; cast them out of your hearts,
and God will soon blot them out of his Book. O that sinners were but as wise in
preventing, as they shall be woeful in undergoing the everlasting sorrows, which
shall follow their short sinful pleasures. It Is but a foolish bargain, that
every sinner makes to purchase eternal pains for momentary pleasures, to choose
rather to be turned out of Heaven, then to turn one sin out of thy heart.

4. Here we see likewise the Reason, why People are so in love with sin, which
is so ugly in its own nature, and so odious in the sight of God. If we had the
true picture of sin, drawn to the life before our eyes, together with the
Judgments of God in this life, and the Torments of Hell in the other life,
carrying up its train, we could not but sit down and wonder at the madness of
our hearts, that we should so much dote upon it or fall in love with it. O but
wonder not, here is the Reason, every man loves one sin or other because it is
his own sin. Do not some of you wonder why David should love Absalom so well, a
Murderer, a Traitor, what not, one that in many respects dealt worse with David
than ever Saul did, one that was a continual grief to David, yet he loved him
dearly for all this, would you know the Reason, see it in the 2 of Sam. 19. 4.
why, he was his own Son, that was the Reason. Do you wonder that men can love
sin so well, which is a Traitor in their bosoms, the Destroyer of their Souls,
the only hindrance of their Eternal Happiness, oh here is the reason, it is their
own sin, a Babe conceived in the womb of their own hearts, nursed up and
suckled in their own Breasts. All men are mightily taken with their own things;
the Proverb is every man's own goose is better than his Neighbors swan, so is it
with sin we do hate sin others, but we love it in our selves, nay the very same
sins that we hate in others, we hug them while they are in our own bosoms; the
truth is this, when ever a wicked man hates sin, he does not hate it as it is
sin, but because it is not his sin, if it were his sin he would love it as well
as others; nay and perhaps this man that hates one sin in his Neighbor, may as
dearly love another sin in himself, see an example in the 38. Genesis 24, 25, 26.
we look not upon our own sins, with the same pair of spectacles that we look on
other men's sins withal: Men will never think their own Children to be so ill as
other men's Children are, though perhaps they be a great deal worse. Here lies
the great deceit, and that which does our Souls all the mischief our owning of
sin so far as to countenance it, and all the evil actions that come from it: If
we could but once disown sin, we should quickly be out of love with it.

5. Here we may see what is the chief work and duty of Ministers; it is to
persuade men what they can against their own Iniquities, and bring them out of
love with their own sins, 58 of Is. 1. Cry aloud, spare not; life up thy voice
like a trumpet, and show my People their transgression, and the house of Jacob
their sins; and this has been always the practice of the Prophets and Apostles
of Christ, in all their Sermons and Preaching. Noah he reproved the men of the
old World for their sins, Elijah he dealt plainly with Ahab and reproved him
for his sin, the Murder of Naboth; Nathan the Prophet he comes bluntly to David
and tells him thou art the man. John Baptist he tells Herod of his Herodias,
and Paul when he Preached to Felix and Drusilla, he reasons of righteousness
and temperance, whereby he plainly intimated what was his Iniquity. General
Preaching is as good as no Preaching at all; Ministers must not only tell
People of sin, but of their sins. Should a Physician come to a sick man, and
discourse learnedly before him of the nature and causes of sickness in general,
and not tell him what is his disease and sickness, and tell him what means he
must use against it, this would do him no good; such are all our Learned
Sermons and quaint discourses, etc. Brethren, we have to deal with sinners, sin
in Scripture is a sickness; now we must tell every man what is his sin, and
what may be a means to bring him out of the snare of the Devil; such general
Preaching is like prophesying in an unknown tongue, which the Apostle says in
the 1 Cor. 14. 9. is speaking into the air, it is Preaching at random. He is not
a good Soldier that knows only, how to discharge his Musket and let it off,
but he must be skillful how to level it that he may shoot his Enemy. He is not
to be accounted for a good Preacher, that can make a quaint Sermon or a Learned
discourse; but if we would do good by our Preaching, we must tell every one of
his own Iniquities; we must not Preach against the sins of the Court in the
Country, nor against the sins of the Country at Court; we must not set men
against other men's sins, but every man against his own sins. The Prophets did
not go to Samaria to Preach against the sins of Jerusalem, nor to Jerusalem to
Preach against the sins of Samaria. This will do you most good, will make most
for the health of your Souls. Thus Brethren, you see what is the duty of
Ministers if they would do you any good, and I hope none of you will be
offended at us, if we deal so plainly aand faithfully with you. This ^ in
respect of some that were present when he Preached this Sermon. who it seems
thought he dealt too plainly with them in telling them of and reproving them
for their sins.
Here are some that have been angry with me for Preaching thus, but let them
know that they themselves are the greatest enemies to their own Souls. If you
choose a Lawyer to manage your case for you at the common Law, and he states
your case wrong, and you loose the Suit by it, will you not call him Knave for
his pains; what then will you call us Ministers in Hell, if we deal not now
plainly and faithfully with your Souls. I never yet heard otherways amongst
honest men, but that plain dealing was ever accounted best. This is the Anvil
that we must strike upon, tho thereby w^ make the sparks to fly about our ears.

6. And lastly, here then we see the righteousness and the justice of all Gods
dealings with us. He is righteous in the extremity of all his proceedings
against us. May we not say of England as the Prophet of Tyrus in the 28. Ezekiel.
12, 15, 18. v. do we not keep those sins in our hearts, which bring down God's
Judgments upon our Houses; can we expect it should be otherways with us, when
we are resolved not to part with our sins. How can we expect while we own sin,
but that God should disown us, while we countenance Iniquity, but that God
should discountenance us, while we suffer our hearts to be overrun with these
briars and thorns, but that God should make us fuel for the fire of his
indignation, 9. Daniel 13, 14. God has publicly in his word proclaimed sin
for a Traitor, and has forbidden us upon pain of his heavy displeasure to
harbor any sin in us, now if we make our hearts the rebellious houses of sin,
God may justly fire our houses about our ears, and make our habitations like a
dunghill. And therefore in all our miseries and calamities that have or may
befall us, and under all the Judgments of God, let us cry out with the Church
in the Lamentations, woe unto us that we have sinned, had not we loved sin, God
would then have loved us.

2. Use of Reproof. If that we ought to keep our selves from our own
Iniquities, then this reproves,

1. Those who instead of keeping themselves from their Iniquities, keep up
close and hide up their Iniquities; who deal with their sins as Rachel with her
Idols, when Laban came to make a search after them, she hid them in the midst
of the stuff. How many Persons are there that will not be known of their sins
as if they knew not what they meant, tell the Swearer of his swearing, he
denies it, he is not the man, or the Drunkard, or Covetous etc. Brethren, you
deal unfaithfully with your Souls, why do you go thus to hide up your sins? I
can tell you the true Reason, because you have no mind to leave them, the
Scripture puts confessing and forsaking of sin together, and confessing is
always first, and a means to the latter, 28. Prove. 13. I can tell you further,
the Scripture puts confessing and forgiving together, 32. Ps. 5. So that no
confessing no forsaking, no forsaking no forgiving. And this is the great
danger that these sins our own Iniquities bring us into, keep us from
confession and therefore seldom are pardoned. That man is in a forlorn
condition, who when his sin like the Smallpox would break out, drives it in
again and strikes it to the very heart; what a madness is it for a man to send
to a Physician, and desire him to heal him, and yet will not be known of any
disease that troubles him. So, this is desperate folly and hypocrisy, for men
to come and pray to God to pardon their sins, and yet will not be known of any
sin that is in them; of all things take heed of such sins as you cannot endure
should be touched, or meddled with, or reproved, but will do all that you can to
hide them, and keep them secret, these are your own Iniquities, and are very
dangerous.

2. Those who instead of keeping themselves from their Iniquities, boast of
them and glory in them, 3. Is. 9. Men are apt to boast and to brag of their own
things, and so do sinners of their own Iniquities; as the Apostle Paul says in
another case; upon our uncomely members, we bestow the more abundant
comeliness, so these Persons paint over and varnish what they can their
uncomely sins, that so they may ^he more freely commit them, this is the ^ry
height of Impiety to boast and glory in our Iniquities; and were they not our
own, we should not thus glory in them.

3. Those who instead of forsaking their own Iniquities, are partakers also
with other men in their sins; there is none of us all, but has sins enough of
his own to sink him to the bottom of Hell; see what an account David gives us
of his sins in the 40 Psalm. 12. if David's were so many, how many then are
ours, oh what desperate madness then to add to that multitude, which we are not
able already to number. These Persons I cannot better compare them, than to
broken Tradesmen that have spent all, and run themselves so far in debt, that
they are like to lie in the Goal all their days, why these Persons are the
readiest Persons to be bound for other men's debts. This is the right and true
adding sin to sin and Iniquity to Iniquity, adding the sins of others to our
own sins. Now the best way to remedy this, is with David in the Text; to keep
our selves from our own Iniquities, and then we shall the better look to our
selves, in keeping our selves from other men's sins; that man that is unwilling
to give a bond for his own debt, will never be surety, or enter into bonds for
another man's debt.

4. Those who instead of keeping themselves from their own Iniquities, are
drawing on others, and persuading others to commit the like sins with them.
Brethren, I think our sin has done mischief enough, or at least will do
mischief enough, if it ruin and damn only our own Souls, oh then, why should we
be so greedy of bringing others into the same guilt and condemnation with us; I
think the World was never so full of such kind of Persons as it is now, sinners
are stark mad that every body is not like them, and because they cannot draw
others with them to the same excess of riot; sin is such a sweet bit, such a
dainty morsel, that they love not to eat it alone, like some kind hearted men,
who if they have a joint of meat extraordinary, presently send for some
Neighbors or Friends to dine with them. Brethren, this is the very Image and
Superscription of the Devil, that these men carry in their foreheads, the Devil
after he had sinned himself, have made it his work ever since to make us all
Devils like himself, by drawing us into the same sins; now the best way to
remedy this, is to keep our selves (as David in the Text) from our own sins,
and when we see the evil of them our selves, we shall the more earnestly
persuade all others, to keep themselves from them likewise.

3. Use Consolation to all those that can say with David in the Text, I have
kept my self from mine Iniquity. This is the proper use of the Text, David he
comforts himself with this consideration, this one thing was better to David
than his honors and riches, than his Crown and Kingdom. This was David's cordial
in the Wilderness, and his Song of rejoicing upon his Throne. I will desire you
once more to look upon the Title of this Psalm, and read it over, a Psalm of
etc. in the Title David rejoices over his outward Enemies, among which he
reckons Saul as the chiefest, but in the Psalm David triumphs over his
Spiritual Enemies, and among these he reckons his own Iniquity as the King,
the chiefest v. 21, 23. this was a far greater comfort to David, that he kept
himself from his own Iniquity, than his being kept from the power and malice of
Saul his chiefest Enemy. And therefore David leaves this upon record for all
the World to take notice of it; and seems to intimate thus much to us, that
this was the Reason why God delivered him from his greatest Enemy, because he
kept himself from his own Iniquity, v. 24 Here then beloved, we see the
Fountain for a dry and thirsty Soul. Here is the true cordial in calamity, the
surest comfort under the greatest conflict; let Men and Devils muster up all
their Armies, and rally up all their Regiments against the Saints, they cannot
hurt those who have kept themselves from their own Iniquities: Sincerity my
Friends, is such armor of proof, that no bullets of afflictions, no chain shot
of tribulations, no poisoned darts of Temptations, no fiery grenades of
persecutions are able to pierce or enter into That man that has kept his own
Iniquity out, need not fear any sorrows entering into his Soul. No wonder that
those who keep common tiplinghouses, to which Drunkards and Swearers, and
wicked Persons of all sorts have free resort, are seldom quiet, but singing and
ranting, railing and reviling, wrangling and fighting are the daily dishes they
feed upon. Just so are the hearts of all sinners, where this Iniquity as the
Master, keeps a common Inn for all other sins to resort unto, their is no
quietness no comfort, no peace in that Soul, 57. Isaiah 20, 21. it is seldom
that a sinner dines a good day; and therefore Solomon tells us that even in
laughter the heart of the wicked is sorrowful, 2 Kin. 9. 22. this thine
Iniquity is the true Jezabel, and all other sins are but her brats and
bastards; cast out this Jezabel and thy Soul shall live, fling but this Jonas
overboard and their will be presently a calm. O the Heaven that there is in
that Soul, whereinto neither this Iniquity, nor any other wicked thing does
enter. Give me leave in a few words as I am able to show you some part of the
happiness of that man that can say as in the Text, I have kept, etc.

1. There is nothing to hinder the Union and Marriage between Christ and that
Soul; here what Paul tells us concerning the Laws of Wedlock, in the 1 Cor. 7.
39. This is the case of every man, while we are in our natural unregenerate
condition (mark it well) we are wedded every one of us to this our own
Iniquity, every Soul is bound to this Husband; now the Ministers they publish
the Banns of Marriage between Christ and the Soul, will you sinners accept of
Christ, Christ is desirous to have you, he has a great love to your Souls, he
is willing to espouse you, to make you happy; every Minister is the Friend of
the Bridegroom, in every Sermon, we ask the Banns between Christ and your
Souls, and tell you that Christ for his part is very willing, nay earnestly
desirous of you, why then what is it that hinders, where does it stick; O
beloved, I will tell you the very truth, as I expect to answer for your Souls
and mine own, at the great day of Judgment; why it is this sin our own Iniquity
in every one of our own bosoms, that steps in and forbids the Bans, sin cries
out the Soul is mine, it is my Wife, Christ has nothing to do with her while I
live. O Friends, consider seriously what you do, while you maintain this sin in
your hearts, you stand most in your own light, and refuse Christ to be your
Husband. But now kill this sin, and then you are free to accept of Christ, and
here is the happiness of every true Saint, Christ and his Soul is united,
as soon as sin and his Soul is parted, 7. Romans 24. it implies thus much; O how
happy a man should I be, were I but once freed from this sin, which is as a
body of death to me. I have read of a cruel Tyrant, who invented this cruel
kind of death for Malefactors, that he did not kill them presently, but tied
them while they were living, to the stinking Carcasses of dead men, and so were
pining to death by degrees, by the very noysomness of those Carcasses; O sin is
a most noysom Carcass, could you but once smell the stink of it, you would cry
out with the Apostle, O wretched Man or Woman that I am, etc. but the Soul that
is freed from this sin, may sit and sing with the spouse, my beloved is mine
and I am his. O the spiritual joy and comfort, that is in that heart, when
Christ and the Soul meets. If John the Baptist leaped for joy in the Womb of
Elizabeth, when the Virgin Mary came but into the House, how then will that
Soul leap, when Christ is entered into the heart. But the wicked they loose this
happiness, because they will not part with sin; what said Balaam to Balak in
the 24. Number. 11. so will Christ say to sinners, depart from me ye cursed, flee
away, I thought to have espoused you, and to have promoted you to great honor,
but sin has kept you back from honor and happiness.

2. There is no sin shall be laid to that man's charge, O this is a great
happiness, and the most wicked Person in the World will acknowledge as much,
and cry out, O that my sins were pardoned, O that God would not lay sin to my
charge, 32. Ps. 1, 2. now this is the blessedness of every one, that keeps
himself from his own Iniquity. Brethren, know this, that if we our selves do
not own any sin, God will never Father any sin upon us, as soon as we cast any
sin out of our hearts, God he presently blots that sin out of his Book, 18.
Ezekiel. 30. O that you would but hearken to this word; turn from your Iniquity
and your Iniquity shall not be your ruin. 8. Romans 1. let not sin command you,
and sin shall never condemn you. O here is comfort indeed; go to a poor
Prisoner and tell him you will give him a great Estate a Thousand a Year, tell
him how bravely he shall live then, and eat and drink of the best: O but says
the poor Prisoner I have committed a great fault for which the Judge will not
pardon me, I must dye for it, and what will all these things that thou do
promise do me good, If I had but my pardon to save my life, that is all that I
desire, that is better than all; so here, tell a man of worldly prosperity, and
glory, and honor, and pleasures; alas, what will all this do me good, if my
sins be not pardoned, and I must be sent to Hell; sin unpardoned, that causes
sorrow in the best of outward conditions, but sin pardoned causes joy in the
worst of all conditions; what says such a man, what care I for poverty,
losses, troubles, I can triumph in all, because I know that my sins are blotted
out, and I shall be eternally happy.

3. All things shall work together for their good, 8. Romans 28. now who are they
that love God, why, we may certainly conclude, that it is they who do not love
any sin. How did God testify his love to us, but by parting with his own Son
for our sakes; so shall we sufficiently testify our love to God, if we can
part with our own sin for his sake, now such and all such have this privilege,
that nothing shall hurt them, nay every thing shall do them good. All evils
whatever, shall be to such Persons like Joseph's Prison, the way to preferment.
O what a comfort is this to us in a World so full of evils, evils of sin, evils
of sufferings, evils of temptations, evils of afflictions. A sick man will
joyfully drink the bitterest potion, when he knows it will do him good, so the
Saints rejoice and are comforted in all their miseries, here knowing that they
shall work for their greater glory hereafter.

4. They shall have this privilege to have their Prayers heard and answered;
says David in the 66. Psalm. 18. if I regard Iniquity in my heart the Lord will
not hear me; therefore by the rule of contraries, we may conclude, that if we
do abhor, and forsake, and turn Iniquity out of our hearts, then God will hear
our Prayers, 2. Hos. 17. what was Baalim, why this was their Iniquity, their
great Idol, well what follows v. 21, 22. O Friends, consider well this
privilege, you that come to Church and say your Prayers, for what end is it
that you Pray, if you desire not that God should hear you, if not you Pray in
vain, if you desire that God should hear you, put away your Iniquities; we read
of Hannah, that when God answered her Prayers, she was comforted, her
countenance was sad no more, on the other side see the 4. Genesis 5. O we may
guess whither God hears our Prayers or no by our faces, and by men's very looks.
O Friends, prize this privilege of having your Prayers answered, and do not
loose it for the love of a few sins, did you but know what is gained by Prayer,
you would not part with this privilege for all the sins in the World.

5. These Persons only are fit to dye, these are the Persons that do triumph
over death, 1 Cor. 15. 55. Death is a cruel biting venomous Serpent, it makes
the proudest to stoop, the strongest to tremble, lays the stoutest man upon his
back, and makes the greatest Beauty to look pale; but now says a Saint come
death I fear thee not, I have taken out thy sting, which was mine own Iniquity,
now do thy worst, I shall live in spite of thee, O you that are afraid to dye,
come learn this lesson, learn how to unsting death; sin brought death into the
World, turn out sin, and you shall not need to fear death. A man that is in
debt, and has a writ out against him, he is fain to hide and keep close, but
as soon as the writ is out of date, then dare he boldly go abroad, and look the
Sergeant in the face; when we are assured, that our sin is cancelled out of
God's Book, then death's writ signifies nothing to us, we can smile in the very
face of this grim Sergeant. O learn to live without sin, that you may dye
without sorrow, O how happy are all they, whom death it self the worst of evils
cannot make miserable. And thus you see some of the parts of their happiness,
who can say as in the Text, I have kept etc. here is comfort enough for any
man, and Brethren, if you do but remember them so as to consider them again,
you will find that it is a far greater happiness, than the greatest Kings and
Princes in the World have in all their plenty and prosperity; here is happiness
in life, all things work for our good; all our Prayers answered; at death,
unsting it; at judgment, no sin charged; after, to all Eternity espoused to
Christ and be with the Lord. But least any should take this comfort to
themselves to whom it does not belong, I will lay down some Marks and
Characters of such Persons as those are, who keep themselves from their own
Iniquities.

1. That man that keeps himself from his own Iniquity, he is one that has felt
the smart and burden of sin. No wise man after he has made a good meal of such
meat as he loves best, will presently take a vomit to cast it up, unless it
make him sick, and load his stomach; so is it in respect of our beloved sins,
till they vex us, we will not turn them out of doors; Like the Egyptians, who
would be persuaded by no means to let Israel go, till they saw the Plagues that
they suffered for it. 11. Mat. 28. Come unto me all ye that labor and are heavy
laden; implying that none but such will come. Now let me ask you this Question,
what is the Reason that some of you have parted from some sins, are these sins
a trouble and burden to your Souls; or else do you not rather deal with sin, as
David with Absalom, who banished him the Court, but yet loved him for all that,
if so, then know that you and sin are not rightly parted, you must cast sin out
of your hearts, as the Israelites cast their leaven out of their houses, they
were to curse it thence.

2. That man that has kept himself from his own Iniquity, he is one that has
duly considered the great danger of sin; we all of us hate poison, because we
know it will cost us our lives, O, that we knew but sin as well, we should hate
it as much. When Jacob knew that Esau sought his life, he presently fled away
from him; so did we, but know that sin will assuredly ruin our Souls, though we
love it never so well, we should part with it. Like some fish who love the bait
well, and therefore do swallow down the hook, but when they perceive the danger
of the hook in their bodies, vomit up their beloved baits again. O sirs have
you seriously considered Death, Judgment and Hell; have you ever set the wrath
of God before your eyes; if you have, I think you will never love sin more.

3. That man that has kept himself from his own sin, will endeavor to keep
others from their sins also, 2 Cor. 5. 11. all such Persons will be telling
others the danger of sin, and persuading others what they can from sin: Paul
was no sooner a Convert, but he presently turned a Preacher. Nemo acrior inter
persecutores, nemo prior inter peccatores Aug. do you do so; are any of you
sensible of the danger of sin, you will be telling it to others. It Is in this
case as in other cases; have any of you kept a Servant in your houses that is a
Thief, has purloyned your goods, and embezel'd away any of your commodities,
if you find him out, you will not only turn him away, but also forewarn all
others from receiving him, telling them the danger of having such a fellow in
their houses; so is it here if any man has found out the danger of his own
sin, and turned it out of his heart, he will forewarn all others of their sins,
and persuade them what he can to do likewise.

4. That man that has turned his own sin out of his heart, will be much in
aggravating of it what he can, he will speak the worst of it that he can, nay,
not only of that sin, but of every other sin also. If a Father be highly
provoked by his Son, that he has formerly been very tender of, so that he
turns him out of doors, he will be always speaking against him wherever he
goes, and will not endure that any should speak in his behalf. Paul before his
conversion, took great delight in his sin, ( viz.) in Persecuting the Disciples
of Christ, but when once he was turned from it, he was always aggravating it to
the height, and speaking the worst of it, and himself for it that he could, as
you may read in the first of Tim. 1. 13, 15. v. and in the 1 Cor. 15. 9. when
men can connive or wink at their sins, or speak fairly of them, it is a sign
that they have not yet renounced them. Suppose a man's own Iniquity be
Covetousness, O he will seek to daub it over, and say, why I am good Husband, I
do but look after the main chance, when perhaps this man is as gripple a
Worldling as any that lives; suppose his sin be swearing, he will plead for it
thus, there is no such hurt in it, it is a trick that I have got and I cannot
leave it, there be others that swear as well as I, or the like, it is a sign
when men seek to extenuate their sins, or to plead for plead for their sins,
that they and their sins are still cater-cozens, they are not yet parted. O,
but every true convert will loath his sin, and loath himself for it, 42. Job 6.
here was a true sign of Jobs Repentance, in that he abhorred himself, and by
the way, here we may learn a distinguishing mark and character, between a true
convert and an unconverted Person; a wicked unconverted Person, always looks
upon others as greater sinners than himself, and thinks other men's sins worse
behalf than his own. A true convert, thinks worst of himself and his own sins;
so Paul, I am the chiefest of sinners.

5. That man that has renounced his own sin, will live ever after in a quite
opposite and contrary course to that sin, 1 Gal. 23. Paul you see after his
conversion, was as much for Christ as before he was against Christ, 1 Cor. 15.
10. As before his conversion, he was more furious than all the Persecutors of
Christ, so after he was more laborious, than all the Preachers of Christ. His
zeal was still at the full tide, only it ran in a quite contrary channel; and
this was a true mark, that Paul was a sincere convert, so if any of you would
know the truth of your conversion; by this you may know it, are you as much
against sin as you were formerly for sin? are you as much for godliness, as
formerly you were enemies to it? if the heart be changed, the life will be
changed; you may know that man has cast off his old friend, if he seeks all
manner of ways to undo him; so if you have cast off your old sin, your beloved
sin, you will seek as much to destroy, as formerly to maintain it, 6. Romans 19.

6. That man that keeps himself from his own sin, will be less in censuring
others for their sins. And the Reason is this, because he has had experience
enough what it is to grapple with sin, how easy a matter to be overcome by
sin, and such a man lives in continual fear of sin, least he be foiled again,
least sin should once more get into his heart, 6. Gal. 1. that man that has
conquered sin, knows the strength of sin, better than others, that have never
so much as once encountered sin; he knows that sin will make the wisest Solomon
a fool, the strongest Sampson weak, the ^e^kest Moses angry, the most patient
Job impatient, and the courageous Peter a coward. O he has learnt by his own
experience, to see that sinners have need of pity and prayers, rather than
censures and revilings, 2 King. 8. 11, 12, 13. It Is a worthy Speech of Dr.
Harris says he, use no more words against men's sins, than thou will make
Prayers for their Souls in secret. All the People of God will bewail sinners,
while they are as confident as Hazael, it is a sign that man never went about to
keep his own sin out, that thinks others can leave their sins when they will.

7. He that has parted with his beloved sin, will part with every sin. I have
heard of many men, that have set their affections so strong upon some women,
that when those women have cast them off, have professed that for their sakes,
they would never Marry nor endure any women after; how strongly do sinners set
their affections upon their beloved sins, but if it please God to convert them,
that they and sin break, they will never endure any sin after, they have known
so much by that one sin; when Sarah fell out with Hagar, she presently goes to
her Husband Abraham, and bids him cast out not only Hagar the Bondwoman, but
Ishmael her Child also; he that has cast out this sin, will cast out all the
retainers to it; every thing that does but smell of sin, 1 Thessalonians. 5. 22. here
is a true note of sincerity, for when we are casting out of sin if we do not
cast out every sin, we do as good as nothing, for if we cast out all but one,
that one sin in time, will bring in all the rest, and many more again. When
Haman was angry with Mordecai, he thought it no revenge to kill him alone, for
he knew that the rest of the Jews were like him, and therefore like a wise
Politician, he sought to destroy them all; do so with sin, put out every sin,
they are all of the same gang. Kings when they make laws against such and such
things, do not make them for particular Persons, if such a one or such a one,
do so or so, he shall suffer so and so, but for all in general; so if Christ be
King in thy heart, and thou be a convert one of his Subjects, his Laws will be
general against every sin.

8. All they that have parted with this sin, their own sin, their beloved sin,
will never return to it more, 2 Samuel 13. 15, 16, 17. so will thou deal with
this sin, bolt and bar thy heart against it; the hatred will be
irreconcilable, 17. Ex. 16. never make a league with this sin more, herein was
Jobs sincerity, 34. Job. 32. such a man would not be in his former condition,
living under the power of that sin, no not to gain Ten Thousand Worlds; they
are dogs that return to their vomit, and Swine that return to their wallowing
in the mire again; we do not read or very seldom of the Saints being twice in
the same sin; or if they have, yet they have not returned with delight to it,
or it was not thoroughly purged out at first. In the Gospel we read when our
Savior cast out the Devil out of many Persons, he charged him never to return
again, 9. Mark 25. so when Christ converts a Soul, he turns out sin, as here he
turned out the Devil; so that tho sin still hanker about that man, yet it is
never entertained more, it is never received into the heart more, there is not
that love, familiarity and friendship, that their was before, but now if sin be
only like a quartan Ague, to go away for a certain time and then return, that
man is no true convert, but his estate is sad, like an Ague, the fit gets
strength and returns more violently, there is a dreadful place to this purpose
in the 11. of Luke 24, 25, 26. and in the 2 Pet. 2. 20.

All these are sure and certain marks of that man, who like David in the Text,
has kept himself from his own Iniquity; and happy is that man that can find
these in him; he is far happier than the greatest King or Prince in the World.
We read of Alexander the Great, and when he had conquered the whole World, that
he fate down and wept, that he had no more Worlds to conquer, he that has
conquered this sin, may rejoice that he has no more to conquer.

4. Use, is a use of exhortation to the duty in the Text, to keep your selves
from your own Iniquities, this is a work you see of very great concernment,
either this sin or your Souls must perish; Our Savior Christ in the Gospel
tells us, that it is better to pluck out a right eye, than to go to Hell with
two eyes, and to cut off a right hand, than to go to Hell with two hands, and I
suppose that he speaks it in reference to this very sin, our darling best
beloved sin. O sirs, what will you do for your Souls? I may say to you
concerning this sin, as Abishai to David concerning Saul, 1 Samuel 26. 8. O do
not you answer as David did Abishai at the 9 th verse, when you have done this,
the greatest part of your work is done; you will quickly find an happy change
in you, were but this one sin thoroughly purged out.

In the further prosecution of this use, I will do three things. 1. I will show
you the great Mystery of this Iniquity, I working and ruling in the heart,
together with, 2. The deceitfulness of the heart in joining with it, and hiding
and cloaking of it. 3. And thirdly, the great mischief that follows thereupon.
2. I will answer some scruples or objections, that may be made by some
concerning this Iniquity. 3. And thirdly, lay down the motives effectual to
persuade every one against his own Iniquity, together with some further means
and directions.


1. The great Mystery of this Iniquity, this consists of three particulars. 1.
The Mystery of this Iniquity 2. The hearts deceitfulness in joining with it. 3.
The great danger that follows upon it;
each of these three, shows us the mischief of this sin, but all these three
joined together, make it the more dreadful and formidable. I begin with the
first,

1. The Mystery of this Iniquity, and this is twofold. 1. Its working into the
heart. 2. Its working in the heart.


This sin is like a Traitor, who is first an Usurper and then a Tyrant; first
it gets into the heart which is proper only to God, usurps his Throne; and then
secondly, is as a Tyrant ruling and domineering there, O what havoc does it
make there, and as Usurpers and Tyrants do get into the Throne, and when got
in, strive to settle themselves there for ever, and this they do with a great
deal of cunning and policy; so does this sin, there is a great deal of policy
in both its workings, first into the heart, 2ly in the heart. Now I will
endeavor to show you the great Mystery in both these workings.

1. The Mystery of this sin working into the heart, this I will lay down in
these following particulars.

1. This sin it works altogether with the nature of every man. Here is a great
deal of policy in this, sin carries on its design apace, when nature it self (I
mean corrupt nature) works for it and with it; it always sail with wind and
tide, and therefore so prosperously. For the better understanding of this, you
must know what the heart of man is when he comes into the World, and the
Prophet will tell us, in the 4. Jer. 3. it is fallow ground, and what does
fallow ground bring forth, why the latter part of the verse tells you thorns;
what are these thorns? sins are thorns, and afflictions are thorns, but here
it is meant of sin; and why does fallow ground bring forth thorns, every one
will tell us, it is the nature of it so to do; so that you see, it is as natural
for a corrupt heart to breed sin, as for fallow ground to bring forth thorns.
Now as every piece of ground brings forth those thorns, or briars, or bushes;
which are most proper to the nature of the soil, so every man's heart naturally
brings forth those sins, which are most proper to its nature; hence it is, that
one man is by nature inclined to lust, another to covetousness, another to
prodigality, another to malice, etc. here is the Mystery of this sin, it breeds
in our very natures, and that is the reason it grows up so fast in us, terra
spinarum matter frumenti noverca; let ground lie fallow, you shall have a
greater crop of thorns, than with all your labor of corn, so it is with the
heart; nay their be many, that will be hardly persuaded, that this is any sin
at all, but reprove them for it, O they will say it is my nature, I cannot help
it, nay sinner know that it is thine Iniquity, and that which if it abide still
in thee will ruin thee. This is the first piece of policy, sin it works
altogether with our natural inclinations, and that makes us so willing and
ready to embrace it, and so loath to part with it.

2. Sin speaks us very fair at first, as if it came to us to be our servant
only, and to do us good, and by this trick it gets into our hearts; this is a
great piece of policy, 1 Kings 12. 6, 7. so does sin come to us at the first
with sugured words, with golden promises, with the fairest pretenses that can
be. O says sin, if you will but entertain me, I will make you happy, you shall
live after a better rate then ever you have done. Thus Solomon describes sin
to us by an Harlot, 7. Prove. 15, 16, 17. v. what is the event of it, read the
21, 22. v. be sure sin will never loose any thing for want of good words, a
thousand fair pretenses will it make to get into our hearts.

3. Sin will bribe the senses to get into the heart, this was the first piece
of policy, that the Devil used to make Eve sin, 3. Genesis 6. and as he prevailed
over the first Adam with this, so he thought to have overcome the second Adam
likewise, by the very same policy, 4. Mat. 8, 9. certainly the Devil made the
World to look very beautiful to the eye, that the glorious view of it might
have enticed our Savior, so sin that gets in either by the casements of the
eyes, or by the gates of the lips, or the back doors of the ears, or through
the sink of the throat, by one sense or another that is bribed or corrupted by
sin, and we in the mean time to please our senses entertain sin in our hearts;
this is another great policy and mystery of sin; like cunning suitors when they
go a wooing, give largely to the Maids, that so they may get the Mistress, so
sin pleases the senses, that it may gain the heart; the Saints of old, they
knew well and found out this Mystery of sin, and therefore they stopped its
passage, 31. Job. 1. So David was as careful of his mouth, as Job of his eyes,
therefore he prays thus, 141. Ps. 3. and the Reason of it, he gives in the 4.
v. O says David, sin often creeps in at the mouth, and so gets into the heart;
sinners dainties often makes us to think daintily of sin. O how few are their
that do take notice of this Mystery of sins policy, but prostitute their eyes,
their ears, their mouths to the allurements of sin, and so at last come to give
their hearts to sin. O remember that Eve looked on the Apple, and sin got into
her heart, Solomon he hearkened to his Wives, and Idolatry crept into his heart,
the Drunkard he tastes of the Wine, the lascivious wanton does but touch the
Harlot, and both are drawn into sin. Solomon has a strange exhortation, in the
23. Pro. 31. why is it such a matter to look on it, yes, read v. 32. and he
shows how soon sin gets through the eyes into the heart in the 33. verse.

4. This sin will pretend a reformation that so it may get into the heart. O
here is the very marrow of Devilish policy, this was Jehu's policy to get into
the Throne of Israel, he pretended that he would pull down Idolatry, and yet he
was still as great an Idolater as any. Mark him in all his passages, 2 Kings
10. 16, 26, 27, 28, 29. v. so this sin comes like a Jehu, drives on furiously,
will do strange things, thou must leave such and such idle courses, as
Covetousness will not let men be Drunkards, Whoremongers, Prodigal, Proud in
their Apparel; so Hypocrisy will not let men be Swearers, or Proud, or
intemperate; and thus poor silly men are deceived by sin, and take this for a
reformation, 2 Kings 5. 17, 18. so says the sinner, if God would but pardon me
this one sin, I will never be guilty of other sins; why don't you know, that
it is for no good to your Souls, that this your sin will not suffer other sins
in you? Did you never hear that sins will quarrel among themselves? Herod and
Pilate were enemies one to another, yet neither of them friends to Christ. This
one sin though thou cast out all others, will be enough to damn thy Soul; and
therefore have a care of it when it puts on an holy dress; if you be never
better reformed than sin can reform you, you may be damned for all such a
reformation, 2 Cor. 11. 14, 15. sin is one of the Devils Ministers, his
Servants that does exactly follow his steps for to deceive us.

5. Sin endeavors to work God out of the heart, that so it may work into the
heart, fills a man's thoughts with prejudices against God, and seeks
wonderfully to discredit God. This was the first piece of the Devils policy, 3.
Genesis 1. as much as if the Devil had said, what is this your God that you make
so much of, and will he not let you eat an Apple? what mean you to obey such a
God, as will be so strict with you for such small and petty trifles? so sin
fills the heart with hard thoughts of God, 25. Mat. 24, 25. And this is the
great argument that sin puts into the mouths of wicked Persons, do but hear
what they say, 3. Mal. 14, 15. O say they, what a madness is it to be the
Servant of God, a sinner fares better and lives merrier, and is far more happy
than a Saint, sin persuades the Soul that God is hardest to his best Servants.
O Brethren, take notice of this, this is wonderful and deep policy, and many
thousand Souls have perished by this deceit. This is the common course of the
World, that he that will give most shall be Master. Thus sin brings the Soul
out of dislike of God and his Government, and wrests God out of his own Throne,
and gets into the Throne it self. This was the policy whereby Absalom won the
Kingdom away from David his Father, 2 Samuel 15. 1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 6. verse. Thus sin
by this very kind of policy, wins away men's hearts from God; as wicked Persons
entice Servants from their Masters, by telling them that they are hard Masters,
so do sin entice away the heart from God.

6. Sin will always out-bid God in his promises, does God promise to make us
happy hereafter; sin will promise to make us happy both here and hereafter too,
sin will persuade us, that a bird in the hand is worth two in the bush; sin
like the Devil is very large in its promises, and mark the policy, it promises
always those things, that are most suitable to our corrupt natures; like
Fishermen, that put on such baits on their hooks, that the fish likes best, 1.
Prove. 10, 11. mark the promise v. 13. so in our Saviors Temptation 4. Mat. 8,
9. what no less than the whole World? Brethren, the Devil and sin if you will
but listen to them, will tell you of strange things, will promise you whatever
you can desire of them, you shall have all things as you list, you shall never
want. O how many are there in the World, that prefer sin before God upon this
account, because the Promises of sin are far greater, as to the things of this
World, and such things as will best please carnal hearts than the promises of
God, and the reason is this, because sin promises more than ever it can
perform, but God promises no more than he will perform, and therefore upon
this very account have we that caveat of the Apostle in 3. Heb. 13. Now sin is
never more deceitful than in its promises; O, therefore have a care of trusting
to what sin promises; you shall see what you shall get by taking sins word, in
the 7 Prove. 15. -- 18. well what follows ver. 21. -- 23. 7. Sin will urge us
very much with the common practice of most men; that the generality of men do
so and so, and will charge us with singularity if we yield not to it, hereby it
deceives many a Soul. As the Danites enticed away Micha's Priests from him with
this policy, 18. Judge. 19, 20. So says sin, what will thou be alone by thy
self, come with us we are many. As the Devil told Christ, my name is Legion,
for we are many, so man sinners say we are Legion, we are many, sinners have
the major part, the stronger part, and the highest part of the World.

First. The major part, 7. Mat. 13, 14. verses. O this takes with many, they
love not to be singular they love to do as others do; secondly, the stronger
part, 10. Luke 3. the Wolves are the strongest side; there was only one Elijah
a poor persecuted Prophet on the Lords side, as you may read, 1 Kings 18. 22.
when Baal had four hundred and above. And all those men of the times, they had
not only the major but the stronger part; O this is a deceit to many a poor
Soul, that loves to swim down with the stream of the times. Thirdly, the
highest part of the World, the great and mighty, and noble 7. John 48. have any
of the Rulers of the World believed on him? O there are few else, but the
poorer and meaner sort that close with Christ, O this encourages many to sin,
that they may join with the better sort as they call them, men of fashion, and
quality, and estate in the World. O Brethren, take heed of this snare, many a
poor Soul is ensnared by it; look not who are the Persons that sin, but look
what sin is; sin is not the less dangerous to our Souls, because of the
multitudes that do embrace it, did Sodom fare ever the better, because they
were all sinners except Lot; which of you will drink a cup of poison, because
you see many are killed by it, O then why will you entertain sin, because you
see others and many, nay multitudes that are damned by it.

8. Sins policy in getting into the heart, is its modesty at first, it seems to
blush at great sins and to abhor them, O but says sin, such or such a sin thou
may commit, that is but a small matter. Thus sin inticeth many first to their
Faith and Troth, and then to common gross swearing. Nemo repent fuit
turpissimus, sin gets up by degrees, 1 Cor. 15. 33. be not deceived i. e. O
Christians, look upon this as the great policy and deceit of sin, when it
begins at first only with wicked words, and thence it will proceed to wicked
works, 1 Cor. 5. 6. O Brethren, remember that stinking weeds grow fastest, and
if you make but room for the Devil to get in his claw, he will soon get in his
whole paw; if you begin but with a small sin, you will hardly end without
greater sins. O Brethren, if sin ask you or would compel you to go with it but
one mile, go not, for you will hardly leave it before you have gone twain.

9. Sin has another policy to work into the heart, and that is by urging to
moderation. O how many amongst us are perverted themselves, by perverting that
Text in the 7. Eccl. 16. what is the general voice and cry among us, truly we
love not to be precise, there be many are more scrupulous than they need to be.
Brethren, in some things it is granted that a man may be righteous overmuch,
that is in placing their Religion and devotion, in that which God never
commanded: But in the duties of the Gospel, we can never be too righteous, we
can never love God or hate sin, we can never fear God or be afraid of sin too
much; see what the Gospel commands 5. Ephesians. 15. (...), we must walk up to the
very top of our Religion and Profession, and mark what our Savior says in the
5. Mat. 20. and they were the most precise Persons in all the World, and yet we
must exceed them, and read but the verse before, verse the 19. there you see
the very least command is to be of great concernment with us.

10. Sin is very importunate, it will take no denial at our hands. O this is a
winning way, it wearieth us out from day to day, that we must either grant what
she would have, or else never be quiet. This has betrayed many Souls, this is
old policy, as in Dalilah, 16. Judge. 16, 17. this is a mighty prevailing way,
as 18. Luke 2, 3, 4, 5. verses. O Brethren, this is the policy of sin and the
Devil, to weary out our hearts with continual Temptations; therefore the Devil
is called Beelzebub, which word signifies the Prince of the flies or gnats,
look as gnats, beat them off, and they will fly on you again, an 100, or 1000
times, so will the Devil and Sin, when sin once begins to tempt, it will hardly
give over till it has prevailed; and therefore the best remedy is to resist
the very first Motions of it, and if it come again, be sure that you be
prepared for it again and again, do as the Romans did, if you would conquer sin
as they did the World. Nunquam vincebant sed crastina bella timebant.

11. Sin oftimes gets into a man's heart insensibly, it slips in before he is
aware of it; many a man commits a sin when he does not intend to do so. O
Brethren, here is a very great deceit; and when once it is got in, then it is
hard to get it out again: The reason of this is, because men do not keep a
spiritual watch over their hearts as they ought to do, they are carnally
secure. Peter, he little thought of denying Christ, when he entered into the
High Priests Palace. David little thought of committing murder and adultery,
when he was walking upon the top of his house. Hazael little thought of his
being so cruel a murderer before he was a King; is thy servant a dead dog to do
so? O Brethren, sin it draws us insensibly many times into the Temptation and
Snare, before we are aware of it; and therefore let us always mind that of the
Apostle in the first of the These. 5. 3, 6. sin has many a by-trap-door to get
in at, which we know not of, O therefore, we had need be the more careful and
fearful of our selves.

12. Sin has another policy to get into the heart, and that is by telling us
much of the mercy of God, and of the power of Repentance, that when the worst
comes to the worst, yet we may repent and God has then promised pardon. O
Brethren, this is a great deceit, and that which has carried thousands of
Souls to Hell, and therefore consider two or three things.

1. What a folly is it, if a man be but himself rightly to consider of it, for
a man to sin purposely that he may repent; there is none but a fool will break
his leg willingly, because there is a good bone setter in the same Town.

2. Do you know what Repentance is, if you did, you would never make work for
Repentance; true Repentance is a gr^t work that is most tiresome to flesh and
blood; the pleasure of sin will never half countervail the pains of true
Repentance; as a man that drinks himself into a fever, the bitter potions and
the rending tearing purges he takes, do far exceed the pleasure of the Wine he
drank, ask Peter, Manassah, and Mary Magdalen what Repentance is, and you will
never sin, that so you may Repent.

3. It Is abominable wickedness to sin on this account, because God is merciful
in pardoning sin. Nay, O sinner, whoever thou art that committest any sin upon
this score, I dare say it unto thee for a truth that that sin shall never be
pardoned, take heed of tempting the Lord, and abusing mercy in this manner.

4. Though God has promised pardon to those that repent, yet God never yet
promised Repentance to willful sinners; know this, that Repentance it is Gods
gift, and it is not in any man's power to repent when he will, and therefore if
thou sin that so thou may repent hereafter for it, know this, that it is a
very great hazard whether ever thou shall repent or no. Mark that place the
Apostle puts a peradventure to it, 2 Timothy 2. 25, 26. here you see is no more
than a peradventure, O then do not hazard your Souls at peradventures. I will
only add this one word more, if it be a peradventure, whether ever God will
give such Persons Repentance, it is a greater peradventure, that they shall
never repent, than that they shall repent.

Thus you see the great Mystery of sin in working into the heart, O how many
ways has sin to get into us, it is our wisdom and policy, to learn the policy
and mystery of sin in this regard, this will help us much to the keeping of it
out of our hearts; when we know all its by-passages and secret trap-doors, and
false pretenses, and deceitful Arguments to get into our hearts, we may then be
the better able to shut it out.

Instead of the application of this truth, I will commend two ways to you to
keep out this sin from working into your hearts.

The first is to study more, and endeavor to learn all its plots and policies;
I say all for sin has several Keys to unlock our hearts, if we prevent it in
one design, it presently makes use of another. Now how to compass this, there
are these two directions.

1. Study much the Scriptures, the word of God that will discover all sins,
plots and policies to us, the Scripture will do as much for us, as the Prophet
Elisha for the King of Israel, 2 Kings 6. 8, 9, 10, 11, 12. v. so the word of
God will discover all sins policy. Does sin consult to catch us at our
pleasures, the Scripture sends us word of it, 21 Luke 34. Does sin think to
give us a fall in our holy duties, the Scripture sends us word of that, 5.
Eccl. 1. Does sin think to catch us with small baits, I mean by tempting to
small sins, the Scripture sends us word of that, 1 These. 5. 22. Does sin think
to steal away our hearts, the Scripture sends us word of it, 4. Prove. 23. in
the word of God you shall find all disclosed. Do to sin when the Scripture has
discovered it to you, as you read at the 21 v. the King of Israel would have
done to the Syrians, when the Prophet Elisha discovered their plots to him; he
was presently for smiting of them, but that the Prophet Elisha forbad him, as
you may read in the 22 v. of that 6 Chap. of the 2 Book of the Kings.

2. Be much in Prayer, begging the spirit of God, 5. Gal. 16. This is the way
to keep sin out, by letting the spirit of God into our hearts; the spirit of
God (as one speaks) is an Heavenly Antidote against the Poison and Infection of
Sin, 8. Romans 2.

Secondly, labor to counterplot sin, be you as wise and subtle to keep sin
out, as sin is wise and subtle to get in. To this end, use these Scripture
stratagems. The first is that of Solomon, 23. Prove. 17. here is sins plot, by
showing us the prosperity of sinners, the counterplot, be thou in the fear of
the Lord all the day long, see the 8. Prove. 13. and 14. Prove. 27.

2ly. That of the Apostle 6. Ephesians. 13. it is sad for a naked man to meet with an
armed Enemy, keep on your Armor.

3ly. That of our Savior in 13. Man 37. though a man be armed, yet if asleep,
the enemy has advantage; the Devil and sin gets most when we sleep, 13. Mat.
24, 25.

4ly. Avoid all occasions of sin, 4. Prove. 14, 15. 5. Prove. 8. 23. Prove. 20.
and 31. verses.

5ly. Make the chief end of your life the glory of God, 1 Cor. 10. 31. be exact
in following this Rule, and sin will never snap you.

2. The mystery of this sin working in the heart, and here is no less policy
than in the former, you shall see abundance of subtlety, and variety of
stratagems, that sin uses to keep in the heart when once it is gotten in. This
sin I told you before is like an Usurper or Tyrant, when once it is gotten into
the Throne, 'twill use all the subtlety and policy imaginable to keep there,
'twill be an hard matter to get rid of it.

Now some of its policy lies in these particulars.

1. It will endeavor all that it can to win upon the heart. The first thing a
Tyrant does when he is got to the Throne, is to win the hearts of his Subjects
if he can, so do sin, 1 Kings 11. 4. Solomon's Wives when they had got his
heart, they might do any thing with him, they could then persuade him to any
thing. As a man that has won another man's heart, O he can deny that man
nothing, 14. Mat. 6, 7. O Herodias daughter had quite won his heart, her
dancing pleased him so well, and therefore she might have of him what she would
ask; so sin quite wins some men's hearts, that they are altogether for it, they
will not deny it any thing. As we say of some Servants, they have quite won
their Masters heart for ever, he will never part with them, so such Persons
will hardly ever part with their sins, speak against these sins, or Preach
against these sins, you quite strike them to the heart. O Brethren, take heed
of this when sin in your hearts once comes to get your hearts, then it is like
to keep possession; God must work a very great Miracle, some wonderful change
to part you and that sin.

2. When sin is got into the heart, that so it may keep possession, it begins
to build and raise forts and bulwarks to keep out all its enemies. As Rehoboams
policy to confirm his Kingdom; the first thing that he did after he came to be
King, was building Cities and fortifying the strong holds, as you read in the 2 Chronicles. 11. c. 5, 11, 12. v. so sin fortifies it self in the heart, when once it
has got possession there; therefore we read in Scripture of the strong holds
of sin, 2 Cor. 10. 4. the word (...) signifies Forts, Towers, or Castles,
places that are kept strong and fortified against all enemies and opposition
whatever.

Thus sin when it is got into the heart, it presently raises forts, and
bulwarks, and rampires, builds Castles, lays in ammunition against a Siege.

Will you see the particulars.

1. Sin has its Forts, Castles and strong Holds.

1. A blind mind is one of sins strong Holds; sin strives to make the Soul as
dark as any Dungeon, and keeps the Soul what it can from seeing any light. Thus
the Apostle tells us of this strong Hold, 4. Ephesians. 18. As long as sin can keep
the Soul in this posture, it is sure of it. O Brethren, this is such a strong
Fort, that all the Batteries of the Scripture cannot overthrow it. Men that are
resolved to be ignorant, and delight in their ignorance (as too many do) O how
hard a matter it is to convert such Persons. Now sin raises this Fort in the
Soul these three ways.

1. It keeps the Soul ignorant of Christ and the ways of Christ, it will not
let the Soul see the excellency of these things, which are enough to ravish the
Soul. Hence they cry out, 5. Cant. 9. and again 3. Mal. 14. when the Soul is
thus it is far from conversion; there is no talking to such Persons of Christ
and Grace, no persuading of such Persons to Holiness; they love not to hear of
these things, because they know not the excellency of them.

2. It keeps the Soul ignorant of sin, as to the nature and danger of it. O you
shall hear People cry out, what harm is there in telling a Lie, in swearing an
Oath, in drinking a merry Cup now and then, in taking a little pleasure, 1 Samuel
14. 43. So say sinners, what must I be presently damned for every small sin, I
did but do so and so, and must I dye for it. Thus ignorant People will do all
that they can to excuse and to extenuate and lessen their sins, because they
are ignorant of the nature and danger of them; some will say, they see no
reason why Ministers should keep such a stir about such petty trifling
businesses, O it is a sign sin has got strong Hold in their Souls.

3. It keeps the Soul ignorant of its estate and condition, it cries peace,
peace, when God speaks no peace; Heaven frowns on them, and the Scriptures
denounce nothing but Wrath and Judgment against them, 29. Deuteronomy. 13. O tell a
sinner of such and such sins, O they will say they hope to be saved for all
that; poor blind Souls, how does sin lead them blindfold to Hell. O Brethren,
this is a strong Fort, and it is hard to storm it, we may Preach and God may
send his judgments on the earth, and all to no purpose, for they will not learn
righteousness; O take heed of this; endeavor all that you can to learn while
you have the means of grace continued to you; take pains for knowledge, for
while sin keeps you in blindness, it keeps a strong Hold in you.

2. Another strong Fort or Castle, that sin raises up in the Soul, is hardness
of heart; hence it is called in Scripture, an heart of stone, or a stony heart,
11. Ezekiel. 19. we account Castles that are built with Freestone, and on Rocks,
the strongest Castles. O, sin makes it self strong, when it makes it self a
Fort, and a Castle of stone in the heart. Oh! how hard is it to get sin out of
such an heart, it is like a stone hardened in sin; lay a Mountain upon a stone
(says a late Divine) and it never groans, so is it with sinners, let a
Mountain of sin, a World of guilt lie upon his Soul, he feels it not, he groans
not under it; smite a stone while you will, beat it as long as you can stand
over it, it complains not; Oh, reprove sinners, beat them with the hammer of
the word of God, they are not moved at all, they complain never the more of
sin, read 6. Hosea 5. God hews sinners by the Preaching of the word as a Mason
does hew stones and cut them, yet are they stones still v. 7. A stone will not
bend nor bow, break it you may, but bend it you cannot; so sinners, let them
hear the best Sermons, sit under the most powerful Preaching and pathetical
persuasions, they are like stones still, God may break them to pieces with the
strokes and blows of his Judgments, yet every piece remains a stone still. Oh
hard and rocky hearts! how has sin fortifyed it self to the purpose in these
hearts; when their hearts are so hard, that they are Sermonproof, or
Ordinance-proof, and Judgment-proof, what shall we then say of their Salvation.

3. Another Castle, Fort, or strong Hold, sin erects in the Soul, that it may
keep the possession, is a seared Conscience, 1 Timothy 4. 2. Oh, this is an
invincible Castle, 4. Ephesians. 19. When a man is not sensible of his vileness, is
not ashamed of sin, but rather boasts and glories in it, this is limen inferni,
the very threshold of Hell. Reproof's like pistol bullets, will not enter such
coats of mail as these; what will they say? tell us of Sin and Hell and
Damnation? we care not a rush for these things. Oh Brethren, have a care of
letting sin get such a power in your hearts, as to raise up such an invincible
Fort as this is, that all the Sermons in the World, all reproofs and
persuasions in the World, all the mercies and judgments of God should do you no
good. Oh, when men come to be once past feeling, then do they work all
uncleanness with greediness, then do they make have to damnation, and gallop
full speed to Hell; as the hard heart is a Castle of stone, this is a wall of
brass, sic murus ahaeneus esto, nil conscire tibi nulla pallescere culpa.

Thus I have showed you the strong Holds of sin, the Forts and Castles (...)
its strong Fortifications. Now,

2. I will show you some of its Artillery or Ammunition, that it Fortifies
these Castles withal; for the strongest Castle or Garrison, must yield at last
for want of Ammunition; sin does furnish the Soul herein. As,

1. With carnal affections and desires, these are like match, take fire with
the least spark; blow but the coal of temptations over them, and they are
presently all in a flame, 8. Romans 6. Oh, take heed of all carnal affections,
they are the Ammunition sin lays into the Soul.

2. With sinful and wicked Arguments to plead for sin. Oh, how are sinners
furnished with these Hellish Arguments, these are sins Ammunition also: Oh what
eloquent Tertulluses, are many sinners to plead for their sins; as some will
plead for Drunkenness, oh they must not be base, they must keep Gentlemen
company and spend their money; others for Covetousness, the times are hard,
they have great Families, they must be sparing; others plead for sin, because
Noah, David, and Peter committed the like sins. Oh Brethren, sin will furnish
you with a Thousand Arguments against your Souls, these are like shields and
bucklers to keep off the reproofs of the word.

3. With prejudices against the People of God, and the ways of God: Oh say
some, these Saints are the basest fellows in the World, as Ahab said of
Michaiah, I hate him, I cannot endure him: Oh, these are like Grenades that
carry wildfire in them, these are furious like Saul, and breath out
threatenings against the People of God, and this makes them to hate the ways of
God. Brethren, take heed of prejudices against the People of God, Oh this is
sins Ammunition in the heart, when it cannot bring a man out of dislike with
Religion, then it sets him to hate the Professors of Religion. Oh take heed of
harboring ill thoughts of the Servants of Christ. This very thing, have
brought many sober Persons to debauchery and wickedness, because of their
hatred to the Godly, and has brought many to forsake Religion, because they
have a prejudice against such as profess Religion.

4. With many curious and pleasant fantasies of the pleasures, happiness, and
delights, that there are in sin; these fantasies sin lays into the heart
beforehand, as so many Barrels of Gunpowder, that it may be ready stockt
against the temptation comes, and then with every little spark of temptation,
sin is ready to blow up the Soul at once. Oh take heed of entertaining any good
thoughts of sin. It was a sure sign, that Jonathan loved David well, and was
loath to part with David, because when ever Saul spoke of Killing David, he
would be speaking well of him and pleading for him; so Brethren, it is a sure
sign you love sin well, and are loath to part with your sins, when ever
Ministers or others, are speaking to you of slaying it, you will think well of
it, and be still pleading for it. And thus you see a second piece of policy in
sin, to keep possession of the heart, when once it is got in, by raifing strong
Holds in the Soul, and furnishing it with such abundance of ammunition, that
it is hard to get it out.

3. Sin has another policy to keep possession, by bolting and barring up all
the doors, and stopping all passages, when it perceives any will endeavor to
get it out, sin will keep a man from good company what it can, will not let a
man sit under the powerful Preaching of the word, will stop the ears to all
reproofs and good admonitions. This was the policy of Amaziah Jeroboams
Idolatrous Priest, he would suffer no good Preaching at Bethel, for fear his
Idols should go down, 7. Amos 12, 13. Sin does not love, that there should be
any correspondence kept between Christ and the Soul, it intercepts all letters
and messages from Christ to the Soul, and from the Soul to Christ; will keep
the Soul from praying, reading, hearing, that so it may keep the Soul from
Christ. Oh Brethren, this is great policy: I have read of William the
Conqueror's policy to gain England was this, asson as he had landed all his men
here, he presently burnt all the Ships that brought them over, that so none
might return back, but they must fight it out. When sin has drawn away the
heart from God and Christ into evil ways and courses, then it hinders it from
all ways and means of returning to Christ: Hence sinners cry down Preaching,
cry down Sabbaths, cry down Ordinances, cry down Prayers in Families; because
sin knows if these go up, it must come down; sin bars the doors of the heart
against any thing that should bring in Christ; this is desperate policy, 29.
Prove. 1.

4. Another policy of sin to keep possession, is to be always very pleasing and
observant to the heart, always delighting of it with its pleasures; the sinner
would quickly grow weary of that wicked course and trade, did not sin daily
supply him with new pleasures and delights. This policy of sin, the Scripture
takes much notice of in diverse places, take two or three 4. Hosea 11. when the
Soul has full sails of pleasures, and a full tide of earthly delights, Oh how
merrily does it swim down the stream to Hell. To this purpose is that of
Solomon, 5. Prove. 20. by the strange Woman, and the bosom of a stranger, he
means all the pleasures and delights of sin, now he gives us the Reason why we
should not embrace these, v. 22. these are the cords of sin to bind us fast,
this is sins policy to keep the possession of our hearts, sin cares not what it
spend upon us, that so we may still entertain it; therefore again says
Solomon, 7. Eccl. 4. a wise man that is afraid of sin, will keep from this
house of mirth. Oh Brethren, sin keeps a merry a jovial house, to please and
delight the sinner, and by this stratagem keeps the possession of his heart;
therefore Solomon calls these pleasures the song of fools v. 5. Oh how merrily
does sin carry poor Souls to Hell; alas they sing, but they know not whether
they are going, 22. Is, 12, 13, 14. hardly do such Persons get rid of sin, and
chain of pleasures will keep any man fast. Oh when sinners once begin to be
serious, and to think of their Souls and Salvation, then sin begins to make
them merry, to put away all such thoughts out of their minds. I have read in
the story of the Life of King Edward the sixth, that the Lords that had
contrived the Death of the Duke of Somerset, Uncle to the King, and Lord
Protector; after he was condemned, their policy to keep the King from being
troubled at his Death, and that he might not pardon him, was to entertain the
King every day at Feasts and Banquets, and with new Plays, Masks and Sports,
which they thought pleased the King best; just such is the policy of sin to
ruin our Souls, by entertaining of us with the vain pleasures and delights of
this World, to keep out of our hearts the care of our Souls, the hatred of sin,
and the thoughts of Death and Eternity.

Thus sin has formerly played its pranks with the old World, and will use the
same policy to destroy this World too, 24. Mat. 37, 38, 39. Oh Brethren, let us
take notice of this policy of sin, we live in the last days of the World, upon
the very edges or banks of Eternity, Oh let us have a care of these pleasures,
whereby sin will draw away our hearts from God to our Eternal ruin.

5. Sin has another policy to keep possession, when once it is got into the
heart, it keeps the heart abroad as much as it can, I mean thus, it sets the
heart a work, and busy abroad in looking after other men's sins. Thus sin deals
just like an Harlot, that sends her Husband from home, while she may entertain
her Adulterer with her, so sin will make us busy in judging other men's hearts,
and prying into and looking over other men's lives and actions, that so we may
have no time to look into our own hearts, lives, and actions. Thus the
Pharisees of old, all their trouble was for others, because they were sinners,
but never considered their own sins. And I pray, what are we now a days? are
not we the same, we are all jury men in other men's cases and actions, we can
tell when others do amiss, but cannot tell when we our selves do amiss; oh this
is deep policy, and it is that mystery that is now at work among us, even
amongst the greatest Professors. In all companies they are asking of others,
and talking of others, what such and such have done; you shall hear few or none
complaining of themselves, of their own hearts, of their own lives; oh
Brethren, we give sin the greatest advantage that can be, while we are rifling
and spending our verdicts on other men's hearts; you shall see an example of
this in the 12. John 3, 4, 5. v. Judas would fain be spying a fault in others,
but considered not the desperate wickedness of his own heart. Our Savior
reproves all such reprovers as these are, in 7. Mat. 3, 4, 5. v. This is like
some Persons, that at their Neighbors houses will be spying out a sluttish
trick and telling of it, but regard not any sluttishness or nastiness at home;
oh Brethren, we our selves are in the greatest fault, when we can see no fault
in our selves. O take notice of this policy of sin, it is only sin that makes
men so censorious of others. Christ in his Gospel, bids you not to censure
others, look to your selves, if you see any thing amiss in another, search
whether there is not the like in you; say thus, oh am not I guilty of the same
sin my self? have not I as wicked an heart my self? Brethren, always observe
it, a censorious heart, is a wicked heart; it is some sin or other, that would
fain be ruler in our hearts, that sends us abroad so often; oh let us leave off
this trick of censuring others, and look to our own sins, set our own hearts in
order, we do all complain of sins in the Nation, that bring judgments upon us,
but have not we some of those sins in us? do not we harbor some of those
caterpillars, that devour our Land in our hearts; it is worth every man's
diligent search and inquiry; sin deals with us in this case, like thieves that
cry out fire, fire, and so call People abroad, and then they get in and rifle
their houses. O Brethren, the best of men, they have been the most tender of
others, and most sharp and severe against themselves, 2 Samuel 24. 17. 1 Timothy 1.
15. these were better acquainted with their own hearts, than many of our proud
censuring Saints now a days. O Brethren, do but try this way, and see if you do
not get advantage against your own sin. Be as diligent in spying out your own
sin, as you have been formerly in spying out sins in others, and talk more
bitterly against your own sins than formerly you have done against other men's
sins.

6. This sin will keep very close in the heart, that so others shall not take
notice of it. This is another of sins policies to keep possession; for sin
knows our tempers very well, sin knows we are all Hypocrites by nature, and
love to make a fair show outwardly before men, but care not how we are in the
sight of God; sin knows this, and therefore 'twill teach us an hundred cunning
ways, how we may keep it secret from the eye of man; how cunningly and closely
did Judas conceal and keep in his sin, none of the other Disciples took the
least notice of him, no not when he was ready to do the Fact, as you may read
13. John 27, 28. oh this is the bargain, that most of us make with our own
sins, we will give them room in our hearts and entertainment, so long as they
will keep secret, and no man knows of them, but if they once come to be
discovered, then we can keep them no longer; oh how has this very thing ruined
many Souls, we think all is well as long as we can but keep the matter secret
and private from men; oh Brethren, the way for us to get rid of our own sins,
is to shame our selves for them before men, 5. James 16. you will tell all the
diseases of your body to your Physician, you will tell all the flaws in your
Evidences, for your Estate to your Counselor or Attorney; why, if you love
your Souls, keep not sins counsel, out with it to some Godly bosom intimate
Friend, get some such to help you out with it by his good counsels, or by his
fervent prayers; sin will speak to us as Sisera to Jael, Judge. 4. 20. so when
Ministers come to reprove sin, such or such a sin, and to put men upon
examining their own hearts; whether they have not such or such sins in them, oh
then will sin whisper the Soul, do not say that I am here, oh do not say that I
am here. Thus many keep sins counsel to their own ruin; take heed of this
policy.

7. Another policy is this, when sin sees that a man being convinced by the
light of the word, goes about to turn it out of doors, then to keep possession,
'twill persuade the Soul thus, that it is an impossible thing for a man to be
wholly freed from every sin in this life, and therefore what need he trouble
himself about one sin, as long as he can keep himself from other sins. This was
that which deceived the Pharisee, God I thank thee I am not as other men, nor
as this Publican, he thought it well enough, that he was free from the grosser
sins; so I have heard many say when reproved for sin; and who I pray you is
free from one sin or other. As if God had given every man a pattent to keep one
sin in his heart, so he kept no more. Brethren, take notice of it, sin plays
the sophister with you here; and I will show you the fallacy of this Argument;
it is true every man has sin in him while he is in this life, but it does not
from hence follow, that every man does keep, allow, and maintain sin in his
heart. A true Saint does all that he can to be rid of every sin, though he
cannot be rid of it; He is as careful to avoid sin, as a Traveller is to avoid
a Thief, though he may fall into the hands of Thieves for all that. It Is sins
policy to be always beleaguering of us, and besetting of us round about, but
it is our duty to be always watchful against it, and to do our utmost, to turn
it out of doors. It Is not the bare having of sin, but the owning of any one
sin, the loving it, the obeying it, the maintaining of it, that will damn a
man. And therefore in a Gospel sense, a man may be perfect in this life and
free from every sin, i. e. from the countenancing of sin, 1 John 3. 7, 8, 9.
Learn rightly to understand this Text. Bernard gives us a threefold exposition
of it.

1. He does not commit sin. Non peccatum facit, quod patitur potius quam facit.
Sin is sometimes too hard for him, and so he is rather made to sin than to make
sin; like a Prisoner taken by the Turks, he is made a slave in the Galleys,
it is true he rows the boat but it is against his will, it is his punishment grief
and trouble, but a wicked man he sins, and it is his pleasure and delight to do
so. A chaste Virgin may be caught by a man and ravished or deflowred, oh but it is
as Death to her, but a common Whore, she seeks after men it is her pleasure to
play the Whore.

2. Non peccat, id est, non permanet in peccato; sinners like swine, they go to
the mire on purpose to lie down and tumble in it, a Saint if he fall into the
dirt, he presently makes have home and washes himself, and rubs his clothes
and makes himself clean. As Soon as Peter had sinned grievously, he presently
falls to weeping bitterly. A wicked man lives in sin as a fish in the water,
it is his element, yea he cannot live without sin.

3. Non peccat, id est, tantundem est ac si non peccet, pro eo scilicet quod
non imputatur ei peccatum. Now God will not impute sin to a regenerate man, why
so? because it is not the regenerate man that sins, but the unregenerate part in
him that is only guilty of the sin, 7. Romans 15, 17. I sin says the Apostle, yet
I hate it when I do commit it, it is not my will to do so but my weakness. O
Brethren, learn these things, and see the policy of sin how you must avoid it,
thrust it from you, out with it, hate it, abhor it, do not hearken to it, and
if any time you fall into any sin let it be your grief and sorrow for it; oh do
not countenance sin, because you cannot be wholly rid of sin. Learn this Gospel
perfection, not to sin at all, i. e. not to delight in sin, own it, not for
your act and deed, continue not in it, nor suffer it to continue in you.

8. Another policy of sin to keep possession, is to tell you of the examples of
the Saints, every one of them had their sins, and yet they went to Heaven for
all that, and why may not you keep a sin as well as any of them, and yet go to
Heaven at last* Thus it will tell you of Noah's Drunkenness, of Lots Incest, of
Joseph's Swearing, of David's Murder and Adultery, of Peter's Denial of Christ,
etc. O Brethren, this we may call sins Charter, whereby it holds fast
possession of many Souls. This very argument has made many to keep their sins
all their lives, and to carry them to their graves with them, only in hope to
find mercy with God, because such and such did notwithstanding their sins.

Now to unhamper this snare, consider,

1. That these Saints, though they did commit those sins, yet we cannot call
them their own sins as in the Text, they were not beloved sins, sins that they
took delight in, they did not continue in those sins, neither did they give
those sins room and possession in their hearts; but now if you keep sin in you,
why yours and theirs are not alike.

2. It Is as vain a thing for a man to make this an argument to live in sin,
because others viz. the Saints have fallen into a sin now and then, and
obtained mercy, as for me to drink a cup of rank poison, because I have heard
of one that has drunk a cup and it did not kill him; take heed of tempting
God, because I have seen men dance on ropes, shall I therefore that have no
skill venture to do the like? because I have read, that Jonas saved his life in
the Sea in a Whales belly, shall I therefore leap into the Sea, or into a
Whales mouth? because God had mercy on some, shall I therefore desperately run
into the very jaws of fury and vengeance.

3. Qui sequutus es errantem sequere poenitentem, if we would follow the
examples of the Saints, why then we must cast away sin, we must turn sin out of
doors. None of the Saints in all the Bible suffered sin to keep possession, if
you would find mercy as they did, follow their Repentance.

4. This is no proper way to hope for mercy at death, by continuing in sin all
our lives; if we do not put away sin now we are alive, do you think God will
take away sin from us when we are dead, nay rather the contrary, if we suffer
sin to live with us, will not God suffer sin to dye with us, 8. John 24. O will
not Christ say at the day of Judgment, to such as will not in this life part
with sin, and yet cry for mercy then. O, sin and you have been old companions,
you have lived a long time together, it is pity to part you now, and therefore
sin and you shall to Hell together; if we keep sin for our Tenant on Earth,
it is pity but we should be Tenants to sin in Hell.

5. Consider with what difficulty those Saints got pardon; O they were fain to
pray, and cry, and roar, and weep bitterly before they could be healed; now
consider if these so hardly escaped, that did but give sin a nights lodging, or
an hours baiting as we may so speak, O how do you think you shall escape, or
get pardon, or find mercy at last, that have farmed out your Souls to sin, for
the whole term of your lives; read that of the Apostle, and I say no more, 1
Pet. 4. 18. 9. sin has another policy yet to keep possession, and that is, by
keeping the Soul formal in holy duties, by making the Soul to rest and to trust
in those duties, that notwithstanding all their sins, they shall be saved for
their good Prayers, and reading the Scriptures, and hearing Sermons, for being
Baptized, and because they have received the Sacrament, etc. O Brethren, I am
afraid sin does hit many of us here in this particular; what more common
now-adays, than Swearers to be Swearers still, and Drunkards to be Drunkards
still, and cheaters to cheat and cozen their Neighbors still, etc. every
sinner keeps his sin still, and what Brethren, do you keep your sins, and yet
hope to be saved? why yes, you do hope to be saved; you hope to be saved by
your duties, if you would but speak it out, this is the Reason; as long as you
can but come to Church to hear a Sermon now and then, and to say divine
service, and Ministers will but let you come to the Sacrament, you think all is
well, you care not for amending your lives, you think not of putting away sin.
O Brethren, sinners would very fain go to Heaven with their sins in their
hearts, and sin has found them out a way, as they think by trusting to their
holy duties; O says sin, what needs thou trouble thy self with Repentance,
it is but sending to the Minister to pray for thee when thou art a dying and all
is well. Friends, this is deep policy, of all things be sure you learn this
Mystery and take heed of it; sin will hereby deal with you like Herod, mingle
your blood with your sacrifices, if all our waters in England should be
poisoned, would it not be a sad thing; when People drink of them they must dye,
and if they do not drink, they must dye; so Brethren, sin poisons all our
duties, if we perform them we must dye, if we do not perform them we must dye
too; read 66. Ps. 18. the Prayers and the Duties of the wicked, i. e. such as
continue in their sins are an abomination to God; and hear how it will go with
them at the day of Judgment; 13. Luke 25, 26, 27. and 7. Mat. 22, 23. O learn
to repent, to amend, to turn over a new leaf of your lives, else your Duties,
your Prayers, Sermons, Sacraments, all will but add to your greater
condemnation at last.

10. Another policy of sin to keep possession when once it is got into the
heart, is this, sin will persuade you that you cannot live without it; if you
part with me says sin, then farewell all your happiness, farewell all your
merry days, farewell all your friends, you must be singular and alone by your
selves, you must be like no body in the World. O Brethren, cut the throat of
this argument before it speak again, else sin by this policy will ruin your
Souls. To this end I will lay down some arguments against this argument.

1. Suppose this, that all the World will hate you if you cast out sin, yet
know this if you do not cast it out, God will hate you. Now try your selves,
which do you most of all set by, the hatred of the World or the hatred of God,
5. Ps. 4, 5.

2. You say you love not to be singular, you would fain be like other People,
why do you know what you say? this is to reject God, 1 Samuel 8, 4, 5. what
follows v. 7. take heed of rejecting the Lord.

3. You would not willingly partake with the wicked in their torments, why then
will you partake with them in their sins, these two cannot be separated, 18.
Rev. 4.

11. Sin has one piece of policy more to keep possession, and if it see you
get the better in all the rest, yet if you have not a great care it will worst
you here. It Is this, sin will promise you to be gone of its own accord; O says
sin let me alone and you shall not need to trouble your selves, I will be gone
time enough; there be but few that do understand this Mystery of sin, hence it
is, that many People never think of repenting and reforming, but let sin alone
in hope it will wear away of it self; and therefore to advise you herein, take
these particulars.

1. Consider that you may be deceived herein, you may think your sin is gone
and has left you, when it is nothing so; many a man may think sin has left his
heart, when yet sin is there still, it is hid in some hole or corner. I will
show you this in a few particulars.

1. Some think that their sin is gone, because they have not been tempted to it
as formerly. O Brethren, this is no sign, the reason of this may be for want of
an object, or by reason of many businesses that have drawn away your thoughts
another ways, or perhaps you are now removed into such Places or Families,
where you have not the liberty you had; when ever you meet with these
circumstances, look then for the temptation again, 2 Chronicles. 24. 2, 17, 18. v.

2. Some think that their sin is gone, because they have not committed it for a
great while. O Brethren, sin may be in your hearts for all that, sin is like a
King, will keep its State, will not be seen every day abroad; many deal with
sin as David with Absalom, 2 Samuel 13. 38, 39. And 2 of Sam. 14. 1. Absalom you
see ran away out of his Fathers Kingdom, but still abroad in his Fathers heart;
so sin may seem to be gone, and we have left committing it for a while, yet we
love it as much as ever, and keep it in our hearts; see an example of this in
Judas, what he was in 12. John. 6. O Judas might think this sin had left him
all the while he followed Christ, but though he did not openly steal as others,
yet for all this, the Text says he was a Thief, that is a Thief in his heart,
so is it with many, sin we think is gone, but it lies in the heart still.

3. Some think their sin is gone, because they are turned professors, and make a
great profession, which formerly they did not; O sin will deceive you here, we
have a clear example in Simon Magus, 8. Acts 13. yet sin was still in his
heart, as you may read at the 21, 22, 23. v. O Brethren, sin will lurk and lie
hid under an Holy Profession, like Goliah's Sword behind a Linen Ephod, 2 Timothy
3. 5. it is not a man's Baptism, receiving the Sacrament, being of a gathered
Church, which People account so much of nowadays, will clear the heart of
sin, sin may deceive you for all that, I might instance in more particulars,
but these are enough to show the truth of it.

2. Consider, that some men's sins do really leave them, and yet for all this
they do not leave their sins; as for example, a Drunkard when all his money is
spent, cannot go to the Alehouse, the Whore-master when his body is decayed
cannot do as formerly, the Swearer is struck dumb, he does not Swear as
formerly, etc. these men have not left their sins, but their sins have left
them, and what have they left them to, but the Judgment of God, for all this is
far from Repentance or Reformation. No thank to a man that he does not sin,
when he cannot sin; O Brethren, have a care of this, do you leave sin first
before sin leave you.

3. Consider, if you leave it to sin, when it will be gone, you will never be
rid of it, sin will put us off from time to time, but once more, and then once
more, and so to Eternity; if we let it alone and do not thrust it out of our
hearts. Observe but this, if you once begin to set a time for Repentance
hereafter, you will never repent, do it presently or you will never do it.

And thus you see the great Mystery of sin working into our hearts, and in our
hearts; how many ways it has to get in, and also how many tricks and policies
to keep in; sin you see is loath to part with us, God grant we be not as loath
to part with our sins.

2. The deceitfulness of the heart in joining with this sin.

You have heard how loath sin is to part with us, now you shall hear how loath
our hearts are to part with sin; sin is not more cunning in getting into our
hearts, nor more politic in keeping possession there, when once it is in, then
our hearts, our own deceitful hearts, are in contriving all ways and means
possibly to keep it there; when Saul would have killed David, Jonathan Saul's
own Son, that came out of his bowels, hides him and secures him; so when we go
about to slay our own Iniquities, then our Jonathans, our hearts in our own
bosoms, they hide the sin and secure it. O Brethren, Jonathan never loved a
David, better than a carnal heart loves sin. And many a cunning shift, do our
own deceitful hearts make use off to deceive us, and to keep sin from being
turned out of doors. Now I will show you some of them in these following
particulars.

1. Our hearts are very apt to deceive us thus, in telling us what sins, and
what lusts and corruptions we have subdued already; and they will persuade us
that now we have done enough, what need we trouble our selves any further; this
is but one single sin let it alone, and there be but few that have done as much
as you have done against most sins. This was the deceit of the young man in the
Gospel that came to Christ, whereby his heart deceived him, O he had done all
things but one, and that one thing could he by no means persuade his heart
unto, you shall find it 19. Mat. 16. -- 22. O his heart deceived him in that
one thing, every thing else his heart could yield to but not to that one thing;
he thought himself a very brag fellow that could boast of doing so much, all
these have I kept, etc. so Herod did many things, but one thing he would not
do, he would not put away his Herodias. O Brethren, let us take heed that our
hearts do not deceive us here, in thinking that we have done enough in putting
away many sins, when as we have not put away every sin, therefore consider
these particulars.

1. One sin may damn our Souls, as well as one wound may kill our bodies; it is
not enough for a man to say I shall never dye, for I come not at the fire and
therefore cannot be burned, I come not at the water, and therefore cannot be
drowned, I look to every thing that I eat or drink, and therefore cannot be
poisoned, I am temperate, and therefore cannot be surfeited, etc. O but for all
this care there are other ways to take away this man's life; just so is it
here, no man may say I shall not be damned, for I am no Swearer, Drunkard,
Coz'ner, Adulterer, Fornicator, Covetous, Prodigal, Malicious Person; well thou
have kept thy self from all these sins and many more, but have thou no sin in
thy heart, if there be but one sin, that may cost thee thy Soul: What our
Savior said of the state of the damned in Hell, may be truly said of the state
of unregeneracy, which is the state of Damnation, 12. Luke 59. so thou can
not come out of this state of unregeneracy, till thou have parted with thy very
last sin. As no man can take a legal possession of an house, as long as there
is any body of the contrary part in the house; so Christ will not take
possession of thy Soul, till every sin be out, no sin which is of the contrary
side to Christ must be there; therefore the Scripture tenders mercy to us only
on these terms, if we turn from every sin, 18. Ezekiel. 21, 27, 28. v.

2. We must part from all those sins, for which Christ paid the price, and
satisfied God the Father. Now Christ he satisfied for all our sins, when Christ
laid down his life, he laid down a sufficient price for every sin, now then
surely we ought not to live in any sin for which Christ dyed. O Brethren, what
had become of you and I, and all the World if Christ had satisfied the Justice
of God for all but one sin. Think of this, whenever you think of keeping any
one sin in your hearts.

3. If ever you outlive this one sin you must repent of it at last, and why
not better at first, and if you do repent of it, 'twill be a But to your
credit, and a blemish to your good name, 1 Kings 15. 5. O you see what a great
blemish that was to that good man David.

4. Lastly. Though you do repent of it, yet it will be a burden and trouble to
you as long as you live; your eye-sins (says one) will prove your eye-sores,
and your heart-sins will prove your heart-sores, 13. Job 26. No question, but
those were some sins that Job delighted much in, when he was young, and they
were a great trouble to him when he was old. O remember this you that are
young, the wounds or bruises, that some have received when young, they have
felt the pain of them in old age, so here etc. O you know not how many years
hence, you may smart for those sins you delight in now.

2. Our hearts will deceive us again, by telling us that they are against this
sin, they loath, hate it, and abhor it, when as they do not use any endeavor
to get rid of it. Thus I have heard Swearers, when they have been reproved for
Swearing, presently say, O God forgive me for it, it is a base trick that I have
got, but I cannot leave it; I do not at all approve of it. Thus I have heard
Drunkards speak against Drunkenness, O they do not love it, it is a beastly
filthy sin, but they cannot help it, now and then company will draw them in. O
Friends, see plainly how your hearts deceive you, you say you do not love such
or such a sin, why then do you live in it? if you hate it, why do you not use
all means to destroy it? if you hate any of your Neighbors, they shall be sure
to know it, by one ill turn or other you will do them, why deal you not thus
with your sin you say you hate? say as Abishai to David, shall not Shimei dye?
do as Sarah when she was angry with her maid Hagar, presently out of doors with
the Bondwoman and her Child; if you be really angry with sin, if you hate it
indeed you will out with it, but if you will still keep it in your hearts, it is
a sign sin and your hearts are very well agreed; your hearts do but deceive you
all this while.

3. Another deceit of the heart is this, 'twill set a man to duties, as to
prayer, ay and that to pray against this particular sin, to hear Sermons, ay
and to hear this sin reproved, and to perform all other duties, and make a
great stir, as if this sin were presently to be sentenced to banishment, and
yet all this while keep this sin close and not let it go; like David he raised
an Army against Absalom to fight with him, sends his Army into the Field, but
when it comes to the upshot, then Joab and the Soldiers must be commanded not
to touch the young man Absalom, O deal kindly with Absalom for my sake, O do
not kill Absalom, if it were so, what need David send an Army against him?
Brethren, you are all here in the presence of God, you attend on his
Ordinances, wherefore come you hither if not to fight against sin your beloved
sins, O if you let this sin live, and pray, and read, and hear the word, etc.
your hearts do but deceive you all this while. To what purpose are all your
duties, if sin be safe still, 1 James 21, 22. to hear Sermons, and keep your
sins is to deceive your selves; so to pray against sin and to practice sin, is
to deceive your selves.

4. Another deceit of the heart is this, when the heart complies with sin only;
a man does not commit the sin, i. e. the outward Act of it, O, but he loves it,
he likes it, he approves of it. Now many a man's heart deceives him in this
particular, he thinks he is rid of the sin, because he does not actually commit
it: O this is a great deceit. And therefore know this, though a man may have no
hand in it (as we say) yet if he has an heart in it, it is enough to make him
guilty before God; we have an example of this in Saul, he had no hand in
Stephens death, he did not cast a stone at him, he was only a looker on, O but
he liked it very well, he consented to it, that was enough, Acts 22. 20. God
looks to the heart, feels which way the pulse beats; a man may never have
killed a man in his life, yet he may be a murderer in his heart, he may wish
his enemies death, and so a man may never be drunk and yet a drunkard, if he
love to see others drunk, if that be his sport and delight. As we call a man a
hatter, that never made an hat in all his life, only because he keeps a shop
furnished with hats; or an hosier, etc. so though a man never committed such or
such sins, yet if his heart be filled with them, it is all one in the sight of
God, hear what our Savior says, 15. Mat. 19. why says one, from the hand
proceeds murders and thefts, from the eye adulteries and fornications, from the
tongue false witness and blasphemies, O but the heart is the forge of all;
therefore Brethren, take heed your hearts do not deceive you here, and make you
think that you are not guilty of any sin, because you do not commit it. Observe
that place well 17. Jer. 10. when God comes to punish our ways, he searches
our hearts, it is not enough to cast sin out of the life, if it be not turned
out of the heart; this is to thrust one out of the Hall, and bring him into the
Parlour; we must not only leave of committing but also loving sin.

5. Another deceit is this, when a man does commit a sin, his heart will plead
thus, that it did not consent to it, he never liked it in his heart. O this is
the common cheat whereby many deceive themselves; when they swear, lie, cozen,
backbite, are drunk, or do any thing amiss, O they will say, they have they
thank God as good hearts as the best; why Brethren, if your hearts be so good,
how come your lives to be so bad, if I see smoke come out at the chimney top,
none shall make me believe, but that there is fire on the hearth; Solomon will
make this plain, and he traceth up sin to the very fountain of it, 6. Prove. 12,
13. but whence comes all this that he says, of the naughty Person in those 2.
v. why read the 14. v. and you will see frowardness is in his heart, and no
wonder then that he walks with a froward mouth; there can be no surer sign of
a naughty heart than a wicked life, it is true an upright sincere heart, may now
and then commit a sin, but it is not his common trade and practice; but where we
see a continual stream of profaneness, daily running in a man's life and
conversation, then we may certainly judge and conclude, that there is a naughty
fountain in that man's heart.

6. Another deceit is this; our hearts will persuade us from the commission of
sin, to the continuance in sin; our hearts will thus argue with us, you have
done so and so, why you cannot be much worse; as when a man has spent half a
day idly, O says he, I Will e'ne make it up an whole day, I cannot do much work
now. Thus our hearts will persuade us according to the Proverb, over shoes
over boots. Thus Peter's heart deceived him, after he had denied Christ once, he
then makes no bones of it to deny him again and again, and forswear him too. As
sometimes by eating, we get a stomach to eat more, so by committing one sin, we
do as it were get us a better stomach to commit more sins, after the first
draught, which perhaps we may a little breath at it, sin the next draught will
go down the more glib. O Brethren, take heed of this deceit, it is no policy in
the World to give ground to sin; such a cunning wrestler keep it off at arms
length, if it once come to close and get in, we are sure to fall, and therefore
to prevent this deceit, let us make use of the Apostles remedy against anger,
as a sovereign balm against every sin, 4. Ephesians. 26, 27. come out of sin
presently, as soon as we are fallen into it. O let us not make that an argument,
because we have committed one sin weakly, therefore to commit two sins
wilfully. O remember that sin is unsatiable, like the Daughters of the
horse-leach, always crying, give, give, it will never cry enough, hold your
hand; and remember also the deceitfulness of your heart, how ready to close
with sins motion at any time. O Brethren, lay but these two things together,
sins unsatiableness, and our own hearts deceitfulness, and you will see it is no
good wisdom to try conclusions, between fire and such an heap of Gunpowder.

7. Another deceit is, our hearts will persuade us, that if we are elect and in
the favor of God, then our sins shall not be laid to our charge. But O sinner
remember this, that this is no sign of election that thou runnest wilfully
into sin. But will our hearts say, what was Paul? was he not an elect Person,
while he was a Saul a Persecutor, yet he found mercy because elected. Answer, O
sinner consider there is a vast difference between thy sins and Saul's, 1 Timothy
1. 13. 26. Acts. 9. But thou know the contrary, that thou ought not to
commit these sins, therefore thy sins far exceed Paul's, again what a great
deceit is this of our hearts, that we should try whether we are elected by
sinning. This is to tempt the Holy One of Israel; O Brethren, have a care of
this deceit; to this end follow the Apostle Peter's Counsel, 2 Pet. 1. 10. but
how must we do this? how may we make our election sure? how, he lays down the
way in the 5, 6, 7, 8, 9. v. which if we walk in we shall never fall. Brethren,
know this that you may by living in sin make it out plainly, that you are not
elected; but it is only by increasing in grace and sanctification, that any man
can prove his election.

8. Another deceit is this; our hearts will tell us of the judgment and
opinions of men concerning such and such sins; they think well enough of them,
and if you do commit them you shall be never the worse thought of for all that.
O how many has this deceit plunged over head and ears in sin! and therefore to
take of this deceit in a word, remember that we are not to inquire the judgment
and opinion of men concerning sin, but the judgment of God; look to the
Scripture and see what that says; do as Jehosaphat 1 Kings 22. 6, 7. so when
all men speak well of sin, yet go thou to the Scriptures, say is there not a
Prophet of the Lords that we might inquire of him; we must approve our hearts
to God and not to men, what God says we must not do, we must not do it, though
all the World say we may do it; we must answer to God only for our lives, and
therefore let us be sure to inquire of God only how to order our lives.

And thus I have given you only a few of those many instances, that might be
given of the deceitfulness of our hearts, 17. Jer. 9. there is no end of its
deceits, but from what has been said we may learn these things.

1. How little we are beholden to our own hearts. Bernard speaking of the
deceitfulness of the heart says, dum me diligenter inspicio, tolerare meipsum
non possum. O Brethren, if you did but know your own hearts, you would not
endure them, every carnal natural man carries his worst enemy in his own bosom,
and that is his own heart, we may say of our hearts in the language of David,
55. Ps. 11. O who knows the abundance of wickedness that is in his own heart;
nay, not only wickedness deceit and guile, that is that that ruins many Souls;
and we may go on with the Psalmist v. 12, 13. our own hearts are such enemies,
that we cannot hide our selves from them, they are our guides, and if our very
guides deceive us, O how great must needs be our misery; how many are there now
in Hell that may thank their own hearts for bringing them thither.

2. How little we ought to trust our own hearts; alas if we once trust them
they will deceive us. O Brethren, trust not your deceitful wretched hearts,
they will betray you into the hands of sin. Do you not know there is a league
between sin and your hearts, 44. Is. 20. a deceived heart has turned him
aside, sin deceives the heart, and the heart deceives us, O let us not trust to
it. Learn Brethren, to be most afraid of your own hearts, they will do you the
most mischief; when we have prayed, or heard a Sermon, or kept a Sabbath, our
hearts will be telling us we have done well, O believe them not, when we have
committed a sin, our hearts will be apt to tell us there is no hurt in it, we
need never be troubled for it, O believe them not; O brethren, this is a sad
thing that a man must not believe his own heart; you will say it is a strange
World when we can trust no body, nay I tell you worse yet, you cannot trust
your own hearts; oh how careful, how watchful ought we to be. Many a man will
say, I am tied altogether at home, I dare not go abroad, because I have no body
at home, but Servants, Children, none that I can trust. Brethren, every one of
us had need be much at home, much in looking to himself and looking to his
duties, and looking to his ways, because he has none that he can trust, 3.
Prove. 5. a man that trusts his own heart or his own understanding, ruins
himself.

But what shall we do then?

Answ. 1. Cross thy heart in all its desires; this was that which did almost
ruin Solomon, he did gratifye his heart too much, whatever his heart desired
presently he consented to it, 2. Eccles. 10. when Solomon gave his heart so
much liberty, he did not think what will come of it, he little thought his
heart would have cozened him so far, as to have brought him to Idolatry.

2. Labor to know your own hearts better; look into them, into the windings
and turnings that are in your hearts, and then perhaps you will believe what we
say of your hearts; says Bernard, nihil recte existimat, qui seipsum ignorant,
he that knows not his own heart is a man of no judgment at all. It Is not all
the learning of the World will make a man a wise man, but the learning of his
own heart, you may read more there than in all the Books that ever were
Printed, and when you once come to know your own hearts better, you will trust
them less.

3. Endeavor to get Christ into your hearts, he will be a faithful steward, a
diligent overseer there, he will not suffer your hearts to deceive you. This is
that which Paul prays for the Ephesians, 3. Ephesians. 17. read the policy of Darius,
6. Dan. 1, 2. O Brethren, set Christ over the affairs of your hearts, and you
shall be sure to receive no damage.

3. How needful it is for us to have our hearts renewed, 4. Prove. 23. expurga
cor Jun. and Tremel. The Romans by the Law of the twelve Tables, were bound to
purge and keep clean all fountains of water. O Brethren, let us get our hearts
cleansed, they are fountains; a poisoned fountain is very dangerous; a
deceitful heart is far more dangerous. Motives,

1. Because it is thine own heart, and here are 3 Motives.

1. It Is thy duty God commands every man to keep and to cleanse his own heart,
to this end God has entrusted us with them. At the day of Judgment, God will
call us to an account for our hearts, as well as our lives.

2. It Is thy benefit; when a man fies a pond, or scoures a ditch, he himself
has the benefit of it. O Brethren, 'twill be your great profit to have clean
hearts; what do you think, is it not more profitable to have a faithful than an
unfaithful steward, 16. Luke 1. O so may we complain to many men of their
hearts, look to your hearts they will bring you to Hell.

3. It Is a sign of sincerity; he that is careful of his own heart, will be the
more careful of another man's heart; he that regards his own Soul and
Salvation, will the better regard his Brothers Soul and Salvation; but he that
is regardless of himself, certainly will less regard others.

2. Out of it are the issues of life; ex eo prodeunt actiones vitae. As a man's
heart is, so is his life; if his heart be for God, his life will be to God's
Glory; if thou give thy heart to sin, thou will give thy life to sin, and as
thou live so shall thou dye, and as thou dyest so shall thy Estate be to all
Eternity; so that life that flows from the heart, death follows life, and
Eternity follows all. It is a matter then you see of great concernment, to have
your hearts renewed. A good heart makes a good life, and a good life ends in an
happy death, and an happy death brings the Soul to Eternal Happiness.

3. The great danger that follows from the two former considerations, sins
subtlety, and our own hearts deceitfulness.

This will appear more plainly in these following particulars; wherein you
shall see what cause every one of us have to look about our selves, and the
wisdom of the People of God, in being so careful to keep themselves from their
own Iniquities. The men of the World they do not understand these things, and
therefore they think it a needless scrupulosity in the Saints in being so much
afraid of sin, they call it only an humor and a fancy, and I know not what;
but learn but to know the danger of sin especially of your own sins, and you
shall find there is cause enough for it.

The danger lies in these following particulars.

1. Here is very great odds against us, two against one, sin without, and our
own hearts within us; sin battering, and our own hearts betraying of us. Each
of these singly is too hard for us, but when both combine together against us,
in what a case are we? sin that corrupts our hearts to betray us, and our
hearts they conspire with sin to destroy us. O sirs, look in what a dangerous
condition we are in. That Garrison is not like to hold out long, when there is
an Army in the Field besieging it round about, and Traitors within the Walls
and Fort among themselves. Thus sin deals with us as the Israelites with the
Tribe of Benjamin, 20. Judges 38, 39, 40, 41. O so does sin set an ambushment
for us, while we are fighting against sins Army without ( viz.) Temptations,
then the liars in wait our own corruptions they begin to rise against us; so
that you see we must fight with both hands, the battle is before and behind; O
sirs we must look to it, for evil is determined against us. Paul had the trial
of this, and he sets down his own experience in this case, 7. Romans 18. O says
he, I am in such a strait, I am so put to it between two enemies that fight
against me at once, that I know not how to perform the good I would do, and he
gives us the example verse 21. there is sin without besets him, and you shall
see another enemy within, verse 23. this makes him cry out for help, verse 24.
and the help he finds verse 25. O Brethren, you see there is great danger;
Hercules durst never encounter with two at once, but every Saint must,
therefore keep always one eye shut against the Temptation, and the other eye
always open to watch over your own hearts.

2. As we have two enemies against us, so unless we subdue them both, and
conquer them both, we shall never be the better; unless we kill both these
enemies we kill neither; unless the heart be mortifyed, sin can never be
subdued, and unless sin be subdued, the heart can never be truly mortifyed. As
for example, a man may seem for a while to beat off the temptation, by
abstaining from the outward Act and Commission of a sin, yet if this man's
heart be not changed he will to this sin again. A man that is a Swearer or a
Drunkard, may be so far persuaded of the evil of these sins, that for a while
he may leave off these sins of Swearing and of Drunkenness, nay when he is
tempted to them, as when he is provoked, as at other times he will forbear his
Swearing and Cursing; when he is invited to the Alehouse to ill company he
will not go; what will you say of such a man? has he not got the mastery of
his sin do you think? Tell me but one thing and I can resolve you, and it is
this, has this man his heart reformed and changed, if not, I warrant you he
will to his former sins again; this is plain 78. Psalm 34, 35. you would think
there was a Reformation, O but though the sin were routed, yet the heart was
not reformed verse 36, 37. you must conquer both, or else you do as good as
nothing at all; here you may see the great danger likewise; you have not only
two enemies to fight with at once, but also both these must be destroyed at
once; we must rout the sin and reform the heart, either subdue both or none at
all.

3. The great danger will further appear in, that these two enemies will revive
again as soon as they are slain, so that we must be always killing of them, a
thousand deaths will scarce suffice, as long as we live we must be killing
them, sin like Hydra's head, one cut off two spring up; so that the battle will
not be ended till our lives be ended; our corruption like the Leprosy under
the Law, not out of the walls till the house be pulled down.

4. The great danger will further appear, in respect of the great love we all
of us naturally do bear to these our two grand enemies. They are our own sins
and our own hearts; so that we must kill our selves if we would kill these
enemies, we must stab our hearts if we would stab our sins. As for example, one
man he loves drinking at his heart, another loves gaming at his heart, another
loves adultery at his heart, another loves money and gain at his heart, so that
he cares not how he comes by it so he have it. O Brethren, judge you your
selves, are not these in a dangerous condition. O kill their lusts and you kill
their very hearts, it is hard for such Persons to be converted; when their sins
are nearer to their hearts, then their Souls and they love them better than
their Salvation, such Persons are in a dangerous Estate. It is with such
Persons as with Jacob and his Son Benjamin, it is said that Jacob's life was
bound up in Benjamins life, if evil befall Benjamin, Jacob thinks he must
presently dye, 42. Genesis 38. O Brethren, never was a Jacob fonder of his
Benjamin, than are some men of their sins, O they think if they should part
with their sins or leave their sins, they can live no longer. Jacob could have
found in his heart, rather he and all his Family should be starved, than let
Benjamin be out of his sight, O so will many venture rather to ruin their Souls
and lose all, than put sin away. O this is the hardest lesson that Christ can
teach to deny our selves, and yet we must learn it if we would be Christ's
Disciples. O sinner thou say if thou part with such or such a sin thou can
not live; hear what Christ says, 12. John 25. what says Christ, can thou
not live without thy sin, why then dye rather than let sin live, fling away
thine own life, rather than not fling away thine own sin. Every Saint must be
like Sampson, sin and he must dye both together; we must pull down the house
over our own heads, if we would kill these Philistines our beloved sins and
corruptions, we must kill our selves too; if ever we would have grace to live
in us (...) and nature, that is corrupt nature must both dye in us.

5. The danger is great likewise in respect of the occasions of sin; our
corrupt hearts will be always drawing of us into the occasions of this sin; we
are all of us like little Children we love to be in harms way; we love to keep
within sight of the Temptation occasions, says Mr. Dike a reverend Divine, are
the taps to give vent to our corruptions; we do as it were broach these unclean
Vessels our filthy hearts, when we seek after occasions of sin; O this is very
dangerous, you shall see it in the example of David, David you know was an
upright man, and sin had a mind to wrestle with David to try a fall with him,
and how goes sin to work, why thus, that which sin would have David do was to
commit adultery with Bathsheba, now David's heart must draw him into the
occasion of this sin, else nothing could be done, his sin and his heart go
cunningly to work to draw him on to it, and so they did at last; you shall see
it, 2 Samuel 11. 2, 3, 4. see how cunningly David was drawn into this sin, only
by not avoiding the occasion of it, David must walk on the top of his house to
view about, he little thought whether he was going, or what a snare sin had
laid for him, then he looks on Bathsheba as she was washing her self, O says
his heart presently there is a fair Woman, look what a Beauty is there, thus
David between his heart and sin has a sad fall. O Brethren, let us learn to
have a care of the very occasions of sin. The Scripture commands us as strictly
to avoid the occasions of sin as sin it self, 25. Deuteronomy. 13. why some perhaps
would say, what harm is there in this, as long as I do not buy and sell by
them, O but says God, thou shall not keep a false weight in thy bag, it is a
great occasion of sin, and 'twill draw thee into sin at last, so 23. Prove. 31.
what harm is that, O if thou look on it, there will be tasting and sipping of
it at last, remember David did but look on Bathsheba at first, and you know
what followed; so in the 1. Epistle of John 5. Chap. 21. it is not only keep
your selves from Idolatry, but do not keep so much as an Idol, that will prove
occasion to Idolatry, so 1. These. 5. 22. O that all those who blame others for
being too precise and scrupulous, would take notice of this. Occasions of sin
are the shooing-horns to draw us on to sin, and in this respect it is very
dangerous to yield the least inch to our corrupt hearts.

6. The danger is very great likewise, because our hearts are the best weapons
we have to fight against sin, as long as the heart is sound with God, sin
cannot so easily prevail, but now when our very hearts turn traitors and
deceivers, how hard a matter is it to oppose sin; you may see the truth of this
in other things, that which a man's heart is set against, it is a very hard
matter if not altogether impossible to persuade him to it, but when a man has
set his heart to do a thing, you may draw him to it easily with a wet finger as
we say. 'Twas the easiest thing in the World, to persuade Judas to that great
and horrible sin of betraying Christ, when his heart was once set upon it. 13.
John 27, and 30. verses, mark it, as soon as the Devil was entered into Judas
heart, he presently goes about his work, the Text says he went out immediately;
so if sin once get into our hearts, our hearts will quickly draw us into sin.
The Devil could never tempt Eve to eat the forbidden Apple, till he first had
made her in love with it, then she presently falls aboard with it, and carries
some to her Husband, I prithee sweetheart taste some of this Apple, it is the
best you ever eat; so it is said of Solomon, 1 Kings 11. 4. If Solomon's Wives
had not first turned his heart, they could never have turned Solomon to
Idolatry. O Brethren, it is a very dangerous thing, when sin and our hearts are
both against us, when our hearts are both against us, when our hearts once
begin to lean toward sin. A strong and great Tree, if it once be leaning on
one side it is the sooner blown down, so when our hearts are leaning downward,
sin and temptations then do blow us quite down. O look to your hearts, set your
hearts against sin what you can; when a man's heart is fully bent one ways,
it is not all the World can persuade him to the contrary, 119. Ps. 128. observe
it which way David's heart was bent, to God's precepts, that made him to hate
sin, not only abstain from sin but hate sin.

7. The danger will further appear in respect of Repentance; while our hearts
and sin are agreed we can never repent, therefore Repentance is called (...)
the turning of the heart another ways. A man will never repent of what he
loves; while a man loves sin in his heart, he will never repent of it truly and
sincerely, and therefore the Scripture requires the heart as the main thing in
conversion, 11. Acts 23. where the bent and purpose of the heart goes, that is
the way that a man goes that is his rode. Now a man that is riding a journey for
a friends company, may ride a mile or two out of his way, or to see a great
Town may ride a little out of his way, but he turns into his old rode again, so
a sinner his rode is to Hell, perhaps to stop the mouth of Conscience, or for
fear of the Laws, or to please a Godly friend he may abstain a while from sin,
and so turn out of his rode, O but he will into his old rode of sin again, till
the heart be truly changed a man is never truly converted, nor ever truly
repents of sin; on the other side when a man's rode lies to Heaven, he is bent
thither with full purpose of heart, though perhaps by reason of a temptation or
weakness, he fall now and then into sin and perhaps gross sins, yet he turns
into his rode again, Peter as soon as he had sinned presently repented. And
David as soon as Nathan the Prophet had awakened him, and discovered to him that
he was out of his rode, presently turned into his rode again. O Brethren, from
hence you may gather what an hard nay impossible thing it is for a man, whose
heart and sin can close together, for such a man while such to repent and be
converted, consider then your hearts, and labor to know your own hearts which
way they stand affected, which way the frame and bent, and purpose, and edge is
turned, and if it be thus that sin and they are not utter enemies, know that
your Estate is very dangerous, that as yet you never have truly repented, nor
is it possible for you, unless your hearts be changed ever to repent.

8. The danger will appear further in reference to temptations, desertions,
distresses; what have any man to support him, when the Devil shall roar against
him, and object all his sins and his failings to him, thou committedst such a
sin at such a time, thou art guilty of such and such great sins, in all thy
best duties thou have failed and sinned? What can a man answer the Devil in
this case, but only this, what we did we did in the uprightness of our hearts,
though we have sinned and failed in our best duties, it was full sore against
our minds, the bent and purpose of our hearts was to have served God better,
and to have lived better. But now on the other side when poverty, sickness,
troubles, temptations, death comes, O what a desperate dangerous condition is
that man in, that has the Devil to accuse him, his heart to witness against
him, and God to condemn him; when he knows that what he has done he has done
out of a wicked heart, and that he has committed, no sin but his heart have
been very forward and active in it. O Brethren, think of this before these
things come upon you; get your hearts turned, changed, altered, reformed, get
an heart for God and for Christ, and you will have no heart for sin, nay for no
sin whatever, no not the most beloved sin in the World. Else if you will not
take advice when your sorrows and horrors shall seize upon you, then may you
say as sick People when they are in great pain, O I may thank my self for this,
because I eat such a thing and such a thing, and drank such a liquor, such a
Wine, when all Friends and Physicians told me 'twas hurtful for me, and would
bring me into the condition that I am now in, but I would then believe and
regard none of them; so you, O I may thank my self for these terrors of
conscience, I was forewarned of such and such sins, such an evil course of
life, all Ministers and Friends, told me what would come of me, but O my wicked
heart that would not let me hearken to them, but would still draw me on further
and further into sin, till now the Lord is executing his fierce wrath upon me.
Friends, this may be the case of any of us, if we will not now we see the
subtlety of sin, the deceitfulness of our own hearts and the danger that comes
from both, take warning while it is time, and turn every sin even our own sin
out of our hearts, that with full purpose of heart we may cleave to the Lord.

2. Some Scruples and objections, and cases of diverse Persons concerning this
sin their own Iniquity.

You have heard Brethren, from this Text the great Mystery of our own Iniquity;
a truth of great and weighty importance to every one of us; there is none of us
all can know himself, or his own condition well, unless he know his own sin;
there can be no true Repentance, Reformation, or Conversion wrought in any man
till this sin be cast out; we do but labor in vain, while we labor to cast
out other sins and let this sin alone. As every great tree has some great
roots, that run strait downward into the ground, which we call Tap-roots; cut
all the other roots yet the tree stands firm till these be cut, O this sin is
the Tap-root that holds the sinner fast, when he has left all other sins, yet
this keeps him in his unregenerate state still. This is the Devils nest-egg,
that which he leaves in the Soul to keep possession as it were for him. O
Brethren, if you mind the good of your Souls mind these things; you have heard
the great policy of this sin working into the heart, and working in the heart,
getting possession and keeping possession, you have heard likewise the
deceitfulness of our own corrupt hearts, assisting this sin what they can, you
see there is danger enough; but this is not all, there is greater danger yet
behind, you shall find that there is not only the hand of Joab, (I mean our own
hearts) but also Achitophels headpiece in all this. Behold a third enemy
against us, and that is the Devil, and he is more dangerous than either of the
two former, he speaks us fairly, but intends nothing but mischief against us;
the Devil he comes on both sides of us; some Persons he persuades that they
have not yet cast out this sin, and so would drive them to despair, others he
persuades that they have already cast out this sin, there work is done and so
drives them to presumption. The first way he sets on the Godly, he envies their
happiness, and therefore like the worm at the root of Jonah's Goard strives to
blast all their comforts; the last way he sets upon the wicked, fearing least
they should repent and be converted, he persuades them that all is well they
have no beloved sin, no sin that shall keep them out of Heaven, and so leads
them through a fools paradise to Hell. Here Is the sum of the Devils cunning,
he will needs persuade the Godly, that they have not done what they have done,
and he will needs persuade the wicked, that they have done what they have not
done; and thus his trade goes forward, by making converted Persons doubt of
their conversion, and unconverted Persons presume of their conversion, and take
it for granted without any grounds or reasons, that they shall surely be saved.
Thus he turns this Doctrine into gall and warmwood to the Godly, and into poison
to the Wicked. Now that we may the better defeat the wicked counsel of this
Achitophel, I will lay you down the doubts, and scruples, and objections that
the Godly make against themselves in the first place, and answer them, and then
in the second place, examine the grounds, and reasons, and arguments of the
Wicked, whereby they plead for themselves that they are truly converted, and
have kept themselves from their own Iniquity, wherein I will give you several
Antidotes against this Poison, and all very plainly.

First, Scruples and Objections of Godly Persons against themselves about their
own Iniquity.

These are very many, but I shall only name some of the chiefest, and those
that are most common, wherein most of you that have any experience of the
workings of your hearts, or have at any time lay under doubts and fears, and
troubles of mind may second me with your own experience, and say, O thus and
thus it has been with me, and this has been my case. And so when you have
once taken measure of the Devils foot, you may the more easily be able to
discern and track his footsteps for the future.

1. Scruple, some good Persons will be apt to cry out, that they have not kept
themselves from their own Iniquity, because they are sensible of their
Hypocrisy, and the Text makes this a true note of sincerity and uprightness, I
was also upright -- and kept my self -- O but says a poor Soul, I am an
Hypocrite, and whatever I have done it is Hypocrisy, and therefore I can take
no comfort from thi^ Doctrine.

Answ. 1. You must know, that we are all of us born Hypocrites, for we have all
of us the seeds of this sin, as well as of all other sins in our natures; but
though every one, Saints as well as Sinners (as nothing is more sure) have
Hypocrisy in them, yet it does not follow, that all are in a state of
Hypocrisy, or Hypocrites in state as we say, so that as a late Divine Doctor
Harris observes, the Question must not be whether Hypocrisy be in you, for
that you may be sure of, but whether Hypocrisy reigns in you; for know this
for your comfort, that if you discern Hypocrisy in you, and you bewail it,
loath it, abhor it, and labor all that you can against it, sure it does not
reign in you; we may apply that particularly to this sin of Hypocrisy, what
the Apostle says of sin in the general, in the 6. Romans 11. Reckon your selves
dead unto sin, i. e. in a state of grace, O but who may account himself so, or
when may a man reckon so and reckon right? the Apostle tells us verse the 12.
if sin do not reign in you, it is a sign you are in a state of grace though sin
be in you. This is the Gospel account of it; just so may we say of Hypocrisy,
if Hypocrisy do not reign in us (though there may be some Hypocrisy in us)
yet we may in a Gospel sense account our selves to be no Hypocrites. To make
this plain to you, there is a Rising or Rebellion in England against the King,
the Rebels come into this Town, here they quarter, they lie in our houses, eat
of our meat and drink of our beer, yet if we do not entertain them willingly,
but it is full sore against our minds, we do what we can to be rid of them, we
openly testify against them we are not to be accounted Rebels; so is it with
this sin of Hypocrisy or any other sin, though it will abide in us and with
us, yet if we hate it, and labor against it, and would fain be rid of it; God
will not account us, as Hypocrites.

2. It Is a good sign of sincerity and true grace, for any man to complain of
his Hypocrisy. Hypocrites they are always boasting of their sincerity; and
therefore, Hypocrites are like Ranters, which wear more silver lace on their
backs, than they have silver in their pockets; they boast of their holiness, i.
e. their external holiness, when as they have not a dram of true grace in
their hearts; the best of men have always the worst thoughts of themselves.
Holy Mr. Bradford would many times subscribe himself in his Letters, John the
Hypocrite, and a very painted Sepulcher, see what Agur one of the wisest men
says of himself, Prove. 30. 33. Job an upright man, yet see Job 42. 6. But now
on the other side, the Hypocrite does all that he can to justify himself, you
may know who is an Hypocrite by this, that man that will not own himself to be
an Hypocrite. And therefore as the Hypocrite is never the better for justifying
himself, so a good Christian, a sincere heart is never the worse for condemning
himself, 18. Luke 13, 14.

3. The best rule to judge of our Hypocrisy is by our love, do we love any
sin, why then our heart is not upright with God? though we commit many sins and
great sins, yet if we do not love them nor delight in them, it is our grief that
we do commit them, this is a sign of sincerity. As David could say, I hate
every false way, though he could not say, I have kept my self from every false
way. David committed many a sin, yet David never loved any sin; why, his heart
was set upon God. A true Saint, when he has committed any sin, he will cry out
as the wandering Traveller, O I am out of my way, pray set me into it again.
Peter was no Hypocrite, though for fear he denied Christ and forswore him;
O'twas not his mind to do so, he did it out of fear, full sore against his
will, and it cost him many a bitter tear for it. Judas he was the right
Hypocrite, he made it a set plotted business to betray Christ, he did it with
his heart, and then he thought to smooth all over with a kiss at last. Thus you
may see what is Hypocrisy, and learn how to judge of your selves or others,
that is not Hypocrisy when a man complains how bad he is, but when a man would
fain seem to be better than he is, that is Hypocrisy when a man would cover a
wicked heart under an Holy Profession.

4. A word of advice to such who are thus grieved and troubled for their
Hypocrisy; know for your comfort that this is but a Temptation of the Devil,
who envies the inward joy and peace of a good Conscience, and therefore seeks
by all means to blank and disturb you, and as it is a temptation, so be careful
that it does not drive you from your duty; the Devil has much prevailed this
way, and many have cried out, why should I pray, or hear, or read, or go to the
Sacrament, why I am an Hypocrite, 'twill be all in vain, God will never accept
of me nor of my duties, take heed of such a thought as this; do your duty, keep
on your way though it be your grief, you cannot do better, endeavor to do your
best, and let this be your comfort you would fain be better and do better.
Follow the example of the Prodigal, in the 15. Luke 18, 19. the Prodigal might
have thought thus with himself, why should I think of returning to my Father,
can I ever think my Father will own me, that have been such a Wretch to spend
all that he gave me so vainly and foolishly, and to run away from him, yet you
see he is resolved to go, and you shall see the event to your comfort, verse
the 20. Never forsake God in point of duty, and he will never forsake you in
point of mercy.

2. Scruple, O but some will say, I am afraid I am no sincere Christian, I have
not kept my self from mine Iniquity, for I have run again and again into the
commission of the same sins, I have relapsed many times after Prayers, and
Confession of sin, and Promise of Amendment, yet have I committed the same sin
again and again.

Answ. 1. I will lay down some propositions.

1. It cannot be denied, but that the Saints themselves are subject to this
falling sickness, they have in them the seeds of Apostasy as well as others.
This appears from many examples in Scripture, Abraham twice denied his Wife
Sarah, nay and that was not all, he made a bargain to do so still, 20. Genesis 13.
David, what did he less than commit murder intentionally, when he swore he
would be the death of Nabal and all his innocent Family, so he confesses, 1 Samuel 25. 32, 33, 34. yet after this he commits actual murder on Uriah; how often
in the Book of Judges did the Church sin the sin of Idolatry, and repented and
fell again and again; now we must unchurch the Church of the Jews, if we say
that the People of God never relapse, or fall into the same sin after
Repentance. Vid. Dr. Goodwins folly of relapsing.

2. The Scripture does no where tell us, that if a man after Humiliation or
Repentance fall into the same sin again, he shall not be pardoned, nay we may
prove the contrary.

1. God will certainly forgive us as much as we are commanded to forgive our
Brother, 17. Luke 3, 4. 18. Mat. 21, 22. Now God is much more infinite in mercy
than we are, and certainly if God will not limit us any time from forgiving our
Brethren, we ought not to limit the mercy of God, as to say if we commit a sin
so many times, it shall not be forgiven.

2. There is no sin exempted from pardon in Scripture, but the sin against the
Holy Ghost, and the reason of it is this, that sin shall never be pardoned,
because he that commits it can never repent of it. But now a man may repent of
his falling again into the self same sin, and therefore that sin may be
pardoned, 3. Jeremiah 12.

3. A man may commit the same sin often, and yet be in Christ, and in a state
of grace for all that; Peter thrice denied Christ, and yet Christ did not
reject him for all that, and the Disciples of Christ, we read that twice they
contended for the Superiority and Supremacy, and yet for all this they
continued still in the favor of Christ; the reason of this is, that all those
that are in Christ once, are ever in Christ, 13. John. 1. it is not all the sins
in the World can take off the love of Christ from any of his Saints. Christ
will never suffer any of his Saints so to fall as to fall quite away. Though
like Eutichus they fall from the third loft, yet there is life, the life of
Grace in them.

4. A man may commit the same sin often, and yet for all that, that sin may not
be his beloved sin his own Iniquity; he may commit it only out of fear, as
Abraham and Peter did, or through the violence of the Temptation, as David his
murder the second time, or through the strength and power of corruption, or for
want of watchfulness, etc. Now for all this a true Saint commits the same sin
again and again, yet he may not love it, nor delight in it, nor desire to live
in it, his heart may be another way for all that. These things may serve for
consolation to such as are herein concerned, but withal,

2. Let them take these cautions along with them.

1. Take heed after you are once gotten up of falling again, a man that falls
once and has no harm, let him not be too ventrous; the second time he may
break his leg or arm, the third time he may break his neck, 5. John 14. 'twas
mercy in Christ you were not in Hell for the first sin, take heed of sinning
against mercy; every fall after the first fall is a sin against mercy; and sins
against mercy will run deep in score against us.

2. Take heed of presuming to commit the same sin again and again, because many
of the Saints have done so; though I say, this will not thrust a man out of
Christ, yet 'twill be a strong presumption that such Persons were never in
Christ. Observe but David, what he Prays for after his fall in 51. Ps. 10. in
the Margin, a constant spirit. O, David takes a course to secure himself from
falling again, Lord says he, give me such an heart, as I may never let sin in
more; though David commit the same sins, the second time 'twas his grief. A man
that has once stumbled by walking in the dark, the next time he will have a
light with him. Follow the Saints not in their sins, but in their carefulness
against sin. The Saints falls should make us take heed of falling; if the winds
blow down such tall Cedars, such strong Oaks, well may the under Shrubs
tremble.

3. Take heed of relying too much on your own strength. In te stas and non stas
Aug. when you see that Satan has thrown you so often, O labor for strength
from Christ, there is sure footing in him and only in him; we never read of
Paul that ever he fell after his Repentance, and the reason you have in the 2.
Galath. 20. Christ lived in Paul, and that kept him upright.

4. Make use of all means to keep you from relapsing, I will note two or three.

1. Keep conscience always tender, take heed of hardness of heart, when sin
has once pricked you to the heart, keep the wound open, do not fear it with
more sins. A tender conscience is like the eye, be it but a small mote or dust
fallen into it, it never leaves till it has wept it out.

2. Be sure you repent to purpose for sin, that will keep you from sinning
again, when a man has paid dear for suretyship, and his friend comes again and
desires him to be bound once more, no says he, I smarted enough the last time.
When Satan tempts you again, look back to your former Repentance, and see what
'twill cost you, 3. Lam. 19, 20. this will keep you humble.

3. Take our Saviors own receipt, in 26. Mat. 41. Watch and Pray, etc.

I will conclude with the words of Mr. Capel a Reverend Divine. Let us then
say, that it is a dangerous case for a Godly man to sin the same sin after
Repentance; what if it do not put him out of Christ? What if it do not hang
him? yet it burns him in the hand, whips him up and down the Town, my meaning
is, that it does cast him into a bed of miserable sorrow; but withal we must
say, it may possibly be, that after true and hearty Repentance for such a
fault, a Child of God may chance to fall into the same sin again and again, how
often I cannot tell, but this I can tell, that how often soever he sins, let
him repent and return, and his pardon is ready. These things are spoken only
for the comfort of such as fall again and again through weakness, therefore
with all, remember what the Scripture says of such as do willingly and
wilfully fall again and again, and make their trade, as most do nowadays of
Praying and Sinning, and Sinning and Praying, which is abominable, and none of
these things spoken belong to such, 2 Pet. 2. 22. They are no Children of God,
but dogs and swine that do so. A Sheep may fall twice or thrice into the same
ditch, but the Sow returns to it again and again, it is her delight to be there.

3. Scruple. Some will say we are none of those that have kept our selves from
our own Iniquities, because they do not find the benefit and influences of the
ordinances upon their hearts as others do, they cannot rejoice and be comforted
with the word and promises as others are, they are not refreshed after duties
as others are, sure some Achan or other is still in us, else God would be with
us in his Ordinances.

Answer twofold. 1. By way of concession; it is true, this sin if it be still in
any of us, and we do own it and countenance it, this is enough to hinder the
power, and virtue, and comfort of the Ordinances; if we would live under the
power of the Ordinances, we must not live under the power of any one sin, 13.
Mat. 58. where was this, see verse 54. Christ Preached there, and that to their
astonishment, but yet his Preaching had little or no effect, he did not many
mighty works, the power of it and virtue of it did not reach them, and why so
the Text tells us, because of their unbelief, they were under the power of that
sin. O sinner, thou come to the Ordinances for peace and comfort, just as
Joram sent to Jehu, is it peace Jehu? But what said he? What peace so long as
there are so many Whoredoms; so, O poor Soul, what peace can thou expect, so
long as sin is in thee? Sin hardens thy heart and makes it like the stony
ground, and what good can the Word or the Ordinances do on the stony ground?
You know what hindered Herod, that he received no good at all by John Baptist
Preaching, O he had an Herodias in his heart; the Text tells us, that he heard
John gladly and did many things, O but Herodias spoiled all; had it not been
for that one sin which Herod would not part withal, he might have been a
sincere convert for ought we know. This sin will drive the word out of our
hearts, as fast as it is set home upon our hearts; it will keep the Soul lean
and ill favored without any comfort under the fattest Ordinances. But this I
speak only by way of concession. I am to speak to true sincere hearted
Nathaniels, that keep no sin in their hearts, or desire and endeavor to be rid
of every sin, name any sin to them they cannot say they have any love to it,
and these Persons they complain, that they feel not the influences of the
Ordinances upon their Souls, they feel not the power and comfort of them, to
these

2. Two words of caution.

1. Take heed that this be not false, examine the case well, perhaps you may
speak without your books; there be many complain of this, who yet have no
reason to complain, they think they are never the better for the Ordinances,
when indeed they are much the better. Now that you may state the Question
aright, consider these two things.

1. What are the influences of the Ordinances; for answer to this, there is a
fourfold influence that the Ordinances have, etc.

1. A pricking wounding influence, it is such an influence as makes a man
sensible of his condition; every man by nature has a spiritual kind of
lethargy, such a Disease in his Soul as the num-palsie is to the Body, he is
quite sottish and senseless, has not so much as the understanding of a bruit,
to know whether it be well or ill with him, knows not whether he belong to
Christ or the Devil, is not sensible that he is in danger of Hell. Now this is
the first power and influence of the Ordinances, to bring a man to his right
senses, to make him understand his condition, 2. Acts 37. here the word reached
to the quick, before they were not sensible of what they had done. O Brethren,
there be many that never felt this pricking, wounding power of the Ordinances,
never yet were made sensible of their conditions, that think all is well with
them, and hope to be saved as well as the best; O if once they were but pricked
to the heart, how would they roar and cry out, how would they be started at it,
to see the misery they are in.

2. An humbling influence; when a man is sensible of his lost condition, then
he begins to be humble, he will never be humble till now; poverty will bring a
man upon his knees; O then what will such a conviction as this is do, when a
man sees that he is ready to drop into Hell, that he must endure the wrath of
God to all Eternity. O this makes the Soul humble and pliable before God, the
man now is like melted wax, God may work him how he pleases, command what he
will he is ready to obey, 9. Acts 6.

3. A strengthening influence; after the word has weakened the power of sin in
a man, then it strengthens the Soul with grace, as Physicians when they have
thoroughly purged their Sick man, and so made him weak, then they give him
strengthening meats; so the word conveys Faith and Hope, and other strengthening
graces into the Soul; so it is said of Paul after his Humiliation, 9. Acts 22.
and so he prays for the Ephesians in the 3. Ephesians. 16. Now this strength the word
conveys to the Soul, from the spirit of Christ to enable him against sin, and
all other oppositions whatever to an holy life, 1. Colos. 10, 11.

4. A comforting influence; this is the highest of all, when a Soul is
comforted under the Ordinances, and is filled with joy and delight, and
abundance of satisfaction, 2. Cant. 3, 4. now is the Soul as it were in
Christ's Banqueting House, or House of Wine, i. e. the Soul rejoices, and is
glad of the presence of Christ, like John Baptist in Elizabeth's Womb leaps and
skips for joy. Thus it is with many a Soul under the power and influences of
the Ordinances, as those converts, 2. Acts 37. there is pricking, but what
follows? read the 46. verse and you will see.

2. Consider and examine your selves, whether you have felt none of these
influences under the Ordinances; perhaps you have not felt the comforting
influence, O do not say therefore that there is no influence, perhaps you find
little or no strength, yet say not it is in vain, the means of grace are in vain
to my Soul; have the word humbled you, have it pricked your hearts and made you
sick of sin, and sensible in what a lost condition you are in by nature, bless
God for that, and wait still on him in the ways of his Ordinances, you shall
find comfort at last; you must not expect to come to the highest pitch
presently, as our Quakers do, as soon as any turns Quaker, presently he is full
of joy and comfort as his heart can wish, suspect such a thing as not the work
of God, God will have us thoroughly humbled before comfort comes in. Naaman was
bid go into Jordan seven times and wash, now if Naaman had after the first or
second washing come out of Jordan, and finding himself not cleansed, left the
waters and said there was no virtue in them, would you not say the fault was
his own. Our Savior Christ will teach us the true way to comfort, i. e. true
comfort indeed, 5. Mat. 4. be content to mourn and be humbled a while, and wait
still on God to perfect his work in you.

2. Take heed that this be not true, O it is a sad thing to be under the
Ordinances, and never the better for them, and therefore labor for these
influences when you are sensible of the want of them; means,

1. Go not out in your own strength; think not that you of your selves are able
to pray, or read, or hear with profit; O you must go out of your selves, get
Christ along with you, 21. John 3, 4, 5, 6. take Christ along with you, go
forth in his strength and not in your own strength, the want of this may be a
means of your miscarriage.

2. Look out beyond all Duties and Ordinances; do not rest satisfied when you
have Prayed, or heard a Sermon, or received a Sacrament; let not that be all
your Religion only to do these things; but look further, the Ordinances are but
means to the attaining of a further end, and the main end is to bring us in to
Christ, O look to the end whether you are brought nearer and nearer to Christ
by any Ordinance, whether you love Christ more, and live to Christ more than
ever, take heed of making the Ordinances your end, this will hinder you of your
blessing.

3. To name no more, be much in Prayer to God for an influence upon your Souls,
sin that dams and stops up these Waters of the Sanctuary, Prayer opens the
sluices again; sin poisons these fountains, Prayer, that must heal them; Prayer,
that brings down the influences of the clouds upon the Earth, and Prayer, that
brings down the influences of the Ordinances upon the Soul; the Spirit is
obtained by Prayer, and where the Spirit moves in the Ordinance, there be sure
is an influence; be much in Prayer to God to bless all his Ordinances and Means
of Grace to you, and you will quickly find the benefit of it.

4. Scruple. Many a poor Soul complains, O I am afraid that I have this mine
own Iniquity still in me, that I have not yet subdued it, for I discern and see
more sin in me now than ever before, I find sin more busy and stronger, and
more prevailing in me than ever before.

Answ. 1. Consider what is the work of conversion, 26. Acts 18. you see that
the state of conversion is a state of light; when a man lies in a dark dungeon,
he sees not the dirt and the spots and filth about his clothes, nor the
vermin and nastiness about him, but bring this man into the light, and then he
will see every spot, and all vermin crawling about him. A man before
conversion he is quite in the dark, nay darkness it self, 5. Ephesians. 7, 8. now
what can darkness see? hence it is that it is so hard a matter to persuade a
wicked man that he is a sinner, he will not believe it, though he be drunk
every day and swear every minute, yet this man will not be persuaded, but he is
a good man as good a Saint as any; alas poor creature, he is in darkness and
sees not his filthiness, and cannot be persuaded it is so ill with him as it is;
but let this man be converted, i. e. brought into the light, O then he will
complain of himself as the vilest creature living, now he sees more sin in him
than ever he did. Paul before his conversion what he thought of himself he
tells us, 3. Philip. 6. after conversion, he thought otherwise, 1. Tim. 1. 15.

But you say you find sin stronger now than before, therefore,

2. Consider that after conversion, there is a new principle of grace put into
the Soul, and that resists the corruption that is in us; it is with every
converted Person as with Rebecca, 25. Genesis 21, 22, 23. before conversion, the
Devil has the full possession of the whole man, and then what follows, see 11.
Luke 21. there is no disturbance or disquietness in that man's Soul, the Devil
he rules there, and he is content, and sin that has a warm nest there and
that is content, and the sinner he is at his liberty of sinning and he is
content too, and so all is well, no disturbance at all, all is peace; but now
after conversion, there is a quite contrary principle of grace, and that fights
with sin, and sin that begins to muster up all its forces, hence comes the Soul
to complain of the power and strength of sin. As a man that is quite under
water, feels not the weight of all the Tuns of water on his back, but let him
come out and take but a ferkin of water on his shoulders, and he will feel the
burden; sin is like a Be, let it alone, suffer it to crawl about your hands or
face, and you cannot tell whether it has a sting or no, but anger it or beat
it off, and it will sting you presently. A man is sick and while he feeds the
distemper he feels not much pain, but let him take Physic to drive out the
distemper, then he grows sicker and sicker, because the Physic is contending
with the distemper, does that man think he is worse than he was before? so
here, etc.

3. Consider further, that the Devil will trouble you more now than ever,
because you are got out of his chain; the Devil he roars and raves, when he is
like to loose one of his Prisoners, he will endeavor all that he can to bring
such Souls back again to himself.

4. Lastly, from all that has been said, we may conclude, that certainly it is
a sign of a state of grace for any man to be in this condition, we never read
in Scripture, nor never heard of unregenerate Persons complaining after this
sort; Paul before his conversion never complained thus, but afterward Romans 7.
24. O comfort your selves poor Souls that thus groan under the Burden of sin,
you are the Persons that shall be welcome to Christ, 11. Mat. 28. comfort your
selves the Alarm is sounded, and war is proclaimed between you and your sins,
nay the Battle is begun and for your further comfort, it shall assuredly end in
victory, 7. Romans 25.

5. Scruple. O but some poor Soul may say, though for the present I abstain
from this sin mine own Iniquity, and can now say I love no sin, yet am I afraid
of falling back again, because I have not (I fear) thoroughly repented of this
sin, my Repentance is only a slight formal Repentance, I have not been humbled
nor grieved to the purpose, Oh this is my fear, and this is that which troubles
me very much.

Answ. 1. It Is a good sign that Person has truly repented, who is troubled
that he has repented no better, this very thing is part of thy Repentance;
again it is a good sign that man has repented, and that truly of sin, that is
afraid of committing that sin again, there is none more afraid of sin than a
truly converted penitent Person; this fear of falling again and carefulness
against sin for the future, sure are the marks and tokens the Apostle gives of
true Godly sorrow for sin, 2 Corinthians. 7. 10, 11. I add that man is furthest of
from falling that is most fearful of falling. But,

2. By way of direction; Repentance being a work of such great concernment, and
a thing that may be and is so often counterfeited, it behooves every one of us
for our better satisfaction and surety to try our Repentance. Now you shall
know, whether you have truly repented or no by these two signs.

(1.) By its root. (2.) by its fruit. Repentance in Scripture is compared to a
tree; the tree has roots but they lie under ground every body cannot see them,
but when we see a tree stand against many great winds and strong blasts, and
when we see it green and flourishing, we may know it has good roots, it is well
rooted, again our Savior tells us, a tree is known by its fruits, and
therefore we must look to these two.

1. The root of Repentance, and that is humiliation, now the deeper the root the
stronger the tree, the deeper our humiliation, the stronger are we in grace and
holiness; what is the reason that bulrushes bow, and bend, and turn backwards
and forwards with every wind, but because they have no good root, 2. Col. 6, 7.
rooted and stablished both go together, (...). Now humiliation lay a deep sure
foundation, being well rooted makes him firm and strong; this is twofold.

1. In respect of what is past; O he is much humbled and cast down for what is
past, though God will forget what he has done, yet he will never forget it,
though God will never cast it in his dish, yet he will be always hitting
himself in the teeth with it ever now and then. Thus did Paul, he was ever now
and then telling what a Persecutor he was, O that troubled him and vexed him,
that ever he should Persecute Christ. O true humiliation will make us do so, we
shall never be well pleased with our corrupt nature as long as we live, we
shall be always speaking against our selves what we were heretofore.

2. There is another branch of this root, and that respects the time to come,
when we are thoroughly humbled for what is past, we shall be very fearful for
the future 2. Philip. 12. cum timore and tremore. O he is like a fearful man
that dares not climb up any high steep place, dares not walk aloft for fear of
falling, therefore he keeps the lowest ground; so the Apostle directs 11. Romans
20. 2. The fruits of Repentance; what is a tree good for if it bears no fruit,
away with it, so what is Repentance good for, I mean that Repentance that has
no fruits, 3. Mat. 8. do not says John Baptist think your selves to be Saints,
because you come to hear me Preach or be Baptized, no bring forth your fruits,
and such fruits as are meet for Repentance, (...), worthy the name of
Repentance.

Now there are two parts of Repentance. 1. A turning from sin. 2. A turning
unto God or unto Godliness.


Now our fruits must be answerable to both these parts of Repentance.

1. The first part turning from sin, your loathing of sin must be as great as
formerly your loving of it, your hatred as great against it as formerly you
delighted in it; ea specialiter horreas, quae specialiter appeteb as. Bern let
thy best beloved sins be most abhorred by thee, let them be like the Israelites
dainty Quails, O how did they long for them, and afterward they could not
endure them, they stunk in their Nostrils; deal with thy beloved sin as Amnon
with Tamar, 2 Samuel 13. 15, 16, 17. 1. He hated her. 2. He would not hearken to
her motion. 3. He put her out of doors. 4. He bolted her out, do so with sin.

2. The second part turning to God and Godliness.

Do as much for God and Christ as ever you did for sin, love Holiness as much
as ever you loved Wickedness. Nay take as much pains in the ways of God, as
ever in the paths of Unrighteousness; so did Paul, we have both his Example and
Precept, 1 Cor. 15. 9, 10. 6. Romans 19. we must not says one bind our selves to
a trade of sin, and use Religion only as a recreation. No but we must work as
hard in Righteousness, as formerly we have wrought in sin. Nay further, as we
have been scandals to others to turn them out of the way by reason of our sins,
so now we must be good examples, not only to keep in the way our selves, but to
bring others into the ways of Holiness also.

Now examine your Repentance by these signs, and you need never trouble your
selves, you shall not fall, so says the Apostle, 2 Pet. 1. 10. how so, see the
fruits of Repentance verses 5, 6, etc. be as fearful and as careful of falling
as you will it is the better, but such Persons may be comforted, that they shall
never fall away i. e. totally and finally from Christ and Grace.

6. Scruple. O but say some, if we are such as have cast out every sin, even
our most beloved sins, how comes it to pass that we are so much afraid of
Death, and so loath and unwilling to dye? O this is our great trouble that we
are so afraid of death, whereas a true convert, one that is quite freed from
sin (which is the sting of death) he rejoyeeth and triumphs over it. O death
where is thy sting! and O grave where is thy victory!

Answer briefly 4 ways.

1. By concession in two particulars.

1. That there is nothing in all this World so terrible as death is, it is (...)
of all terrible things the most terrible, says the Philosopher; the King of
Terrors says the Scripture, 18. Job. 14. It made that great Ahasuerus so
afraid, that he would suffer none to come into his Court in Mourning Apparel;
and another great King commanded all his Servants when he was sick, that none
should so much as speak of death in his hearing; there is no Ague fit will make
a man's face look paler, and his whole body quake and tremble, more than the
very thoughts and apprehension of death. But,

2. That sin as it is the only thing that brought death into the World, so it is
the only thing that makes it look so terribly. As a man that has the yellow
jaundice, every thing that he looks on seems yellow, so he that has sin in his
Conscience, O what a ghastly sight is death to that man! take only the instance
of Cain, one that had a guilty Conscience, 4. Genesis 13. why so? see the latter
end of verse the 14. so cries out the sinner of death, O wherever it find me it
will slay me, 'twill spoil me of all my comforts and pleasures, rob me of all
my riches and treasures, pull down my house (my body) about my ears, drag my
naked Soul to Judgment, deliver me over to Devils to be tormented for ever and
ever. O sinners, you that make a mock, a sport of sin; consider, are not these
terrible things! you that will be rich right or wrong, you that will domineer
and have your minds, you that laugh and scoff at holiness, jeer at Sermons, O
for all this be sure you do not forget your selves but be sure you tremble at
death! O think how terrible it would be to you should a voice from Heaven say,
this very day or this very hour, your Souls shall be required of you.

2. By way of distinction; there is a twofold fear of death, one that is
natural proceeding from mere nature, as nature it self abhors her own
destruction and dissolution; the other sinful, as proceeding from the guilt of
sin, when the Soul knows that to Hell it must go as soon as he is dead. The
natural fear of death is lawful, and may be found in true Saints. David he
Prays against death, 39. Psalm 13. so Hezekiah weeps and mourns, and prays at
the news of death, 2 Kings 20. 1, 2, 3. yea our Savior Christ himself was
troubled and very sorrowful at the approach of death, 14. Mark 32, 33, 34, 35,
36. Now this fear of death could not be sinful because it was in Christ who
knew no sin, again it is said of Christ, that he took upon him all our
infirmities sin only excepted; so that the fear of death may be in a Child of
God. 1. As it is a dissolution of nature. 2. As it is a punishment for sin, so
every Child of God ought to fear it.

3. By way of consolation, to any true hearted Christian, that complains of the
fear of death. O let this be thy comfort, thou fear death without a cause;
there is many a true Saint fears death that has no cause at all to fear it;
and whence is this, but only because he wants his assurance. A man that is
condemned to dye, O he weeps and mourns, he quakes and trembles, O but he has
no cause, because the King has Signed and Sealed his Pardon, but this poor
wretch does not know of it; O so it is here, it is the want of assurance, that
makes death so uncomfortable to many a good Christian, therefore,

4. And lastly by way of exhortation, O seek after assurance, would you live
above the fears of death, labor for assurance that your names are written in
the Book of Life, 2. Cor. 5. 8. Why so? because of assurance, verse 1. we know
we are assured; O how willingly does a poor Soul cast of this little tenement
of his body, that is assured of Heavenly and Eternal Mansions.

This makes him smile in the face of Death, and laugh at the King of Terrors. O
Friends, would you upon your Death Beds, when all your Kindred, Friends, and
Neighbors stand weeping about, you laugh in the midst of them; get this
assurance; sin brought us weeping into the World, assurance will carry us
rejoicing out of the World. O Brethren, when once you have got this assurance
(without it you may dye happily but not cheerfully) you will be looking out for
Christ and for Death, you will be crying out as Sisera's Mother, why is death
so long in coming? Why tarry the wheels of Christ's Charriots; ejus est timere
mortem qui ad Christum nolit ire, O but he that is certain of his going to
Christ, how does he cry after him, come Lord Jesu, come quickly; make have my
beloved and be thou like to the Roe, or the young Heart upon the Mountains of
Spices.

And thus we have answered the Scruples of the Godly about this particular, not
all but some of the chiefest of them. Now we come secondly to the,

2. Objections of the wicked or their Arguments, whereby they seek to blind
their own Souls, or rather the Devil blinds them, thinking that they are free
from this sin their own Iniquity, when as yet it rules and reigns in them. And
in the prosecution of this you shall see that the Godly are not more fearful
and scrupulous, but the wicked are as willful and confident, and will not be
persuaded of the sadness of their estate and conditions; and to this purpose
they have many Arguments to plead for themselves (or rather against themselves)
we will examine some of them and answer them.

1. Plea.

They say they are free from all sin, sure they have no Iniquity, why so? why,
there is no body can charge them with doing any thing amiss, there is no man
can say black is their eye; sure if they had any sin some body or other would
find them out, and tax them, and charge them with it.

Answer.

1. Remember what I told you in the discovery of the policy and mystery of this
our own Iniquity, this is one piece of sins policy to lie close and lurk
secretly in the heart, and to keep it self from the eyes of men, and by this
policy it keeps possession in many men's hearts. Brethren, if every man would
deal faithfully in discovering what is in his heart, the best of us all might
hang down our heads; what says the Prophet David, a man sure as righteous, and
as good a Saint as any now living, 19. Psalm 12. why says he, I my self cannot
tell all the wickedness that is in me, much less can others. I have many secret
sins that never any eye of man yet discovered; what dos^ thou think now sinner,
do all men acquit David and yet will not David acquit himself? how do you or
any of us all think to acquit our selves then? What says the Apostle, 1 John
1. 8. if every body in the World should say that I have no sin, yet if I my
self should say so, I should be a liar for my pains.

2. Perhaps others may see sin in thee though they do not tell thee of it. A
man's own Iniquity is like a man's eye, to tell a man of it it is to thrust a
pin in his eye. O there be few or none dare tell thee so whatever they think.
And Brethren, by the way note this, that it is the great sin of us all, that we
are loath to tell one another of our sins; we are afraid of reproving for fear
of angring; what a sad thing is this? we had rather let our Brethren go to Hell
than anger them. Another reason why we are loath to tell others of their sins,
is, for fear they should tell us of our sins; if we tell them of one sin they
will check us by another sin. Observe that story in the Gospel, 8. John 3, 4,
5. well but what follows, 7, 9. verses, first you see they acknowledge their
duty; Moses commanded them to stone her, yet because they were either guilty of
the same sin or worse, they go their way and let her alone; veniam petimusque
damusque vicissim; this is let me alone, and I Will let thee alone, don't check
me for my sin, and I Will not reprove thee for thy sin, this is our common
practice, we ruin one another Souls by it. O Brethren, do not trust to this,
when others do not tell you of your faults, think never the better of your
selves for it; be of David's mind, 141. Psalm 5.

3. What though all the World should acquit you, yet if God condemn you what
will you get by it; God can spy a sin where man can see no sin. A man may
conceal his sins as well as his Estate from men. Now what good will it do me,
that all my Neighbors shall take me to be very rich, when I know that I am not
worth one groat. O Brethren, this will be poor comfort for you at the day of
Judgment; if you can plead nothing but this, that all your Neighbors or all
the Country speak well of you. Remember this, that God will not call a Jury of
your Neighbors to try you by at the day of Judgment. And though you have
deceived men, yet you cannot deceive an All-seeing God; that saying of our
Savior is true in this sense also, woe to us, not only when all men speak well
of us, but speak well to us, 6. Luke 26. he is our best Friend that tells us
the worst of our condition. If a man come to any of you and say, Sir, there is
a spot of dirt upon your face, you will say I thank you for it; but if a man
tell you of your Lying, Swearing, Drunkenness, Cozening and the like; the Spots
of your Souls, you are presently angry. O sirs know this, that though men never
tell you of your sins, one day you shall hear of them. And what will you get by
this though all the men of the World try you up now for Saints, if God at last
fling you into Hell among the Devils for sinners.

2. Plea.

O but others will say, sure we are upright before God, and have kept our
selves from our own Iniquities, for our Consciences did never yet check us for
any sin, and as long as we have good Consciences what need we fear; sure if it
were so that we were guilty of this sin, or did nourish it, Conscience would
smite us for it, though no body else would tell us of it.

Answer.

1. As to the former, no man accuses you of any sin, it does not thence follow
that no man can accuse you of any sin; so here you say your Conscience does not
accuse you, O it follows not, that therefore your Conscience cannot accuse you;
there be many vile Persons in the World, whose Consciences never yet smote them
for many sins that they committed, it does not therefore follow that they never
committed them, you must know this, that Conscience does not speak always; some
men's Consciences are like some Devils we read of in the Gospel, they were dumb
Devils, so there are dumb Consciences: Nay, and where Conscience does sometimes
speak, sometimes it holds its tongue. An example in David, when David cut the
lap of Saul's Garment, it is said his heart smote him, there Conscience spoke, 1 Samuel 24. 5. but when David had committed those two great sins of of Murder and
Adultery, it is not said then that David's heart smote him, no he lay a whole
Year in that sin without any remorse of Conscience at all, till the Prophet
Nathan came and reproved him for it. Divines they tell us that great sins do
vastare conscientiam, they sear and harden the Conscience that so it speaks not
at all. O Brethren, be afraid of your selves when you sin, and your Consciences
let you alone and never tell you of them.

2. Again you say, Conscience never yet accused you for any sin, it does not
follow that therefore Conscience will never accuse you, nay rather thus you
must think, that Conscience has a long reckoning with you, Conscience has the
more against you, and it will call you to an account for all at last.
Conscience is like a Shopkeeper, you take up Wares at your Mercer or Grocer,
etc. he asks you never a penny, you send for more and more still, he asks you
no money, O but all this while, he writes down all in his Book, and there must
be a pay day at last; so thou sinnest, Conscience says nothing, thou sinnest
again and again, Conscience still holds its peace, O but Conscience is all this
while a writing, sets down every particular sin, and this Book of Conscience
will assuredly be brought as a Witness against you at the last day. And
therefore says one, though Conscience be not always speaking, yet it is always
Writing. O sinner tremble at this, I may say almost the same to you, that Saint
James says to rich men, 5. James 1, 2, 3. rich men, O they think it is a merry
World while they are hoarding and treasuring up their riches, and gold, and
silver, and none to contradict or oppose them; O but says the Apostle they
would howl if they did but know the miseries that shall come upon them, and
what they are treasuring up for the last days; so sinners you may think it now
a brave and a merry World, you can sin at your liberty, be drunk day after day,
swear oath after oath, and cozen one man to day another to morrow, lie and
forswear and speak as you list, and do as you list, and live as you list, and
none to contradict you, your Consciences hold their peace and say not a word to
you, O but tremble and howl to consider, what an hoard a treasure of sins you
are heaping up together against the last day the day of Judgment. O sinners you
that say your Consciences never yet did smite you for any sin, do not trust to
that, Conscience will deal by you as Absalom by his Brother Amnon, 2 Samuel 13.
22. mark what follows v. 23, 28. so Conscience, etc.

3. Once more, you say Conscience did never accuse you, but let me ask you one
Question, did ever your Consciences excuse you, or do they now excuse you, if
you can say so you say somewhat to the purpose, 2. Romans 15. one of these two
every man's Conscience will do and must do, either accuse him or excuse him,
and therefore if your Consciences do not excuse you, look for it, as sure as
death they will one time or other accuse you; if Conscience do not witness with
you, it is a sure sign that it will witness against you, do not boast or
rejoice of a silent Conscience, but rather tremble and be afraid; the Apostle
will tell you wherein he rejoiced and wherein you may rejoice, 2 Cor. 1. 12. so
do your Consciences witness with you, your simplicity of heart and sincerity
toward God, and your carefulness in your whole lives, to walk before God with
a perfect heart, and to keep your selves from your own Iniquity, in this may
you truly rejoice and have true peace and comfort; otherwise if you live in sin
and your consciences smite you not, do not rejoice, all such rejoicing is vain.

Question.

But you will say what shall we do in this case, when we do so or so and
Conscience never smite us for it, how shall we know whether it be good or bad.

Answer.

Take Bernards Rule in this Case, unicuique suus liber est conscientia, etc.
and ideo scribi dehent libri nostri ad exemplar libri vitae, and si sic scripti
non sint, saltem corrigantur. Go to the Law and to the Testimony, if thy
Conscience speak not according to this rule, it is because there is no light in
it. Conscience (as one well observes) must have its negative voice, nothing
must be done without its assent and good liking, but be sure your Consciences
go by the certain rule of the word of God, else you will miserably perish. And
therefore Chrysostom does worthily blame those who are so scrupulous in taking
money, they must see the figures and look for the right stamp, but in matters
of Conscience, and Points and Practices of Religion, People are not so
scrupulous to examine every thing by the Scriptures, whether the stamp of God
the King of Heaven be upon it. Take heed therefore that you be not condemned by
the Scripture God's Book, when as your Consciences lie asleep and warn you not,
O be warned by the voice of God in the Bible.

4. And lastly, you say that your Consciences never smite you. O take heed of
such Consciences; most People love such Ministers as will let them alone in
their sins, and never thunder out Hell and Damnation against them; and so
perhaps you may love such Consciences as will never smite you, reprove you for
sin; O how many will say they thank God they were never troubled in Conscience
for any sin all their days, O do not thank God for it, but rather Pray to God
to awaken Conscience, and to open the mouth of Conscience; when Conscience lies
asleep as it were, and in a lethargy, that Soul is in a dangerous estate and
near death, -- gelidae est quasi mortis imago. A speechless Conscience is the
most desperate disease in the World. It is a most certain token of death
approaching to the body when the speech is gone, the eyes are set in the head,
feeling is lost, the pulse leaves beating, and the excrements come away
unawares, that man is drawing on to his grave; so when you see the eyes of
Conscience set, feeling and sense of sin gone, heart-smiting done, and sin all
manner of sin committed without the least remorse, and the Soul lies wallowing
in the noisome excrements of sin and uncleanness, it is a sure sign that that
Soul is drawing on to the Chambers of Hell.

3. Plea.

O but say others, we are not in this condition, for we cannot commit a sin,
but Conscience presently smites us for it; and Conscience makes them to tremble
and quake, and to look out for help, and therefore though they sin, yet are
they troubled and vexed for it, and therefore sure it is not their own Iniquity.

Answer.

It Is no safe way for any man to trust to the troubles of his Conscience. O
sinner do not say with Agag, surely the bitterness of death is past, because
Conscience has terrifyed thee for sin. Many are smitten by Conscience in this
World, and yet shall be tormented also by it in another World. Many there are
that go ex inferno ad infernum, out of one Hell into another, out of the horror
of Conscience into the terrors of the Damned. And therefore it is great wisdom
to distinguish between the terrors of Conscience, which are good and which not.
I will lay you down some rules to judge of both.

1. Troubles of Conscience whereby a man is never the better.

1. Go to the fountain and look from whence all these troubles of Conscience
arise, thus, art thou troubled because thou have sinned and offended God thy
Father, wronged Christ and put him to shame, dishonored the Gospel, art a
stumbling block to others, because sin has defiled thee, or is it only for
fear of the punishment, art thou troubled only because thou art afraid of being
Damned? If so then I will show thee what thou art in the picture of Cain, 4.
Genesis 13. Cain's Conscience was troubled only for the punishment; so Ahab a
wicked Wretch he had such a troubled Conscience, 1 Kings 21. 27. What words?
see verse 21. This is to be troubled for Hell and not for Sin; and there are
many such now in Hell.

2. But suppose thou art troubled for sin, examine what sins they are that thou
art most troubled for. Are they only gross, open, notorious sins that the World
takes notice of? and can thou please and delight thy self in small and secret
sins? then is not thy Conscience good, and this trouble will do thee no good.
Thou art troubled that men see thee, but thou art not troubled that God sees
thee; see Ahab again, 1 Kings 21. 20. Ahab was more troubled at Elijahs
presence, he considered not that God saw him; a good Conscience will be
troubled for every sin. David's Conscience smote him only for cutting of the
Skirt of Saul's Garment? A man that has a tender skin will cry out more for the
prick of a little pin, than another for a wound or gash made with a sharp
sword; so a man that has a tender Conscience, 13. Heb. 18. mark it in all
things; a good Conscience will dispense with no sin.

3. Examine whether this trouble of Conscience drives thee, what does it set
thee to do for thy cure? you may know the disease sometimes by the plaster. Do
these tronbles drive thee to God, the only Physician of a troubled spirit, and
who only has the balm that can cure the wounds of Conscience? or do thou
take other courses that are not warrantable by the word of God? as merry boon
companions or mirth, or the like, to drown these sorrows? then see thy picture,
1 Samuel 16. 14, 15, 16, 17. O Brethren, this is only like drinking in a dropsy,
eases for the present, but makes the sick man the worse afterward; there are
many such troubled Consciences in Hell.

4. Examine the effects of this trouble. Art thou any whit reformed by it, or
do thou loath sin by it? or otherwise does it not rather drive thee further
and further into sin, O this is an ill sign, when the terrors of Conscience do
not make thee make more Conscience of sin; see thy Picture once more, 24. Acts
25. see what effects verse. 26, 27. Paul leaves Foelix as he found him, and
Foelix leaves Paul as he found him. His trembling fit did not make him at all
afraid of sin; there are many such troubled Consciences in Hell.

2. Troubles of Conscience when a man is better by them.

You may know this partly by opposition to what has been said. I will only lay
down a few particulars briefly.

1. When the Soul is troubled only for the sin committed, when his sin is a
greater burden to him than Hell it self, when he mourns only for sin, 5. Lam.
16. 13. Job 26.

2. When the Soul is more careful to wash away the spot, and the stain and
filth of sin, than to be freed from the punishment of sin, 51. Psalm 2, 7. like
a cleanly man that is fallen into the dirt, he is never quiet till he has
shifted himself and put on clean clothes, a sloven if he fall into the dirt
cares not if he be not hurt.

3. When the Soul is more careful ever after of running into the same sin
again, 34. Job. 31, 32. No says such a Soul, if it please God I will have no
more to do with sin, when such a Soul will not be tempted to sin for the gain
of a Kingdom; when Conscience thus smites a man, it is like the wounds of a
friend, which are far better than the kisses of an enemy.

4. Plea.

But what say others! O we pray and read the Scriptures and hear Sermons, keep
up duties in our Families, and good orders, and frequent the Ordinances, surely
we are purged from our Iniquities; none under the power of sin do as we do.

Answer.

1. In the words of our Savior, what do you more than others? do not even the
Hypocrites the same? they run to Sermons, they thrust themselves to Sacraments,
they read Chapters, and pray in their Families, they keep a clean outside.
Hypocrites are as much in these duties as any, and the reasons of it are these.

1. That they may have somewhat to boast of, and therefore this is always an
Hypocrites note to boast of his duties. I fast twice in the Week etc. and I do
so or so; whereas a true Saint is even ashamed of his best duties, and flings
them away as rags; the Hypocrite he seeks his own glory in duties, a true Saint
seeks only God's Glory, and that is the reason he performs duties at all.

2. That they may by these outward duties, cloak and cover their inward lusts
and corruptions, hide their beloved sins; hence our Savior calls them gilded
and painted Sepulchers, 30. Prove. 20. so the Hypocrite after he has slily
committed a sin, then he wipes his mouth with some Heavenly Speeches or Prayers
or the like, and O then he passes for a Saint; whereas a sincere heart he
performs duties to get rid of sin, the Hypocrite he performs duties thereby to
keep his sins.

3. That they may have somewhat to trust unto and to rest upon. All the hope
and confidence in the Hypocrite is in what he has done; whereas a true Saints
confidence is only in what Christ has done for him; you shall see both these;
what does the Hypocrite plead at the day of Judgment? see 13. Luke 26. his
duties. But what is a true Saints confidence then? only Christ's merits and
righteousness, 3. Phil. 8, 9.

2. A man may do all these duties and yet live under the power of sin. A man
may pray against sin and yet delight in sin. Are there not many among us, too
many that say over the Lords Prayer every day, yea some many times in a day,
Hallowed be thy Name, thy Kingdom come, thy will be done, yet continue to be
Swearers, Drunkards, scoffers at Holiness, and Sabbaoth-breakers, yea and
delight in these sins? and what more contrary? Again some will speak against
those very sins that they love best, 2 Samuel 15. 3, 4. while Absalom was there
railing against injustice, he was then plotting the greatest peace of wrong and
injustice, in taking away his Fathers Kingdom from him. As our Ranters, that
will sit drinking of healths so long till they have quite drank away their own
health; so many do even harden themselves in their sins by their holy duties,
when they do pray one ways, and their hearts are set the other ways, O how
loath are they that God should hear their Prayers; Saint Austin confesses that
before his conversion he prayed for chastity, yet was afraid, (as he writes of
himself,) least God should hear his Prayers too soon, for he was not yet
willing to part with his lusts; so do many perform duties, only out of
formality and custom, not that they have any desire to be rid of their sins.

3. Duties performed where the life is not reformed will but harden a man's
heart the more in sin. Tundens pectus, and non corrigens vitia, illa
consolidat. Aug. Hence is that of our Savior, 21. Mat. 31. latter part, these
Persons are the furthest of from Conversion, therefore,

4. That you may not on the one side be discouraged from Holy Duties, nor on
the other side be deceived and deluded by them, labor after the power of
Godliness in your hearts; set your selves to be Christians indeed, and then
these duties will be great helps to you. Do not make these duties all your
Religion, but only means to further you in the ways of Holiness; labor for a
pure heart, then will God accept of your duties; say of all these duties as
Haman of all his honors, 5. Esther 11, 12, 13. I am one that enjoy great
privileges, am Baptized into the name of Christ, partake of the Ordinances of
Christ, sit under the means of grace, perform all Holy Duties, but what will
all this avail me, as long as I see this Mordecai my own Iniquity sitting in my
heart and ruling there. O Beloved, this is the duty of duties, the main duty of
all to purge out sin, labor for a sincere heart, else all your duties will be
to no purpose, 66. Psalm 18. and then,

5. And lastly, a word to those that perform no duties at all, that have no
Praying or Reading the Scriptures in their Families, no frequenting the
Ordinances, and flighting the means of grace, if there be many that do these
things that shall go to Hell; O what will become of you that come far short of
them that come short of Heaven? 1 Pet. 4. 18. if they that have the form of
Godliness must to Hell, where shall your place think ye be in Hell; that are
the very pictures of Atheism and Profaneness? O think of this and labor to be
better and to do better. O you that call your selves Christians, do not live
like so many swine in their sties, only to eat and drink and sleep, but live to
God, and honor God, and serve God in your houses, and then the blessing of God
shall be upon your Families.

5. Plea.

O but say some we have reformed our selves, and have left many of our sins and
of our evil courses, and we are now more out with sin, than ever we were in our
lives.

Answer.

1. You say you are reformed; but how? why you have left many sins. Is it so?
that is a good beginning, but you must not stay and rest there, your work is not
done. This is just as if a man whose arm is gangrened, cuts off all his
fingers, that will not save his life for the gangrene is higher up in his arm;
so for a man to leave only some sins, and to suffer the domineering heart
rotting sin still to abide, this will not keep that man out of Hell. Herod did
many things yet a Reprobate, Agrippae was almost persuaded to be a Christian,
yet a castaway; you may do the like and be in their condition; and therefore I
will lay down a few particulars to be considered by you.

1. There is no sinner in the World but abstains from some sins, yea hates some
sins; go to the Covetous man, and ask him to go to the Tavern and there to
revel it and spend his money, O he will tell you he cannot endure this drinking
and tippling, it is an offense to God to spend and waste our Estates so vainly;
go to the Drunkard and tell him of Covetousness, O he cannot endure this
hoarding up of money, he loves to spend it freely, 2. Romans 22. latter part.
Judas a covetous Wretch, he pleads for Charity to the Poor, 12. John 3, 4, 5,
6. if the leaving of some sins, or the hating of some sins would make a man a
Saint, all the World would be Saints.

2. When the Scripture gives us the Character of a true Saint, it does not
describe him by leaving of such or such particular sins; but by forsaking sin
in the general; 1. Job 1. he eschewed evil, i. e. he avoided every sin; so
repentance is a turning from every sin, 26. Acts 18. every sin is darkness, now
if a man turn from every sin but one, yet he cannot be said to turn from
darkness, because that sin is darkness; take a piece of cloth that has twenty
spots of dirt, and wash away nineteen of them, yet you cannot say that cloth
is clean, why because there is a spot of dirt in it; no more can you say that
man is a Saint, that reforms many things if he live but in one sin.

3. Those that have reformed many sins, yet they must repent of the rest, and
turn from the^ too if they hope ever to find mercy; Christ will never own us,
while we do own the least Iniquity. Observe but the Message of Christ sends to
the Church of Pergamus, 2. Rev. 12, 13. why was not all this well, but mark
further, 14, 15. O but you will say, this is not so great a matter, as long as
she had so many good things in her, therefore hear what Christ says to her
verse 16. O says Christ, all this will not do unless thou repent of this sin
also; so Beloved say I to you, you that have left many sins that formerly you
were guilty off, all this will not do unless you leave every sin; should a man
that is a Swearer come and tell me he was formerly a Drunkard, but he has left
that, a Liar, but he has left that, a despiser of Ordinances, but now he
frequents them and many more; O but have thou left thy Swearing too? else all
is nothing; look once more into your hearts, is there any sin behind, repent of
that, turn that out also, else all is to no purpose.

2. You say you have reformed your selves in many things, and have left many
sins, let us a little examine this reformation, it is to be feared it is no sound
true reformation, look to the bottom, and you will find it very dirty there,
and the reason is this, because he that truly hates one sin, will upon the same
account hate every sin; true reformation routs out every sin.

Now there be two Questions that will resolve this case.

Question.

1. What are the sins thou art reformed from? Answer truly to this Question.

1. Are they not only some small petty sins that thou never made any great
matter of, thou never tookest any great delight in; but still retainest thy
great and best beloved and delightful sins. This is to do just like Saul, 1 Samuel 15. 3. God bids him destroy all the Amalekites, spare none of them says
God, well what does Saul, see verse the 9 th. he spares Agag and the best of
the Cattle notwithstanding; just so thou servest God, God bids thee part with
every sin, no thou will spare the best.

2. Are they not only those sins, that cross thy designs or hinder thy
preferment in the World, 2 Kings 12. 2. Jehoash could willingly have set up
Idolatry, as appears by what he did afterward, O but he was but young, and he
durst not anger Jehoiada the Priest, for fear of loosing his Kingdom; so when
Religion is in fashion, O many a man will leave his sins if he see they hinder
his preferment. A Godly Man has a Wicked Son, he tells him, if he leave not
his idle courses, he will disinherit him, for fear of loosing an Estate, have
many left their sinful courses.

3. Are they not such sins, gross Iniquities, that all the Country would cry
shame upon thee if thou did not leave them. O how many are there that leave
their sins, just as they leave their old clothes, because they are out of
fashion? sinners love to be singular in nothing, no not in sinning, if they
have not companions in their sins, they will leave them.

4. Are they not such sins as have first left you; just as some are fain to
leave off their clothes, because they have out grown them, so many have out
grown their sins; the Drunkard is taken sick and lame, he cannot go to the Ale
house as formerly, and so he has left that sin, it is time, the Adulterer his
body is quite worn out, he cannot do as formerly, and so he has left that sin
because he cannot commit it. Alas Brethren, if this be all your reformation it
is altogether unsound and good for nothing.

Question.

2. What kind of reformation is this? you may know it by these particulars.

1. Is it only an outward reformation, a reforming of the life and not of the
heart, a reforming of the actions and not of the affections? if so it is not
right, true conversion always begins at the heart; that man's life can never be
good if his heart be not good; this is just like Lot's Wife leaving of Sodom,
19. Genesis 26. This is Simon Magus repentance, 8. Acts 21.

2. Is this a reformation only of passion, and not of sound reason and
judgment; do thou only leave sin in an anger, or a passionate fit, and not
out of a due and serious consideration of the evil of it, and the deadly nature
of it. This is just like Saul's reformation, 1 Samuel 28. 3, 7. Saul put away the
Witches only in an angry mood, and afterward seeks to them again. No, no, true
and serious repentance is wrought by serious deliberation; he that leaves his
sin only in an anger, when his anger is over will to it again. As furious
Gamesters, in an anger will fling up their cards and dice, and swear they will
play no more, when their anger is over, perhaps the very next day they are at
it again; so do many deal with sin; true reformation is a deliberate work, and
always has conviction and humiliation going before.

3. Is this reformation only a leaving of sin and not an hating of sin. It Is
true, thou do thrust sin out of doors, but thou can not say thou art angry
with it: Alas this is but like a Landflood 'twill not last long. David
Banished his Son Absalom, but he was not angry with him, and see what follows,
2 Samuel 13. 3^. if thou deal so with sin, thy Soul will ere long desire and long
for this thine Absalom again; true repentance is with anger and indignation in
the heart against sin, 2. Cor. 7. 11. just like Ephraim, how angry is he, 14.
Hosea. 8.

4. Is thy reformation only a turning from sin, and not a turning to God; it is
not enough to hate sin, but we must love holiness, to leave sin but we must
cleave to God; we must love Christ as much as formerly we loved sin, else the
leaving of sin only is but an half repentance, an half reformation, 1 Thessalonians. 1.
9. 12. Romans 9. 1. Isaiah 16, 17. O how many are there that are grown cold in
the ways of sin, but yet are never the hotter in the ways of Christ, these
Persons are Neuters, they are neither for Baal nor for the Lord of Hosts; O if
we do not take in both these parts, our reformation is no true, sound, perfect
reformation; and therefore boast not of it, nor deceive your selves by it; if
you are no better reformed, you shall never be saved.

6. Plea.

O but say others, sure we are those that are free from our own Iniquities, for
we cannot endure the least Iniquity in others; we are no Hypocrites for we
cannot endure Hypocrites.

Answer.

1. If censuring, and judging, and finding fault with others would make true
Saints, we should have enough of them nowadays; the World is full of such
Persons like the Lamiae, those Witches that (as it is reported of them) carried
their eyes with them on their foreheads, when they went abroad to spy faults
in others, but put them into boxes when they came at home, that they might see
none in themselves. Mr. Greenham calls them the Devils Registers, that look
after other men's sins. A wicked man may hate the same sin in another, that he
loves in himself; witness Jehu that hated Ahabs Idolatry, but yet was an
Idolater himself; 2 Kings 10. 28, 29. so we read of Joab a wicked man, yet he
could reprove David for a sin, 2 Samuel 24. 2, 3. if this be all thou can
plead, thou may be ill enough for all this.

2. I add further, that it is the very sign of an Hypocrite and a naughty heart
to be angry with others for sin, and not to be angry with our selves for sin;
the old Proverb is true, Whores will call Whores first. These Persons they do
the Devils work, for he is still accusing one or other before God, when he is
the worst of all himself.

3. If we would deal uprightly with sin, let us follow the Gospel Rules in this
case, and they are two.

1. In judging and censuring let us ply that work at home; the directions that
the Apostle gives to the Wife, may well serve in this case, that the Wife ought
to keep at home; so in judging Christians ought to keep at home, 1 Cor. 11. 31.
It Is our selves we must judge and censure, and the more the better; but we must
not go abroad, 14. Romans 10. and 4. James 12. it is dangerous meddling here.

2. In reproving or reforming, we must first begin at home and afterward go
abroad; it is our Saviors own Rule, 7. Matthew. 3, 4, 5. we ought to be good
examples to others; and then we might spare reproofs, our very lives would
better serve the turn. Tibi ipsi esto durus nunquam aliis Bern. This Brethren,
is the best way to save our selves and others, to destroy our own sins, and
others will be thereby provoked the better to leave their Iniquities. Christ
compares his Disciples to Salt; that is savoury in it self, and savours all
other things, a Christians savoury life makes others to relish Godliness the
better; again he compares them to lights, now a Godly life is not only shining
in it self, but directs others the way, therefore if we would glorify God let
us look to our selves, and if we would provoke others to holiness, let us
follow it our selves, 5. Mat. 16.

7. Plea.

O but say others, we are not those that make a mere profession, our good works
are to be seen. Our Savior tells us the tree is known by his fruits, and
grapes are not gathered of thorns, nor figs of thistles.

Answer.

1. It Is the surest sign of a Saint (as far as we can judge) to be fruitful in
good works, and yet an Hypocrite, he may also imitate a Saint in these likewise
and deceive the World; did not the Pharisees which were Hypocrites give much
Alms, were liberal to the Poor; did not Saul a wicked King slay all the Witches
and Wizards; Jehu destroyed Baal; the unjust judge avenge the poor Widow of her
Adversaries; were not all these good works as to the matter of them, and yet
the Persons that did them wicked? therefore,

2. We must look to the Qualifications of them. Now there are several
qualifications required in good works to make them good in the sight of God,
which can be found in none but true Saints. As,

1. They must proceed from a good heart, 12. Matthew 33. so 8. Luke 15. God
looks to the goodness of the heart, if our hearts be naught* God will never
taste of the fruit we bear. That Is the root.

2. The tree must belong to Christ, or else he will never own the fruit; the
Woman is first Married, and then she bares Children, else what she bring forth
before Marriage are not legitimate; so all our good things before united to
Christ, etc.* therefore the Fathers call all the virtues and good works of the
Heathens, splendida peccata, only because they did not belong to Christ. Nay
Christ tells us, that none out of him can do any thing acceptable unto God, 15.
John 4. Look that you belong to Christ.

3. For the fruit it self. The^ qualifications.

1. They must be done in Faith. He that has no Faith cannot please God. Faith
that ripens all our fruits else they will taste very raw.

2. In Charity. 1 Cor. 13. 3. without charity i. e. a true love to God and
Holiness, all our fruits will taste sower.

3. Our good fruits must bear proportion.

1. To our former bad fruits, 6. Romans 19. we must do as much for God as
formerly for our selves, or the Devil, or sin, or lusts.

2. To the Soil we are planted in, i. e. to the means of grace we live under,
92. Psalm 13, 14. God expects more from us than from others; less would carry a
man to Heaven formerly than now, because we have more means than they.

4. We must look especially that our aim and end be good, or else our works
cannot be good, 1 Cor. 10. 31. Now if such be our fruits, then may I say to you
in the words of the Apostle, 6. Romans 22. Now are ye made free from sin, and
become servants unto God, and ye have your fruit unto Holiness, and the end
shall be everlasting life.

3. Motives together with means and directions.

1. Motives.

Though the several reasons of the Doctrine laid down already might serve as so
many strong convincing motives against this sin, yet because it is a sin of so
much delight to us, and of so much difficulty to get rid of it. I will add a
few words more by way of motive to persuade you to this duty.

1. Keep your selves from this sin, because it is a beloved sin; this has been
proved already in the Doctrinal part, that it is the sin that we love most
dearly. Now if it be so, a sin that we love therefore let us cast it out; this
is the Gospel Rule, if ever we would be happy, we must love that which we
naturally hate, and hate that which we naturally love. A natural man hates the
light and loves darkness, hates God, loves the World, hates Christ, loves sin,
now if ever this man be saved he must be brought to this, to hate what he
loved, and to love what he hated, he must love the light and hate darkness, he
must love God and hate the World, he must love Christ and hate sin. Now here
lies the strength of the motive, if there be any sin that we love we must hate
it, cast it out because it is beloved of us; it is our love to this sin, that
makes this sin stick and cleave so close and so fast to us, 8. Cantic. 7. so
may we say here many waters, many tears, yea whole rivers and floods of
Repentance can scarce drown our beloved sin.

Here are three things especially to move us to cast out this sin upon this
very account that it is our beloved sin.

1. We love it; what love sin? do you know what you do when you love sin? sin
is communion with the Devil, and do you love communion with the Devil? there is
none of you all but would be ready to spit in my face, if I should tell you you
love the Devil, and you love his company; why yes, if you love any sin you love
communion with the Devil. Our Savior calls sin (...), 8. John 44. peculiariter
dicit? de amatoria cupidine. scapula. Now the Devil he loves sin, and if you
love sin too, here is your communion with the Devil; what says the Apostle to
the Corinthians, 1 Cor. 10. 20. He that worships an Idol as the Heathens did,
he has fellowship with Devils; he that loves any sin sets up an Idol in his
heart, and serves and worships this sin as much as the Heathens did their
Idols, therefore he has fellowship with Devils; you see what it is to love
sin; to keep a beloved sin in ones heart, is to have fellowship and communion
with Devils; all the Devils in Hell, riot, and feast, and make merry in that
man's heart. Are you not afraid of this, O then let this be an Argument to cast
out this sin, because it is a beloved sin.

2. If we love any sin we cannot love Christ, this sin will make us leave him
and forsake him. Judas his beloved sin made him betray Christ, O what an horrid
thing was that; and Brethren, are there not many Judasses in the World, that
will betray Christ to satisfy their beloved sin. Every man that has a beloved
sin in his heart, is a very Judas in his heart to Christ, let Christ and his
sin stand in competition, and you shall see that man will be the greatest enemy
to Christ, 3. Philip. 18. but who were these, see verse 19. here were their
Gods their beloved bellies, and their beloved earthly things, their beloved
sins, these were Christ's enemies, 2 Timothy 4. 10. what is the reason Demas
forsook Christ, why his beloved sin made him, he loved the World; what says
Christ, 6. Matthew. 24. so is the case here between Christ and Sin; he that loves
sin hates Christ, and he that loves Christ hates sin; the reason of this is
plain, Christ comes to destroy sin, therefore he that loves sin cannot endure
Christ, and sin that dishonours Christ, therefore he that loves Christ cannot
but hate sin. Christ and Sin are like Caesar and Pompey -- nec far partem
Caesarve priorem Pompeiusve parem -- sin will not endure Christ to be above it,
and Christ will not endure sin to be equal with him. Now here is a trial of your
love, are you resolved to love sin, then you must part with Christ? are you
resolved to love Christ, then you must part with your beloved sin; consider
seriously of this, whether a beloved sin will countervail your loss of Christ.

3. We cannot honor Christ better, than by parting with our beloved sin; O the
Lord Jesus will take this very kindly at our hands; when a man shall say, Lord
I have a sin, a lust within me, that I love most dearly, it is my darling O I
take great pleasure and delight in it, it is not all the World shall make me
part with it, but Lord at thy command I leave it, rather than I will offend
thee I will have no more to do with it, yea rather than I will not love thee, I
will hate even my beloved sin. O Brethren, Christ will take this weary kindly at
our hands; O that every one of us could say so! as the Martyr said when he was
wished to recant and save his life, no says he, if every hair on my head were
a life, I would lay them all down for the sake of my Lord Christ, so should we
say, if every hair on our heads were a beloved sin, we would part with them all
for the sake of Christ. Here is a true sign of an upright heart, and there is
no other sign of it, for a man to leave other sins it signifies little or
nothing, but when it comes to our beloved sin, whether we will part with our
Benjamin or no, herein will our love to Christ be tried, 22. Genesis 11, 12. so
will Christ say, O my dear Soul, now I know that thou love me, seeing thou
have not withheld thy sin, thine only sin, thy beloved sin, but have even
parted with that for my sake. O Brethren, you will show more love to Christ,
and respect to Christ in parting with this one sin, than with a thousand other
sins. And thus you see there is great reason, why we should keep our selves
from our own sin, upon this account, because it is our beloved sin.

2. A Second Motive is this.

This sin our own Iniquity, is the only thing that hinders the making up the
match between Christ and our Souls, were it not for this Christ, and we should
quickly agree and close together, without more ado; the sinner stands upon this
Lord spare me in this one thing, no Christ will not bate thee this one sin. O
Soul hearken to this, and if thou go to Hell at last, when thou art in Hell
remember this word, that it is only this one sin that keeps thee from Christ and
Christ from thee. Thou will not accept of Christ; why? because thou will not
part with this sin; and Christ will not accept of thee; why? because thou will
not part with this sin. O but perhaps thou will say, I have many sins more; why
let not that trouble thee, Christ will accept of thee with all thine
infirmities, if thou will but part with thine Iniquities, 11. Matthew. 28. if
thou art weary of sin, go to Christ he will ease thee, have thou thousands of
sins, if thou disown them, Christ will never disown thee for them. Here
Brethren, is all the pinch when a man will own sin, and love sin, and keep and
maintain sin, that is the Soul that will not close with Christ; come then
sinners let us examine the case a little; what is there between Christ and you,
let us try whether we can reconcile you together or no; come sinners speak,
what is it that Christ would have you do? why it is only this to keep your
selves from your own Iniquities; well, and what is the reason you will not do
this? why will you not part with your sins? O do not stand with Christ for so
small a matter as a sin; O let it never be said that a sin parted you and
Christ, that a sin kept you out of Heaven; why, do in this case as in other
cases of lesser moment, put it to reference, and choose whom you will to umpire
between you and Christ.

1. Let reason decide the controversy, 1. Isaiah 18. Christ you see is willing
to stand to this. Hear then what reason will determine in this case; does not
reason tell us, than an Estate of an Hundred Pound per annum is worth more than
a shilling? again reason tells us, that poison though it be never so sweet and
pleasant to the taste, is not good because 'twill kill us; does not reason tell
us, that a living Dog is better than a dead Lion; does not reason judge that
man a fool, who lying in Prison in a nasty Dungeon, will not have his liberty
when it is offered? Is not this thy case O sinner, reason it self condemns thee,
when thou will part with Heaven for a sin, and poison thy Soul with sin,
because it is sweet and pleasant to thy corrupt nature; to esteem more of a dead
pleasure than a living Christ; and when thou art so freely offered liberty by
Christ, to have thy fetters and shackles of sin knocked off, that thou will
choose rather to lie rotting in that stinking Dungeon of Hell to all Eternity.
Brethren, if you will but stand to reason that will cast you. But perhaps you
will say reason may err, therefore,

2. Choose you an Infallable Judge, and that is the word of God, O let that be
umpire between thee and Christ; hear what the Scripture says, 18. Mat. 8, 9.
8. Mark 36. what can be more plain than this? Brethren, if you will but read
the Scriptures and stand to their determination, they are infallable and will
not deceive you, you will not stand out for a sin any longer; but perhaps you
will say of the Scriptures, as Ahab of Micaiah, they speak not good concerning
you but evil, therefore,

3. We will choose another umpire, a bosom friend of yours, and that is your own
Consciences, refer the business to Conscience, and stand to what your own
Consciences shall determine. Hear what Conscience says, 13. Job 26. Job's
Conscience told him, that sin was a bitter Pill, a thing not to be beloved, 38.
Psalm 3, 4, 5, 6, 7, 8. so will Conscience, read you the same lesson if you
would but appeal to it. And let me mind you of one thing; though you will not
hearken to the voice of reason, nor to the voice of the word, yet you must
hearken to the voice of Conscience either sooner or later, if you slight it now
'twill roar against you another day; do but consider the case of Judas, 27.
Matthew. 3, 4, 5. Judas might have argued thus before, what shall I be such a
fool to leave Christ for thirty pence, O but he goes on without Scripture
Reason and Conscience, and after 'twas done, O what an Hell was Conscience to
him, it drags him first before the Chief Priests, and there Conscience condemns
him, it drags him next to the Gallows, and there Conscience executes him, and
after that it drags his Soul to Hell, and there Conscience torments him to all
Eternity. You see Brethren, what Judas got by his sin, O there is none of you
but will be ready to say, better Judas had parted with his sin, than with his
Savior; in condemning Judas you condemn your selves, you that stand with
Christ for one sin, for one lust, mark, this will serve you at last as Judas's
sin served him, if you leave it not 'twill bring you to Hell.

3. A Third Motive is this.

Consider how long God and Christ have waited upon you for this one thing, for
the mortifying of this your own Iniquity. Reckon up how long you have lived,
first how many Years, then how many Months, then how many Weeks, then how many
Days, then how many Hours, then how many Minutes God has so long waited upon
thee; every Year, every Month, every Week, every Day, every Hour, nay every
Minute thou have deserved to be cast into Hell for this thine Iniquity,
remember that God has spared thee all this while to try whether thou will cast
off thy sin or no; again reckon the Ordinances, Sermons, Sabbaths, and the
means of grace that God has afforded thee, and all this while God has waited
upon thee in every Ordinance, in every Sermon and every Sabbath, to try whether
thou would repent of this thine Iniquity. Reckon again all God's Providence
toward thee, such a time thou were sick, and Death looked in at thy Chamber
Window, the Devil was ready to draw the curtains to carry thee away to Hell,
but God spared thee, and raised thee up again, and ever since has waited on
thee for the casting away of this thine own Iniquity; such a time thou were in
danger to be drowned, such a time in danger of breaking thy neck by a fall,
such a time in danger of killing by such or such men, and yet thou art still
alive to read these lines or hear them read, remember that all this while, God
has been waiting on thee for the leaving of this thine Iniquity. God speaks to
every one of us as he did to Jerusalem, 13. Jer. 27. I have seen says God thy
sins all this while, do not think that thou art not punished because I know not
thine Iniquities, O but I have waited all this while to have thee cleansed, and
now Jerusalem when will thou be clean? what have I waited so long, and thou art
not clean yet? O when shall it once be? so says God to us, what sinners do you
think I have not yet waited long enough upon you, and what are not your
Iniquities gone yet? I have seen them all this while, O what will become of
you? look what became of those on whom God waited long and would not repent,
the old World, 1 Pet. 3. 19, 20. they are now in Prison, in Hell for it;
Jezebel 2. Revel. 21, 22. And what shall become of us if we abuse his patience,
see 2. Romans 4, 5.

4. A Fourth Motive is this.

Consider what gracious offers the Lord makes to thee if thou will but part
with this sin. God does not only persuade us, but he does wager us also to part
with our sins; shall I tell you what God offers, why part with this sin, you
shall have Christ, the spirit of Christ, the graces of Christ, the promises of
Christ, the Kingdom of Christ, the Crown of Christ, the Glory of Christ, and
the Company of Christ to all Eternity. Ah Christians, throw away your beloved
sins, and all these shall be yours, 8. Romans 13. there is the duty what follows
verse 14. what then verse 17. so 1 Cor. 3. 16. i. e. such as keep themselves
from their Iniquity, for the spirit of God never enters in till this sin be
cast out, well what then, verses 21, 22, 23. the Scripture is full of promises
to this purpose. But what can be said more? he that has Christ has all
things, what ever he can desire, 84. Psalm 11. O that God should wager us to be
sincere and upright, and yet we still remain willful and obstinate! we have not
only precept upon precept to leave this sin, but we have also promise upon
promise if we will leave it. O what sots, what bruits are we, if we should
esteem of this sin before all the promises of the Gospel, the riches of grace,
and the glories of Heaven. O sinner, let me speak plainly to thee, what would
thou have God to do for thee? to carry thee to Heaven with this sin in thy
heart, I tell thee God will not do it, yea (with reverence be it spoken) God
cannot do it. 21. Revel. 27. what has not God staked down sufficient against a
single sin? would thou have God to bid more? he has given us his Son
already, and with him has freely granted all good things to us? what would
thou have more? would thou be more glorious than God can make thee? more
secure than Heaven can make thee? more rich than Christ can make thee? more
joyful than the Holy Spirit the Comforter can make thee? and more blessed than
all the promises of the Gospel can make thee? Well sinner if all this will not
persuade thee to part with thy sin, I have done, keep it still, go to Hell with
it, and try what markets thou can make there.

5. A Fifth Motive is this.

Consider the several aggravations of this sin; should I reckon them up 'twould
make your very hairs to stand an end, and your joints to tremble; well I will
show them to you, that you may see I have not been so long upon this Text,
persuading you from this sin to no purpose.

Aggravations of this sin called our own Iniquity.

1. It Is a sin against light, sins of ignorance cannot properly be called our
own Iniquities, but that sin is our Iniquity, which though we know it to be a
sin, yet for some pleasure or profit or the like, we still retain it. This
aggravation heightens it above that horrid sin of the Jews in Crucifying
Christ, 3. Acts 14, 15, 17. verses, nay Saint Paul tells us, if they had known
it they would not have done it, 1 Cor. 2. 8. But this is an high aggravation of
sin to know it, and yet to commit it. All that Paul could plead for his bloody
sin was his ignorance, 1 Timothy 1. 13. If Paul had known it to be a sin, he would
not have done it for all the World, 26. Acts 9. But what can thou say for thy
self, O sinner, that sinnest against knowledge, thou that know swearing to
be a sin, and yet wilt swear, drunkenness and yet be drunk, whoredom, yet play
the baud, oppression of the poor, cozening, yet gripe and cheat. O know that
your sins deserve an hotter Hell, than they that Crucified Christ, and worse
than Paul's that persecuted Christ. O sinner, tremble to think that thou art
worse than Herod and Pilate, and the cruel Jews that spit in Christ's face, had
they known so much as you, or made so much profession they would not have done
the like.

2. It Is a willful sin. This aggravation makes this sin like Saul, taller by
the head and shoulders than all other sins; we pity a man that is working upon
the top of an house, and his foot slips, and he falls down and bruises himself,
but that man that goes wilfully to the top of an house, and on set purpose,
leaps down and breaks his neck, deserves no pity at all; sins of weakness and
infirmity are called in Scripture, (...) the slipping of the foot unawares,
these we are to pity and be careful of 6. Gal. 1. there are three words
significant, (...) preocupatus overtaken unawares, (...) the slipping of the
foot, (...) set him in joint again. God does pity such, and he would have us
pity such as sin out of weakness, but a wilful sin, it is a sin that God
cannot endure; see what charge Christ gives his Ministers concerning such
Persons, who wilfully cont^in in their sins against the means, 6. Mark. 11.
and again there is a dreadful place, 22. Revel. 11. and he that is wilfully
so, so the place must be understood; what follows verse 12. remember that under
the law there was a sacrifice appointed for the sin of infirmity, but the
wilful sinner was to be cut off, read and tremble, and that place, ^. Numb.
27, 30, 31.

3. It Is a deliberate sin; a sin in cool blood, this sin is the sin of our
thoughts, we contrive it there and then put it in practice; this is like the
Gadarens they besought Christ to be gone from them, for they had no leisure to
hear him Preach, they had work enough to do to look after their Swine; so these
Persons they have no time to entertain Christ in their hearts, they are full of
contrivances how to manage and carry on their sin. O this makes this sin
abominable, because we commit it with deliberation; an holy man may commit a
sin in a passion which he hates, O but these they set their thoughts and their
wits a work to commit this sin; the Scripture always condemns deliberate
sinning, 4. Prove. 14, 15. What sinners? O deliberate sinners, they are
expressed two ways (1) by contriving sin, forecasting it on their beds, verse
16. (2) by their deliberate commission of it, it is as their meat and drink to
them verse 17. there is a woe to such, 2. Mic. 1. these are far from mercy 14.
Prove. 22. err i. e. from mercy as the Antithesis note. I will show you the sad
end of such Persons in the case of Joab 1 Kings 2. 5, 6. Joab had killed many
in war, O but those two he contrived their death, he killed them in cool blood,
that brought sorrow to him at last, so here etc. tremble at it.

4. It Is an heart hardening sin, other sins defile the heart, but this hardens a
man's heart against all reproofs, admonitions, checks of Conscience, and all
means of Repentance whatever; this is another great aggravation of this sin,
this was that which was the sin of Pharaoh, God had sent him message after
message, and yet all would not do, because his sin had hardened his heart, this
provoked the Lord to destroy him. O sinners tremble at this, hardness of heart
will assuredly bring destruction; there are two terrible Texts to this purpose,
9. Job. 4. 29. Prove. 1. hear this you that have been told of your sins and yet
will not leave them, have had message after message, Sermon after Sermon,
reproof after reproof, and yet all is nothing, you keep your own Iniquities
still, O tremble to think that your hearts are hardened to your own destruction.

5. It Is a sin that makes us slight and contemn all the Judgments of God; as
long as we keep this sin in us, all afflictions will do us no good at all, 27.
Prove. 22. mark it, his foolishness i. e. his sin, we have two notable examples
of this; Jeroboam you know what was his sin, the Scripture calls it so the sin
of Jeroboam, God sends a Prophet to cry against him for it, what does he? see 1
Kings 13. 4, 6. mark it he prays that his hand may be restored, not his sin
mortifyed, it is a sign his heart was not humbled by this Judgment, as appear
likewise verse 33. the other is King Ahaz 2. Chron. 28. 22. O Brethren, take
notice of this when afflictions will work no good upon you, O this is the
aggravation of your own Iniquity; for any other sin, O how will God's Judgments
humble us and make us leave them, but this our own Iniquity, it is not all the
storms and tempests whatever will make us cast them overboard, O sinners look
on your selves you that have had great sicknesses and great afflictions, and
yet you retain your own Iniquities still, the Swearer his Swearing the Drunkard
his Drunkenness etc. O it is a fearful sign that God has rejected you as it is
said of Israel, 6. Jer. 29, 30.

6. It Is a sin of custom that is another great aggravation of it. O Brethren,
once committing a sin is enough to sink any of us to Hell, as once swearing,
once lying, once cozening, etc. but to make a custom of it, how can we expect
mercy. Is a Thief Arraigned for Felony, and it is proved that he has been a
Thief so many years, he has made it his trade and custom, the Judge will
condemn that man presently without any favor, never put such an Old Rogue to
his Psalm of mercy. O then what is it to make a trade and custom of sin; other
sins we may say men commit only by the bye, but this their own Iniquity, it is
their very trade and custom, there is a dreadful place, tremble at it you that
have lived in any known sin many years, 13. Jer. 23, 24.

7. It Is a sin that we take the greatest delight in, that is another aggravation
of it; to commit sin is ill enough but to take pleasure and delight in sin, O
that is most horrid. Is it not grief enough to a Father that his Son will do
what he would not have him, but to delight to vex his Father, O this is the
height of undutifulness; sin in Scripture is called a grieving of God, a vexing
his Holy Spirit, now they that delight in any sin, delight to vex God; the
Apostle reckons these Persons among those that are rejected, or given over by
God to themselves the saddest Judgment of all, 1. Romans 28, 32. and Christ
threatens them, 1. Prove. 22, 31. so 2. Prove. 14, 18.

8. It Is a ruling sin, that is another great aggravation of it. O Brethren, do
you not tremble at this to have a Beelzebub in your hearts, the Prince of
Devils, the King of sins; such a man has the curse of Cham lighted upon him,
to be a servant of servants, his other sins are servants, all of them to this
Iniquity this great Beelzebub, and he himself is slave to them all. O what a
case is that man in, that is servant to his sin, his lust, whatever work his
sin sets him about he must do it, there is no King in the World has such a
power over his Subjects, as sin has if it gets once to rule, sin will make a
man hang himself, or drown himself, or cut his own throat; experience is
witness, and therefore the Apostle exhorts us especially against this sin upon
this account, 6. Romans 12, 13. whatever you do, do not keep a reigning sin in
you.

9. It Is a sin that must be maintained at an high rate; a man's own Iniquity
will bring him as we say to skin and bones, how many have wasted all their
Estates to satisfy their lusts, and afterward have been fain to go a begging,
so the Prodigal. Nay it is not Estate and Body will serve the turn, this sin
will ruin the Soul too. O tremble sinners to think of this, God has given you
fair Estates in the World, God has given you healthy Bodies, God has given
you reason to rule all the Creatures in the World, above all God has given you
Immortal Souls, and will you spend all these upon such a baggage as sin is. Do
but think of the story of Absalom, he was the Son that David loved and cockered
most of all his Children, bred him up at an high rate, and this Son he seeks
his Fathers Life and Kingdom; so will this sin deal with you.

10. The great aggravation of all is this, that this sin comes nearest of all
sins to that great transgression the sin against the Holy Ghost; as we say of
some things they are so cold, as that if they were but a degree or two colder
they were rank poison; so this sin had it but two drams more, 'twere the very
sin against the Holy Ghost, and that is malice and final impenitency. O
therefore sinner take heed thou art upon the very brink of Hell, upon the very
borders and edge of that unpardonable sin, O cast out this sin least God cast
thee out of his presence.

Now Brethren, consider these ten particulars the aggravations of this sin, and
methinks none of us all should ever love it more; a sin so dishonorable to
God, so inconsistent with our profession, so scandalous in respect of the
Gospel, so opposite to true conversion, sound and sincere holiness, a sin that
wins our affections from Christ, hardens our hearts against the means of grace,
fills us with darkness, robs us of all graces, and renders us liable to the
Wrath of God and Eternal Damnation.

A Sixth Motive is this.

6. Consider the several dreadful effects of this sin. This sin is the true
Pandora's box, that lets fly all miseries and mischiefs upon us. This sin makes
our Souls a mere Bethesda full of impotencies, sicknesses, troubles and
sorrows; I can compare it to nothing better than to that poison which some call
the Jesuits poison, which (as some say) if a man drink it, he shall perceive
nothing, but it will work insensibly in his body, and kill him many years
after; so O sinner, it may be for the present thou see no evil at all in this
thy sin, thou find no damage at all by it, but many years hence thou may
find and feel the poison of it in thy bones the gnawings and gripings of it in
thy Conscience, be sure at one time or other it will meet with thee, 'twill
never let thee go to thy grave in peace. Brethren, give me leave to rip open
the belly of this Adder, and you shall see what a venomous brood is in it.

1. This sin the Dalilah that lies in thy bosom, and in whose lap thou sleep
so securely, has scissors to cut of thy locks wherein all thy strength lies,
it makes a man like Reuben weak as water, unable to resist the least
temptation, 49. Genesis 3, 4. Reubens sin took away Reubens strength and
excellency, so this sin whoever maintains it, shall never excel in any thing
that is good; what the disease of the Scurvy is to the Body, that is this sin
to the Soul, O how faint and weak and weary are many in Holy Duties, O how
feeble when under temptations, it makes a man unable to resist what is evil,
and to perform any thing that is good, read that story 7. Josh. 2, 3, 4, 5.
what was the reason of this, you shall see verses 10, 11, 12, 13. you see how
that one Achan in the Camp of Israel, made them all faint and loose all their
strength. O Christians when you find your selves weak in faith, weak and faint
in Holy Duties, in serving God, weak in opposing temptations and lusts, why
then look narrowly, there is an Achan in your hearts, and till that sin be out
you can have no strength; O Brethren, what a sad thing is this? If I speak in
respect of the body, you will understand me the better; what a sad thing is it
for a man that has nothing but his labor to maintain himself and Family
withal, for this man to loose all his strength that he is not able to help
himself, O this weakness will bring poverty on apace upon him, you will pity
such a man, O you will say he is a poor weak creature and deserves to be
pitied; pity your own Souls you are ready to drop into Hell, and you cannot
help your selves, why sin has weakened you, you may say a Prayer but there is
no strength in it, you may keep Sabbaths and perform Holy Duties, but there is
no strength in them, and no good comes to your poor Souls by them, you may go
to the Sacrament, but you get no strength by it; what fresh-water-Soldiers are
you to oppose the vanities of the World, or to look death in the face, it makes
you look paler than death it self. After God had reckoned up all the sins of
Jerusalem observe how he speaks to her, 16. Ezekiel. 30. so may we say to many
sinners, O how weak are you grown! what every lust too strong for you, every
temptation too hard for you, what so weak that you cannot shut your Mouths
against an Oath or a bad word, so weak that you cannot stop your feet from
going to the Alehouse, what so faint that one Sabbath in a week, one Sermon in
a day quite tires you out. O Brethren, you may thank this your own sin, it
takes away all your strength from you, Job will tell you the way to get
strength, 17. Job. 9. purge out sin and you shall get strength.

2. This sin will mix with all thy Holy things, and so make even thy best
things odious unto God; when thou prayest this sin will mix with thy Prayers,
and make them an abomination to the Lord, when thou hear a Sermon this sin
will be there with thee, and if it do not stop thy ears, yet 'twill barricado
up thy heart, that thou shall hear in vain or in hearing not hear, when thou
receivest the Sacrament 'twill mix even there also, 'twill come to the Lords
Table with thee, and so thou shall eat and drink there thine own damnation,
like Judas at the Passover, the Sop and the Devil both went down his throat
together, so the Sacramental Bread and Wine and thy Sin all go together, and
what do thou think Christ will say of such a receiving. O sirs know this that
God hates all such mixtures, he hates such services, 1. Isaiah 13, 14, 15, 22.
verses, O says God do not serve me so, I cannot endure this, either leave off
thy sins or leave off thy sacrifices. Gideon had Seventy Sons and but one
Bastard, and that one Bastard destroyed all the rest; you may easily apply this
to your selves, you have performed many duties, done many good works, but this
sin will bane them, poison them, destroy them all.

3. This sin 'twill be to you like the worm at the root of Jonahs Gourd, 'twill
make all your pleasures and delights to wither. Alas People they love sin
because they love pleasures, they think if they part with their sins, then they
must say farewell pleasures, farewell a merry and an happy life, whereas sin
like Summer frosts, nips the very buds and blossoms of all our outward comforts
and delights, sin poisons all these fountains from whence stream forth all a
man's comfort and delight.

1. Sin takes away the cause of all comfort, 2 Kings 5. 1. that took away all
Naamans comfort, in all his riches, and greatness and honor, so a man may have
great riches, great friends, great honors, but he is a covetous Wretch, or but
he is a terrible drunkard, or but he is a filthy Whoremaster, O these buts
spoil all, that man has no cause to be merry to day, that is to be hanged to
morrow, and thou sinner, though thou have money enough and estate enough to
make thee merry, O but thou have a sin also for which thou may be damned
before another day come. It Is madness for a man to laugh when he is going to
Hell; and as long as any of us do keep this sin we are going to Hell.

2. Sin takes away the sweetness and juice of all our comforts; one of the
Fathers compares all the pleasures of sinners to the bones that are flung to
Dogs, all the meat is picked off, and all the marrow sucked out; sinners like the
Prodigal have only the husks of pleasures, sin makes these pleasures.

1. Empty, like thorns make a great crackling, but give but a little heat, like
a nut that has a maggot in the kernel, like a glass of wine that has a Spider
in it; what comfort can a man take in these? they are like a bladder full of
wind to an hungry man; whereas cast out this sin and you may rejoice heartily,
as Mary when Christ was in her Womb, 1. Luke 46, 47.

2. Dangerous, like the Israelites Quails, so are all pleasures to sinners
dainty but dangerous, 78. Ps. 30, 31. it is a dangerous thing for us to be
taking our pleasures, when the wrath and anger of God is gone out against us;
small comfort to have God to frown on us; but cast out sin, and then there is
peace with thy pleasure, 3. Prove. 17. it cannot be said so of the ways of sin,
her ways may seem to be pleasant, but there is no peace in her paths.

3. Very short, that pleasure cannot last long where sin is gnawing at the root
of it, only the joy of the righteous is lasting, 4. Phil. 4. a man may rejoice
in sin but not always, may rejoice in the World but not always, but he that
rejoice in the Lord may rejoice always, no end of that joy.

3. Sin many times damps the sinner in the midst of his pleasures, it sends to
Belsbazzar an hand to write on the wall in the midst of his cups and merriment,
and makes him tremble; it smote Herod with lice, even while he was honored as
a God; suppose any of you at a great feast very merry, and news is brought that
your house is all on a fire, what comfort can you take in that mirth, you will
leave dinner and friends and all. O sinner while thou art merry in the midst of
thy delights the fire of God's Wrath is burning against thee, and Hell Fire is
kindling for thy Soul.

4. Sin will make all our comforts to end in sorrow, 2. Eccl. 2. A sinner knows
no measure in his pleasures, but he laughs even to madness. Nabal though but a
Country Farmer, yet he makes a feast like the feast of a King, 1 Samuel 25. 36.
but how ends it, see verse 37. A sinner's sun always sets in the darkest cloud;
he is all laughture in this World, and therefore is all sorrow in the other
World; put these things together, O what an enemy is this sin to us, that will
let us take pleasure in nothing, or else if we do take pleasure, like the Be
we are drowned in our own honey; this is another sad effect of this sin, no
true comfort while we have it.

4. This sin robs us of all our beauty, I mean of all the beauty of our
profession; what says Christ to his Spouse, 4. Cantic. 1. why Doves eyes? O
the Doves eye is most beautiful in this respect because it is the emblem of
chastity; this is the beauty of Christianity to have the doves eye, a chaste
eye looking only to Christ. Now sin that makes us cross eyed and to look a
squint, which is the greatest deformity that can be in the body, I am sure it is
in the Soul; God abhors a professor that keeps any sin in his heart, that looks
crosseyed, one eye to the World and the other eye to God, 16. Ezekiel. 25. O
Friends consider this, cast out your sin whatever it is, else all your prayers,
profession, good words, good works will come to nothing, all your fair shows of
being religious will come to nothing, Christ will not own you for beautiful,
Christ will not have his spouse to wear black patches in her face, I mean the
black spots of sin. Hear what Counsel is given to the Church 45. Psalm. 10. i.
e. forget and forsake for the sake of Christ all that is dear to thee in this
World, look only to Christ, and the reason v. 11. this is another sad effect of
this sin, 'twill make us ugly in the eyes of Christ.

5. This sin will by degrees steal away our hearts from Christ, as 'twill take
away our beauty that Christ will not love us, so 'twill take away our hearts
from Christ that we shall not love him. How can we love Christ and Sin both
together, the more we look toward sin the less we shall look toward Christ;
Judas loved sin and therefore betrayed Christ, Pilate loved sin therefore
condemned Christ, the Thief on the Cross loved sin and therefore he scoffed at
Christ there also; and if any of us love any sin it will make us hate Christ as
the Jews did, and fly away from Christ and forsake him as his Disciples did. O
Brethren, consider what a dreadful thing it is not to love Christ, 1 Cor. 16.
22. all the curses in the Bible are comprehended under those two words;
therefore tremble at it, to think what it is to love sin; it is a worthy speech
of Akempis l. 2. c. 7. de imit. Christi oportet dilectum pro dilecto
relinquere, quia Jesus vult solus super omnia amari. He that will love Christ
must have no beloved sin.

6. This sin will at last fill the Soul with horror; O sinner, thou delightest
in this sin now, but one day it will prove a Devil to thee; now it flatters
thee, then 'twill affright thee; now thou runnest after it, one day thou shall
run from it, and yet shall never be able to get rid of it. Judas he first ran
after his sin when he went to the Highpriests to betray Christ, O but
afterward he would fain have run away from that sin but could not; you sinners
that cannot endure now to hear others cry out against your sins, shall one day
cry out against your sins your selves; you that are angry with Ministers now
for crying out O ye Drunkards, upon your death beds you will cry out O my
Drunkenness, my Drunkenness; you that are angry with Ministers now for crying
out, O ye Swearers, upon your death beds you will cry out, O my Swearing my
Blaspheming of the Name of God; you that are angry with Ministers now for
crying out, O ye covetous Worldly minded men, upon your death beds will cry
out, O my covetousness, O my Worldly mindedness; you shall see what this sin
will do to you at last, 20. Job. 11, 12, 13, 14. v. O who would entertain a sin
that will bring such an Hell into his Soul at last.

And now sinners consider these sad effects of this your own sin, how it will
take away all your strength, make all your Religion odious to God, poison all
your pleasures and comforts, rob you of all your beauty, steal away your hearts
from Christ, and bring Hell into your Souls at last, and will you run all these
hazards rather than part with it; all that I can say more is sure you have a
very great love to it.

A Seventh Motive is this.

7. Consider the blessings and the benefits that will accrue to you upon the
casting out of this sin; these benefits are very many and very great. I will
only touch upon some.

1. Now may you truly rejoice and be merry, and you had never cause before in
all your life to be merry, 15. Luke 32. it is meet to be merry, before when sin
lived in thee thy Soul was dead, now sin is dead and thy Soul lives, nay more
(mark it) it is not the prodigal, but his Father that says so, O poor Soul thou
may be sad no more, for God himself will come now and be merry with thee; O
what an harvest, what a plentiful crop of joy shall that Soul reap, that has
weeded out this sin out of his heart! Assure thy self that there is a work of
conversion wrought in thee, when thou have cast out this sin. Now art thou the
Child of God, before while thou kept this sin the Devil was thy Father, now
thou may call God thy Father; will not this make a man merry? the Saints are
described in Scripture with harps in their hands, and singing 14. Rev. 2, 3, 4,
5. to note the joy and comfort of that Soul that is freed from sin; that day
that Haman was hanged proved a joyful day, and a day of gladness to all the
Jews. O that day that any of us has killed this sin, will prove the most
joyful day that ever we had in our lives; the upright are commanded to
rejoice, 32. Psalm. 11.

2. Now is the match fully concluded between Christ and thy Soul, now are the
writings signed and sealed, now O poor Soul art thou made the Spouse of Christ
an Heir of Heaven, and all that thou have to be troubled for is only this (as
Austin said of himself) Nimis sero te amavi Domine, that thou have stood out so
long before thou would yield to Christ; know this that Christ is thine, and
Heaven shall be thine; thou have parted with a sin and thou have found a
Savior; formerly sin and you were all one, now Christ and you are all one, 17.
John 20, 21. Brethren, this is both an unspeakable Mystery, and also an
unspeakable Mercy, for a poor Soul to be united to Christ, O if sinners knew
this, they would never keep a sin more in their hearts.

3. Now can the Devil do you no more mischief, the Devil may roar and tear, and
fret, and fume, but he can do that Soul no harm that is united to Christ; O
what an happiness is this to be freed from the power of the Devil! when a man
has cast out his own Iniquity, then is the Devils Castle demolisht, and his
main engine broken to pieces, 10. Luke 17, 18. Obedience to the Gospel that
curbs the power of the Devil, obey Christ, and the Devil can never hurt you.
After Paul had commended the Romans obedience to the Gospel, 16. Romans 19. he
adds verse 20. the God of peace shall tread Satan under your feet shortly; cast
out this sin and you cast out the Devil, trample upon this sin and you trample
upon the very neck of the Devil.

4. Now you may trample upon all the miseries, and afflictions, and troubles,
and crosses of this life; such Nightingals may sing with thorns at their
Breasts. Upright Noah is safe and secure, when all the World is in a deluge;
the Mariners found a calm Sea as soon as they cast Jonah over board; the Army of
Israel quickly routed the men of Ai after they had stoned Achan to death. A
pure Conscience like the Town Clerk of Ephesus, quickly appeaseth a multitude
of distractions and discontents in the Soul, in the midst of outward dangers
and calamities. As Soon as Judas was gone out of their Company, Christ and his
Disciples sung an Hymn; O poor Soul, whoever thou art that have bid thy sin
farewell, thou may then also bid all sorrow farewell, 5. Job 19, 20, 21, 22,
23, 24. as a Father takes out the sting out of a Snake or Adder, and then gives
it to his little Child to play with it, so when sin is purged out, then all the
afflictions our Heavenly Father sends us, are like Adders without sting or
poison, he knows they will not nor cannot hurt us, we may then play with them,
9. Genesis 12, 13, 14. Observe it, God makes a Bow the sign of his Covenant; O but
that is rather a sign of anger; no, it is a Bow without an Arrow; so are all the
miseries of the People of God in this World like the Rainbow, it is a Bow
without an Arrow, there is no anger nor wrath in God against them.

5. Now are you fit for death, and now may you triumph over death; cast out
this sin, and then cry O Death where is thy sting? This is the work and
business that will cheer up your spirits upon your Deathbeds, this will make
you look merrily upon your Friends that come to you, merrily upon the World you
are leaving, merrily upon Death with whom you are to wrestle, and merrily upon
Christ to whom you are going. O will a Soul say then, I would not have this sin
in me now for a thousand Worlds, though once I was loath to part with it, and
could be hardly persuaded to it. When a man has paid all his debts, if the
Sergeant or Officer come and knock at his door, he will bid him come in and bid
him welcome; so a Saint whose bonds are all cancelled by the merits of Christ,
and whose sins are all purged out by the blood of Christ, when Death comes and
knocks at the door of his earthly Tabernacle, come in Death (says he) thou art
welcome thou art very welcome to me, I desire to be dissolved and to be with
Christ.

Now put these things together, would you have Christ to embrace you, the Devil
to be afraid of you, all afflictions to work good for you, would you live
merrily, dye comfortably, then cast out this your own Iniquity.

8. Another Motive is this. Consider how many loud calls you have to leave this
sin. I will be brief.

1. The voice of the word, 18. Jer. 31. 1 Cor. 5. 7. 12. Heb. 1. what should I
add more, it is the voice of the whole Bible calling upon us to out with sin.
This is the whole design of God in the whole Bible, it consists of four parts,
First, precepts commanding us to leave sin. Secondly, presidents or examples to
teach us to abhor sin. Thirdly, threatenings to affright us from sin. Fourthly,
promises to allure us and persuade us from our sins; if you leave not this sin,
you cross the whole design of God in the Scriptures; so that Brethren, either
part with your sins or fling away your Bibles.

2. The voice of the rod, Mic. 6. 9. and what does the rod say? see verse 13. O
Brethren, remember all the judgments of God upon your Persons, Families,
Relations, Goods, Names, Estates; remember this I say, that every rod calls for
Repentance, cast out your Iniquities, 36. Job 8, 9, 10.

3. The voice of the blood of Christ; Christ's blood has a voice it is a
speaking blood, 12. Heb. 24. Abels blood that cried for vengeance, Christ's
blood that calls for Repentance. Methinks sinners you may hear the blood of
Christ speaking thus to you, O do not trample me under your feet; O do not make
me as water spilt upon the ground, good for nothing; O do not leave me as a
witness against you at the last day; if you sin against me you must needs
perish, if you reject me there is nothing else can help you. Brethren, this is
the very Speech and Language of the blood of Christ to you, 10. Heb. 26, 29.
Now put these things together, and remember that God has spoken to you, you
have been often enough called upon* O do not sin against the word of God that is
a saving word; O do not sin against the rod of God, that is an instructing rod;
but above all do not sin against the blood of Christ, that is an healing blood,
if you sin against this blood, God has not a more precious sovereign balm in
all his Gilead for your Souls; and mind this that sinning against the blood of
Christ, will cost you dear at the day of judgment; the Saints they have this
blood at a cheap rate, and it does them good, but sinners must pay dear for it
to all Eternity.

9. Another Motive is this. Consider your profession, and there is enough in
this were there no other argument to persuade you against this sin. The Apostle
urges this same argument to the Ephesians 5. Ephesians. 3. this becomes not your
profession; so may we say here to willful sinners, O these evil courses become
not your profession; when Alexander was persuaded to run at the Olympic games,
made this answer. Vellem si non essem Alexander, when Scipio was proffered an
Harlot answered; vellem si non essem Imperator, so do you answer all
temptations to sin, Christianus sum, committere non possum; let others do as
they please thou art engaged to Christ, thy profession will aggrevate thy sin
the more. Consider some principal parts of thy Christian profession, they are
all arguments against this sin.

1. Look back to thy Baptism, there thou have promised and also sworn to
Christ to forsake sin, and have thou an own sin a dear sin that thou keep,
thou art a forsworn wretch; Baptism is a seal of the Covenant between God and
thee; now thou must either deny sin or deny thy hand and seal to Christ. Tell
me sinner, were thou Baptized or no? if yea, and what live thou in a known
wilful sin, out upon thee, thou shall be far worse tormented in Hell than
Heathens.

2. Look upon thy prayers; how often have thou prayed against sin, and what
do thou live in sin; O abominable Prayers! thou shall be (...), out of thine
own mouth will Christ condemn thee. Do not say thou hopest to go to Heaven for
thy good prayers, nay thou shall to Hell for them.

3. Look upon thy promises; speak truly, when thou were sick did thou not
promise if God would but spare thy life thou would become a new man? when
thou were in trouble did thou not promise God to leave thy sin if he would
help thee out? Is not all this true? and what art thou the same man still? take
heed of breach of promise with God; God will not be mocked, 66. Psalm 13, 14.
an honest man will be as good as his word. O this is to make Religion odious,
and thy profession a mere stalking horse to thy lusts.

4. Look on thy coming to the Sacrament of the Lords Supper. Did thou not
come to the Lords Table with an intent to leave sin, if thou did, why do
thou not leave it? if not thou art a most base dissembling Hypocrite in the
sight of God, thou have profaned that Holy Ordinance, and the blood of Christ
will be required at thy hands. In a word, if thou leave not this sin, better
thou had never heard of a Sacrament, better thou had never promised
Repentance, better thou had never prayed at all, better thou had never been
baptized, yea ten thousand times better thou had never been born, or that God
had taken thee out of thy Mothers belly, and sent thee to Hell the first moment
of thy life. O sirs, consider seriously in what a sad condition you are in; the
very Heathens will condemn thee, and the Devil that tempted thee will cry out
shame upon thee in Hell. It Is a most horrid taking of God's name in vain, to
make an outward profession and yet live in sin; thy very prayers and Holy
duties will bring greater damnation upon thee, than the sins of Sodom and
Gomorrah upon them.

10. Another Motive is this. Consider what great things thou have to loose, 19.
Acts 24, 25, 26, 27, 28. O how did Demetrius his argument prevail with them to
cry up their Diana, (viz.) the loss that they were like to sustain by it. O
consider the loss you are like to sustain by keeping this Diana this your own
Iniquity, let this prevail with you to cast it out. O sinners, you are undone,
you are undone to all Eternity, unless you cast out this sin. Consider these
two things.

1. The things themselves you shall loose by keeping of this sin; they are
great things, things of great price and great value.

1. The Favor of God, the smiles of his fatherly countenance; sin that draws a
cloud before the face of God, hence is that expression, 90. Psalm 7, 8. O what
comfort can that man have in his life, that wants the favor of God, the smiles
of his countenance, a frown from God is like Hell it self.

2. The protection of God; when we are out of God's ways, we are out of God's
protection, 91. Ps. 11. every Saint while he walks in God's ways, has a sure
lifeguard of Heavenly Angels, 34. Ps. 7. O this is a blessed condition, O who
would loose this blessing for the commission of a sin. O go not out of the path
that leads to Heaven there is safety, in a sinful way thou art left alone,
there God and his Angels leave thee. A Woman that was a professor went to a
stage play, and there the Devil entered into her, when one asked the Devil how he
durst enter into such a one, he answered I found her in my way. O consider of
this loss, of God's protection.

3. Our assurance. Though the commission of sin may not blot a Saints name out of
the book of life, yet 'twill blot and blur his evidences for Heaven, and
without this assurance we can have no comfort, and while we live in any sin we
can have no assurance; O, sin will make us live in a doubting and despairing
condition. Sirs, if you know not what you loose by sin in loosing assurance,
you shall-know it upon your Deathbeds; O what a sad thing will it be to dye
without assurance, then all your Friends, all your Lands, all your bags of
money will do you no good, nothing but assurance is a cordial against death.

4. But greater things yet are lost if thou part not with this sin; thou shall
loose thy part in Christ, thy place in Paradise, thy Mansion in Heaven, sin
will keep thee from God and from Eternal Happiness. O sinner if thou will enjoy
all these things, then thou must part with this sin, let others that have no
hopes in the other World, let all those that have nothing to loose keep their
sins, do not thou for a sin venture the loss of all together.

2. Consider the loss, it is an irreparable loss, a loss that all the pleasures
of sin cannot make thee amends for, this is a loss will utterly undo thee. This
very thing made Holy Anselem say, that he had rather be thrust into Hell
without sin, than go to Heaven with sin; for it is not Hell it self can make a
man miserable, but it is sin that makes Hell a place of misery; were there no
sin in Hell, there should be no sorrow in Hell. O consider then what a loss
'twill be to you to keep sin, 'twill make you more miserable than Hell it self
can, you do not only loose a worldly estate by the first death, but sin will
bring a second death upon you also, whereby you shall loose all the Joys,
Glories, and Happiness of Heaven to all Eternity.

11. Another Motive is this. It is an unquestionable truth on all hands, never
any body in the World unless out of his wits did ever deny this; that we must
cast out sin. O sinner thou with whom God is pleading this day in this Sermon,
and has been pleading all along in the handling of this text, thou do
acknowledge the truth of this, why then do thou not practice, 14. Romans 22.
latter part, when thou say one thing (this sin must out) and do another
thing (keep this sin in thy heart still) thou condemnest thy self; thine own
Conscience will draw up a bill of Indictment against thee at the last day; take
heed of that, so likewise all others acknowledge this truth. As for other
Doctrines most of them have been and are called in Question by Heretics, This
he said in respect of the place where he Preached these Sermons.
but never any Questioned the truth of this, were this Church now full of
Papists, Socinians, Arminians, Brownists, Anabaptists, Millenarians, Quakers,
and all other Heretics in the World, I am persuaded we should all agree in
this, that every man ought to keep himself from his own Iniquity. O then
sinner, this Argument will leave thee inexcusable at the day of Judgment all
the World and thine own Conscience will condemn thee for not casting out this
sin.

12. Another Motive is this. This is the power of Godliness, the power of
Religion, all your Religion besides is but a form of Godliness. We will a
little alter the Apostles words, 1 Cor. 15. 14, 17. we may say here, if you be
yet living in this sin, and this sin living in you, then is not Christ risen
from the dead, i. e. as to you Christ is no better than a dead Christ, Christ
is not raised to life in your Souls, and if Christ be not risen in your hearts
your faith is vain, if you be yet in your sins all our Preaching is vain also.
Brethren, if you will not part with this sin all our Preaching will be in vain
to you. As some Quakers lately turned cast this in my teeth, that they got no
good by hearing of me, why Brethren, do I or did I ever promise any man
Salvation for hearing of Sermons, nay I tell you more, if you do not reform and
practice this truth, you will never get good by Sermon^ as long as you live;
never talk of Religion, never comfort your selves with sheltring your selves
under this Sect, or that Sect, this persuasion or that persuasion, till you
have cast out this sin you have no Religion at all in you; Religio vox vivenda
non audienda. There be many will give Christ the bare hearing of truths, but
Christ calls for doing as well as hearing; for living as well as learning.
Christ when at the day of Judgment he shall keep his great Assizes, he will
proceed there as in these Courts here, every sinner must hold up his hand at
that bar, Christ will examine our hands as well as our hearts, our actions as
well as our affections, 24. Ps. 3, 4. Christ will have works as well as words.
O Brethren, set upon this work, do not content your selves with a form of
Godliness, O let not these Sermons rise up in Judgment against you at the last
day; therefore I will conclude this Sermon with the words of our Savior
Christ, wherewith he concluded his Sermon on the Mount, 7. Mat. 24, 25, 26, 27.

2. Means and Directions.

And first of the Means.

But before I prescribe or set down the several receipts or antidotes, that may
serve as a counter-poyson against this sin, it will be necessary to put one
Question to you, and that is this, are you willing to part with this sin? if
you be but willing, I dare warrant you a cure, but if you be not willing, all
the Ministers in the World may Preach out their lungs in vain to you.

But perhaps some of you will say, this is a strange Question, why do you put
such a Question to us? what do you think of us? do you look upon us as mere
Hypocrites, do you think we are not willing?

Hear me and I will show you as strange a Question as this, that our Savior
put to a man, 5. John 6. This is a very strange Question if you consider three
particulars.

1. The sickness of this man; it was a Palsy, a sickness that makes a man's
life both a burden to himself and to all that are about him; now to ask such a
man, or indeed to ask any man that is sick, whether he would be healed, were
one would think a strange Question.

2. The length of his sickness; Eight and Thirty Years, one would think a man
that has lien bedridden so long, should be so weary of his disease, that he need
not be asked this Question, will thou be made whole?

3. The place where he lay at the Pool of Bethesda, the place of cure, he came
or was brought thither on purpose to be cured; why then does our Savior ask
him this Question, whether he would be made whole? Brethren, here is enough in
these three particulars to make you to wonder at the Question; yet consider
it is our Savior Christ puts the Question, and surely there is more in it than
we can see at first sight, for Christ the wisdom of the Father would not put
forth an unnecessary or unprofitable Question; and therefore there are diverse
expositions of it, I will name (and only name) some.

1. Will thou be made whole? i. e. will thou use the means to be made whole?
many love the cure that hate the means; every body loves health, few love
Physic.

2. While this man lay sick he was an object of pity and charity and might get
much alms, if he were whole he might loose them; the Question is will thou be
made whole? that is, art willing to loose what thou gettest by thy sickness to
be made sound.

3. He had been sick so long, that now his sickness was grown to be almost a
second nature to him, and it did not trouble him so much as at the first, he
had forgot the price of his health; so that the Question is will thou that have
layen so long sick be made whole.

I will name no more.

Now to apply this to our present purpose; there is every one of you has one
sin or other, that is your particular sin or sickness of your Soul, and you
have lien under the power of this sin many a year, some Thirty, some Forty, or
Fifty, or Sixty, or Eighty years; nay more you come to these waters the
Ordinances, you lie at Bethesda under the means of grace, as if you desired to
be rid of sin, yet still the Question is, will you be made whole? will you part
with this Iniquity? I know you will all answer, yes, you are willing to part
with sin; O but still the Question is will you be healed?

1. Do you love the means, are you willing to make use of such means as the
Lord prescribes you in his word for the good of your Souls? can your hearts
answer to this Question, whatever the Lord bids us do we will do it? like
setting Dogs that hunt eagerly to catch the fowls, but will rather starve than
eat any of them; so many hunt after Sermons but not do them. Do you endeavor
to practice all the Sermons that you hear; if you hear Sermons but do not
practice them, it is a sign you are loath to part with your sins.

2. Are you willing to forego whatever pleasure, or profit, or advantage sin
brings in to you, that you may be healed of it? O can your hearts answer to
this Question; there be many that say they hate sin, yet love the pleasure,
profit, and wages of sin. Brethren, if you love not the meat, why do you eat of
the broth? if men love not hanging, why do they love stealing? do as Zacheus
did, 19. Luke 8. if you would turn sin out of doors, turn all its lumber out of
doors too.

3. Have not custom in sin made you unwilling to part with sin? have you not
lived so long in sin, that you do not know now how to live without it? have you
not forgot the price of Salvation and the worth of your Souls? O you that have
been sinners so many years, you that are Swearers of Fourscore years standing?
are you willing to leave your Swearing? you that are Drunkards of Threescore
years standing? are you willing to leave your drinking? you that have been
covetous worldly minded Persons, griping Usurers, biting Landlords, that have
used the trick of cozening many years, will you be made whole? can you part
with your old companions, can you come out of Sodom and never look back, can
you cross the Red Sea, and not smell the Garlikes and Onions of Egypt on the
other side? can you or are you willing for the love of your Souls to do
whatever Christ bids you, and forego what ever Christ would have you? why
Brethren, if this be your resolution, then hearken and I will lay you down such
means be your sin what it will, I Will warrant you a thorough cure.

I have already in the doctrinal part laid down nine several remedies or
receipts against this sin, which if you would but make use of might work the
cure, but least you may have forgot them, I will add a few more and lay them
down before you as plainly and as practically as I can, so that if after all
this you still retain your own Iniquities and go to Hell, you shall thank your
selves for it.

1. The first is a very plain and easy receipt (and so shall all the rest be)
O sinner, thou have that within thee that will cure thee. As we say to some
sick Persons, what need you send to the Apothecaries, you have herbs enough in
your own gardens to cure you; so here I say, sinners you have that which can
cure you in your own breasts.

Quest. But you will say, I pray what is that?

I Answer thus. Friends what do you think of Judas? and what do you think of
Herod? and what do you think of Pontius Pilate? I know what you will say; you
will say thus, why if we had been in their cases we would not have done as they
did, if we had been in Judasses place, we would not have betrayed Christ; in
Herod's place, we would not have mocked Christ; in Pilates place, we would not
have condemned Christ; well I ask you further, what do you think of such and
such Neighbors of yours; why I know what you will say, you wonder that such a
one is such a Drunkard, another such a Swearer, etc. you wonder that they do
not leave their ill courses, you wonder that they do not look after their Souls
more and Eternity. Again I ask you further, what do you think of Sermons? I
know what you will say here also, why if we did but practice what we hear we
might do well; well then is this your verdict? is this your judgment? this
comes out of your own breasts, do as you say and you may cure your selves; you
say were you in Judasses place you would not have done as he did, why then have
a care you do not as ill as Judas or worse than Judas; you wonder at your
neighbors that they are no better, why, wonder at your selves that you are no
better; you say all the good that comes by Sermons is practice, why then if you
would get good by hearing Sermons follow your own directions. Do not give away
all your counsel to others and take none your selves; Our Savior reproves this
very thing in the Scribes and Pharisees, 23. Mat. 29, 30. so say you if we had
lived in our Forefathers days, we would have been better than they, O be as
good now as you think you would have been then; you that are able to prescribe
to others, why do you not prescribe to your selves? you that are such rare
Physicians in other men's distempers, take heed that you prove not very fools in
your own case! alas sinner, all the World cannot do thee good if thou art an
enemy to thy self, well sinner here is thy case, thou would feign go to
Heaven that is thy desire, thy very reason as it is enlightened by the word tells
thee, then thou must leave thine own Iniquity, now if thou will not follow the
best counsel of thine own heart who can help thee; thou speak against others
that live in sin, and art angry with them because they will not reform; O be
not like to some Parents, that will beat their Children for swearing and yet
swear themselves, or like some Magistrates that will punish drunkards, and yet
be drunk themselves; so that this is the first means improve what thou have in
thine own breast of reason, or counsel, or judgment. Many Persons can give such
counsel to others that if they would but follow it themselves would prove rare
Christians.

2. A second means to help out with this sin our own Iniquity is this; go to
the Scriptures Gods Pharmacothoea, his closet of receipts, and see what
particular receipt thou can find there against thy particular sin; the
Scriptures does not only give us general rules and directions for our whole
lives, but also particular directions in particular cases, and peculiar
remedies against particular sins; to instance in a few; is any man inclined to
the sin of Fornication? the Scripture has a particular receipt for that, 1
Cor. 7. 9. Is any man given to stealing? the Scripture has a particular
receipt for that, 4. Ephesians. 28. Is covetousness thy sin? a receipt 19. Mat. 21.
another 119. Ps. 36. Do thou distrust God's providence, our Saviors receipt,
12 Luke 24, 31. is pride thy sin, 11. Mat. 29. Thus Brethren, if you will but
search the Scriptures, you shall find receipts for your particular sins, and do
what the Scripture bids you do, and you shall find a cure wrought, Physicians
they ask this Question; How come People to dye that have so much sage in their
Gardens? may we not much more ask this Question: How come People to perish, so
many Souls to go to Hell that have Bibles in their hands, and Bibles in their
houses, and Bibles continually by them. O Brethren, make use of this excellent
book, this is Heavens dispensatory, here is a salve for every sore, here are
the waters of life the wells of Salvation for poor perishing sinners.

3. Have an eye to the promises of God in Scripture, these will stir up our
hearts to fight with our sins. I will allude to that story of David 1 Samuel 17.
25, 26, 32. so say I to you thus and thus shall it be done to the man that
casts out his own Iniquity, his name shall be enrolled in the Book of Life, his
portion shall be in Heaven, he shall be called the Friend of God, shall be made
a Coheir with Christ; O Brethren, would not all this stir up a man's spirits
and make his fingers itch to be dealing with this Goliath like sin his own
Iniquity; take the sum of all the promises in that one Text, 3. Rev. 21. how
many men have ventured their lives in battle only in hope to be Knighted, the
victorious Saint shall be crowned that is more, shall be crowned with glory
that is more, shall be crowned with an Eternal weight of glory that is more yet;
here is the very strength of the Apostles argument, 1 Cor. 9. 25. latter part.
Is an earthly Crown that last but for a while so forcible a means to make a man
run, labor, strive, fight for it; O how much more than an incorruptible. Now
sirs here is your choice, overcome this sin and you shall at death ride
victoriously to Heaven, triumphing not only over this sin but over every sin,
and not only over every sin but over all your spiritual enemies the Devil,
Death, Hell, and all the powers of it. Otherwise if you live as slaves to this
sin all your days at Death, the Devil will ride in triumph over you, dragging
your miserable Caitiffe Souls to Hell, to be tormented to all Eternity.

4. If any man would cast out his Iniquity he must also cast off the World; and
therefore know this for a truth, that that man that either loves or fears the
World will never cast off sin. It was a sad judgment upon Corah, Dathan and
Abiram, that the earth swallowed them up, 16. Numb. 32. and thus it is with
many now, the earth swallows them quite up, the World takes up all their time
that they cannot mind the everlasting concernments of their Souls; if you put
earth upon fire, the earth will put out the fire, so if there be any spark of
Fire or Heavenly zeal kindled in any Soul to the destroying of sin by the word,
presently comes in the World and quenches it; the love of the World makes many
with Demas forsake Christ and embrace sin, and the fear of the World makes many
with Pilate kill Christ, and save this Barabbas this Soul murdering sin alive.
O Friends, if you would renounce sin you must renounce the World also; the
Apostle tells us that they that mind earthly things are enemies to the Cross of
Christ.

5. Take not up a profession of Religion at large, but enter into a more strict
way of holiness. It Is the Devil that has taught men this damnable art of being
professors at large; that is, to profess Christ and serve sin; it is not enough
for a man to have a smack of Religion, no if ever we would be free from this
sin from the power of it, we must be Christians in good earnest. Those Birds
that fly abroad though some of them can sing well yet it is but their wild notes,
but the Birds that are kept up in cages these learn to warble out pleasant
tunes. A profession at large will never make a man leave his wild notes, 2.
Romans 28, 29. O do not content your selves only with being Baptized, with
hearing Sermons, receiving the Sacrament, saying over your ^ers, living
honestly, all this is only a pro^n at large, and will never kill the power of
sin; but learn the power of Godliness, get a true Faith in Christ, a true love
to Christ, a care to please him, be much in Communion with God, be much in
searching your hearts, in humbling your selves for sin, in bewailing your
weakness, in striving against lusts, in denying your selves, etc. this is the
way to kill sin.

6. Avoid the company of the wicked, those that live under the power of sin;
wicked men are sins panders and decoys to draw others into the net. Many a man
I am persuaded had not lived in such or such sins, had they not lived in
sinful companies; what Solomon says of the angry man, that may we say of the
wicked man, 22. Prove. 24, 25. it is a common Proverb, he that lives with a lame
man will learn to limp. How soon did good Joseph learn to swear, when he came
into wicked Pharaohs company; and therefore as you would avoid the sin avoid
the sinner; we read in Scripture how wicked men have often fared the better for
the Godly, but never that the Godly fared the better for the company of the
wicked, but rather the worse. I have read of the Lacedaemonians, that they would
never suffer a stranger to be with them above the space of 3 days, for fear of
Infection and Corruption with their evil manners. O we should be as careful of
having such for our companions, that are strangers to God and the power of
Godliness; it is impossible for that man to keep sin under his power, who keeps
company with those that are under the power of sin, 119. Psalm. 115. it is a very
hard matter to keep company with the wicked, and to keep the commandments of
God both together.

7. And lastly be much in Soul sanctifying meditations; when the stream or
river that watered a Meadow is turned another way, that ground will in time grow
barren again. Brethren, our thoughts and meditations are like streams and
rivers to Meadows, do make us fruitful in those things that we meditate on; if
we mind only wickedness 'twill make us fruitful in wickedness; now turn the
stream, and sin you shall see will dry up apace O meditate much on the great
things of Eternity, this will take of your appetite from sin. I have read a
story of a Godly Man who being tempted by his former evil companions to sin, he
made this answer, I am so busy in reading a little book with 3 leaves, that I
have no leisure so much as to mind my other business, and being asked
afterward whether he had read over the Book, replied, this book of 3 leaves
are of 3 several colors, red, white, and black, which contain such deep
Mysteries, that I have resolved with my self to read therein all the days of my
life; in the first leaf which is red, I meditate on the precious Blood of
Christ which was shed for my sins; in the white leaf, I meditate on the pure
and delicious joys of Heaven; in the black leaf, I contemplate the hideous and
dreadful torments of Hell, prepared for the wicked to all Eternity. Thus
Brethren, thus season your thoughts with such Soul sanctifying meditations, be
always full of such thoughts, and I Will warrant you the power of sin will
quickly be destroyed in you.

2. The Directions of two sorts.

1. In getting out this sin.

1. Be not over hasty in this work. I mean thus, do not think to get rid of
this sin presently or in an instant; O how many have failed herein, because
they have tried once or twice, therefore have left of and utterly despaired of
conquering this sin: Brethren, it is not the taking out of two or three buckets
of water that will empty a pond so deep as this is, no rather three or four
hundred buckets must be taken out, 2. Cor. 12. 8. (...) i. e. saepe
Chrysostomus apud Bezam. terque quaterque, look you must be often upon your
knees if you would quite rout this sin; chronick diseases are not soon cured
but perseverance is to be used in the use of the means; Christian zeal must not
be like straw that is soon kindled but quickly out. O Brethren, you must not
tire or give over though you spend your whole life in killing only this single
sin; O never think of dying before this sin be dead.

2. Do not set a time for this work but begin it presently. This is the great
folly of Christians in cases which concern their Souls they set times for them,
but in cases which concern only their Bodies or Estates they set on that
presently; some set the time of sickness when well; when sick set the time
after their recovery; some set that time when they are married and have a
settled Family, others that are Married and have Familes set the time when they
break up house; so we post of the time from time to time, till at last we loose
many of us both our time and our Souls; for the World we never think we can
begin soon enough, for our Souls we always think it too soon. I have heard many
old men say, O if they were young again O what Husbands would they be, how
would they provide for the World, but you shall seldom hear those that are old
say if they were young, O what penitents would they be. Consider the folly of
this setting of time, vid. Fullers good thoughts in bad times.

1. It Is a means to wast and mispend our time; we loose all the time wherein we
leave this great work undone, the longer we defer it the stronger grows our
sin, and the weaker grow we; sin always gets by our delays, and we loose by
them.

2. Hereby we discover our despising of God and his commands, leaving his work
to the very last; it is an affront and a great affront to God, after we have
served the world, sin, lusts, our pleasures, then to say that we will serve God.

3. The sooner we begin this work the easier will it be to us; fire is soon
quenched when it is but newly kindled, a young thorn or bramble is easily
pulled up, the fierce Lion may be tamed when he is a whelp; O the longer you
bear with your sins the harder will it be for you to get them out of your
hearts.

4. The sooner you begin the more pleasant will the work be. Repentance I can
compare it to nothing so well as to Butter, we say Butter is Gold in the
Morning, Silver at Noon, but Lead at Night; O so is Repentance, in the Morning
of our days it is Gold for its rarity, Gold for its purity, Gold for its weight,
Gold for its price; at Noon in the middle of our Age, it is Silver, it is of
great value but not so pure as in the Morning, we contract more dross and filth
to our Souls by that time; but at Night, O then Repentance is like lead to a
man, upon his Deathbed it is an hard tedious unpleasant work. O do not put it
off so long you loose the price and the benefit of it.

5. Take heed of staying too long least it prove too late. It is reported of
Thales one of the Wise Men of Greece, that being urged by his Mother to Marry,
he told her at first it was too soon; and afterward when she urged him again,
he told her it was too late. O Brethren, hearken to this word; when we exhort
you to part with your own Iniquities, we are urging a match, an espousal
between Christ and your Souls, Christ will consent if you will but part with
this sin, O do not say, it is too soon, it is too soon, perhaps before you hear
another Sermon Christ may say to some of you now it is too late. O make good use
of the present seasons, that is all the time you can promise to your selves.

3. Whatever you do in this work of casting out your own Iniquity, examine it by
the Scripture, else you may be deceived; the strength of a building consists in
the rectitude and straitness of it, and therefore to every stone that is laid
on, the Mason he lays his rule, his line, his plummet that it may be even.
Brethren, what we do by Scripture rule, we may be sure is well done and will
last to Eternity; when Saul would cast out his melancholy, the Devil he does it
by Music, that was the advice of his Courtiers, and not of God's word. No let
us follow the Scripture, what that bids us do and what means that bids us use
to the casting out of this sin, let us follow that counsel and none else; there
is peace to all that do walk according to that Rule.

4. Be sure you go not forth in your own strength against this sin or any sin;
O how many are foiled by Temptations, because they have not taken Christ along
with them, 4. Phil. 13. and we may add this if Christ had not strengthened him
Paul could have done nothing. O Brethren, be sure you forget not this, else all
that you do will be in vain. 'Twas in the Name of the Lord that David went out
to fight against Goliath, and it must be in the Name of Christ, and strength and
power of Christ that we must go out against this sin, and then shall we
assuredly return conquerors.

2. After we have got this sin out. Brethren, it is not enough to turn this sin
out, but we must keep it out else 'twill return again, 12. Mat. 43, 44, 45. O
prevent its return again, have a care of returning to it again, that will be
very dangerous, and therefore I will at present give you the advice the Prophet
gave to the King of Israel 1 Kings 20. 21, 22. so observe mark what you do, be
not secure, sin will rally up again, and the Devil will give you another onset.
Brethren, I might here as it were enter into a new field, and enlarge my self
very much, but my intent is to put a period to this discourse, and therefore I
will only lay down two directions in this case, and so conclude.

1. Pray much against this sin, even after you have thrown it out; prayer will
fetch down strength from Heaven to resist. A praying Christian is a powerful
Christian; the Devil trembles at the Prayers of a true Saint, O then neglect
not this duty.

2. Be watchful against this sin; what Solomon says of a Virtuous Woman may
be applied to this case, 31. Prove. 18. when a man comes to see the happiness of
being freed from his own Iniquity, O this makes him watchful and industrious
that he come not into the slavery of sin again, the good Christian keeps his
Watch-candle always burning. It was an excellent saying of Luther, apperuit
nobis in paradiso oculos Satan; nunc omnis labor in eo nobis est, ut eos iterum
claudamus and obturemus. Christ he bids us watch, and he would feign find us
waking when he comes, but the Devil he would feign find us sleeping when he
comes; security that brings sin to us again. O Brethren, after we have taken
pains to cast out this sin, let us not be so careless and negligent as to
suffer this sin to get possession again. And this is the way the Text points
out to us to keep this sin out to be watchful against it, the word in the Text
is (...) I kept my self, it signifies, as I noted at the beginning of my
entering upon this Text, the care and diligence of a Sentinel, that stands upon
his Watchtower to descry an enemy coming. O Brethren, are we Christians let us
be always upon our guard, always upon our Watch tower. Brethren, we can never
be too careful in this business, our Souls our everlasting condition depends
upon this, as ever we hope to appear in the presence of God at the Day of
Judgment, let this be the Rule of our whole lives here upon the Earth, To live
uprightly before God, and to keep our selves from our own Iniquities.

FINIS.
A Catalogue of Books Printed for, and are to be Sold by Edward Giles,
Bookseller in Norwich, near the MARKETPLACE.
SEveral Discourses concerning Actual Providence. A Word in Season. Defensive
Armor against four of Satan's most fiery Darts. Sermons upon the whole first
and second Chapter of the Canticles. Thirteen Sermons upon several useful
Subjects, all Published by John Collins, D. D. of Norwich. The way of the
Spirit in bringing Soul to Christ. The Glory of Christ set forth, with the
necessity of Faith, in several Sermons: both by Mr. Thomas Allen, late Pastor
of a Church at Norwich. Enoch's Walk with God and Christ, a Christian's Gain:
by Mr. Timothy Armitage, late Minister at Normich. A Discourse of the
preciousness of Christ, and of the preciousness of Faith. Precious Promises the
Portion of Overcomers. Sermons on five several useful Subjects; all by Mr. John
Longher, Minister in Norfolk. The Saints Ebenezer, by Mr. Francis English, late
Minister in Norwich. Directions to spell English right. The History of the
Protestant Reformation, as it was begun by Luther. The Dead Saint speaking;
being a Sermon preached upon the Death of Mr. Newcomb of Dedham in Essex. The
English Presbyterian. The Miracles of Christ. The ordinary matter of Prayer,
drawn into Questions and Answers. Two Treatises, the first, Rejoicing in the
Lord Jesus in all Cases and Conditions: the second, Of a Christian's Hope in
Heaven, and Freedom from Condemnation by Christ: both by Mr. Robert Asty, late
Minister of Jesus Christ in Norwich. Obedience to Magistrates, recommended in a
Sermon preached ^eptember the 9 th. 1683. being the Thanksgiving Day for his
Majesty's Deliverance: by Jonathan Clapham, Rector of Wramplingham in Norfolk.
A Present for Youth, and an Example for the Aged; Two Discourses, one of
Spiritual Blessings; the other, That God has an high account of the least
Grace in the Saints: by Mr. John Cromwell, late Pastor of a Church of Christ in
Norwich. Infant Baptism of Christ's Appointment: by Mr. Samuel Petto, Minister
of the Gospel in Sudbury in Suffolk. Of the Conversion of Sinners to God in
Christ, the necessity, nature, means, and signs of it, with a concluding Speech
to the Unconverted: by Martin Finch, a Servant of Christ in the Work of the
Gospel, in the City of Norwich. Sincerity, or the upright Man's Walk to Heaven,
delivered in several Sermons in the Parish Church of St. Michael, in
Long-stratton, in Norfolk: by James Oldfield, late Minister there.
POSTSCRIPT.
BY reason of the Publishers distance from the Press, there are several
Errata's have passed it, some of which are very material and quite spoil the
sense, as these following.

ERRATA.
IN the Publishers Preface, Page 3. line 13. after studied put in for this he
lived. p. 5. l. 26. for by it r. God it. p. 6. l. 1. for or r. and.

In the Sermons p. 5. l. 25. for upright r. unright. p. 10. l. 2. for as r. at.
p. 14. l. 7. instead of for r. so. p. 36. l. 25. after Christ put in your
selves you that can part with Christ. p. 39. l. 10. for and r. that. p. 41. l.
15. for may r. had. p. 48. l. 25. before other add in. p. 60. l. 1. for dines
r. deines. p. 73. l. 17. for weakest r. meekest. p. 76. l. 27. for and r. that.
p. 81. l. 10. for servants r. servant. p. 107. l. 6. for when r. whence. p.
109. l. 17. for and r. that. p. 111. l. 22. after can be add while we are thus
abroad to keep possession at home, to play its pranks in our own hearts. p.
117. l. 2. after will add so a saint sins but it is much against his will. p.
125. l. 24. for abroad r. abode. p. 141. l. 15. after wickedness add but. p.
143. l. 11. for will. r. would p. 215. l. 1. for in r. of.

These are the most considerable Mistakes, for literal faults and mispointings,
which are too many the Reader is desired to amend them.


