THE WORKS OF Mr. JOHN OLDHAM, Together with his REMAINS.

LONDON: Printed for Jo. Hindmarsh, Bookseller to his Royal Highness, at the
Black Bull in Cornhil, 1684

CONTENTS.
Book I.
PRologue to the Satyr upon the Jesuits. Page 1 The first Satyr. Garnet's Ghost
addressing to the Jesuits met in private Cabal after the Murder of Godfrey. 5
The Second Satyr. 24 The Third Satyr. Loyola's Will. 39 The Fourth Satyr. S.
Ignatius's Image brought in, discovering the Rogueries of the Jesuits, and
ridiculous Superstition of the Church of Rome. 74 The Satyr against Virtue.
Pindarique Ode 93 An Apology for the foregoing Ode by way of Epilog. 111 The
Passion of Byblis out of Ovid's Metamorphosis imitated in English. 119 Upon a
Woman who by her Falsehood and Scorn was the Death of his Friend. A Satyr. 139
Book II.
Horace his Art of Poetry imitated in English. 1 An Imitation of Horace. Book
I. Satyr 9. 43 Paraphrase upon Horace. Boook I. Ode 13. 54 Paraphrase upon
Horace. Book II. Ode 14. 58 The Praise of Homer. Pindarique Ode. 62 The
Lamentation for Adonis imitated out of the Greek of Bion of Smyrna, Pastoral.
Bion, A Pastoral in imitation of the Greek of Moschus, bewailing the Death of
the Earl of Rochester. 73 Paraphrase upon the 137 Psalm. Pindarique Ode. 99
Paraphrase upon the Hymn of S. Amb. Pindariq. Ode 107 A Letter out of the
Country to a Friend in Town, giving an account of the Author's inclination to
Poetry. 118 Upon a Printer, that exposed him by printing a Piece of his grossly
mangled and faulty. A Satyr 131
Book III.
Monsieur Boileau's Satyr upon Man, imitated 1 Juvenal's thirteenth Satyr,
imitated 25 David's Lamentation for the Death of Saul and Jonathan,
paraphrased. Ode 49 The Ode of Aristotle in Athenaeus, paraphrased 66 Upon the
Works of Ben. Johnson. Ode 69 The Ninth Ode of the third Book of Horace,
imitated 87 Upon a Lady, who by overturning of a Coach had her Coats behind
flung up, and what was under shown to the view of the Company 90 Catullus,
Epigram 7. imitated 97 The fourth Elegy of the second Book of Ovid's Amors,
imitated 99 The Fifth Elegy of the same Book, imitated 104 The Tenth Elegy of
the same Book, imitated 110 A Fragment of Petronius, paraphrased 114 An Ode of
Anacreon, paraphrased 116 An Allusion to Martial, Book I. Epigr. 118. 120 The
Dream, an Elegy 122 A Satyr, touching Nobility. Out of French 127 A Satyr,
addressed to a Friend that is about to leave the University and come abroad in
the World 137 Presenting a Book to Cosmelia. Elegy 149 The Parting. Elegy 153
Complaining of Absence. Elegy 156 Promising a Visit. Elegy 158 The careless
Good Fellow. Song 160 A Satyr concerning Poetry 164 The Third Satyr of Juvenal,
imitated 180 A Dithyrambick. The Drunkards Speech in a Mask 260
REMAINS.
Counterpart to the Satvr against Virtue, 1 Virg. Eclogue VIII. The Enchantment
13 To Madam L. E. upon her Recovery from a fit of Sickness 22 On the Death of
Mrs. Katharine Kingscourt, a Child of excellent Parts and Piety 31 A
Sunday-Thought in Sickness 34 To the Memory of Mr. Charles Morwent 49 To the
Memory of that worthy Gentleman M. Harman Atwood 95
SATYRS UPON THE JESUITS: Written in the YEAR 1679.

And some other PIECES By the same HAND.

The Third Edition Corrected.

LONDON: Printed for Joseph Hindmarsh, at the Black Bull in Cornhill. 1685.

Advertisement.
THE Author might here (according to the laudible custom of Prefaces) entertain
the Reader with a Discourse of the Original, Progress, and Rules of Satyr, and
let him understand, that he has lately Read Casaubon, and several other
Critics upon the Point; but at present he is minded to wave it, as a vanity he
is in no wise fond of. His only intent now is to give a brief account of what
he Publishes, in order to prevent what Censures he foresees may coulourably be
past thereupon: And that is, as follows:

What he calls the Prologue, is in imitation of Persius, who has prefixed
somewhat by that Name before his Book of Satyrs, and may serve for a pretty
good Authority. The first Satyr he drew by Sylla's Ghost in the great Johnson,
which may be perceived by some strokes and touches therein, however short they
come of the Original. In the second, he only followed the swinge of his own
(...). The Design, and some Passages of the Franciscan of Buchanan. Which
ingenious confession he thinks fit to make, to show he has more modesty than
the common Padders in Wit of these times. He doubts, there may be some few
mistakes in Chronology therein, which for want of Books he could ^ot inform
himself in. If the skilful Reader meet with any such, he may the more easily
pardon them upon that score. Whence he had the hint of the fourth, is obvious
to all, that are any thing acquainted with Horace. And without the Authority of
so great a President, the making of an Image speak, is but an ordinary Miracle
in Poetry. He expects, that some will tax him of Buffoonery, and turning holy
things into ridicule. But le^ them Read, how severely Arnobius, Lactantius,
Minutius Felix, and the gravest Fathers; have railly'd the fopperies and
superstitions of the Heathen, and then consider whether those, which he has
chosen for his Argument, are not as worthy of laughter. The only difference is
that they did it in Prose, as he does in Verse, where perhaps it is the more
allowable.

As for the next Poem (which is the most liable to censure) tho the world has
given it the Name of the Satyr against Virtue, he declares 'twas never designed
to that intent, how apt soever some may be to wrest it. And this appears by
what is said after it, and is discernable enough to all, that have the sense to
understand it, 'Twas meant to abuse those, who valued themselves upon their Wit
and Parts, in praising Vice, and to show, that others of sober Principles, if
they would take the same liberty in Poetry, could strain as high rants in
Profaneness as they. At first he intended it not for the public, nor to pass
beyond the privacy of two or three Friends, but seeing it had the Fate to steal
abroad in Manuscript, and afterward in Print, without his knowledge, he now
thinks it a Justice due to his own Reputation, to have it come forth without
those faults, which it has suffered from Transcribers and the Press hitherto,
and which make it a worse Satyr upon himself, than upon what it was designed.

Something should be said too of the last Trifle, if it were worth it. 'Twas
occasioned upon reading the late Translations of Ovid 's Epistles, which gave
him a mind to try what he could do upon a like Subject. Those being already
forestalled, he thought fit to make choice of the same Poet, whereon perhaps he
has taken too much liberty. Had he seen Mr. Sandys his Translation before he
began, he never durst have ventured: Since he has, and finds reason enough to
despair of his undertaking. But now it is done, he is loath to burn it, and
chooses rather to give somebody else the trouble. The Reader may do as he
pleases, either like it, or put it to the use of Mr. Jordan 's Works. It Is the
first attempt, he ever made in this kind, and likely enough to be the last, his
vein (if he may be thought to have any) lying another way.

SATYRS UPON THE JESUITS.
PROLOGUE
FOR who can longer hold? when every Press,
The Bar and Pulpit too has broke the Peace?
When every scribbling Fool at the alarms
Has drawn his Pen, and rises up in Arms?
And not a dull Pretender of the Town,
But vents his gall in Pamphlet up and down?
When all with license rail, and who will not,
Must be almost suspected of the PLOT,
And bring his Zeal, or else his Parts in doubt?
In vain our Preaching Tribe attack the Foes,
In vain their weak Artillery oppose:
Mistaken honest men, who gravely blame,
And hope that gentle Doctrine should reclaim.
Are Texts, and such exploded trifles fit
T'impose, and sham upon a Jesuit?
Would they the dull Old Fisher men compare
With mighty Suarez, and great Escobar?
Such threadbare proofs, and stale Authorities
May Us poor simple Heretics suffice:
But to a seared Ignatian's Conscience,
Hardened, as his own Face, with Impudence,
Whose Faith in contradiction bore, whom Lies,
Nor nonsense, nor Impossibilities,
Nor shame, nor death, nor damning can assail:
Not these mild fruitless methods will avail.
It Is pointed Satyr, and the sharps of Wit
For such a prize are the only Weapons fit:
Nor needs there Art, or Genius here to use,
Where Indignation can create a m^e:
Should Parts, and Nature fail, yet very spite
Would make the arrant'st Wild, or Withers write.
It is resolved: hence forth an endless War,
I and my Muse with them, and theirs declare;
Whom neither open M^lice of the Foes,
Nor private Daggers, nor St. Omer's Dose,
Nor all, that Godfrey felt, or Monarchs fear,
Shall from my vowed, and sworn revenge deter.
Sooner shall false Court Favorites prove just;
And faithful to their Kings, and Countries trust:
Sooner shall they detect the tricks of State,
And knav'ry, suits, and bribes, and flattery hate:
Bawds shall turn Nuns, Salt D -- s grow chaste;
And Paint, and Pride, and Lechery detest:
Popes shall for Kings Supremacy decide,
And Cardinals for Huguenots be tried:
Sooner (which is the great'st impossible)
Shall the vile Brood of Loyola, and Hell
Give over to Plot, be Villains, and Rebel;
Than I with utmost spite, and vengeance cease
To prosecute, and plague their cursed race.
The rage of Poets damned, of Women's Pride
Contemned, and scorned, or proffered lust denied:
The malice of Religious angry Zeal,
And all, cashiered resenting Statesmen feel:
What prompts dire Hags in their own blood to write
And sell their very souls to Hell for spite:
All this urge on my rank envenomed spleen,
And with keen Satyr edg my stabbing Pen:
That its each home-set thrust their blood may draw,
Each drop of Ink like Aquafortis gnaw.
Red hot with vengeance thus, I Will brand disgrace
So deep, no time shall e're the marks deface:
Till my severe, and exemplary doom
Spread wider than their guilt, till it become
More dreaded than the Bor, and frighten worse
Than damning Pope's Anathema's, and curse.
SATYR I. Garnet's Ghost addressing to the Jesuits, met in private Cabal just
after the Murder of Godfrey.
BY Hell 'twas bravely done! what less than this?
What Sacrifice of meaner worth, and price
Could we have offered up for our success?
So fare all they, who e're provoke our hate,
Who by like ways presume to tempt their fate;
Fare each like this bold meddling Fool, and be
As well secured, as well dispatched as he:
Would he were here, yet warm, that we might drain
His reaking gore, and drink up every vein!
That were a glorious sanction, much like thine.
Great Roman! made upon a like design:
Like thine; we scorn so mean a Sacrament,
To seal, and consecrate our high intent,
We scorn base Blood should our great League cement:
Thou did it with a slave, but we think good
To bind our Treason with a bleeding God.
Would it were His (why should I fear to name,
Or you to hear't?) at which we nobly aim
Lives yet that hated en'my of our Cause?
Lives He our mighty projects to oppose?
Can His weak innocence, and Heaven's care
Be thought security from what we dare?
Are you then Jesuits? are you so for naught?
In all the Catholic depths of Treason taught?
In orthodox, and solid pois'ning read?
In each profounder art of killing bred?
And can you fail, or bungle in your trade?
Shall one poor life your cowardice upbraid?
Tame dastard slaves! who your profession shame,
And fix disgrace on our great Founder's name.
Think what late Sect'ries (an ignoble crew,
Not worthy to be ranked in sin with you)
Inspired with lofty wickedness, durst do:
How from his Throne they hurled a Monarch down,
And doubly eased him of both Life, and Crown:
They scorned in covert their bold act to hide,
In open face of Heaven the work they did,
And braved its vengeance, and its powers defied.
This is his Son, and mortal too like him,
Durst you usurp the glory of the crime;
And dare ye not? I know, you scorn to be
By such as they, outdone in villainy,
Your proper province; true, you urged them on,
Were engines in the fact, but they alone
Share all the open credit, and renown.
But hold! I wrong our Church, and Cause, which need
No foreign instance, nor what others did:
Think on that matchless Assassin, whose name
We with just pride can make our happy claim;
He, who at killing of an Emperor,
To give his poison stronger force, and power
Mixed a God with it, and made it work more sure:
Blessed memory! which shall through Age to come
Stand sacred in the Lists of Hell, and Rome.
Let our great Clement, and Ravillac's name,
Your Spirits to like heights of sin inflame;
Those mighty Souls, who bravely chose to die
To Have each a Royal Ghost their company.
Heroic Act! and worth their tortures well,
Well worth the suffering of a double Hell,
That, they felt here, and that below, they feel.
And if these cannot move you, as they should,
Let me, and my example fire your blood:
Think on my vast attempt, a glorious deed,
Which durst the Fates have suffered to succeed,
Had rivaled Hells most proud exploit, and boast,
Even that, which would the King of Fates deposed,
Cursed be the day, and never in time inrol'd,
And cursed the Star, whose spiteful influence ruled
The luckless Minute, which my project spoiled:
Curse on that Power, who, of himself afraid,
My glory with my brave design betrayed:
Justly he feared, lest I, who struck so high
In guilt, should next blow up his Realm, and Sky:
And so I had; at least I would have durst,
And failing, had got off with Fame at worst.
Had you but half my bravery in Sin,
Your work had never thus unfinished bin:
Had I bin Man, and the great Act to do;
H'ad died by this, and bin what I am now,
Or what His Father is: I would leap Hell
To reach His Life, tho in the midst I fell,
And deeper than before. --
Let rabble Souls, of narrow aim, and reach,
Stoop their vile Necks, and dull Obedience preach:
Let them with slavish aw (disdained by me)
Adore the purple Rag of Majesty,
And think it a sacred Relick of the Sky:
Well may such Fools a base Subjection own,
Vassals to every Ass, that loads a Throne:
Unlike the soul, with which proud I was born,
Who could that sneaking thing a Monarch scorn,
Spurn off a Crown, and set my foot in sport
Upon the head, that wore it, trod in dirt.
But say, what is it that binds your hands? does fear
From such a glorious action you deter?
Or is it Religion? but you sure disclaim
That frivolous pretense, that empty name:
Mere bugbear word, devised by Us to scare
The senseless rout to slavishness, and fear,
Never know to aw the brave, and those, that dare.
Such weak, and feeble things may serve for checks
To rein, and curb base-mettled Heretics;
Dull creatures, whose nice bogling consciences
Startle, or strain at such slight crimes as these;
Such, whom fond inbred honesty befools,
Or that old musty piece the Bible gulls:
That hated Book, the bulwark of our foes,
Whereby they still uphold their tottering cause.
Let no such toys mislead you from the road
Of glory, nor infect your Souls with good:
Let never bold incroaching Virtue dare
With her grim holy face to enter there,
No, not in very Dream: have only will
Like Fiends, and Me to covet, and act ill:
Let true substantial wickedness take place;
Usurp, and Reign; let it the very trace
(If any yet be left) of good deface.
If ever qualms of inward cowardice
(The things, which some dull sots call conscience) rise,
Let them in streams of Blood, and slaughter drown,
Or with new weights of guilt still press 'em down.
Shame, Faith, Religion, Honor, Loyalty,
Nature it self, whatever checks there be
To loose, and uncontrol'd impiety,
Be all extinct in you; own no remorse
But that you have balk'd a sin, have been no worse,
Or too much pity shown. --.
Be diligent in Mischiefs Trade, be each
Performing as a Devilish; nor stick to reach
At Crimes most dangerous; where bold despair,
Mad lust, and heedless blind revenge would never
Even look, march you without a blush, or fear,
Inflamed by all the hazards,, that oppose,
And firm, as burning Martyrs, to your Cause.
Then you're true Jesuits, then you're fit to be
Disciples of great Loyola, and Me:
Worthy to undertake, worthy a Plot,
Like this, and fit to scourge an Huguenot.
Plagues on that Name! may swift confusion seize,
And utterly blot out the cursed Race:
Thrice damned be that Apostate Monk, from whom
Sprung first these Enemies of Us, and Rome:
Whose poisonous Filth, dropped from ingend'ring Brain,
By monstrous Birth did the vile Insects spawn,
Which now infest each Country, and defile
With their o'respreading swarms this goodly I Will,
Once it was ours, and subject to our Yoke,
Till a late reigning Witch the Enchantment broke:
It shall again: Hell and I say it: have ye
But courage to make good the Prophecy:
Not Fate it self shall hinder. --
Too sparing was the time, too mild the day,
When our great Mary bore the English sway?
Unqueen-like pity marred her Royal Power,
Nor was her Purple died enough in Gore.
Four, or five hundred, such like petty sum
Might fall perhaps a Sacrifice to Rome,
Scarce worth the naming: had I had the Power,
Or been thought fit to have been her Counselor,
She should have raised it to a nobler score.
Big Bonfires should have blazed, and shone each day,
To tell our Triumphs, and make bright our way:
And when 'twas dark, in every Lane, and Street
Thick flaming Heretics should serve to light
And save the needless Charge of Links by night:
Smithfield should still have kept a constant fire,
Which never should be quenched, never expire,
But with the lives of all the miscreant rout,
Till the last gasping breath had blown it out.
So Nero did, such was the prudent course
Taken by all his mighty Successors,
To tame like Heretics of old by force:
They scorned dull reason, and pedantick rules
To conquer, and reduce the hardened Fools:
Racks, Gibbets, Halters were their arguments,
Which did most undeniably convince:
Grave bearded Lions managed the dispute,
And reverend Bears their Doctrines did consute:
And all, who would stand out in stiff defense,
They gently clawed, and worried into sense:
Better than all our Sorbon dotards now,
Who would by dint of words our Foes subdue.
This was the rigid Discipline of old,
Which modern sots for Persecution hold:
Of which dull Annalists in story tell
Strange Legends, and huge bulky Volumes swell
With Martyred Fools, that lost their way to Hell.
From these, our Church's glorious Ancestors,
We Have learnt our arts, and made their Methods ours:
Nor have we come behind, the least degree,
In acts of rough and manly cruelty:
Converting Faggots, and the powerful stake,
And Sword resistless our Apostles make.
This heretofore Bohemia felt, and thus
Were all the numerous Proselytes of Huss
Crushed with their head: So Waldo's cursed rout,
And those of Wickliff here were rooted out,
Their names scarce left. -- Sure were the means, we chose,
And wrought prevailingly: Fire purged the dross
Of those foul Heresies, and sovereign Steel
Lopt off the infected Limbs the Church to heal.
Renowned was that French Brave, renowned his deed,
A deed, for which the day deserves its red
Far more than for a paltry Saint, that died:
How goodly was the Sight! how fine the Show
When Paris saw through all its Channels flow
The blood of Huguenots; when the full Sein,
Swelled with the flood, its Banks with joy o're-ran!
He scorned like common Murderers to deal
By parcels, and piecemeal; he scorned Retail
In The Tra^e of Death: whole Myriads died by the great,
Soon as one single life; so quick their Fate,
Their very Prayers, and Wishes came too late.
This a King did: and great, and mighty 'twas.
Worthy his high Degree, and Power, and Place,
And worthy our Religion, and our Cause:
Unmatched 'thad been, had not Mac-quire arose,
The bold Mac-quire (who, read in modern Fame,
Can be a Stranger to his Worth, and Name?)
Born to out-sin a Monarch, born to Reign
In Guilt, and all Competitors disdain:
Dread memory! whose each mention still can make
Pale Heretics with trembling Horror quake.
T'undo a Kingdom, to atchieve a crime
Like his; who would not fall and die like him?
Never had Rome a nobler service done,
Never had Hell; each day came thronging down
Vast shoals of Ghosts, and mine was pleased, and glad,
And smiled, when it the brave revenge surveyed.
Nor do I mention these great Instances
For bounds, and limits to your wickedness:
Dare you beyond, something out of the road
Of all example, where none yet have trod,
Nor shall hereafter: what mad Catiline
Durst never think, nor's madder Poet feign.
Make the poor baffled Pagan Fool confess,
How much a Christian Crime can conquer his:
How far in gallant mischief overcome,
The old must yield to new, and modern Rome.
Mix Ills past, present, future, in one act;
One high, one brave, one great, one glorious Fact,
Which Hell, and very I may envy --
Such as a God himself might wish to be
A Complice in the mighty villainy
And barter's Heaven, and vouchsafe to die.
Nor let Delay (the bane of Enterprise)
Mar yours, or make the great importance miss.
This fact has waked your Enemies, and their fear;
Let it your vigor too, your haste, and care.
Be swift, and let your deeds forestall intent,
Forestall even wishes, e're they can take vent,
Nor give the Fates the leisure to prevent.
Let the full Clouds, which a long time did wrap
Your gathering thunder, now with sudden clap.
Break out upon your Foes; dash, and confound,
And spread avoidless ruin all around.
Let the fired City to your Plot give light;
You razed it half before, now raze it quite.
Do It more effectually; I Would see it glow
In flames unquenchable as those below.
I Would see the Miscreants with their houses burn,
And all together into ashes turn.
Bend next your fury to the cursed Divan;
That damned Committee, whom the Fates ordain
Of all our well-laid Plots to be the bane.
Unkennel those State Foxes, where they lie
Working your speedy fate, and destiny.
Lug by the ears the doting Prelates thence;
Dash Heresy together with their Brains
Out of their shattered heads. Lop off the Lords
And Commons at one stroke, and let your Swords
Adjourn 'em all to the other World --
Would I were blessed with flesh and blood again,
But to be Actor in that happy Scene!
Yet thus I will be by, and glut my view,
Revenge shall take its fill, in state I Will go
With captive Ghosts to attend me down below.
Let these the Handsells of your vengeance be,
But stop not here, nor flag in cruelty.
Kill like a Plague, or Inquisition; spare
No Age, Degree, or Sex; only to wear
A Soul, only to own a Life, be here
Thought crime enough to lose't: no time, nor place
Be Sanctuary from your outrages.
Spare not in Churches kneeling Priests at prayer,
Tho interceding for you, slay even there.
Spare not young Infants smiling at the breast,
Who from relenting Fools their mercy wrest:
Rip teeming Wombs, tear out the hated Brood.
From thence, and drown 'em in their Mothers blood.
Pity not Virgins, nor their tender cries,
Tho prostrate at your feet with melting eyes
All drowned in tears; strike home, as 'twere in lust,
And force their begging hands to guide the thrust.
Ravish at the Altar, kill when you have done,
Make them your Rapes, and Victims too in one.
Nor let gray hoary hairs protection give
To Age, just crawling on the verge of Life:
Snatch from its leaning hands the weak support,
And with it knocked into the grave with sport;
Brain the poor Cripple with his Crutch, then cry,
You Have kindly rid him of his misery.
Seal up your ears to Mercy, lest their words
Should tempt a pity, ram 'em with your Swords
(Their tongues too) down their throats; let 'em not dare
To mutter for their Souls a gasping Prayer,
But in the utt'rance choked, and stab it there.
'Twere witty handsome Malice (could you do it)
To make 'em die, and make 'em damned to boot.
Make Children by one Fate with Parents die,
Kill even revenge in next Posterity:
So you will be pestered with no Orphans cries,
No Childless Mothers curse your Memories.
Make Death, and Desolation swim in blood
Throughout the Land, with naught to stop the flood
But slaughtered Carcasses; till the whole Isle
Become one tomb, become one funeral pile;
Till such vast numbers swell the countless sum,
That the wide Grave, and wider Hell want room.
Great was that Tyrants wish, which should be mine,
Did I not scorn the leavings of a sin;
Freely I would bestow't on England now,
That the whole Nation with one neck might grow.
To be slie'd off, and you to give the blow.
What neither Saxon rage could here inflict,
Nor Danes more savage, nor the barbarous Pict;
What Spain, nor Eighty Eight could ere devise,
With all its Fleet, and freight os cruelties;
What never Medina wished, much less could dare,
And bloodier Alva would with trembling hear;
What may strike out dire Prodigies of old,
And make their mild, and gentler acts untold.
What Heavens Judgments, nor the angry Stars,
Foreign Invasions, nor Domestic Wars,
Plague, Fire, nor Famine could effect or do;
All this, and more be dared, and done by you.
But why do I with idle talk delay
Your hands, and while they should be acting, stay?
Farewell
If I may wast a Prayer for your success,
Hell be your aid, and your high projects bless!
May that vile Wretch, if any here there be,
That meanly shrinks from brave Iniquity;
If any here feel pity, or remorse,
May he feel all* I Have bid you act, and worse!
May he by rage of Foes unpitied fall,
And they tread out his hated Soul to Hell.
May's Name, and Carcass rot, exposed alike to be
The everlasting mark of grinning Infamy.
SATYR II.
NAy, if our sins are grown so high of late,
That Heaven no longer can adjourn ourfate;
May't please some milder Vengeance to devise,
Plague, Fire, Sword, Dearth, or any thing but this.
Let it rain scalding Showers of Brimstone down,
To burn us, and of old the lustful Town:
Let a new deluge overwhelm again,
And drown at once our Land, our Lives, our Sin.
Thus gladly we'll compound, all this we'll pay,
To have this worst of Ills removed away.
Judgments of other kinds are often sent
In mercy only, not for punishment:
But where these light, they show a Nation's fate
Is given up, and past for reprobate.
When God his stock of wrath on Egypt spent,
To make a stubborn Land, and King repent,
Sparing the rest, had he this one Plague sent;
For this alone his People had been quit,
And Pharaoh circumcised a Proselyte.
Wonder no longer why no Curse, like these,
Was known, or suffered in the Primitive days:
They never sinned enough to merit it,
'Twas therefore what Heavens just power thought fit,
To scourge this latter, and more sinful age
With all the dregs, and squeesings of his rage.
Too dearly is proud Spain with England quit
For all her loss sustein'd in Eighty Eight;
For all the Ills, our Warlike Virgin wrought,
Or Drake, and Rawleigh her great Scourges brought.
Amply was she revenged in that one birth,
When Hell for her the Biscain Plague brought forth;
Great Counter-plague! in which unhappy we
Pay back her sufferings with full usury:
Than whom alone none ever was designed
T'entail a wider curse on Human kind,
But he, who first begot us, and first sinned.
Happy the World had been, and happy Thou,
(Less damned at least, and less accursed than now)
If early with less guilt in War thou had died,
And from ensuing mischiefs Mankind freed.
Or when thou view'dst the Holy Land, and Tomb,
Th'had'st suffered there thy brother Traitor's doom.
Cursed be the womb, that with the Firebrand teemed,
Which ever since has the whole Globe inflamed;
More cursed that ill-aim'd Shot, which basely mist,
Which maimed a limb, but spared thy hated breast,
And made the at once a Cripple, and a Priest.
But why this wish? The Church if so might lack
Champions, good works, and Saints for the Almanac.
These are the Janissaries of the Cause,
The Lifeguard of the Roman Sultan, chose
To break the force of Huguenots, and Foes.
The Churches Hawkers in Divinity.
Who 'stead of Lace, and Ribbons, Doctrine cry:
Rome's Strowlers, who survey each Continent,
Its trinkets, and commodities to vent.
Export the Gospel, like mere ware, for sale,
And truck't for Indigo, and Cutch^neal.
As the known Factors here, the Brethron, once
Swopt Christ about for Bodkins, Rings, and Spoons.
And shall these great Apostles be contemned,
And thus by scoffing Heretics defamed?
They, by whose means both Indies now enjoy
The two choice Blessings, Pox and Popery?
Which buried else in ignorance had been,
Nor known the worth of Beads, and Bellarmine?
It pitied holy Mother Church to see
A World so drowned in gross Idolatry:
It grieved to see such goodly Nations hold
Bad Errors and unpardonable Gold.
Strange! what a zeal can powerful Coin infuse!
What Charity Pieces of Eight produee!
So you were chosen the fittest to reclaim
The Pagan World, and give't a Christian Name.
And great was the success; whole Myriads stood
At Font, and were baptized in their own blood.
Millions of Souls were hurled from hence to burn
Before their time, be damned before their turn.
Yet these were in compassion sent to Hell,
The rest reserved in spite, and worse to feel,
Compelled instead of Fiends to worship you,
The more inhumane Devils of the two.
Rare way, and method of Conversion this,
To make your Votaries your Sacrifice!
If to destroy be Reformation thought;
A Plague as well might the good work have wrought.
Now see we why your Founder, weary grown
Would lay his former Trade of Killing down;
He found 'twas dull, he found a Crown would be
A fitter case, and badge of cruelty.
Each sniv'lling Hero Seas of Blood can spill,
When wrongs provoke, and Honor bids him kill.
Each tiny Bully Lives can freely bleed,
When pressed by Wine, or Punk to knock of the head:
Give me your through-pac'd Rogue, who scorns to be
Prompted by poor Revenge, or Injury,
But does it of true inbred cruelty:
Your cool, and sober Murderer, who prays,
And stabs at the same time, who one hand has
Stretched up to Heaven, the other to make the Pass.
So the late Saints of blessed memory,
Cut throats in Godly pure sincerity:
So they with lifted hands, and eyes devout,
Said Grace, and carved a slaughtered Monarch out.
When the first Traitor Cain (too good to be
Thought Patron of this black Fraternity)
His bloody Tragedy of old designed,
One death alone quenched his revengeful mind,
Content with but a quarter of Mankind:
Had he been Jesuit, had he but put on
Their savage cruelty; the rest had gone:
His hand had sent old Adam after too,
And forced the Godhead to create anew.
And yet 'twere well, were their foul guilt but thought
Bare sin: it is something even to own a fault.
But here the boldest flights of wickedness
Are stamped Religion, and for current pass.
The blackest, ugliest, horrid'st, damned'st deed,
For which Hell flames, the Schools a Title need,
If done for Holy Church is sanctified.
This consecrates the blessed Work, and Tool,
Nor must we ever after think 'em foul.
To undo Realms, kill Parents, murder Kings,
Are thus but petty trifles, venial things,
Not worth a Confessor; nay, Heaven shall be
It self invoked t'abet the impiety.
Grant, gracious Lord, (Some Reverend Villain prays)
'That this the bold Assertor of our Cause
'May with success accomplish that great end,
'For which he was by thee, and us designed.
'Do thou to his Arm, and Sword thy strength impart,
'And guide 'em steady to the Tyrants heart.
'Grant him for every meritorious thrust
'Degrees of bliss above among the Just;
'Where holy Garnet, and S. Guy are placed,
'Whom works, like this, before have thither raised.
'Where they are interceding for us now;
'For sure they are there. Yes questionless, and so
Good Nero is, and Dioclesian too,
And that great ancient Saint Herostratus,
And the late godly Martyr at Thoulouse.
Dare something worthy Newgate, and the Tower.
If you will be canonized, and Heaven ensure.
Dull prim'tive Fools of old! who would be good,
Who would by virtue reach the blessed abode:
Far other are the ways found out of late,
Which Mortals to that happy place translate:
Rebellion, Treason, Murder, Massacre,
The chief Ingredients now of Saint-ship are,
And Tyburn only stocks the Calendar.
Unhappy Judas, whose ill fate, or chance
Threw him upon gross times of ignorance;
Who knew not how to value, or esteem
The worth, and merit of a glorious crime!
Should his kind Stars have let him acted now;
H'ad died absolved, and died a Martyr too.
Hear'st thou, Great God, such daring blasphemy,
And let'st thy patient Thunder still lie by?
Strike, and avenge, lest impious Atheists say,
Chance guides the world, and has usurped thy sway;
Lest these proud prosperous Villains too confess,
Tou'rt senseless, as they make thy Images.
Thou just, and sacred Power! will thou admit
Such Guests should in thy glorious presence sit?
If Heaven can with such company dispense;
Well did the Indian pray, Might he keep thence!
But this we only feign, all vain, and false,
As their own Legends, Miracles, and Tales;
Either the groundless calumnies of spite,
Or idle rants of Poetry, and Wit.
We wish they were: but you hear Garnet cry,
'I did it, and would do it again; had I
'As much of Blood, as many Lives as Rome
'Has spilt in what the Fools call Martyrdom;
'As many Souls as Sins; I Would freely stake
'All them, and more for Mother Church's sake.
For that I Will stride over Crowns, swim through a Flood,
'Made up of slaughtered Monarch's Brains, and 'Blood.
'For that no lives of Heretics I Will spare,
'But reap 'em down with less remorse, and care
'Than Tarquin did the Poppy-heads of old,
'Or we drop Beads, by which our Prayers are told.
Bravely resolved! and 'twas as bravely dared:
But (lo!) the Recompense, and great Reward
The wight is to the Almanac preferred.
Rare motives to be damned for holy Cause,
A few red Letters, and some painted straws!
Fools! who thus truck with Hell by Mohatra,
And play their Souls against no stakes away.
It Is strange with what an holy Impudence
The Villain caught, his innocence maintains:
Denies with Oaths the Fact, until it be
Less guilt to own it than the perjury:
By the Mass, and blessed Sacraments he swears,
This Mary's Milk, and the other Mary's Tears,
And the whole muster-roll in Calendars.
Not yet swallow the Falsehood? if all this
Will Not gain a resty Faith; he will on's knees
The Evangelists, and Lady's Psalter kiss.
To vouch the Lie: nay, more, to make it good
Mortgage his Soul upon it, his Heaven, and God.
Damned faithless Heretics! hard to convince,
Who trust no Verdict but dull obvious Sense.
Unconscionable Courts! who Priests deny
Their Benefit of the Clergy, Perjury.
Room for the Martyred Saints! behold they come!
With what a noble Scorn they meet their Doom?
Not Knights of the Post, nor often Carted Whores
Show more of Impudence, or less Remorse.
O glorious, and heroic Constancy!
That can forswear upon the Cart, and die
With gasping Souls expiring in a Lie.
None but tame Sheepish Criminals repent,
Who fear the idle Bugbear, Punishment:
Your Gallant Sinner scorns that Cowardice,
The poor regret of having done amiss:
Brave he, to his first Principles still true,
Can face Damnation, Sin with Hell in view:
And bid it take the Soul, he does bequeath,
And blow it thither with his dying breath.
Dare such, as these, profess Religion's Name?
Who, should they own't, and be believed, would shame
It Is Practice out of the World, would Atheists make
Firm in their Creed, and vouch it at the Stake?
Is Heaven for such, whose Deeds make Hell too good,
Too mild a Penance for their cursed Brood?
For whose unheard of Crimes, and damned Sake
Fate must below new sorts of Torture make,
Since, when of old it framed that place of Doom,
It Was thought no guilt, like this, could thither come
Base recreant Souls! would you have Kings trust you,
Who never yet kept your Allegiance true
To any but Hell's Prince? who with more ease
Can swallow down most solemn Perjuries,
Than a Town Bullie common Oaths, and Lies?
Are the French Harry's Fates so soon forgot?
Our last blessed Tudor? or the Powder Plot?
And those fine Streamers, that adorned so long
The Bridge, and Westminster, and yet had hung,
Were they not stolen, and now for Relics gone?
Think Tories Loyal, or Scotch Covenanters:
Robbed Tigers gentle; courteous, fasting Bears:
Atheists devout, and thrice-wrack'd Mariners:
Take Goats for Chaste, and cloistered Marmosites:
For plain, and open two-edged Parasites:
Believe Bawds modest, and the shameless Stews,
And binding Drunkard Oaths, and Strumpet's Vows:
And when in time these Contradiction meet;
Then hope to find 'em in a Loyolite:
To whom, tho gasping, should I credit give;
I Would think 'twere Sin, and damned like unbelief.
Oh for the Swedish Law enacted here!
No Scarecrow frightens like a Priest-Gelder,
Hunt them, as Beavers are, force them to buy
Their Lives with Ransom of their Lechery.
Or let that wholesome Statute be revived,
Which England heretofore from Wolves relieved:
Tax every Shire instead of them to bring
Each Year a certain tale of Jesuits in:
And let their mangled Quarters hang the I Will
To scare all future Vermin from the Soil.
Monsters avaunt! may some kind whirlwind sweep
Our Land, and drown these Locusts in the deep:
Hence ye loathed Objects of our Scorn, and Hate
With all the Curses of an injured State:
Go, foul Impostors, to some duller Soil,
Some easier Nation with your Cheats beguile:]
Where your gross common Gulleries may pass,
To slur, and top on bubled Consciences:
Where Ignorance, and the Inquisition Rules,
Where the vile Herd of poor Implicit Fools
Are damned contentedly, where they are led
Blindfold to Hell, and thank, and pay their Guide.
Go, where all your black Tribe before are gone,
Follow Chastel, Ravillac, Clement down,
Your Catesby, Faux, and Garnet, thousands more,
And those, who hence have lately raised the Score.
Where the Grand Traitor now, and all the Crew
Of his Disciples must receive their Due:
Where Flames, and Tortures of Eternal Date
Must punish you, yet never can expiate:
Learn duller Feinds your unknown Cruelties,
Such as no Wit, but yours, could e're devise,
No Guilt, but yours, deserve; make Hell confess
It self outdone, its Devils damned for less.
SATYR III. Loyala's Will.
LOng had the famed Impostor found Success,
Long seen his damned Fraternit^s increase,
In Wealth, and Power, Mischief, and Guile improved.
By Pope^* and Pope-rid Kings upheld, and loved:
Laden with Years, and Sins, and numerous Scars,
Got some in the Field, but most in other Wars,
Now finding Life decay, and Fate draw near,
Grown ripe for Hell, and Roman Calendar,
He thinks it worth his Holy Thoughts, and Care,
Some hidden Rules, and Secrets to Impart,
The Proofs of long^ Experience^ and deep Art,
Which to his Successors may useful be
In conduct of their future Villainy.
Summoned together, all the Officious Band
The Orders of their Bedrid-Chief attend;
Doubtful, what Legacy he will bequeath,
And wait with greedy Ears his dying Breath:
With such quick Duty Vassal Fiends below
To meet commands of their Dread Monarch go.
On Pillow raised, he does their entrance greet,
And joys to see the wished Assembly meet:
They in glad Murmurs tell their Joy aloud,
Then a deep silence stills the expecting Crowd,
Like Delphick Hag of old, by Fiend possessed,
He swells, wild Frenzy, heaves his panting Breast,
His bristling Hairs stick up, his Eye Balls glow,
And from his Mouth long strakes of Drivel flow:
Thrice with due Reverence he himself does cross,
Then thus his Hellish Oracles disclose.
Ye firm Associates of my great Design,
Whom the same Vows, and Oaths, and Order join,
The faithful Band, whom I, and Rome have chofe,
The last Support of our declining Caufe:
Whose Conquering Troops I with Success have led
Against all Opposers of our Church, and Head;
Who e're to the mad German owe their Rise,
Geneva's Rebels, or the hot-brained Swiss;
Revolted Heretics, who late have broke
And durst throw off the long-worn Sacred Yoke:
You, by whose happy Influence Rome can boast
A greater Empire, than by Luther lost:
By whom wide Nature's far-stretch'd Limits now,
And utmost Indies to its Crosier Bow:
Go on, ye mighty Champions of our Cause,
Maintain our Party, and subdue our Foes:
Kill Heresy, that rank, and poisonous Weed,
Which threatens now the Church to overspread:
Fire Calvin, and his Nest of Upstarts out,
Who tread our Sacred Mitre under Foot;
Strayed Germany reduce; let it no more
The Incestuous Monk of Wittemberg adore:
Make stubborn Engl. once more stoop its Crown,
And Fealty to our Priestly Sovereign own:
Regain our Church's Rights, the Island clear
From all remaining Dregs of Wickliff there.
Plot, Enterprise, contrive, endeavor: spare
No toil, nor Pains: no Death, nor Danger fear:
Restless your Aims pursue: let no defeat
Your sprightly Courage, and Attempts rebate,
But urge to fresh, and bolder, never to end
Till the whole World to our great Caliph bend:
Till he through every Nation every where
Bear Sway, and Reign as absolute, as here:
Till Rome without control, and Contest be
The Universal Ghostly Monarchy.
Oh! that kind Heaven a longer Thread would give,
And let me to that happy Juncture live:
But it is decreed! -- at this he paused, and wept,
The rest alike time with his Sorrow kept:
Then thus continued he -- Since unjust Fate
Envies my Race of Glory longer date,
Yet, as a wounded General, e're he dies,
To his sad Troops, sighs out his last Advice,
(Who, tho they must his fatal Absence moan,
By those great Lessons conquer, when he is gone)
So I to you my last Instructions give,
And breath out Counsel with my parting Life:
Let each to my important words give Ear,
Worth your attention, and my dying Care.
First, and the chiefest thing by me enjoined.
The Solemn'st tie, that must your Order bind,
Let each without demur, or scruple pay
A strict Obedience to the Roman Sway:
To the unerring Chair all Homage Swear,
Although a Punk, a Witch, a Fiend sit there:
Who e're is to the Sacred Mitre reared,
Believe all Virtues with the place conferred:
Think him established there by Heaven, tho he
Has Altars robbed for bribes the choice to buy,
Or pawned his Soul to Hell for Simony:
Tho he be Atheist, Heathen, Turk, or Jew,
Blasphemer, Sacrilegious, Perjured too:
Tho Pander, Bawd, Pimp, Pathick, Buggerer,
What e're old Sodom's Nest of Lechers were:
Tho Tyrant, Traitor, Pois'oner, Parricide,
Magician, Monster, all, that is bad beside:
Fouler than Infamy; the very Lees,
The Sink, the Jakes, the Common-shore of Vice:
Strait count him Holy, Virtuous, Good, Devout,
Chaste, Gentle, Meek, a Saint, a God, who not?
Make Fate hang on his Lips, nor Heaven have
Power to Predestinate without his leave:
None be admitted there, but who he please,
Who buys from him the Patent for the Place.
Hold those amongst the highest rank of Saints,
Whom e're he to that Honor shall advance,
Tho here the Refuse of the Jail, and Stews,
Which Hell it self would scarce for lumber choose:
But count all Reprobate, and Damned, and worse,
Whom he, when Gout, or Tissick Rage, shall curse:
Whom he in Anger Excommunicates,
For Friday Meals, and abrogating Sprats:
Or in just Indignation spurns to Hell
For jearing Holy Toe, and Pantofle.
What e're he says, esteem for Holy Writ,
And text Apocryphal, if he think fit:
Let arrant Legends, worst of Tales, and Lies,
Falser than Capgraves, and Voragines,
Than Quixot, Rablais, Amadis de Gaul;
Is signed with Sacred Lead, and Fisher's Seal
Be thought Authentic and Canonical.
Again, if he Ordain't in his Decrees,
Let very Gospel for mere Fable pass:
Let Right be wrong, Black White, and Virtue Vice,
No Sun, no Moon, nor no Antipodes:
Forswear your Reason, Conscience, and your Creed,
Your very Sense, and Euclid, if he bid.
Let it be held less heinous, less amiss,
To break all Gods Commands, than one of his:
When his great Mifsions call, without delay,
Without Reluctance readily Obey,
Nor let your Inmost Wishes dare gainsay:
Should he to Bantam, or Japan command,
Or farthest Bounds of Southern unknown Land,
Farther than Avarice its Vassals drives,
Through Rocks, and Dangers, loss of Blood, and Lives;
Like great Xavier's be your Obedience shown,
Outstrip his Courage, Glory, and Renown;
Whom neither yawning Gulphs of deep Despair,
Nor scorching Heats of burning Line could scare:
Whom Seas, nor Storms, nor Wracks could make refrain
From propagating Holy Faith, and Gain.
If he but nod Commissions out to kill,
But becken Lives of Heretics to spill;
Let the Inquisition rage, fresh Cruelties
Make the dire Engines groan with tortured Cries:
Let Campo Flori every day be strow'd
With the warm Ashes of the Luth'ran Brood:
Repeat again Bohemian Slaughters ore,
And Piedmont Valleys drown with floating Gore:
Swifter than Murdering Angels, when they fly
On Errands of avenging Destiny.
Fiercer than Storms let loose, with eager haste
Lay Cities, Countries, Realms, whole Nature waste.
Sack, ^avish, burn, destroy, slay, massacre,
Till the same Grave their Lives, and Names interr:
These are the Rights to our great Mufty due,
The sworn Allegiance of your Sacred Vow:
What else we in our Votaries require,
What other Gift, next follows to enquire.
And first it will our great Advice befit.
What Soldiers to your Lists you ought admit,
To Natives of the Church, and Faith, like you,
The foremost rank of Choice is justly due:
Amongst whom the chiefest place assign to those,
Whose Zeal has mostly Signalized the Cause.
But let not Entrance be to them denied,
Who ever shall desert the adverse Side:
Omit no Promises of Wealth, or Power,
That may inveigled Heretics allure:
Those, whom great learning, parts, or wit renowns,
Cajole with hopes of Honors, Scarlet Gowns,
Provincial ships, and Palls, and Triple Crowns.
This must a Rector, that a Provost be,
A third succed to the next Abbacy:
Some Princes Tutors, others Confessors
To Dukes, and Kings, and Queens, and Emperors:
These are strong Arguments, which seldom fail,
Which more than all your weak disputes prevail.
Exclude not those of less desert, decree
To all Revolters your Foundation free:
To all, whom Gaming, Drunkenness, or Lust,
To Need, and Popery shall have reduced:
To all, whom slighted Love, Ambition crossed,
Hopes often bilk't, and Sought Preferment lost,
Whom Pride, or Discontent, Revenge, or Spite,
Fear, Frenzy, or Despair shall Proselyte:
Those Powerful Motives, which the most bring in,
Most Converts to our Church, and Order win.
Reject not those, whom Guilt, and Crimes at home
Have made to us for Sanctuary come:
Let Sinners of each Hue, and Size, and Kind,
Here quick admittance, and safe Refuge find:
Be they from Justice of their Country fled,
With Blood of Murders, Rapes, and Treasons died:
No Varlet, Rogue, or Miscreant refuse,
From Galleys, Jails, or Hell it self broke loose.
By this you shall in Strength, and Numbers grow
And shoals each day to your thronged Cloisters flow:
So Rome's and Mecca's first great Founders did,
By such wise Methods made their Churches spread.
When shaven Crown, and hallowed Girdle's Power
Has dubbed him Saint, that Villain was before;
Entered, let it his first Endeavor be
To shake off all remains of Modesty,
Dull sneaking Modesty, not more unfit
For needy flattering Poets, when they write,
Or trading Punks, than for a Jesuit:
If any Novice feel at first a blush;
Let Wine, and frequent converse with the Stews
Reform the Fop, and shame it out of Use;
Unteach the puling Folly by degrees,
And train him to a well-bred Shamelesness.
Get that great Gift, and Talent, Impudence
Accomplished Mankind's highest Excellence:
It Is that alone prefers, alone makes great,
Confers alone Wealth, Titles, and Estate:
Gains Place at Court, can make a Fool a Peer,
An Ass a Bishop, can vil'st Blockheads rear
To wear Red Hats, and sit in Porph'ry Chair.
It Is Learning, Parts, and Skill, and Wit, and Sense,
Worth, Merit, Honor, Virtue, Innocence.
Next for Religion, learn what is fit to take,
How small a Dram does the just Compond make.
As much as is by the Crafty Statesmen worn
For Fashion only, or to serve a turn:
To bigot Fools its idle Practice leave,
Think it enough the empty Form to have:
The outward Show is seemly, cheap, and light,
The Substance Cumbersome, of Cost, and Weight:
The Rabble judge by what appears to the Eye,
None, or but few, the Thoughts within Descry.
Make It you an Engine to ambitions Power
To stalk behind, and hit your Mark more sure:
A Cloak to cover well-hid Knavery,
Like it, when used, to be with ease thrown by:
A shifting Card, by which your Course to steer,
And taught with every changing Wind to veer.
Let no Nice, Holy, Conscientious Ass
Amongst your better Company find place,
Me, and your. Foundation to disgrace:
Let Truth be banished, ragged Virtue fly,
And poor unprofitable Honesty;
Weak Idols, who their wretched Slaves betray;
To every Rook, and every Knave a Prey:
These lie remote, and wide from Interest,
Farther than Heaven from Hell, or East from West,
Far, as they e're were distant from the breast.
Think not your selvest' Austerities confined,
Or those strict Rules, which other Orders bind,
To Capuchins, Carthusians, Cord^liers
Leave Penance, meager abstinence, and Prayers:
In lousie Rags let Begging Friars lie,
Content on Straw, or Boards to mortify:
Let them with Sackcloath discipline their Skins,
And scourge them for their madness, and their Sins:
Let pining Anchorets in Grotto's starve,
Who from the Liberties of Nature swerve:
Who make it their chief Religion not to eat,
And place't in nastiness, and want of Meat:
Live you in Luxury, and pampered Ease,
As if whole Nature were your Cateress.
Soft be your Beds, as those, which Monarch's Whores
Lie on, or Gouts of Bedridden Emperors:
Your Wardrobes stored with choice of Suits, more dear
Than Cardinals on high Processions wear:
With Dainties load your Boards, whose every Dish
May tempt cloyed Gluttons, or Vitellius Wish.
Each fit a longing Queen: let richest Wines
With Mirth your Heads inflame, with Lust your Veins:
Such as the Friends of dying Popes would give
For Cordials to prolong their gasping Life.
Never let the Nazarene, whose Badg, and Name
You wear, upbraid you with a Conscious Shame:
Leave him his slighted Homilies, and Rules,
To stuff the Squabbles of the wrangling Schools;
Disdain, that he, and the poor angling Tribe,
Should Laws, and Government to you prescribe:
Let none of those good Fools your Patterns make;
Instead of them, the mighty Judas take.
Renowned Iscaniot, fit alone to be
The Example of our great Society:
Whose daring Guilt despised the common Road,
And scorned to stoop at Sin beneath a God.
And now it is time I should Instructions give,
What Wiles, and Cheats the Rabble best deceive:
Each Age, and Sex, their different Passions wear,
To suit with which requires a prudent Care:
Youth is Capricious, Headstrong, Fickle, Vain,
Given to Lawless Pleasure, Age to gain:
Old Wives, in Superstition overgrown,
With Chimny Tales, and Stories best are won:
It Is no mean Talent rightly to descry,
What several Baits to each you ought apply.
The Credulous, and easy of Belief,
With Miracles, and well framed Lies deceive,
Empty whole Surius, and the Talmud: drain
Saint Francis, and Saint Mahomet's Alcoran:
Sooner shall Popes, and Cardinals want Pride,
Than you a Stock of Lies, and Legends need.
Tell how blessed Virgin to come down was seen.
Like Playhouse Punk descending in Machine:
How she writ B^llets Doux, and Love-Discourse,
Made Assignations, Visits, and Amors:
How Hosts distressed, her Smock for Banner bore,
Which vanquished Foes, and murdered at twelve Score.
Relate how Fish in Conventicles met,
And Mackrel were with Bait of Doctine caught:
How Cattle have Judicious Hearers been,
And Stones pathetically cried Amen:
How cons^crated Hive^ with Bells was hung,
And Bees kept Mass, and Holy Anthems Sung:
How Pigs to the Ros'ry kneeled, and sheep were taught
To bleat Te Deum, and Magnificat:
How Fly-Flap of Church-Censure Houses rid
Of Insects, which at Curse of Friar died:
How traveling Saints, well mounted on a Switch,
Ride Journeys through the Air, like Lapland Witch:
And ferrying Cowls Religious Pilgrims bore
Over waves with the help of Sail, or Oar.
Nor let Xavier's great Wonders pass concealed,
How Storms were by the Almighty Wafer quelled;
How zealous Crab the sacred Image bore,
And swam a Catholic to the distant Shore
With Shams, like these, the giddy Rout mislead,
Their Folly, and their Superstition feed.
'Twas found a good, and gainful Art of Old
(And much it did our Church's Power uphold)
To feign Hobgoblins, Elves, and walking Sprites,
And Fairies dancing Salenger a Nights:
White Sheets for Ghosts, and Will-a-wisps have past
For Souls in Purgatory unreleast.
And Crabs in Churchyard crawled in Masquerade,
To cheat the Parish, and have Masses said.
By this our Ancestors in happier Days,
Did store of Credit and Advantage raise:
But now the Trade is fallen, decayed, and dead,
E're since Contagious Knowledge has o're-spread:
With Scorn the grinning Rabble now hear tell
Of Hecla, Patrick's hole, and Mongibel;
Believed no more, than Tales of Troy, unless
In Countries drowned in Ignorance like this.
Henceforth be wary how such things you feign,
Except it be beyond the Cape, or Line;
Except at Mexico, Brazile,
At the Molucco's, Goa, or Pegu,
Or any distant, and Remoter Place,
Where they may current, and unquestioned pass:
Where never poching Heretics resort,
To spring the Lie, and make it their Game, and Sport.
But I forget (what should be mentioned most)
Confession, our chief Privilege and Boast:
That Staple ware, which never returns in vain,
Never balks the Trader of expected Gain.
It Is this, that spies through Court-intrigues, and brings
Admission to the Cabinets of Kings:
By this we keep proud Monarchs at our Becks,
And make our Foot-stools of their Thrones and Necks:
Give'em Commands, and if they Disobey;
Betray them to the Ambitious Heir a Prey:
Hound the Officious Curs on Heretics,
The Vermin, which the Church infest, and vex:
And when our turn is served, and Business done,
Dispatch 'em for reward, as useless grown:
Nor are these half the Benefits, and Gains,
Which by wise Manag'ry accrue from thence:
By this w'unlock the Miser's hoarded Chests,
And Treasure, though kept close, as States-mens Breasts:
This does rich Widows to our Nets decoy,
Let us their Jointures, and themselves enjoy:
To us the Merchant does his Customs bring,
And pays our Duty, tho he cheats his King:
To us Court-Ministers refund, made great
By Robbery, and Bankrupt of the State:
Ours is the Soldier's Plunder, Padder's Prize,
Gabels on Letch'ry, and the Stew's Excise:
By this our Colleges in Riches shine,
And vy with Becket's, and Loretto's Shrine.
And here I must not grudge a word or two
(My younger Vot'ries) of Advice to you:
To you, whom Beautie's Charms, and generous Fire
Of boiling Youth to sports of Love inspire:
This is your Harvest, here secure, and cheap
You may the Fruits of unbought Pleasure reap:
Riot in free, and uncontrolled delight,
Where no dull Marriage clogs the Appetite:
Taste every dish of Lust's variety,
Which Popes, and Scarlet Lechers dearly buy,
With Bribes, and Bishoprics, and Simony.
But this I ever to your care commend,
Be wary how you openly offend:
Lest scoffing lewd Buffoons descry our Shame,
And fix disgrace on the great Order's fame.
When the unguarded Maid alone repairs.
To ease the burden of her Sins, and Cares;
When youth in each, and privacy conspire
To kindle wishes, and befriend desire;
If she has practiced in the Trade
(Few else of Proselytes to us brought over)
Little of Force, or Artifice will need:
To make you in the Victory succeed:
But if some untaught Innocence she be,
Rude, and unknowing in the mystery;
She Will cost more labor to be made comply.
Make her by Pumping understand the sport,
And undermine with secret trains the Fort,
Sometimes as if you would blame her gaudy dress,
Her Naked Pride, her Jewels, Point, and Lace;
Find opportunity her Breasts to press:
Often feel her hand, and whisper in her ear,
You find the secret marks of lewdness there:
Sometimes with naughty sense her blushes raise,
And make 'em guilt, she never knew, confess;
'Thus (may you say) with such a leering smile,
'So Languishing a look you hearts beguile:
'Thus with your foot, hand, eye, you tokens speak,
'These Signs deny, these Assignations make:
'Thus it is you clip, with such a fierce embrace
'You clasp your Lover to your Breast, and Face:
'Thus are your hungry lips with Kisses cloyed,
'Thus is your hand, and thus your tongue employed.
Ply her with talk with this: and, if sh' incline,
To help Devotion, give her Aretine
Instead of the Rosary: never despair,
She, that to such discourse will lend an Ear*
Tho chaster than cold cloistered Nuns she were,
Will soon prove soft, and pliant to your use,
As Strumpets on the Carnaval let loose.
Credit experience; I have tried 'em all,
And never found the unerring methods fail:
Not Ovid, tho 'twere his chief Mastery,
Had greater skill in these Intrigues, than I:
Nor Nero's learned Pimp, to whom we owe
What choice Records of Lust are extant now.
This heretofore, when youth, and sprightly Blood
Ran in my Veins, I tasted, and enjoyed:
Ah those blessed days,! -- (here the old Lecher smiled,
With sweet remembrance of past pleasures filled)
But they are gone! Wishes alone remain,
And Dreams of Joy, never to be felt again:
To abler Youth I now the Practice leave,
To whom this counsel, and advice I give.
But the dear mention of my gayer days
Has made me farther, than I would, digress:
It Is time we should now in due Place expound,
How guilt is after shrift to be atton'd:
Enjoin no sow'r Repentance, Tear, and Grief;
Eyes weep no cash, and you no profit give:
Sins, tho of the first rate, must punished be,
Not by their own, but the Actor's Quality:
The Poor, whose Purse cannot the Penance bear;
Let whipping serve, bare feet, and shirts of hair:
The richer Fools to Compostella send,
Tome Rome, Monferrat, or the Holy Land:
Pet Pardons, and the Indulgence-Office drain
Their Coffers, and enrich the Pope's with gain:
Make 'em build Churches, Monasteries found
And dear bought Masses for their crimes compound
Let Law, and Gospel, rigid precepts set,
And make the paths to Bliss rugged, and strait:
Teach you a smooth, an easier way to gain
Heavens joys, yet sweet, and useful sin retain:
With every frailty, every lust comply,
To Advance your Spiritual Realm, and Monarchy:
Pull up weak Virtue's fence, give scope and space
And Purliens to out-lying Consciences:
Show that the Needle's eye may stretch, and how
The largest Camel-vices may go through.
Teach how the Priest Pluralities may buy,
Yet fear no odious Sin of Simony.
While Thoughts, and Ducats will directed be:
Let Whores adorn his exemplary life,
But no lewd heinous Wife a Scandal give.
Sooth up the Gaudy Atheist, who maintains
No Law, but Sense, and owns no God, but Chance.
Bid Thieves rob on, the Boisterous Ruffian tell,
He may for Hire, Revenge, or Honor kill:
Bid Strumpets persevere, absolve 'em too,
And take their dues in kind for what you do:
Exhort the painful, and industrious Bawd
To Diligence, and Labor in her Trade:
Nor think her innocent Vocation ill,
Whose incomes does the sacred Treasure fill:
Let Griping Usurers Extortion use,
No Rapine, Falsehood, Perjury refuse,
Stick at no Crime, which covetous Popes would scarce
Act to enrich themselves, and Bastard-Heirs:
A small Bequest to the Church can all atttone,
Wipes off all scores, and Heaven, and all is their own.
Be these your Doctrins, these the truths, you preach,
But no forbidden Bible come in reach:
Your Cheats, and Artifices to Impeach.
Lest thence Lay-Fools Pernicious knowledge get,
Throw off Obedience, and your Laws forget:
Make 'em believed a spell, more dreadful far,
Than Bacon, Haly, or Albumazar.
Happy the time, when the unpretending Crowd
No more, than I, its Language understood!
When the worm-eaten Book, linked to a chain,
In dust lay mouldring in the Vatican;
Dispis'd, neglected, and forgot, to none,
But poring Rabbis, or the Sorbon known:
Then in full power our Sovereign Prelate swayed,
By Kings, and all the Rabble World Obeyed:
Here humble Monarch at his feet kneeled down,
And begged the Alms, and Charity of a Crown:
There, when in Solemn State he pleased to ride,
Poor Sceptered Slaves ran Henchboys by his side:
None, tho in thought, his grandeur durst Blaspheme;
Nor in their very sleep a Treason dream.
But since the broaching that mischievous Piece,
Each Alderman a Father Lumbard is:
And every Cit dares impudently know
More than a Council, Pope, and Conclave too.
Hence the late Damned Friar, and all the crew
Of former Crawling Sects their poison drew:
Hence all the Troubles, Plagues, Rebellions breed;
We Have felt, or feel, or may hereafter dread:
Wherefore enjoin, that no Lay-coxcomb dare
About him that unlawful Weapon wear;
But charge him chiefly not to touch at all
The dangerous Works of that old Lollard, Paul;
That arrant Wickliffist, from whom our Foes
Take all their Batt'ries to attack our Cause;
Would he in his first years had Martyred been,
Never Damascus, nor the Vision seen;
Then he our Party was, stout, vigorous,
And fierce in chase of Heretieks, like us:
Till he at length, by the Enemies seduced,
Forsook us, and the hostile side espoused.
Had not the mighty Julian mist his aims,
These holy Shreds had all consumed in flames:
But since the Immortal Lumber still endures,
In spite of all his industry, and ours;
Take care at least it may not come abroad,
To taint with catching Heresy the Crowd:
Let them be still kept low in sense, they will pay
The more respect, more readily obey.
Pray that kind Heaven would on their hearts dispense
A bounteous, and abundant Ignorance,
That they may never swerve, nor turn awry
From sound, and Orthodox Stupidity.
But these are obvious things, easy to know,
Common to every Monk, a^ well as you:
Greater Affairs, and more important wait
To be discussed, and call for our debate:
Matters, that depth require, and well befit
The Address, and Conduct of a Jesuit.
How Kingdoms are embroiled, what shakes a Throne,
How the first seeds of Discontent are sown
To spring up in Rebellion; how are set
The secret snares, that circumvent a State:
How bubled Monarchs are at first beguiled,
Trepanned, and gulled, at last deposed, and killed.
When some proud Prince, a Rebel to our Head,
For disbelieving Holy Church's Creed,
And Peter Pence, is Heretic decreed;
And by a solemn, and unquestioned Power
To Death, and Hell, and You delivr'd over:
Choose first some dext'rous Rogue, well tried, and known
(Such by Confession your Familiars grown)
Let him by Art, and Nature fitted be
For any great, and gallant Villainy,
Practiced in every Sin, each kind of Vice,
Which deepest Casuists in their searches miss,
Watchful as Jealousy, wary as Fear,
Fiercer than Lust, and bolder than Despair,
But close, as plotting Feinds in Council are.
To him, in firmest Oaths of Silence bound,
The worth, and merit of the Deed propound:
Tell of whole Reams of Pardon, new come over,
Indies of Gold, and Blessings, endless store:
Choice of Preferments, if he overcome,
And if he fail, undoubted Maryrdom:
And Bills for Sums in Heaven, to be drawn
On Factors there, and at first sight paid down
With Arts, and Promises, like these; allure,
And make him to your great design secure.
And here to know the sundry ways to kill,
Is worth the Genius of a Machiavel:
Cull Northern Brains, in these deep Arts unbred,
Know naught but to cut Throats, or knock of the Head,
No slight of Murder of the subt'lest shape,
Your busy search, and observation escape:
Legerdemain of Killing, that dives in,
And Juggling steals away a Life unseen:
How gaudy Fate may be in Presents sent,
And creep insensibly by Touch, or Scent:
How Ribbands, Gloves, or Saddle-Pomel may
An unperceived, but certain Death convey;
Above the reach of Antidotes, above the Power
Of the famed Pontick Mountebank to cure.
What e're is known to quaint Italian spite,
In studied Pois'ning skilled, and exquisite:
What e're great Borgia, or his Sire could boast,
Which the Expense of half the Conclave cost.
Thus may the business be in secret done,
Nor Authors, nor the Accessaries known,
And the slurr'd guilt with ease on others thrown.
But if ill Fortune should your Plot betray,
And leave you to the rage of Foes a prey;
Let none his Crime by weak confession own,
Nor shame the Church, while he would himself atone
Let varnished Guile, and feigned Hypocrisies,
Pretended Holiness, and useful Lies,
Your well-dissembled Villainy disguise.
A thousand wily Turns, and Doubles try,
To foil the Scent, and to divert the Cry:
Cog, sham, out face, deny, equivocate,
Into a thousand shapes your selves translate:
Remember what the crafty Spartan taught,
Children with Rattles, Men with Oaths are caught:
Forswear upon the Rack, and if you fall,
Let this great comfort make amends for all,
Those, whom they damn for Rogues, next Age shall see
Made Advocates in the Church's Litany.
Who ever with bold Tongue, or Pen shall dare
Against your Arts, and Practices declare;
What Fool shall e're presumptuously oppose,
Your Holy Cheats, and godly Frauds disclose;
Pronounce him Heretic, Firebrand of Hell,
Turk, Jew, Fiend, Miscreant, Pagan, Infidel;
A thousand blacker Names, worse Calumnies,
All, Wit can think, and pregnant Spite devise:
Strike home, gash deep, no Lies, nor Slanders spare;
A Wound, tho cured, yet leaves behind a Scar.
Those, whom your Wit, and Reason cannot decry,
Make scandalous with Loads of Infamy:
Make Luther Monster, by a Fiend begot,
Brought forth with Wings, and Tail, and Cloven Foot:
Make Whoredom, Incest, worst of vice, and shame,
Pollute, and foul his Manners, Life, and Name.
Tell how strange Storms ushered his fatal end,
And Hell's black Troops did for his Soul contend.
Much more I had to say; but now grown faint,
And strength, and Spirits for the Subject want:
Be these great Mysteries, I here unfold,
Amongst your Order's Institutes enrolled:
Preserve them sacred, close and unreveal'd;
As ancient Rome her Sybil's Books concealed.
Let no bold Heretic with saucy eye
Into the hidden unseen Archives pry;
Lest the malicious flouting Rascals turn
Our Church to Laughter, Raillery, and Scorn.
Let never Rack, or Torture, Pain, or Fear,
From your firm Breasts the important Secrets tear.
If any treacherous Brother of your own
Shall to The World divulg^, and make them known,
Let him by worst of Deaths his Guilt atone.
Should but his Thoughts or Dreams suspected be,
Let him for safety, and prevention die,
And learn in the Grave the Art of Secrecy.
But one thing more, and then with joy I go,
Nor as a longer stay of Fate below:
Give me again once more your plighted Faith,
And let each seal it with his dying breath:
As the great Carthaginian heretofore
The bloody reeking Altar touched, and swore
Eternal Enmity to the Roman Power:
Swear you (and let the Fates confirm the same)
An endless Hatred to the Luth'ran Name:
Vow never to admit, or League, or Peace,
Or Truce, or Commerse with the cursed Race:
Now, through all Age, when Time, or Place so e're
Shall give you power, wage an immortal War:
Like Theban Feuds, let yours your selves survive,
And in your very Dust, and Ashes live.
Like mine, be your last Gasp their Curse. -- At this
They kneel, and all the Sacred Volumn kiss;
Vowing to send each year an Hecatomb
Of Huguenots, an Offering to ^is Tomb.
In vain he would continue; -- -- Abrupt Death
A Period puts, and stops his impious Breath:
In broken Accents he is scarce allowed
To faulter out his Blessing on the Crowd,
Amen is echoed by Infernal Howl,
And scrambling Spirits seize his parting Soul.
SATYR IV. S. Ignatius his Image brought in, discovering the Rogueries of the
Jesuits, and ridiculous Superstition of the Church of Rome.
ONce I was common Wood, a shapeless Log,
Thrown out a Pissing-post for every Dog:
The Workman yet in doubt, what course to take;
Whether I Would best a Saint, ^r Hog-trough make,
After debate resolved me for a Saint,
And thus famed Loyola I represent:
And well I may resemble him, for he
As stupid was, as much a Block as I.
My right Leg maimed, at halt I seem to stand;
To tell the Wounds at Pampelune sustein'd.
My Sword, and Soldiers Armor here had been,
But they may in Monserrats Church be seen:
Those there to blessed Virgin I laid down
For Cassock, Surfingle, and shaven Crown,
The spiritual Garb, in which I now am shown.
With due Accoutrements, and fit disguise
I might for Sentinel of Corn suffice:
As once the well-hung God of old stood guard,
And the invading Crows from Forage scared.
Now on my head the Birds their Relics leave,
And Spiders in my mouth their Arras weave:
And persecuted Rats often find in me
A Refuge, and religious Sanctuary.
But you profaner Heret^cks, who e're
The Inquisition, and its vengeance fear,
I charge, stand off, at peril come not near:
None at twelve score untruss, break wind, or piss;
He enters Fox his Lists, that dare transgress:
For I Am by Holy Church in Reverence had,
And all good Catholic Folk implore my aid.
These Pictures, which you see, my Story give,
The Acts, and Monuments of me alive:
That Frame, wherein with Pilgrims weeds I stand,
Contains my Travels to the Holy Land.
This me, and my Decemvirate at Rome,
When I for Grant of my great Order come.
There with Devotion rapt, I hang in Air,
With Dove (like Mah'met's) whispering in my ear.
Here Virgin in Galesh of Clouds descends,
To be my safeguard from assaulting Fiends.
Those Tables by, and Crutches of the lame,
My great Achievements since my death proclaim:
Pox, Ague, Dropsy, Palsy, Stone, and Gout,
Legions, of Maladies by me cast out,
More than the College know, or ever fill
Quacks Wiping-paper, and the Weekly Bill.
What Peter's shadow did of old, the same
Is fancied done by my all-powerful Name;
For which some wear't about their Necks, and Arms,
To guard from Dangers, Sicknesses, and Harms;
And some on Wombs the barren to relieve,
A Miracle, I better did alive.
Often I by crafty Jesuit am taught
Wonders to do, and many a Juggling Feat.
Sometimes with Chafing Dish behind me put,
I sweat like Clapped Debauch in Hot-House shut,
And drip like any Spitch-cock'd Huguenot:
Sometimes by secret Springs I learn to stir,
As Paste-board Saints dance by mirac'lous Wire:
Then I Tradescant's Rarities outdo,
Sands Waterworks, and German Clockwork too,
Or any choice Device at Barthol'mew.
Sometimes I utter Oracles, by Priest
Instead of a Familiar possessed.
The Church I vindicate, Luther consute,
And cause amazement in the gaping Rout.
Such holy Cheats, such Hocus Tricks, as these,
For Miracles amongst the Rabble pass.
By this in their esteem I daily grow,
In Wealth enriched, increased in Vot'ries too.
This draws each year vast Numbers to my Tomb,
More than in Pigrimage to Mecca come.
This brings each week new Presents to my Shrine,
And makes it those of India Gods outshine.
This gives a Chalice, that a Golden Cross,
Another massy Candlesticks bestows,
Some Alter-cloaths of costly work, and price
Plush, Tissue, Ermin, Silks of noblest Dies,
The Birth, and Passion in Embroideries:
Some Jewels, rich as those, the Egyptian Punk
In Jellies to her Roman Stallion drunk,
Some offer gorgeous Robes, which serve to wear
When I on Holy days in state appear;
When I Am in pomp on high Processions shown,
Like Pageants of Lord May'r, or Skimmington.
Lucullus could not such a Wardrobe boast,
Less those of Popes at their Election cost;
Less those, which Sicily's Tyrant heretofore
From Plundered Gods, and Jove's own Shoulders tore.
Hither, as to some Fair, the Rabble come,
To barter for the Merchandise of Rome;
Where Priests, like Mountebanks, on Stage appear,
T'expose the Frip'ry of their hallowed Ware:
This is the Lab'ratory of their Trade,
The Shop, where all their staple Drugs are made;
Prescriptions, and Receipts to bring in Gain,
All from the Church Dispensatories taken,
The Pope's Elixir, Holy Waters here,
Which they with Chymick Art distilled prepare:
Choice above Goddard's Drops, and all the Trash
Of Modern Quacks; this is that Sovereign Wash
For fetching Spots, and Morphew from the Face,
And scowring dirty Clothes, and Consciences.
One drop of this, if used, had power to fray
The Legion from the Hogs of Gadara:
This would have silenced quite the Wiltshire Drum,
And made the prating Fiend of Mascon dumb.
That Vessel consecrated Oil contains,
Kept Sacred, as the famed Ampoulle of France;
Which some profaner Heretics would use
For liquoring Wheels of Jacks, of Boots, and Shoes:
This make the Chrism, which mixed with Snot of Priests,
Anoint young Cath'licks for the Church's lists;
And when they are crossed, confessed, and die; by this
Their lanching Souls slide off to endless Bliss:
As Lapland Saints, when they on Broomsticks fly,
By help of Magic Unctions mount the Sky.
You Altar-Pix of Gold is the Abode,
And safe Repository of their God.
A Cross is fixed upon it the Feinds to fright,
And Flies which would the Deity beshite;
And Mice, which often might unprepared receive.
And to lewd Scoffers cause of Scandal give.
Here are performed the Conjurings and Spells,
For Christning Saints, and Hawks, and Carriers Bells;
For hall'wing Shreds, and Grains, and Salts, and Bawms,
Shrines, Crosses, Medals, Shells, and Waxen Lambs:
Of wondrous Virtue all (you must believe)
And from all sorts of Ill preservative;
From Plague, Infection, Thunder, Storm, and Hail,
Love, Grief, Want, Debt, Sin, and the Devil and all.
Here Beads are blessed, and Pater nosters framed,
(By some the Tallies of Devotion named)
Which of their Prayers, and Oraisons keep tale,
Lest they, and Heaven should in the reckoning fail.
Here Sacred Lights, the Altars graceful Pride,
Are by Priests breath perfumed and Sanctified;
Made some of Wax, of Her'ticks Tallow some,
A Gift, which Irish Emma sent to Rome:
For which great Merit worthily (we are told)
She Is now amongst her Country-Saints enrolled.
Here holy Banners are reserved in store,
And Flags, such as the famed Armado bore:
And hallowed Swords, and Daggers kept for use,
When resty Kings the Papal Yoke resuse:
And consecrated Rats-bane, to be laid
For Her'tick Vermin, which the Church invade.
But that which brings in most of Wealth, and Gain,
Does best the Priests swollen Tripes, and Purses strain;
Here they each Week their constant Auctions hold
Of Relics, which by Candles Inch are sold:
Saints by the dozen here are set to sale,
Like Mortals wrought in Gingerbread on Stall.
Hither are loads from emptied Channels brought,
And Voiders of the Worms from Sextons bought;
Which serve for Retail through the World to vent,
Such as of late were to the Savoy sent:
Hair from the Skulls of dying Strumpets shorn,
And Felons Bones from rifled Gibbets torn;
Like those, which some old Hag at midnight steals.
For Witchcrafts, Amulets, and Charms, and Spells,
Are past for Sacred to the Cheap'ning Rout;
And worn on Fingers, Breasts, and Ears about.
This boasts a Scrap of me, and that a Bit
Of good St. George, St. Patrick, or St. Kit.
These Locks S. Bridget's were, and those S. Clare's;
Some for S. Catharine's go, and some for here is
That wiped her Savior's feet, washed with her tears.
Here you may see my wounded Leg, and here
Those, which to China bore the great Xavier.
Here may you the grand Traitor's Halter see,
Some called the Arms of the Society:
Here is his Lanthorn too, but Faux his, not,
That was embezl'd by the Huguenot.
Here Garnet's Straws, and Becket's Bones, and Hair,
For murdering whom, some Tails are said to wear;
As learned Capgrave does record their fate,
And faithful British Histories relate.
Those are S. Laurence Coals exposed to view,
Strangely preserved, and kept alive till now.
That Is the famed Wildefortis wondrous Beard,
For which her Maidenhead the Tyrant spared.
Yon is the Baptist's Coat, and one of's Heads,
The rest are shown in many a place besides;
And of his Teeth as many Sets there are,
As on their Belts six Operators wear.
Here Blessed Mary's Milk, not yet turned sour,
Renowned (like Ass'es) for its healing power,
Ten Holland Kine scarce in a year give more.
Here is her Manteau, and a Smock of hers,
Fellow to that, which once relieved Poictiers:
Besides her Husbands Utensils of Trade,
Wherewith some prove, that Images were made.
Here is the Soldiers Spear, and Passion-Nails,
Whose quantity would serve for building Paul's:
Chips, some from Holy Cross, from Tyburn some,
Honored by many a Jesuit's Martyrdom:
All held of special, and Mirac'lous Power,
Not Tabor more approved for Agu's cure:
Here Shoes, which, once perhaps at Newgate hung,
Angled their Charity, that passed along,
Now for S. Peter's go, and the Office bear
For Priests, they did for lesser Villains there.
These are the Fathers Implements, and Tools,
Their gaudy Trangums for inveigling Fools:
These serve for Baits the simple to ensnare,
Like Children spirited with Toys at Fair.
Nor are they half the Artifices yet,
By which the Vulgar they delude, and cheat:
Which should I undertake, much easier I,
Much sooner might compute what Sins there be
Wiped off, and pardoned at a Jubilee.
What Bribes enrich the Datary each year,
Or Vices treated on by Escobar:
How many Whores in Rome profess the Trade,
Or greater numbers by Confession made.
One undertakes by Scale of Miles to tell
The Bounds, Dimensions, and Extent of Hell;
How far, and wide the Infernal Monarch Reigns,
How many German Leagues his Realm contains:
Who are his Ministers, pretends to know,
And all their several Offices below:
How many Chaudrons he each year expends
In Coals for roasting Huguenots, and Feinds:
And with as much exactness states the case,
As if h'ad been Surveyor of the place.
Another frights the Rout with ruful Stories,
Of Wild Chimaera's, Limbo's, Purgatories,
And bloated Souls in smoaky durance hung,
Like a Westphalia Gammon, or Neats Tongue,
To be redeemed with Masses, and a Song.
A good round Sum must the Deliverance buy,
For none may there swear out on poverty.
Your rich, and bounteous Shades are only eased,
No Fleet, or King's Bench Ghosts are thence released.
A third, the wicked, and debauched to please,
Cries up the virtue of Indulgences,
And all the rates of Vices does assess;
What price they in the holy Chamber bear,
And Customs for each Sin imported there:
How you at best advantages may buy
Patents for Sacrilege, and Simony.
What Tax is in the Leach'ry-Office laid
On Panders, Bawds, and Whores, that ply the Trade:
What costs a Rape, or Incest, and how cheap
You may an Harlot, or an Ingle keep;
How easy Murder may afforded be
For one, two, three, or a whole Family;
But not of Her'ticks, there no Pardon lacks,
It Is one of the Church's meritorious Acts.
For venial Trifles, less and slighter Faults,
They never deserve the trouble of your thoughts.
Ten Ave Mary's mumbled to the Cross
Clear scores of twice ten thousand such as those:
Some are at sound of christened Bell forgiven,
And some by squirt of Holy Water driven:
Others by Anthems played are charmed away,
As Men cure Bites of the Tarantula.
But nothing with the Crowd does more enhance
The value of these holy Charlatans,
Than when the Wonders of the Mass they veiw,
Where spiritual Jugglers their chief Mast'ry show:
Hey Jingo, Sirs! What Is this? it is Bread you see;
Presto be gone! it is now a Deity.
Two grains of Dough, with Cross, and stamp of Priest,
And five small words pronounced, make up their Christ.
To this they all fall down, this all adore,
And strait devour, what they adored before;
Down goes the tiny Savior at a bit,
To be digested, and at length beshit:
From Altar to Close-Stool, or Jakes preferred,
First Wafer, then a God, and then a --
It Is this, that does the astonished Rout amuse,
And Reverence to shaven Crown infuse:
To see a silly, sinful, mortal Wight
His Maker make, create the Infinite.
None boggles at the impossibility;
Alas, it is wondrous Heavenly Mystery!
None dares the mighty God-maker blaspheme,
Nor his most open Crimes, and Vices blame:
Saw he those hands that held his God before,
Strait grope himself, and by and by a Whore:
Should they his aged Father kill, or worse,
His Sisters, Daughters, Wife, himself too force.
And here I might (if I but durst) reveal
What pranks are played in the Confessional:
How haunted Virgins have been dispossessed,
And Devils were cast out, to let in Priest:
What Fathers act with Novices alone,
And what to Punks in shrievings Seats is done;
Who thither flock to Ghostly Confessor,
To clear old debts, and tick with Heaven for more.
Often have I seen these hallowed Altars stained
With Rapes, those Pews with Buggeries profaned:
Not great Cellier, nor any greater Bawd,
Of note, and long experience in the Trade,
Has more, and fouler Scenes of Lust suvey'd.
But I these dangerous Truths forbear to tell,
For fear I should the Inquisition feel.
Should I tell all their countless Knaveries,
Their Cheats, and Shams, and Forgeries, and Lies.
Their Cringings, Crossings, Censings, Sprinklings, Chrisms,
Their Conjurings, and Spells, and Exorcisms;
Their Motly Habits, Maniples, and Stoles,
Albs, Ammits, Rochets, Chimers, Hoods, and Cowls.
Should I tell all their several Services,
Their Trentals, Masses, Dirges, Rosaries;
Their solemn Pomps, their Pageants, and Parades,
Their holy Masks, and spiritual Cavalcades,
With thousand Antic Tricks, and Gambols more;
'Twould swell the sum to such a mighty score,
That I at length should more volum'nous grow,
Than Crabb, or Surius, lying Fox, or Stow.
Believe what e're I have related here,
As true, as if 'twere spoke from Porph'ry Chair.
If I have feigned in ought, or broached a Lie,
Let worst of Fates attend me, let me be
Pist on by Porter, Groom, and Oyster-whore,
Or find my Grave in Jakes, and Common-shore:
Or make next Bonfire for the Powder Plot,
The sport of every sneering Huguenot.
There like a Martyred Pope in Flames expire,
And no kind Catholic dare quench the Fire.
Aude aliquid brevibus Gyaris, and carcere dignum,
Si vis esse aliquis. --
Juven. Sat.
ODE.
1.
NOW Curses on you all! ye virtuous Fools,
Who think to fetter freeborn souls,
And tie'em to dull Morality, and rules.
The Sagarite be damned, and all the Crew
Of learned Idiots, who his steps pursue;
And those more silly Proselytes, whom his fond precepts drew.
Oh! had his Ethics been with their wild Author drowned,
Or a like Fate with those lost Writings found,
Which that grand Plagiary doomed to fire,
And made by unjust Flames expire:
They never had then seduced Mortality,
Never lasted to debauch the World with their lewd Pedantry.
But damned, and more (if Hell can do it) be that thrice cursed name,
Who e're the Rudiments of Law designed;
Who e're did the first Model of Religion frame,
And by that double Vassalage enthralled Mankind,
By naught before, but their own Power, or Will confined:
Now quite abridg'd of all their Primitive Liberty,
And slaves to each capricious Monarch's Tyranny.
More happy Brutes! who the great Rule of Sense observe,
And never from their first Charter swerve.
Happy! whose lives are merely to enjoy,
And feel no stings of Sin, which may their bliss annoy.
Still unconcerned at Epithets of ill, or good,
Distinctions, unadult'rate Nature never understood.
2.
Hence hated Virtue from our goodly Isle,
No more our joys beguile;
No more with thy loathed presence plague our happy state,
Thou enemy to all, that is brisk, or gay, or brave or great.
Be gone with all thy pious meagre Train,
To some unfruitful, unfrequented Land,
And there an Empire gain,
And there extend thy rigorous command:
There where illib'ral Nature's niggardise
Has set a Tax on Vice.
Where the lean barren Region does enhance
The worth of dear Intemperance,
And for each pleasurable sin exacts excise.
We (thanks to Fate) more cheaply can offend,
And want no tempting Luxuries,
No good convenient sinning opportunities;
Which Nature's bounty could bestow, or Heaven's kindness lend.
Go follow that nice Goddess to the Skies,
Who heretofore disgusted at increasing Vice,
Disliked the World, and thought it too profane,
And timely hence retired, and kindly never returned again.
Hence to those Airy Mansions rove,
Converse with Saints, and holy folks above;
Those may thy presence woo,
Whose lazy ease affords them nothing else to do:
Where haughty scornful I,
And my great Friends will never vouchsafe thee company.
You Are now an hard, unpracticable good,
Too difficult for flesh and blood:
Were I all soul, like them, perhaps I Would learn to practice thee.
3.
Virtue! thou solemn grave impertinence,
Abhorred by all the Men of Wit, and Sense:
Thoudamn'd Fatigue! that clogst life's journey here,
Though thou no weight of wealth or profit bear;
Thou pu^ing fond Green Sickness of the mind!
That make us prove to our own selves unkind,
Whereby we Coals, and Dirt for diet choose,
And, Pleasur's better food refuse.
Cursed Jilt! that lead'st deluded Mortals on,
Till they too late perceive themselves undone,
Choused by a Dowry in reversion.
The greatest Votary, thoue'e could boast,
(Pity so brave a Soul was on thy service lost;
What Wonders he in wickedness had done,
Whom thy weak power could so inspire alone?)
Tho long with fond amors he courted thee,
Yet dying, did recant his vain Idolatry:
At length, though late, he did repent with shame,
Forced to confess thee nothing, but an empty name.
So was that Lecher gulled, whose haughty love
Designed a Rape on the Queen Regent of the Gods above:
When he a Goddess thought he had in chase
He found a gaudy vapor in the place,
And with thin Air beguiled his starved embrace.
Idly he spent his vigor, spent his blood,
And tired himself to oblige an unperforming Cloud.
4.
If Humane kind to thee e're Worship paid;
They were by ignorance misled,
That only them devout, and thee a Goddess made.
Known happily in the Worlds rude untaught infancy,
Before it had out-grown its childish innocence,
Before it had arrived at sense,
Or reached the Manhood, and discretion of Debauchery;
Known in those ancient goodly duller times,
When crafty Pagans had engrossed all crimes:
When Christian Fools were obstinately good,
Nor yet their Gospel-freedom understood.
Tame easy Fops! who could so prodigally bleed,
To be thought Saints, and dye a Calendar with with red:
No prudent Heathen e're seduced could be,
To suffer Martyrdom for thee:
Only that arrant Ass whom the false Oracle called Wise
(No wonder if the Devil uttered lies)
That sniveling Puritan, who spite of all the mode
Would be unfashionably good,
And exercised his whining gifts to rail at Vice:
Him all the Wits of Athens damned,
And justly with Lampoons defamed:
But when the mad Fanatic, could not silenced be
From broaching dangerous Divinity;
The wise Republic made him for prevention die,
And sent him to the Gods, and better company.
5.
Let fumbling Age be grave, and wise,
And Virtue's poor contemned Idea prize,
Who never knew, or now are past the sweets of Vice;
While we whose active pulses beat
With lusty youth, and vigorous heat,
Can all their Beards, and Morals too despise,
While my plump veins are filled with lust and blood;
Let not one thought of her intrude,
Or dare appoach my breast,
But know it is all possessed
By a more welcome guest:
And know, I have not yet the leisure to be good.
If ever unkind destiny
Shall force long life on me;
If e're I must the curse of dotage bear;
Perhaps I Will dedicate those dregs of Time to her,
And come with Crutches her most humble Votary.
When sprightly Vice retreats from hence,
And quits the ruins of decayed sense;
She Will serve to usher in a fair pretense,
And varnish with her name a well-dissembled impotence,
When Ptisick, Rheums, Catarrhs, and Palsies seize,
And all the Bill of Maladies,
Which Heaven to punish over-living Mortals sends;
Then let her enter with the numerous infirmities,
Her self the greatest plague, which wrinkles, and gray hairs attends.
6.
Tell me, ye Venerable Sots, who court her most,
What small advantage can she boast,
Which her great Rival has not in a greater store ingrost.
Her boasted calm, and peace of mind
In Wine, and Company we better find,
Find it with Pleasure too combined.
In mighty Wine, where we our senses steep,
And Lull our Cares, and Consciences asleep:
But why do I that wild Chimaera name?
Conscience! that giddy airy Dream,
Which does from brain sick heads, or ill-digesting stomachs steam.
Conscience! the vain fantastic fear
Of punishments, we know not when, nor where:
Project of crafty Statesmen* to support weak Law,
Whereby they slavish Spirits awe,
And dastard Souls to forced obedience draw.
Grand Wheedle! which our Gown'd Impostors use,
The poor unthinking Rabble to abuse.
Scarecrow! to fright from the forbidden fruit of Vice,
Their own beloved Paradise:
Let those vile Canters wickedness decry,
Whose Mercenary tongues take pay
For what they say;
And yet commend in practice what their words deny,
While we discerning Heads, who farther pry,
Their holy Cheats defy
And scorn their Frauds, and scorn their sanctified Cajoulery.
7.
None but dull unbred Fools discredit Vice,
Who act their wickedness with an ill grace;
Such their profession scandalize,
And justly forfeit all that praise;
All that esteem, that credit, and applause,
Which we by our wise menage from a sin can raise.
A true, and brave transgressor ought
To sin with the same height of spirit, Caesar fought:
Mean-soul'd offenders now no honors gain,
Only debauches of the nobler strain.
Vice well-improv'd yields bliss, and fame beside,
And some for sinning have been deifi'd.
Thus the lewd Gods of old did move,
By these brave methods to the seats above.
Even Jove himself, the Sovereign Deity,
Father and King of all the immortal Progeny,
Ascended to that high Degree;
By crimes above the reach of weak Mortality.
He Heaven one large Seraglio made,
Each Goddess turned a glorious Punk o'th trade;
And all that Sacred place
Was filled with Bastard-Gods of his own race:
Almighty Lech'ry got his first repute,
And everlasting Whoring was his chiefest Attribute.
8.
How gallant was that Wretch, whose happy guilt
A Fame upon the Ruins of a Temple built!
'Let Fools, said he, Impiety alledg,
'And urge the no great fault of Sacriledg:
'I'll set the Sacred Pile on flame,
'And in its Ashes write my lasting Name,
'My name which thus shall be
'Deathless as its own Deity.
'Thus the vainglorious Carian I Will outdo,
'And Egypts proudest Monarchs too;
'Those lavish Prodigals, who idly did consume
'Their Lives, and Treasures to erect a Tomb,
'And only great by being buried would become:
'At cheaper rates than they I Will buy renown,
'And my loud Fame shall all their silent glories drown.
So spoke the daring Hector, so did Prophecy:
And so it proved: in vain did envious Spite
By fruitless methods try
To raze his well built Fame, and Memory
Amongst Posterity:
The Boutefeu can now Immortal write,
While the inglorious Founder is forgotten quite.
9.
Yet greater was that mighty Emperor;
(A greater crime besitted his high Power)
Who sacrificed a City to a Jest,
And showed he knew the grand intrigues of humor best:
He made all Rome a Bonefire to his Fame,
And sung, and played, and danced amidst the Flame;
Bravely begun! yet pity there he stayed,
One step to Glory more he should have made:
He should have heaved the noble frolic higher,
And made the People on the Funeral pile expire
Or providently with their blood put out the Fire.
Had this been done,
The utmost pitch of glory he had won:
No greater Monument could be
To consecrate him to eternity,
Nor should there need another Herald of his praise, but me.
10.
And thou, yet greater Faux, the glory of our Isle,
Whom baffled Hell esteems its chiefest Foyl;
'Twere injury should I omit thy name
Whose Action merits all the breath of Fame.
Methinks, I see the trembling shades below
Around in humble reverence bow;
Doubtful they seem, whether to pay their Loyalty
To their dread Monarch, or to thee:
No wonder he (grown jealous of thy feared success)
Envied Mankind the honor of thy wickedness,
And spoiled that brave attempt, which must have made his grandeur less.
How e're regret not, mighty Ghost,
Thy Plot by treacherous fortune crossed,
Nor think thy well deserved glory lost.
Thou the full praise of Villainy shall ever share,
And all will judge thy Act, complete enough, when thou could dare,
So thy great Master fared, whose high disdain
Contemned that Heaven, where he could not Reign,
When he with bold Ambition strove
TO usurp the Throne above,
And led against the Deity an armed Train,
Tho from his vast designs he fell,
O^e power'd by his Almighty Foe,
Yet gained he Victory in his overthrow:
He gained sufficient Triumph, that he durst Rebel;
And 'twas some pleasure to be thought the great'st in Hell.
11.
Tell me, you great Triumvirate, what shall I do
To be illustrious as you?
Let your examples move me with a generous fire,
Let them into my daring thoughts inspire
Somewhat completely wicked, some vast Gyantcrime,
Unknown, unheard, unthought of by all past and present time.
It Is done, it is done; Methinks, I feel the powerful charms,
And a new heat of sin my spirit warms;
I travel with a glorious mischief, for whose birth,
My Soul's too narrow, and weak Fate too feeble to bring forth.
Let the unpitied Vulgar tamely go,
And stock for company, the wild Plantations down below:
Such their vile Souls for viler Barter sell,
Scarce worth the damning, or their room in Hell.
We are his Grandees, and expect as much preferment there,
For our good Service, as on Earth we share.
In them sin is but a mere privative of good,
The frailty, and defect of flesh and blood:
In us it is a perfection, who profess
A studied, and elaborate wickedness:
Wear the great Royal Society of Vice,
Whose Talents are to make discoveries,
And advance Sin like other Arts, and Sciences.
It Is I the bold Columbus only I,
Who must new Worlds in Vice descry,
And fix the pillars of unpassable iniquity.
12.
How sneaking was the first debauch that sinned
Who for so small a Crime sold humane kind!
How undeserving that high place,
To be thought Parent of our sin, and race,
Who by low guilt our Nature doubly did debase!
Unworthy was he to be thought
Father of the great first born Cain, which he begot;
The noble Cain, whose bold, and gallant act
Proclaimed him of more high extract:
Unworthy me,
And all the braver part of his Posterity.
Had the just Fates designed me in his stead;
I Would done some great, and unexampled deed:
A deed, which should decry
The Stoics dull Equality,
And show that sin admits transcendency:
A deed, wherein the Tempter should not share
Above what Heaven could punish, and above what he could dare.
For greater crimes than his I would have fell,
And acted somewhat, which might merit more than Hell,
An Apology for the foregoing Ode, by way of Epilogue.
MY part is done, and you will, I hope, excuse
The extravagance of a repenting Muse,
Pardon what e're she has too boldly said,
She only acted here in Masquerade.
For the slight Arguments she did produce,
Were not to flatter Vice, but to traduce.
So we Buffoons in Princely dress expose,
Not to be gay, but more ridiculous.
When she an Hector for her Subject had,
She thought she must be Termagant, and mad:
That made her speak like a lewd Punk of the Town,
Who by converse with Bullies wicked grown,
Has learned the Mode to cry all Virtue down.
But now the Vizard's off; she changes Scene,
And turns a modest civil Girl again.
Our Poet has a different taste of Wit,
Nor will to common Vogue himself submit.
Let some admire the Fops whose Talents lie
In venting dull infipid Blasphemy;
He swears he cannot with those terms dispense,
Nor will be damned for the repute of sense.
Wit's name was never to profaneness due,
For then you see he could be witty too:
He could Lampoon the State, and Libel Kings,
But that he is Loyal, and knows better things,
Than Fame, whose guilty Birth from Treason springs.
He likes not Wit, which cannot a License claim,
To which the Author dares not set his Name.
Wit should be open, court each Reader's eye,
Not lurk in fly unprinted privacy.
But Crim^nal Writers like dull Birds of Night,
For weakness, or for shame avoid the light;
May such a Jury for their Audience have,
And from the Bench, not Pit, their doom receive.
May they the Tower for their due merits share,
And a just wreath of Hemp, not Laurel wear:
He could be Bawdy too, and nick the times,
In what they dearly love; Damned placket Rhimes,
Such as our Nobles write --
Whose nauseous Poetry can reach no higher
Than what the Codpiece, or its God inspire.
So lewd, they spend at quill; you would justly think;
They wrote with something nastier than Ink.
But he still thought that little Wit, or none,
Which a just modesty must never own,
And a mere Reader with a Blush atone.
If Ribauldry deserved the praise of Wit,
He must resign to each illit'rate Citt,
And Prentices, and Car-men challenge it.
Even they too can be smart, and witty there;
For all men on that Subject Poets are.
Henceforth he vows, if ever more he find
Himself to the base itch of Verse inclined;
If e're he is given up so far to write;
He never means to make his end delight:
Should he do so; he must despair success:
For he is not now debauched enough to please,
And must be damned for want of Wickedness.
He Will therefore use his Wit another way,
And next the ugliness of Vice display.
Tho against Virtue once he drew his Pen,
He Will never for ought, but her defense again.
Had he a Genius, and Poetic rage,
Great as the Vices of this guilty Age.
Were he all Gall, and armed with store of spite;
'Twere worth his pains to undertake to write;
To noble Satyr he would direct his aim,
And by it Mankind, and Poetry reclaim,
He Would shoot his Quills just like a Porcupine
At Vice, and make them stab in every Line,
The world should learn to blush, --
And dread the Vengeance of his pointed Wit,
Which worse than their own Consciences should fright,
And all should think him Heavens just Plague, designed
To visit for the sins of lewd Mankind.
THE PASSION OF BYBLIS IN Ovid's Metamorphosis

Imitated in English.

LONDON, Printed for Jo. Hindmarsh, 1685.

THE Passion of Byblis OUT OF Ovid's Metamorphosis, B. 9. F. 11. Beginning at
Byblis in exemplo est, ut ament concessa puellae. And ending with -- Modumque
Exit, and infelix committit saepe repelli.
YOU heedless Maids, whose young, and tender hearts
Unwounded yet, have escaped the fatal darts;
Let the sad tale of wretched Byblis move,
And learn by her to shun forbidden Love,
Not all the plenty, all the bright resort
Of gallant Youth, that graced the Carian Court,
Could charm the hauty Nymph's disdainful heart,
Or from a Brother's guilty Love divert;
Caunus she-lov'd, not as a Sister ought,
But Honor, Blood, and Shame alike forgot:
Caunus alone takes up her Thoughts, and Eyes,
For him alone she wishes, grieves and sighs.
At first her newborn Passion owns no name,
A glim'ring Spark scarce kindling into flame;
She thinks it no offense, if from his Lip
She snatch an harmless bliss, if her fond clip
With loose embraces often his Neck surround,
And love is yet in debts of Nature drowned.
But Love at length grows naughty by degrees,
And now she likes, and strives her self to please:
Well-drest she comes, and arms her Eyes with darts,
Her Smiles with charms, and all the studied arts
Which practiced Love can teach to vanquish hearts.
Industrious now, she labors to be fair,
And envies all, whoever fairer are.
Yet knows she not, she loves, but still does grow,
Insensibly the thing, she does not know:
Strict honor yet her checked desires does bind,
And modest thoughts, on this side wish confined:
Only within she sooths her pleasing flames,
And now, the hated terms of Blood disclaims:
Brother sounds harsh; she the unpleasing word
Strives to forget, and oftener calls him Lord:
And when the name of Sister grates her ear,
Could wished unsaid, and rather Byblis hear.
Nor dare she yet with waking thoughts admit
A wanton hope: but when returning night
With Sleep's soft gentle spell her Senses charms,
Kind fancy often brings him to her Arms:
In them she often does the loved Shadow seem
To grasp, and joys, yet blushes too in Dream.
She wakes, and long in wonder silent lies,
And thinks on her late pleasing Ecstasies:
Now likes, and now abhors her guilty flame,
By turns abandoned to her Love, and Shame:
At length her struggling thoughts an utt'rance find,
And vent the wild disorders of her mind.
"Ah me! (she cries) kind Heaven avert! what means
"This boading form, that nightly rides my dreams?
"Grant 'em untrue! why should lewd hope divine?
"Ah! why was this too charming Vision seen?
"'It Is true, by the most envious wretch, that sees,
"He Is owned all fair, and lovely, owned a prize,
"Worthy the conquest of the brightest eyes:
"A prize that would my highest Ambition fill,
"All I could wish; -- but he is my brother still!
"That cruel word for ever must disjoyn,
"Nor can I hope, but thus, to have him mine.
"Since then I waking never must possess;
"Let me in sleep at least enjoy the bliss,
"And sure nice Virtue cannot forbid me this:
"Kind sleep does no malicious spies admit,
"Yet yields a lively semblance of delight:
"Gods! what a scene of joy was that! how fast
"I clasped the Vision to my panting breast!
"With what fierce bounds I sprung to meet my "bliss,
"While my rapt soul flew out in every kiss!
"Till breathless, saint, and foftly sunk away,
"I all dissolved in reeking pleasures lay!
"How sweet is the remembrance yet! though night
"Too hasty fled, drove on by envious light.
"O that we might the Laws of Nature break!
"How well would Caunus me an Husband make!
"How well to Wise might he his Byblis take!
"Would God! in all things we had partners bin
"Besides our Parents, and our fatal Kin:
"Would thou were nobler, I more meanly born,
"Then guiltless I Would despaired, and suffered scorn:
"Happy that Maid unknown, whoever shall prove
"so blessed, so envied to deserve thy love.
"Unhappy me! whom the same womb did join,
"Which now forbids me ever to be thine:
"Cursed fate! that we alone in that agree,
"By which we ever must divided be.
"And must we be? what meant my Vision then?
"Are they, and all their dear presages vain?
"Have Dreams no credit, but with easy love?
"Or do they hit sometimes, and faithful prove?
"The Gods forbid! yet those whom I invoke,
"Have loved like me, have their own Sisters took:
"Great Saturn, and his greater Offspring Jove,
"Both stocked their Heaven with Incestuous love:
"Gods have their privilege: why do I strive
"To strain my Hopes to their Prerogative?
"No, let me banish this forbidden fire,
"Or quench it with my Blood, and with it expire:
"Unstained in honor, and unhurt in fame,
"Let the Grave bury my Love, and Shame:
"But when at my last hour I gasping lie,
"Let only my kind Murderer be by:
"Let him, while I breath out my soul in sighs,
"Or gaz't away, look on with pitying eyes:
"Let him (for sure he cannot deny me this)
"Seal my cold Lips with one dear parting Kiss.
"Besides, 'twere vain should I alone agree
"To what another Will must ratify;
"Could I be so abandoned to consent;
"What I have pass for good and innocent,
"He may perhaps as worst of Crimes resent.
"Yet we amongst our Race examples find
"Of Brothers, who have been to Sisters kind:
"Famed Canace could thus successful prove,
"Could Crown her wishes in a Brother's love.
"But whence could I these instances produce?
"How came I witty to my ruin thus?
"Whither will this mad frenzy hurry on?
"Hence, hence, you naughty flames, far hence be gone,
"Nor let me e're the shameful Passion own.
"And yet should he address; I should forgive,
"I fear, I fear, I should his suit receive:
"Shall therefore I, who could not love disown
"Offered by him, not mine to make him known?
"And can thou speak? can thy bold tongue declare?
"Yes, Love shall force: -- and now methinks I dare.
"But lest fond modesty at length refuse,
"I will some sure, and better method choose:
"A Letter shall my secret flames disclose,
"And hide my Blushes, but reveal their cause.
This takes, and it is resolved as soon as said,
With this she raised her self upon her bed,
And propping with her hand her leaning head:
"Happen what will (says she) I Will make him know
"What pains, what raging pains I undergo:
"Ah me! I rave! what tempests shake my breast?
"And where? O where will this distraction rest?
Trembling, her Thoughts endite, and often her Eye
Looks back for fear of conscious spies too nigh:
One hand her Paper, the other holds her Pen,
And Tears supply that Ink her Lines must drain.
Now she begins, now stops, and stopping frames
New doubts, now writes, and now her writing damns.
She writes, defaces, alters, likes, and blames:
Often throws in have her Pen, and Paper by,
Then takes 'em up again as hastily:
Unsteddy her resolves, fickle, and vain,
No sooner made, but strait unmade again:
What her desires would have, she does not know,
Displeased withal, what e're she goes to do:
At once contending, shame, and hope, and fear,
Wrack her tossed mind, and in her looks appear.
Sister was wrote; but soon misguiding doubt
Recalls it, and the guilty word blots out.
Again she pauses, and again begins,
At length her Pen drops out these hasty Lines.
"Kind health, which you, and only you can grant.
"Which, if denied, she must for ever want;
"To you your Lover sends: ah! blushing Shame
"In silence bids her Paper hide her name:
"Would God the fatal Message might be done
"Without annexing it, nor Byblis known,
"E're blessed success her hopes, and wishes crown.
"And had I now my smothered grief concealed,
"It might by tokens past have been revealed:
"A thousand proofs were ready to impart
"The inward anguish of my wounded heart:
"Often, as your fight a sudden blush did raise,
"My blood came up to meet you at my face:
"Often (if you call to mind) my longing Eyes
"Betrayed in looks my souls too thin disguise:
"Think how their Tears, think how my heaving Breast
"Often in deep sighs some cause unknown confessed:
"Think how these Arms did often with fierce embrace,
"Eager as my desires, about you press:
"These Lips too, when they could so happy prove,
"(^d you but marked) with close warm kisses strove
"To whisper something more than Sisters Love.
"And yet, though rankling grief my mind distressed,
"Tho raging flames within burn up my breast,
"Long time I did the mighty pain endure,
"Long strove to bring the fierce disease to cure:
"Witness, ye cruel Powers, who did inspire
"This strange, this fatal, this resistless fire,
"Witness, what pains (for you alone can know)
"This helpless wretch to quenched did undergo:
"A thousand Racks, and Martyrdoms, and more
"Than a weak Virgin can be thought, I bore:
"O'rematch'd in power at last, I Am forced to yield,
"And to the conquering God resign the field:
"To you, dear cause of all, I make address,
"From you with humble prayers I beg redress:
"You rule alone my arbitrary fate,
"And life, and death on your disposal wait:
"Ordain, as you think fit; deny, or grant,
"Yet know no stranger is your suppliant.
"But she, who, tho to you by Blood allied
"In nearest bonds, in nearer would be tied.
"Let doting age debate of Law, and Right,
"And gravely state the bounds of just, and fit;
"Whose Wisdom's but their Envy, to destroy
"And bar those pleasures, which they cannot enjoy:
"Our blooming years, more sprightly, and more gay,
"By Nature we are designed for love and play:
"Youth knows no check, but leaps weak Vertu's fence,
"And briskly hunts the noble chase of Sense:
"Without dull thinking we enjoyment trace,
"And call that lawful, whatsoever does please.
"Nor will our guilt want instances alone,
"'It Is what the glorious Gods above have done:
"Let Us follow where those great examples went,
"Nor think that Sin, where Heaven's a precedent.
"Let neither awe of Fathers frowns, nor shame
"For ought that can be told by blabbing fame
"Nor any gastlier fantom, fear can frame,
"Frighten or stop us in our way to bliss,
"But boldly let us rush on happiness:
"Where glorious hazards shall enhanse delight,
"And that, that makes it dangerous, make it great:
"Relation too, which does our fault increase,
"Will serve that fault the better to disguise?
"That lets us now in private often meet
"Blessed opportunities for stolen delight:
"In public often we embrace, and kiss,
"And fear no jealous, no suspecting eyes.
"How little more remains for me to crave!
"How little more for you to give! O save
"A wretched Maid undone by Love, and you,
"Who does in tears, and dying accents sue;
"Who bleeds that Passion, she had never revealed,
"If not by Love, Almighty Love compelled:
"Nor ever let her mournful Tomb complain,
"Here Byblis lies, killed by your cold disdain.
Here forced to end, for want of room, not will
To add, her lines the crowded Margin fill,
Nor space allow for more: she trembling, folds
The Paper, which her shameful Message holds;
And sealing, as she wept with boading fear,
She wet her Signet with a falling Tear.
This done, a trusty Messenger she called,
And in kind words the whispered Errand told:
"Go, carry this with faithful care, she said,
"To my dear, -- there she paused a while, and staid,
And by and by -- Brother -- was heard to add:
As she delivered it with her commands,
The Letter fell from out her trembling hands,
Dismayed with the ill Omen, she anew
Doubted success, and held, yet bad him go.
He goes, and after quick admission got
To Caunus hands the fatal secret brought:
Soon as the doubtful Youth a glance had cast
On the first lines, and guest by them the rest,
Strait horror, and amazement filled his breast:
Impatient with his rage, he could not stay
To see the end, but threw't half read away:
Scarce could his hands the trembling wretch forbear,
Nor did his tongue those angry threatenings spare:
"Fly hence, nor longer my chafed fury trust,
"Thou cursed Pander of detested Lust;
"Fly quickly hence, and to thy swiftness owe
"Thy life, a forfeit to my vengeance due:
"Which, had not danger of my Honor crossed,
"Thou Would paid by this, and been sent back a Ghost,
He the rough orders strait obeys, and bears
The killing news to wretched Byblis ears;
Like striking Thunder the fierce tidings stun,
And to her heart quicker than lightning run:
The frighted blood forsakes her ghastly face,
And a short death does every Member seize:
But soon as sense returns, her frenzy too
Returns, and in these words breaks forth anew.
"And justly served; -- for why did foolish I
"Consent to make this rash discovery?
"Why did I thus in hasty lines reveal
"That dangerous secret, Honor would conceal?
"I should have first with art disguised the hook,
"And seen how well the gaudy bait had took,
"And found him hung at least before I struck:
"From shore I should have first descri'd the wind
"Whether 'twould prove to my adventure kind,
"E're I to untried Seas my self resigned:
"Now dashed on Rocks, unable to retire,
"I must in the wreck of all my hopes expire,
"And was not I by tokens plain enough
"Fore-warned to quit my inauspicious Love?
"Did not the Fates my ill success foretell,
"When from my hands the unhappy Letter fell?
"So should my hopes have done, and my design,
"That, or the day should then have altered been;
"But rather the unlucky day; when Heaven
"Such ominous proofs of its dislike had given:
"And so it had, had not mad Passion swayed,
"And Reason been by blinder Love misled.
"Besides (alas!) I should my self have gone,
"Nor made my Pen a proxy to my Tongue;
"Much more I could have spoke, much more have told,
"Than a short Letter's narrow room would hold:
"He might have seen my looks, my wishing Eyes
"My melting Tears, and heard my begging Sighs;
"About his Neck I could have flung my Arms,
"And been all over Love, all over Charms;
"Grasped, and hung on his Knees, and there have dyed,
"There breathed my gasping Soul out if denied:
"This and ten thousand things I might have done
"To make my Passion with advantage known;
"Which if they each could not have bent his mind,
"Yet surely all had forced him to be kind.
"Perhaps he, whom I sent, was too in fault,
"Nor rightly timed his Message, as he ought;
"I fear he went in some ill-chosen hour,
"When cloudy weather made his temper lour.
"Not those calm seasons of the mind, which prove,
"The fittest to receive the seeds of Love;
"These things have ruined me; for doubtless he
"Is made of humane flesh, and blood, like me;
"He sucked no Tygress sure, nor Mountain Bear,
"Nor does his Breast relentless Marble wear.
"He must, he shall consent, again I Will try,
"And try again, if he again deny:
"No scorn, no harsh repulse, or rough defeat
"Shall ever my desire, or hopes rebate.
"My earnest suits shall never give him rest,
"While Life, and Love more durable, shall last:
"Alive I Will press, till breath in prayers be lost,
"And after come a kind beseeching Ghost.
"For, if I might, what I have done, recall,
"The first point were, not to have don't at all;
"But since it is done, the second to be gained
"Is now to have, what I have sought, attained:
"For he, though I should now my wishes quit,
"Can never my unchaste attempts forget:
"Should I desist, 'twill be believed that I
"By slightly asking, taught him to deny;
"Or that I tempted him with wily fraud,
"And snares for his unwary honor laid:
"Or, what I sent (and the belief were just)
"Were not the efforts of Love, but shameful Lust.
"In fine, I now dare any thing that is ill;
"I Have writ, I have solicited, my will
"Has been debauched; and should I thus give out,
"I cannot chaste, and innocent be thought:
"Much there is wanting still to be fulfilled,
"Much to my wish, but little to my guilt.
She spoke; but such is her unsettled mind,
It (...) from thought to thought, like veering wind,
Now to this point, and now to that inclined:
What she could wish had unattempted been:
She strait is eager to attempt again:
What she repents, she acts; and now lets loose
The reins to Love, nor any bounds allows,
Repulse upon repulse umov'd she bears,
And still sues on, while she her suit despairs.
A SATYR Upon a WOMAN, who by her Falsehood and Scorn was the Death of my Friend.
NO she shall never escape, if Gods there be,
Unless they perjured grow, and false as she;
Though no strange Judgment yet the Murd'ress seize
To punish her, and quit the partial Skies:
Though no revenging lightni^g yet has flasht
From thence, that might her criminal beauties blast:
Tho they in their old luster still prevail,
By no disease, nor guilt it self made pale.
Guilt, which should blackest Moors themselves but own,
Would make through all their night new blushes dawn:
Though that kind soul, who now augments the blessed,
Thither too soon by her unkindness chased.
(Where may it be her small'st, and lightest doom,
(For that is not half my curse) never to come)
Though he, when prompted by the highest despair,
Never mentioned her without an Hymn, or Prayer,
And could by all her scorn be forced no more
Than Martyrs to revile what they adore.
Who, had he cursed her with his dying breath;
Had done but just, and Heaven had forgave:
Tho ill-made Law (...) Sentence has ordained
For her, no Statute has her Guilt arraigned.
(For Hangmen, Women's Scorn, and Doctors skill,
All by a licensed way of murder kill.)
Tho she from Justice of all these go free
And boast perhaps in her success, and cry,
'Twas but a little harmless perjury:
Yet think she not, she still secure shall prove,
Or that none dare avenge an injured Love:
I rise in Judgment, am to be to her
Both Witness, Judge, and Executioner:
Armed with dire Satyr, and resentful spite,
I come to haunt her with the ghosts of Wit.
My Ink unbid starts out, and flies on her,
Like blood upon some touching murderer:
And should that fail, rather than want, I would,
Like Haggs, to curse her, write in my own blood.
Ye spightful powers (if any there can be,
That boast a worse, and keener spite than I)
Assist with Malice, and your mighty aid
My sworn Revenge, and help me Rhyme her dead:
Grant I may fix such brands of Infamy,
So plain, so deeply engraved on her, that she,
Her Skill, Patches, nor Paint, all joined can hide,
And which shall lasting as her Soul abide:
Grant my strong hate may such strong poison cast,
That every breath may taint, and rot, and blast,
Till one large Gangrene quite o'respread her fame
With foul contagion; till her odious name,
Spit at, and cursed by every mouth like mine,
Be terror to her self, and all her line.
Vilest of that viler Sex, who damned us all!
Ordained to cause, and plague us for, our fall!
WOMAN! nay worse! for she can naught be said,
But Mummy by some Devilish inhabited:
Not made in Heaven's Mint, but base coined,
She wears an humane image stamped on Fiend;
And whosoever Marriage would with her contract,
Is Witch by Law, and that a mere compact:
Her Soul (if any Soul in her there be)
By Hell was breathed into her in a lie,
And its whole stock of falsehood there was lent,
As if hereafter to be true it meant:
Bawd Nature taught her jilting, when she made
And by her make, designed her for the trade:
Hence 'twas she daubed her with a painted Face,
That she at once might better cheat, and please:
All those gay charming looks, that court the eye,
Are but an ambush to hide treachery;
Mischief adorned with pomp, and smooth disguise,
A painted skin stuffed full of guile and lies;
Within a gaudy Case, a nasty Soul,
Like T -- of quality in a gilt Close-stool:
Such on a Cloud those flattering colors are,
Which only serve to dress a Tempest fair.
So Men upon this Earth's fair surface dwell,
Within are Fiends, and at the center Hell:
Court-promises, the Leagues, which Statesmen make
With more convenience, and more ease to break,
The Faith, a Jesuit in allegiance swears,
Or a Town-jilt to keeping Coxcombs bears,
Are firm, and certain all, compared with hers:
Early in falsehood, at her Font she lied,
And should even then for Perjury been tried:
Her Conscience stretched, and open as the Stews,
But laughs at Oaths, and plays with solemn Vows.
And at her mouth swallows down perjured breath,
More glib than bits of Lechery beneath:
Less serious known, when she does most protest,
Than thoughts of arrantest Buffoons in jest:
More cheap, than the vile mercenariest Squire,
That plies for Half-crown Fees at Westminster,
And trades in staple* Oaths, and Swears to hire:
Less Guilt than hers, less breach of Oath, and Word
Has stood aloft, and looked through Penance board;
And he that trusts her in a Deathbed Prayer,
Has Faith to merit, and save any thing, but her.
But since her Guilt description does out-go;
I Will try if it outstrip my Curses too;
Curses, which may they equal my just hate,
My wish, and her desert, be each so great,
Each heard like Prayers, and Heaven make 'em fate.
First, for her Beauties, which the Mischief brought,
May she affected, they be borrowed thought,
By her own hand, not that of Nature wrought:
Her Credit, Honor, Portion, Health, and those
Prove light, and frail, as her broke Faith, and Vows.
Some base unnam'd Disease, her Carcass foul,
And make her Body ugly, as her Soul.
Cankers, and Ulcers eat her, till she be,
Shunned like Infection, loathed like Infamy.
Strength quite expired, may she alone retain
The snuff of Life, may that unquench'd remain,
As in the damned, to keep her fresh for pain:
Hot Lust light on her, and the plague of Pride
On that, this ever scorned, as that denied:
Ach, Anguish, horror, grief, dishonor, shame
Pursue at once her body, soul, and fame:
If e're the Devil-love must enter her
(For nothing sure but Fiends can enter there)
May she a just and true tormenter find,
And that like an ill* conscience rack her mind:
Be some Diseased, and ugly wretch her fate,
She doomed to love of one, whom all else hate.
May he hate her, and may her destiny
Be to despair, and yet love on, and die;
Or to invent some wittier punishment,
May he, to plague her, out of spite consent;
May the old fumbler, though disabled quite,
Have strength to give her Claps, but no delight:
May he of her unjustly jealous be
For one that is worse* and uglier far than he:
May's Impotence ball^, and torment her lust,
Yet scarcely her to dreams, or wishes trust:
Forced to be chaste, may she suspected be,
Share none of the Pleasure, all the Infamy.
In^e, that I all curses may complete
(For I Have but cursed in jest, ra^llied y^)
Whatever the Sex deserves, or feels, or fears,
May all those plagues be hers, and only hers;
Whatever great Favorites turned out of doors,
Scorned Lovers, bilk'd and disappointed Whores,
Or losing Gamesters vent, what Curses e're
Are spoke by sinners raving in despair:
All those fall on her, as they are all her due,
Till spite cannot think, nor Heaven inflict anew:
May then (for once I will be kind, and pray)
No madness take her use of Sense away;
But may she in full strength of Reason be,
To feel, and understand her misery;
Plagued so, till she think damning a release,
And humbly pray to go to Hell for ease:
Yet may not all these sufferings here atone
Her sin, and may she still go sinning on,
Tick up in Perjury, and run o'th Score,
Till on her Soul she can get trust no more*
Then may she Stupid, and Repentless die,
And Heaven it self forgive no more than I,
But so be damned of mere necessit^;
FINIS.
SOME NEW PIECES Never before Published.

By the Author of the Satyrs upon the Jesuits.

-- Nos otia vitae
Solamur cantu, ventosaque gaudia famae
Quaerimus. --
Stat. Sylv. LONDON: Printed by M. C. for Jo. Hindmarsh, Bookseller to his
Royal Highness, at the Black Bull in Cornhil, 1684.

ADVERTISEMENT.
BEing to appear anew in the World, it may be expected, that I should say
something concerning these ensuing Trisies, which I shall endeavor to do with
as much briefness, as I did besore what I last published in this kind.

I doubt not but the Reader will think me guilty of an high presumption in
adventuring upon a Translation of The Art of Poetry, after two such great Hands
as have gone before me in the same attempts: I need not acquaint him, that I
mean Ben Johnson, and the Earl of Roscommon, the one being of so established an
Authority, that whatever he did is held as Sacred, the other having lately
performed it with such admirable success, as almost cuts off all hope in any
after Pretenders of ever coming up to what he has eone. Howbeit, when I let him
kn^w, that it was a Task imposed upon me, and not what I voluntarily engaged
in; I hope he will be the more favorable in his Censures. I would indeed very
willingly have waved the undertaking upon the forementioned account, and urged
it as a reason for my declining the same, but it would not be allowed as
sufficient to excuse me therefrom. Wherefore, being prevailed upon to make an
Essay. I fell to thinking of some course, whereby I might serve my self of the
Advantages, which those that went before me, have either not minded, or
scrupulously abridged themselves of. This I soon imagined was to be effected by
putting Horace into a more modern dress, than hitherto he has appeared in, that
is by making him speak, as if he were living, and writing now. I therefore
resolved to alter the Scene from Rome to London, and to make use of English
names of Men, Places, and Customs, where the Parallel would decently permit,
which I conceived would give a kind of new Air to the Poem, and render it more
agreeable to the relish of the present Age.

With these Considerations I set upon the Work, and pursued it accordingly. I
have not, I acknowledge, been ever-nice in keeping to the words of the Original,
for that were to transgress a Rule therein contained. Nevertheless I have been
religiously strict to its sense, and expressed it in as plain, and intelligible
a manner, as the Subject would bear. Where I may be thought to have varied from
it (which is not above once or twi^e, and in Passages not much material) the
skilful Reader will perceive 'twas necessary for carrying on my proposed
design, and the Author himself, were he again alive, would (I believe) forgive
me. I have been careful to avoid stiffness, and made it my endeavor to hit (as
near as I could) the easy and familiar way of writing, which is peculiar to
Horace in his Epistles, and was his proper Talent above any of mankind. After
all, it is humbly submitted to the judgment of the truly knowing, how I have
acquitted my self herein. Let the success be what it will, I shall not however
wholly repent of my undertaking, being (I reckon) in some measure recompensed
for my pains by the advantage I have reaped of fixing these admirable Rules of
Sense so well in my memory.

The Satyr and Odes of the Author, which follow next in order, I have
translated after the same libertine way. In them also I labored under the
disadvantages of coming after other persons. The Satyr had been made into a
Scene by Ben Johnson, in a Play of his, called the Poetaster. After I had
finished my imitation thereof, I came to learn, that it had been done likewise
by Dr. Sprat, and since I have had the sight of it amongst the Printed
Translations of Horace 's Works. The Odes are there done too, but not so
excellently well, as, to discourage any farther endeavors. If these of mine
meet with good entertainment in the world, I may perhaps find leisure to
attempt some other of them, which at present suffer as much from their
Translaters, as the Psalms of David from Sternhold and Hopkins.

The two sacred Odes I designed not to have made public now, forasmuch as they
might seem unfit to appear among Subjects of this nature, and were intended to
come forth apart hereafter in company of others of their own kind. But, having
suffered Copies of them to straggle abroad in Manuscript, and remembering the
Fate of some other Pieces of mine, which have formerly stolen into the Press
without my leave, or knowledge, and be exposed to the world abominably false and
uncorrect; to prevent the same misfortune likely en^ugh to befall these, I have
been persuaded to yield my consent to their Publishing amongst the rest. Nor is
the Printing of such Miscellanies altogether so unpresidented, but that it may
be seen in the Editions of Dr. Done, and Mr. Cowley 's Works, whether done by
their own appointment, or the sole direction of the Stationers, I am not able
to determine.

As for the two Essays out of Greek, they were occasioned by a report, that
some persons found fault with the roughness of my Satyrs formerly published,
tho, upon what ground they should do it, I could be glad to be informed. Unless
I am mistaken, there are not many Lines but will endure the reading without
shocking any Hearer, that is not too nice, and censorious. I confess, I did not
so much mind the Cadence, as the Sense and expressiveness of my words, and
therefore chose not those, which were best disposed to placing themselves in
Rhyme, but rather the most keen, and tuant, as being the most suitable to my
Argument. And certainly no one that pretends to distinguish the several Colors
of Poetry, would expect that Juvenal, when he is lashing of Vice and Villainy,
should flow so smoothly, as Ovid, or Tibullus, when they are describing Amors
and Gallantries, and have nothing to disturb and ruffle the evenness of their
Style.

Howbeit, to show that the way I took, was out of choice, not want of judgment,
and that my Genius is not wholly uncapa^e of performing upon more gay and
agreeable Subjects, if my humor inclined me to exercise it, I have pitched
upon these two, which the greatestmen of sense have allowed to be some of the
softest and tenderest of all Antiquity. Nay, if we will believe Rapine, one of
the best Critics which these latter Ages have produced; they have no other
fault, than that they are too exquisitely delicate for the Character of
Pastoral, which should not seem too labored, and w^ose chief beauty is an
unaffected air of plainness and simplicity.

That, which laments the Death of Adonis has been attempted in Latin by
several great Masters, namely, Vulcanius, Douza, and Monsieur le Fevre. The
last of them has done it Paraphrastically, but left good part of the Poem
toward the latter end untouched, perhaps because he thought it not so capable
of Ornament, as the rest. Him I chiefly chose to follow, as being most
agreeable to my way of translating, and where I was at a loss for want of his
guidance, I was content to steer by my own Fancy.

The Translation of that upon Bion was begun by another Hand, as far as the
first fifteen Verses, but who was the Author I could never yet learn. I have
been told that they were done by the Earl of Rochester; but I could not well
believe it, both because he seldom meddled with such Subjects, and more
especially by reason of an uncorrect line, or two to be found amongst them, at
their first coming to my hands, which never used to flow from his excellent
Pen. Conceiving it to be in the Original, a piece of as much Art, Grace, and
Tenderness, as perhaps was ever offered to the Ashes of a Poet, I thought fit
to dedicate it to the memory of that incomparable Person, of whom nothing can
be said, or thought so choice and curious, which his Deserts do not surmount.
If it be thought mean to have borrowed the sense of another to praise him in,
yet at least it argues at the same time a value and reverence, that I durst not
think any thing of my own good enough for his Commendation.

This is all, which I judge material to be said of these following Resveries. As
for what others are to be found in the parcel, I reckon them not worth
mentioning in particular, but leave them wholly open and unguarded to the mercy
o^ the Reader; let him make his Attaques how, and where he please.

HORACE His ART of POETRY, Imitated in English.
Addressed by way of Letter to a Friend.
SHould some ill Painter in a wild design
To a man's Head an Horses shoulders join,
Or Fishes Tail to a fair Woman's Was^
Or draw the Limbs of many a different Beast,
Ill matched, and with as motly Feathers dressed;
If you by chance were to pass by his Shop;
Could you forbear from laughing at the Fop,
And not believe him whimsical, or mad?
Credit me, Sir; that Book is quite as bad,
As worthy laughter, which throughout is filled
With monstrous inconsistencies, more vain, and wild
Than sick mensDreams, whose neither head, nor tail,
Nor any parts in due proportion fall.
But 'twill be said, None ever did deny
Painters and Poets their free liberty
Of feigning any thing: We grant it true,
And the same privilege crave and allow:
But to mix natures clearly opposite,
To make the Serpent and the Dove unite,
Or Lambs from savage Tigers seek defense,
Shocks Reason, and the Rules of common Sense.
Some, who would have us think they meant to treat
At first on Arguments of greatest weight,
Are (...), when here and there a glittering line
Does through the mass of their coarse rubbish shine:
In gay digtessions they delight to rove,
Describing here a Temple, there a Grove,
A Vale enameled over with pleasant streams,
A painted Rainbow, or the gliding Thames.
But how does this relate to their design?
Though good elsewhere, it is here but foisted in.
A common Dawber may perhaps have skill
To paint a Tavern Sign, or Landscape well:
But what is this to drawing of a Fight,
A Wrack, a Storm, or the last Judgment right?
When the fair Model, and Foundation shows,
That you some great Escurial would produce,
How comes it dwindled to a Cottage thus?
In fine, whatever work you mean to frame,
Be uniform, and every where the same.
Most Poets, Sir, ('it is easy to observe)
Into the worst of faults are apt to swerve
Through a false hope of reaching excellence:
Avoiding length, we often cramp our Sense,
And make it obscure; often, when we'd have our style
Easy, and flowing, lose its force the while:
Some, striving to surmount the common flight,
Soar up in airy Bombast out of sight.
Others, who fear to a bold pitch to trust
Themselves, flag low, and humbly sweep the dust:
And many fond of seeming mavelous,
While they too carelessly transgress the Laws
Of likelihood, most odd Chimeras feign,
Dolphins in Woods, and Boars upon the Main.
Thus they, who would take aim, but want the skill,
Miss always, and shoot wide, or narrow still.
One of the meanest Workmen in the Town
Can imitate the Nails, or Hair in Stone,
And to the life enough perhaps, who yet
Wants mastery to make the Work complete:
Troth, Sir, if 'twere my fancy to compose,
Rather than be this bungling wretch, I Would choos^
To wear a crooked and unsightly Nose
Among other handsome features of a Face
Which only would set off my ugliness.
Be sure all you that undertake to write,
To choose a Subject for your Genius fit:
Try long and often what your Talents are;
What is the burden, which your parts will bear,
And where they will fail: he that discerns with skill
To ^ull his Argument, and matter well,
Will never be to seek for Eloquence
To dress, or method to dispose his Sense.
They the chief Art, and Grace in order show
(If I may claim any pretense to know)
Who time discreetly what is to be discoursed,
What should be said at last, and what at first:
Some passages at present may be heard,
Others till afterward are best deferred:
Verse, which disdains the Laws of History,
Speaks things not as they are, but ought to be:
Whoever will in Poetry excel,
Must learn, and use this hidden secret well.
It Is next to be observed, that care is due,
And sparingness in framing words anew:
You show your mast'ry, if you have the knack
So to make use of what known word you take,
To give't a newer sense: if there be need
For some uncommon matter to be said;
Power of inventing terms may be allowed,
Which Chaucer and his Age never understood:
Provided always, as 'twas said before,
We seldom, and discreetly use that power.
Words new and foreign may be best brought in,
If borrowed from a Language near akin:
Why should the peevish Critics now forbid
To Lee, and Dryden, what was not denied
To Shakespeare, Ben, and Fletcher heretofore,
For which they praise, and commendation bore?
If Spencer's Muse be justly so adored
For that rich copiousness, wherewith he stored
Our Native Tongue; for Gods sake why should I
Straight be thought arrogant; if modestly
I claim and use the self-same liberty?
This the just Right of Poets ever was,
And will be still, to coin what words they please,
Well fitted to the present Age, and Place,
Words with the Leaves of Trees a semblance hold
In this respect, where every year the old
Fall off, and new ones in their places grow:
Death is the Fate of all things here below:
Nature herself by Art has changes felt,
The Tangier Mole (by our great Monarch built)
Like a vast Bulwark in the Ocean set,
From Pirates and from Storms defends our Fleet:
Fens every day are drained, and Men now Plow,
And ^ow, and Reap, where they before might Row,
And Rivers have been taught by Middleton
From their old course within new Banks to run,
And pay their useful Tribute to the Town.
If Man's and Natures works submit to Fate,
Much less must words expect a lasting date:
Many which we approve for current now,
In the next Age out of request shall grow:
And others which are now thrown out of doors,
Shall be revived, and come again in force,
If custom please: from whence their vogue they draw,
Which of our Speech is the sole Judge, and Law.
Homer first showed us in Heroic strains
To write of Wars, of Battles and Campaigns,
Kings and great Leaders, mighty in Renown,
And him we still for our chief Pattern own,
Soft Elegy, designed for grief, and tears,
Was first devised to grace some mournful Hearse:
Since to a brisker note it is taught to move,
And clothes our gayest Passions, Joy, and Love.
But, who was first Inventer of the kind,
Critics have sought, but never yet could find.
Gods, Heroes, Warriors, and the losty praise
Of peaceful Conquerors in Pisa's Race,
The Mirth and Joys, which Love and Wine produce,
With other wanton sallies of a Muse,
The stately Ode does for its Subjects choose.
Archilochus to vent his Gall and spite,
In keen Iambicks first was known to write:
Dramatick Authors used this sort of Verse
On all the Greek and Roman Theaters,
As for Discourse and Conversation fit,
And ap^'st to drown the noises of the Pit,
If I discern not the true style and air,
Nor how to give the proper Character
To every kind of work; how dare I claim,
And challenge to my self a Poets Name?
And why had I with awkard modesty,
Rather than learn, always unskilful be?
Volp^ne and M^rose will not admit
Of Catiline's high strains, nor is it fit
To make Sejanus on the Stage appear
In the low dress, which Comic persons wear.
What e're the Subject be, on which you write,
Give each thing its due place, and time aright:
Yet Comedy sometimes may raise her style,
And angry Chremes is allowed to swell,
And Tragedy alike sometimes has leave
To throw off Majesty, when it is to grieve:
Peleus and Telephus in misery,
Lay their big words, and blustering language by,
If they expect to make their Audience cry.
It Is not enough to have your Plays succeed;
That they be elegant: they must not need
Those warm and moving touches which impart
A kind con^rnment to each Hearers heart,
And ravish it which way they please with art.
Where Joy and Sorrow put on good disguise,
Ours with the persons looks straight sympathize:
Would have me weep? thy self must first begin:
Then, Telephus, to pity I incline,
And think thy case, and all thy suff^rings mine;
But if you are made to act thy part amiss,
I cannot forbear to sleep, or laugh, or hiss,
Let words express the looks, which speakers wear;
Sad, fit a mournful, and dejected air;
The passionate must huff, and storm, and rave;
The gay be pleasant, and the serious grave.
For Nature works, and moulds our Frame within,
To take all manner of Impressions in.
Now makes us hot, and ready to take fire,
Now hope, now joy, now sorrow does inspire,
And all these passions in our face appear,
Of which the Tongue is sole interpreter:
But he whose words, and Fortunes do not suit,
By Pit and Gall'ty both, is hooted out.
Observe what Characters your persons fit,
Whether the Master speak, or Todelet:
Whether a man, that is elderly in growth,
Or a brisk Hotspur in his boiling youth:
A roaring Bully, or a shirking Cheat,
A Court-bred Lady, or a tawdry Cit:
A prating Gossip, or a jilting Whore,
A traveled Merchant, or an home spun Boor:
Spaniard, or French, Italian, Dutch, or Dane;
Native of Turkey, India, or Japan.
Either from History your persons take,
Or let them nothing inconsistent speak:
If you bring great Achilles on the Stage,
Let him be fierce and brave, all heat and rage,
Inflexible, and headstrong to all Laws,
But those, which Arms and his own will impose.
Cruel Medea must no pity have,
Ixion must be treacherous, Ino grieve,
Io must wander, and Orestes rave,
But if you dare to tread in paths unknown,
And boldly start new persons of your own;
Be sure to make them in one strain agree,
And let the end like the beginning be.
It Is difficult for Writers to succeed
On Arguments, which none before have tried:
The Iliad, or the Odyssee with ease
Will better furnish Subjects for your Plays,
Than that you should your own Invention trust,
And broth unheard of things your self the first.
In copying others works, to make them pass,
And seem your own, let these few Rules take place:
When you some of the^r Story represent,
Take care that you new Episodes invent:
Be not too nice the Authors words to trace,
But vary all with a fresh air, and grace;
Nor such strict rules of imitation choose,
Which you must still be tied to follow close,
Or forced to a retreat for want of room,
Give over, and ridiculous become:
Do not like that affected Fool begin,
King Priam's Fate, and Troy's famed War, I sing.
What will this mighty Promiser produce?
You look for Mountains, and out creeps a Mouse.
How short is this of Homer's fine Address,
And Art, who never says any thing amiss?
Muse, speak the man, Who since Troy 's laying waste
Into such numerous Dangers has been cast,
So many Towns, and various People past:
He does not lavish at a blaze his Fire,
To glare a while, and in a Snuff expire:
But modesty at first conceals his light,
In dazzling wonders, then breaks forth to sight;
Surprises you with Miracles all over,
Makes dreadful Scylla and Charybdis roar,
Cyclops, and bloody Lestrygons devour:
Nor does he time in long Preambles spend,
Describing Meleager's rusul end,
When he is of Di^ed's return to treat;
Nor when he would the Trojan War relare,
The Tale of brooding Leda's Eggs repeat.
But still to the designed event hastes on,
And at first dash, as if before 'twere known,
Embarques you in the middle of the Plot,
And what is unimprovable leaves out,
And mixes Truth and Fiction skilfully,
That nothing in the whole may disagree.
Who e're you are, that set your selves to write,
If you expect to have your Audience sit
Till the fifth Act be done, and Curtain fall;
Mind what Instructions I shall further tell:
Our Guise, and Manners alter with our Age,
And such they must be brought upon the Stage.
A Child, who newly has to Speech attained,
And now can go without the Nurses hand,
To play with those of his own growth is pleased,
Suddenly angry, and as soon appeased,
Fond of new Trifles, and as quickly cloyed,
And loathes next hour what he the last enjoyed.
The beardless Youth from Pedagogue got loose;
Does Dogs and Horses for his pleasures choose;
Yielding, and soft to every print of vice,
Resty to those who would his faults chastise,
Careless of Profit, of expenses vain,
Haughty, and eager his desires to obtain.
And swift to quit the same desires again.
Those, who to manly years, and sense are grown,
Seek Wealth and Friendship, Honor and Renown:
And are discreet, and fearful how to act
What after they must alter and correct.
Diseases, Ills, and Troubles numberless
Attend old Men, and with their Age increase:
In painful toil they spend their wretched years,
Still heaping Wealth, and with that wealth new cares:
Fond to possess, and fearful to enjoy,
Slow, and suspicious in their managry,
Full of Delays, and Hopes, lovers of ease,
Greedy of life, morose, and hard to please,
Envious at Pleasures of the young and gay;
Where they themselves now want a stock to play;
Ill natured Censors of the present Age,
And what has past since they have quit the Stage:
But loud Admirers of Queen Besse's time,
And what was done when they were in their prime.
Thus, what our tide of flowing years brings in,
Still with our ebb of life goes out again:
The humors of Fourscore will never hit
One of Fifteen, nor a Boy's part befit
A full-grown man: it shows no mean Address,
If you the tempers of each Age express.
Some things are best to act, others to tell;
Those by the ear conveyed, do not so well,
Nor half so movingly affect the mind,
As what we to our eyes presented find.
Yet there are many things, which should not come
In view, nor pass beyond the Tiring Room:
Which, after in expressive Language told,
Shall please the Audience more, than to behold:
Let not Medea show her fatal rage,
And cut her Childrens Throats upon the Stage:
Nor Oedipus tear out his eye balls there,
Nor bloody Atreus his dire Feast prepare:
Cadmus, nor Progne their odd changes take,
This to a Bird, the other to a Snake:
Whatever so incredible you show,
Shocks my Belief, and straight does nauseous grow.
Five Acts, no more, nor less, your Play must have,
If you will an handsome Third Days share receive.
Let not a God be summoned to attend
On a slight errand, nor on Wire des^end,
Unless the importance of the Plot engage;
And let but Three at once speak on the Stage.
Be sure to make the Chorus still promote
The chief Intrigue and business of the Plot:
Betwixt the Acts there must be nothing Sung,
Which does not to the main Design belong:
The praises of the Good must here be told;
The Passions curbed, and foes of Vice extolled:
Here Thrift and Temperance, and wholesome Laws,
Strict Justice, and the gentle calms of Peace
Must have their Commendations, and Applause:
And Prayers must be sent to Heaven to guide
Blind Fortunes blessings to the juster side,
To raise the Poor, and lower prosperous Pride.
At first the Music of our Stage was rude,
Whilst in the Cockpit and Black Friars it stood:
And this might please enough in former Reigns,
A thrifty, thin, and bashful Audience:
When Bussy d' Ambois and his Fustian took,
And men were ravished with Queen Gordobuc.
But since our Monarch by kind Heaven sent,
Brought back the Arts with him from Banishment,
And by his gentle influence gave increase
To all the harmless Luxuries of peace:
Favored by him, our Stage has flourished too,
And every day in outward splendour grew:
In Music, Song, and Dance of every kind,
And all the grace of Action it is tefin'd;
And since that Opera's at length came in,
Our Players have so well improved the Scene
With gallantry of Habit, and Machine,
As makes our Theater in Glory vie
With the best Ages of Antiquity:
And mighty Roscius were heliving now,
Would envy both our Stage, and Acting too.
Those, who did first in Tragedy essay
(When a vile Goat was all the Poets day)
Used to allay their Subjects gravity
With enterludes of Mirth, and Raillery:
Here they brought rough, and naked Satyrs in,
Whose Farce-like Gesture, Motion, Speech, and Mien
Resemble those of modern Harlequin.
Because such antic Tricks, and odd grimace,
After their drunken Feasts on Holidays,
The giddy and hot headed Rout would please;
As the wild Feats of Merry Andrews now
Divert the senseless Crowd at Bartholmew.
But he, that would in this Mock-way excel,
And exercise the Art of Railing well,
Had need with diligence observe this Rule
In turning serious things to ridicule:
If he an Hero, or a God bring in,
With Kingly Robes and Scepter lately seen,
Let them not speak, like Burlesque Characters,
The wit of Billingsgate and Temple-stairs:
Nor, while they of those meannesses beware,
In tearing lines of Bajazet appear.
Majestic Tragedy as much disdains
To condescend to low, and trivial strains:
As a Court-Lady thinks her self disgraced
To Dance with Dowdies at a May-pole-Feast.
If in this kind you will attempt to write,
You must no broad and clownish words admit:
Nor must you fo confound your Characters,
As not to mind what person it is appears.
Take a known Subject, and invent it well,
And let your style be smooth and natural:
Though others think it easy to attain,
They Will find it hard, and imitate in vain:
So much does method and connection grace
The common'st things, the plainest matters raise.
In my opinion it is absurd and odd,
To make wild Satyrs, coming from the Wood,
Speak the fine Language of the Park and Mall,
As if they had their Training at 'Whitehall:
Yet, tho I would not have their Words too quaint,
Much less can I allow them impudent:
For men of Breeding, and of Quality
Must needs be shocked with sulsom Ribaldry:
Which, though it pass the Footboy and the Cit,
Is always nauscous to the Box, and Pit.
There are but few, who have such skilful ears
To judge of artless, and ill measured Verse.
This till of late was hardly understood,
And still* there is too much liberty allowed.
But will you therefore be so much a fool
To write at random, and neglect a Rule?
Or, while your faults are set to general view,
Hope all men should be blind, or pardon you?
Who would not such sool hardiness condemn,
Where, tho perchance you may escape from blame.
Yet praise you never can expect, or claim?
Therefore be sure your study to apply
To the great patterns of Antiquity:
Never lay the Greeks and Romans out of sight,
Ply them by day, and think on them by night.
Rough hobbling numbers were allowed for Rhyme,
And clench for deep conceit in former time:
With too much patience (not to call it worse)
Both were applauded in our Ancestors:
If you, or I have sense to judge aright
Betwixt a Quibble, and true sterling Wit:
Or ear enough to give the difference
Of sweet well-sounding Verse from doggrel strains.
Thespis ('it is said) did Tragedy devise,
Unknown besore, and rude at its first rise:
In Carts the Gypsy Actors strowl'd about,
With faces smeared with Lees of Wine and Soot,
And through the Towns amused the wondering rout
Till AEschylus appearing to the Age,
Contrived a Play house, and convenient Stage.
Found out the use of Vizards, and a Dress
(An handsomer, and more gentile Disguise)
And taught the Actors with a stately Air,
And Mien to speak, and Tread, and whatsoever
Gave Port, and grandeur to the Theater.
Next this succeeded ancient Comedy,
With good applause, till too much liberty
Usurped by Writers had debauched the Stage,
And made it grow the Grievance of the Age:
No merit was seoure, no person free
From its licentious Buffoonery:
Till for redress the Magistrate was fain
By Law those Insolences to restrain.
Our Authors in each kind their praise may claim,
Who leave no paths untrod, that lead to fame:
And well they merit it, who scorned to be
So much the Vassals of Antiquity,
As those, who know no better than to cloy
With the old musty Tales of Thebes and Troy:
But boldly the dull beaten track forsook,
And Subjects from our Country story took.
Nor would our Nation less in Wit appear,
Than in its great performances of War;
Were there encouragements to bribe our care,
Would we to file, and finish spare the pains,
And add but justness to our manly sense.
But, Sir, let nothing tempt you to belly
Your skill, and judgment, by mean flattery:
Never pretend to like a piece of Wit,
But what, you're certain, is correctly writ:
But what has stood all Tests, and is allowed
By all to be unquestionably good.
Because some wild Enthusiasts there be
Who bar the Rules of Art in Poetry.
Would have it rapture all, and scarce admit
A man of sober sense to be a Wit;
Others by this conceit have been misled
So much, that they are grown statu^ably mad:
The Sots affect to be retired alone.
Court Solitude and Conversation shun,
In dirty Clothes, and a wild Garb appear,
And scarce are brought to cut their Nails and Hair.
And hope to purchase credit and esteem,
When they, like Cromwell's Porter, frantic seem,
Strange! that they very height of Lunacy,
Beyond the cure of Alle^, e're should be
A mark of the Elect in Poetry.
How much as Ass am I that used to Bleed,
And take a Purge each Spring to clear my Head?
None otherwise would be so good as I,
At lofty strains, and rants of Poetry:)
But, faith, I am not yet so fond of Fame,
To lose my Reason for a Poets name.
Tho I my self am not disposed to write;
In others I may serve to sharpen Wit:
Acquaint them what a Poet's duty is,
And how he shall perform it with success:
Whence the materials for his work are sought,
And how with skilful Art they must be wrought:
And show what is and is not decency,
And where his faults and excellencies lie.
Good sense must be the certain standard still
To all that will pretend to writing well:
If you will arrive at that, you needs must be
Well versed and grounded in Philosophy:
Then choose a Subject, which you thoroughly know,
And words unsought thereon will easy flow.
Whoever will write, must diligently mind
The several sorts and ranks of humane kind:
He that has learnt, what to his Country's due,
What we to Parents, Friends, and Kindred owe,
What charge a Statesman, or a Judge does bear,
And what the parts of a Commander are;
Will never be at loss (he may be sure)
To give each person their due portraiture.
Take humane life for your original,
Keep but your Draughts to that, you will never fail.
Sometimes in Plays, though else but badly writ
With naught of Force, or Grace, of Art, or Wit,
Some one well humored Character we meet,
That takes us more than all the empty Scenes,
And jingling toys of more elaborate Pens.
Greece had command of Language, Wit and Sense,
For cultivating which she spared no pains:
Glory her sole design, and all her aim
Was how to gain here self immortal Fame:
Our English Youth another way are bred,
They Are fitted for a Prentiship, and Trade,
And Wingate's all the Authors, which they have read.
The Boy has been a year at Writing-School,
Has learnt Division, and the Golden Rule;
Scholar enough! cries the old doting Fool,
I Will hold a Piece, he will prove an Alderman,
And come to sit at Church with his Furs and Chain.
This is the top design, the only praise,
And sole ambition of the booby Race:
While this base spirit in the Age does reign,
And men might naught but Wealth and sordid gain,
Can we expect or hope it should bring forth
A work in Poetry of any worth,
Fit for the learned Bodley to admit
Among its Sacred Monuments of Wit?
A Poet should inform us, or divert,
But joining both he shows his chiefest Art:
Whatever Precepts you pretend to give,
Be sure to lay them down both clear and brief:
By that they are easier far to apprehend,
By this more faithfully preserved in mind:
All things superfluous are apt to cloy
The Judgment, and surcharge the Memory.
Let whatsoever of Fiction you bring in,
Be so like Truth, to seem at least akin:
Do not improbabilities conceive,
And hope to ram them into my belief:
Never make a Witch upon the Stage appear,
Riding enchanted Broomstick through the Air:
Nor Canibal a living Infant spew,
Which he had murdered, and devout'd but now.
The graver sort dislike all Poetry,
Which does not (as they call it) edify:
And youthful sparks as much that Wit despise,
Which is not strewn with pleasant Gaieties.
But he, that has the knack of mingling well
What is of use with what is agreeable,
That knows at once how to instruct and please,
Is justly crowned by all men's suffrages:
These are the works, which valued every where,
Enrich Paul's Churchyard and the Stationer:
These admiration through all Nations claim,
And through all Ages spread their Author's Fame.
Yet there are faults wherewith we ought to bear;
An Instrument may sometimes chance to jar
In the best hand, in spite of all its care:
Nor have I known that skilful Marks-man yet
So fortunate, who never mist the White.
But where I many excellencies find,
I Am not so nicely critical to mind
Each slight mistake an Author may produce,
Which humane frailty justly may excuse.
Yet he, who having often been taught to mend
A Fault, will still pursue it to the end,
Is like that scraping Fool, who the same Note
Is ever playing. and is ever out,
And silly as that bubble every whit,
Who at the self-same blot is always hit.
When such a lewd incorrigible sot
Lucks by mere chance upon some happy thought;
Among such filthy trash, I vex to see it,
And wonder how (the Devil!) he came by it.
In works of bulk and length we now and then
May grant an Author to be overseen:
Homer himself, how sacred e're he is,
Yet claims not a pretense to Faultlesness.
Poems with Pictures a resemblance bear;
Some (best at distance) shun a view too near:
Others are bolder, and stand off to sight;
These love the shade, those choose the clearest light,
And dare the survey of the skilfull'st eyes:
Some once, and some ten thousand times will please.
Sir, though your self so much of knowledge own
In these affairs, that you can learn of none,
Yet mind this certain truth which I lay down:
Most Callings else do difference allow,
Where ordinary Parts, and Skill may do:
I Have known Physicians, who respect might claim,
Tho they never rose to Willis his great fame:
And there are Preachers who have great renown.
Yet never come up to Sprat, or Tillotson:
And Counselors, or Pleaders in the Hall
May have esteem, and practice, tho they fall
Far short of smooth-tongu'd Finch in Eloquence,
Tho they want Selden's Learning, Vaughan's sense,
But Verse alone does of no mean admit,
Whoever will please, must please us to the height:
He must a Cowley or a Fleckno be,
For there is no second Rate in Poetry:
A dull insipid Writer none can bear,
In every place he is the public jeer,
And Lumber of the Shops and Stationer.
No man that understands to make a Feast,
With a coarse Dessert will offend his Guest,
Or bring ill Music in to grate the ear,
Because it is what the entertain might spare:
It Is the same case with those that deal in Wit,
Whose main design and end should be delight:
They must by this same sentence stand, or fall,
Be highly excellent, or not at all.
In all things else, save only Poetry,
Men show some signs of common modesty:
You Will hardly find a Fencer so unwise,
Who at Bear-garden e're will fight a Prize,
Not having learnt before: nor at a Wake
One, that wants skill and strength, the Girdle take,
Or be so vain the ponderous Weight to sling,
For fear they should be hissed out of the Ring.
Yet every Coxcomb will pretend to Verse,
And write in spite of nature, and his Stars:
All sorts of Subjects challenge at this time
The Liberty, and Property of Rhyme.
The Sot of honor, fond of being great
By something else than Title, and Estate,
As if a Patent gave him claim to sense,
O^ 'twere entailed with an Inheritance,
Believes a cast of Foot-boys, and a set
Of Flanders must advance him to a Wit.
But you who have the judgment to descry
Where you excel, which way your Talents lie,
I Am sure, will never be induced to strain
Your Genius, or attempt against your vein.
Yet (this let me advise) if e're you write,
Let none of your composures see the light,
Till they have been thoroughly weighed, and past the Test
Of all those Judges who are thought the best:
While in your Desk they are locked up from the Press,
You Have power to correct them as you please:
But when they once come forth to view of all,
Your Faults are Chronicled, and past recall.
Orpheus the first of the inspired Train,
By force of powerful numbers did restrain
Mankind from rage, and bloody cruelty,
And taught the barbarous world civility,
Hence rose the Fiction, which the Poets sram'd,
That Lions were by's tuueful Magic tamed,
And Tigers, charmed by his harmonious lays,
Grew gentle, and said by their savageness:
Hence that, which of Amphion too they tell,
The power of whose miraculous Lute could call
The well-plac'd stones into the Theban Wall.
Wondrous were the effects of primitive Verse,
Which settled and reformed the Universe:
This did all things to their due ends reduce,
To public, private, sacred, civil use:
Marriage for weighty causes was ordained,
That bridled lust, and lawless Love restrained:
Cities with Walls, and Rampires were enclosed,
And property with wholesome Laws disposed:
And bounds were fixed of Equity and Right,
To guard weak Innocence from wrongful might.
Hence Poets have been held a sacred name,
And placed with first Rates in the Lists of Fame.
Next these, great Homer to the world appeared,
Around the Globe his loud alarms were heard,
Which all the brave to war like action fired:
And Hesiod after him with useful skill
Gave Lessons to instruct the Plough-mans toil.
Verse was the language of the gods of old,
In which their sacred Oracles were told:
In Verse were the first rules of virtue taught,
And Doctrine thence, as now from Pulpits sought:
By Verse some have the love of Princes gained,
Who often vouchsafe so to be entertained,
And with a Muse their weighty cares unbend.
Then think it no disparagement, dear Sir,
To own your self a Member of that Quire,
Whom Kings esteem, and Heaven does inspire.
Concerning Poets there has been contest,
Whether they are made by Art, or Nature best:
But if I may presume in this Affair,
Amongst the rest my judgment to declare,
No Art without a Genius will avail,
And Parts without the help of Art will fail:
But both Ingredients jointly must unite
To make the happy Character complete.
None at New Market ever won the Prize,
But used his Airings, and his Exercise,
His Courses and his Diets long before,
And Wine, and Women for a time forbore:
Nor is there any Singing man, we know,
Of good Repute in either Chapel now,
But was a Learner once (he will freely own)
And by long Practice to that Skill has grown:
But each conceited Dunce, without pretense
To the least grain of Learning, Parts, or sense,
Or any thing but hardened impudence,
Sets up for Poetry, and dares engage
With all the topping Writers of the Age:
"Why should not be put in amongst the rest?
"Damn him! he scorns to come behind the best:
"Declares himself a Wit, and vows to draw
"On the next man, who e're disowns him so.
Scriblers of Quality who have Estate,
To gain applauding Fools at any rate,
Practice as many tricks as Shopkeepers
To force a Trade, and put off naughty wares:
Some hire the House their Follies to expose,
And are at charge to be ridiculous:
Others with Wine, and Ordinaries treat
A needy Rabble to cry up their Wit:
It Is strange, that such should the true difference find
Betwixt a spunging Knave and faithful Friend.
Take heed how you e're prostitute your sense
To such a fawning crew of Sycophants:
All signs of being pleased the Rogues will feign,
Wonder, and bless themselves at every line.
Swearing, "'It Is soft! it is charming! it is Divine!
Here they will look pale, as if surpised, and there
In a disguise of grief squeeze out a tear:
Often seem transported with a sudden joy,
Stamp and list up their hands in ecstasy:
But, if by chance your back once turned appear,
You Will have'em strait put out their tongues in jeer,
Or point, or gibe you with a scornful sneer.
As they who truly grieve at Funerals, show
Less outward sorrow than hired mourners do;
So true Admirers less concernment wear
Before your face than the sham Flatterer.
They tell of Kings, who never would admit
A Confident, or bosom-Favourite,
Till store of Wine had made his secrets float,
And by that means they would found his temper out:
'Twere well if Poets knew some way like this,
How to discern their friends from enemies.
Had you consulted learned Ben of old,
He would your faults impartially have told:
"This Verse correction wants (he would have said)
"And so does this: If you replied, you had
To little purpose several trials made;
He presently would bid you strike a dash
On all, and put in better in the place:
But if he found you once a stubborn sot,
That would not be corrected in a fault;
He would no more his pains and counsel spend
On an abandoned Fool that scorned to mend;
But bid you in the Devils name go on,
And hug your dear impertinence alone.
A trusty knowing Friend will boldly dare
To give his sense and judgment, wheresoever
He sees a Fault: "Here, Sir, good faith, you're low,
"And must some heightning on the place bestow:
"There, if you mind, the Rhyme is harsh, and rough,
"And should be soft'ned to go smoothlier off:
"Your strokes are here of Varnish left too bare,
"Your Colors there too thick laid on appear:
"Your Metaphor is coarse, that Phrase not pure,
"This Word improper, and that sense obscure.
In fine, you will find him a strict Censurer,
That will not your least negligences spare
Through a vain fear of disobliging you:
They are but slight, and trivial things, it is true:
Yet these same Trifles (take a Poets word)
Matter of high importance will afford,
When e're by means of them you come to be
Exposed to Laughter, Scorn, and Infamy.
Not those with Lord have mercy on their doors,
Venom of Adders, or infected Whores,
Are dreaded worse by men of sense, and Wit,
Than a mad Seribler in his raving fit:
Like Dog, whose tail is pegg'd into a bone,
The hooting Rabble all about the Town,
Pursue the Cur, aund pelt him up and down.
Should this poor Frantic, as he passed along,
Intent on's Rhiming work amidst the throng,
Into Fleet-Ditch, or some deep Cellar fall.
And till he rent his throat for succor bawl,
No one would lend an helping hand at call:
For who (the Plague!) could guess at his design,
Whether he did not for the nonce drop in?
I Would tell you, Sir, but questionless you have heard
Of the odd end of a Sicilian Bard:
Fond to be deemed a god, this fool (it seems)
In's fit leapt headlong into AE^a's Flames.
Troth, I could be content an Act might pass,
Such Poets should have leave, when e're they please,
To die, and rid us of our Grievances.
A God's name let them hang, or drown, or choose
What other way they will themselves dispose,
Why should we life against their wills impose?
Might that same fool I mentioned, now revive,
He would not be reclaimed, I dare believe,
But soon be playing his old freaks again,
And still the same capricious hopes retain.
It Is hard to guess, and harder to alledg
Whether for Parricide, or Sacriledg,
Or some more strange, unknown, and horrid crime,
Done in their own, or their Forefathers time,
These scribbling Wretches have been damned to Rhyme:
But certain it is, for such a crack-braind Race
Bedlam, or Hogsdon is the fittest place:
Without their Keepers you had better choose
To meet the Lions of the Tower broke loose,
Than these wild savage Rhymers in the street,
Who with their Verses worry all they meet:
In vain you would release your self; so close
The Leeches cleave, that there is no getting loose.
Remorsless they to no entreaties yield,
Till you are with inhumane nonsense killed.
An Imitation of HORACE. BOOK I. SATYR IX.
Written in June, 1681.
Ibam for^e via sacra, etc.

AS I was walking in the Mall of late,
Alone, and musing on I know not what;
Comes a familiar Fop, whom hardly I
Knew by his name, and rudely seizes me:
Dear Sir, I Am mighty glad to meet with you:
And pray, how have you done this Age, or two?
"Well I thank God (said I) as times are now:
"I wish the same to you. And so passed on,
Hoping with this the Coxcomb would be gone.
But when I saw I could not thus get free;
I asked, what business else he had with me?
Sir (answered he) If Learning, Parts, or Sense
Merit your friendship; I have just pretense.
"I honor you (said I) upon that score,
"And shall be glad to serve you to my power.
Mean time, wild to get loose, I try all ways
To shake him off: Sometimes I walk apace,
Sometimes stand still: I frown, I chafe, I fret,
Shrug, turn my back, as in the Baigno, sweat:
And show all kind of signs to make him guess
At my impatience, and uneasiness.
"Happy the solk in Newgate! (whispered I)
"Who, tho in Chains are from this torment free:
"Would I were like rough Manly in the Play,
"To send Impertinents with kicks away.!
He all the while baits me with tedious chat,
Speaks much about the drought, and how the rate
Of Hay is raised, and what it now goes at:
Tells me of a new Comet at the Hague,
Portending God knows what, a Dearth, or Plague:
Names every Wench, that passes through the Park,
How much she is allowed, and who the Spark,
That keeps her: points, who lately got a Clap,
And who at the Groom-Porters had ill hap
Three nights ago in play with such a Lord:
When he observed, I minded not a word,
And did no answer to his trash afford;
Sir, I perceive you stand on Thorns (said he)
And fain would part: but, faith, it must not be:
Come, let us take a Bottle. (I cried) "No;
"Sir, I am in a Course, and dare not now.
Then tell me whether you desire to go:
I Will wait upon you. "Oh! Sir, it is too far:
"I visit cross the Water: therefore spare
"Your needless trouble. Trouble! Sir, it is none:
It Is more by half to leave you here alone.
I have no present business to attend,
At least which I Will not quit for such a Friend:
Tell me not of the distance: for I vow,
I Will cut the Line, double the Cape for you,
Good faith, I will not leave you: make no words;
Go you to Lambeth? Is it to my Lords?
His Steward I most intimately know,
Have often drunk with his Comptroller too.
By this I found my Wheedle would not pass,
But rather served my sufferings to increase:
And seeing 'twas in vain to vex, or fret,
I patiently submitted to my Fate.
Strait he begins again: Sir, if you knew
My worth but half so thoroughly as I do;
I Am sure, you would not value any Friend
You have, like me: but that I will not commend
My self, and my own Talents; I might tell
How many ways to wonder I excel.
None has a greater gift in Poetry,
Or writes more Verses with more ease than I:
I Am grown the envy of the men of Wit,
I killed even Rochester with grief, and spite:
Next for the Dancing part I all surpass,
St. Andrew never moved with such a grace:
And'tis well known, when e're I sing, or set,
Humphreys, nor Blow could ever match me yet.
Here I got room to interrupt: "Have you
"A Mother, Sir, or Kindred living now?
Not one: they are all dead. "Troth, so I guest:
"The happier they (said I) who are at rest.
"Poor I am only left unmurder'd yet:
"Haste, I beseech you, and dispatch me quite:
"For I am well convinced, my time is come:
"When I was young, a Gypsy told my doom:
This Lad (said she, and looked upon my hand)
Shall not by Sword, or Poison come to's end,
Nor by the Fever, Dropsy, Gout, or Stone,
But he shall die by an eternal Tongue:
Therefore, when he is grown up, if he be wise,
Let him avoid great Talkers, I advise.
By this time we were got to Westminster;
Where he by chance a Trial had to hear,
And, if he were not there, his Cause must fall:
Sir, if you love me, step into the Hall
For one half hour, "The Devil take me now,
"(Said I) if I know any thing of Law:
"Besides I told you whither I Am to go.
Hereat he made a stand, pulled down his Hat
Over his eyes, and mused in deep debate:
"I Am in a straight (said he) what I shall do:
Whether forsake my business, Sir, or you.
"Me by all means (say I) No (says my Sot)
I fear you will take it ill, If I should do it:
I Am sure, you will. "Not I, by all that is good.
But I Have more breeding, than to be so rude.
"Pray, don't neglect your own concerns for me:
"Your Cause, good Sir! My Cause be damu'd (says he)
I value't less than your dear Company.
With this he came up to me, and would lead
The way; I sneaking after hung my head.
Next he begins to plague me with the Plot,
Asks, whether I were known to Oats or not?
"Not I,'thank Heaven! I no. Priest have been:
"Have never Doway, nor St. Omers seen,
What think you, Sir; will they Fitz-Harris try?
Will he die, think you? Yes, most certainly.
I mean, be hanged. "Would thou were so (wished I.)
Religion came in next; tho he would no more
Than the Freneb King, his Punk, or Confessor.
Oh! the sad times, if once the King should die!
Sir, are you not afraid of Popery?
"No more than my Superiors: why should I?
"I Have no Estate in Ally Lands to lose,
But Fire, and Faggot, Sir, how like you these?
"Come Inquisition, any thing (thought I)
"So Heaven would bless me to get rid of thee:
"But it is some comfort, that my Hell is here:
"I need no punishment hereafter fear.
Scarce had I thought, but he falls on anew
How stands it, Sir, betwixt his Grace, and you?
"Sir, he is a man of sense above the Crowd,
"And shuns the Converse of a Multitude.
Ay, Sir, (Says he) you're happy, who are near
His Grace, and have the favor of his ear:
But let me tell you, if you will recommend
This person here, your point will soon be gained.
Gad, Sir, I Will die, if my own single Wit
Don't Fob his Minions, and displace 'em quite.
And make your self his only Favorite.
"No, you are out abundantly (said I)
"We live not, as you think: no Family
"Throughout the whole three Kingdoms is more free
"From those ill Customs, which are used to swarm
"In great men's houses; none e're does me harm,
"Because more Learned, or more Rich, than I:
"But each man keeps his Place, and his Degree.
It Is mighty strange (says he) what you relate,
"But nothing truer, take my word for that.
You make me long to be admitted too
Amongst his Creatures: Sir, I beg, that you
Will stand my Friend: Your Interest is such,
You may prevail, I Am sure, you can do much.
He Is one, that may be won upon, I Have heard,
Tho at the first approach access be hard.
I Will spare no trouble of my own, or Friends,
No cost in Fees, and Bribes to gain my ends:
I Will seek all opportunities to meet
With him, accost him in the very street:
Hang on his Coach, and wait upon him home,
Fawn, Scrape and Cringe to him, nay, to his Groom.
Faith, Sir, this must be done, If we'll be great:
Preferment comes not at a cheaper rate.
While at this Savage rate he worried me;
By chance a Doctor, my dear Friend came by,
That knew the Fellow's humor passing well:
Glad of the sight, I join him; we stand still:
Whence came you, Sir? and whither go you now?
And such like questions passed betwixt us two:
Strait I begin to pull him by the sleeve.
Nod, wink upon him, touch my Nose, and give
A thousand hints, to let him know, that I
Needed his help for my delivery:
He, naughty Wag, with an Arch fleering smile
Seems ignorant of what I mean the while:
I grow stark wild with rage. "Sir, said not you,
"You Would somewhat to discourse, not long ago,
"With me in private? I remember't well:
Some other time, be sure, I will not fail:
Now I am in great haste upon my word:
A Messenger came for me from a Lord,
That Is in a bad condition, like to die.
"Oh! Sir, he cannot be in a worse, than I:
"Therefore for God's sake do not stir from hence.
Sweet Sir! your pardon: it is of consequence:
I hope you're kinder than to pross my stay,
Which may be Heaven knows what out of my way.
This said, he left me to my murderer:
Seeing no hopes of my relief appear:
"Confounded be the Stars (said I) that swayed
"This fatal day! would I had kept my Bed
"With sickness, rather than been visited
"With this worse P^gue! what ill have I e're done
"To pull this eur^e, this heavy Judgment down?
While I was thus lamenting my ill hap,
Comos aid at length: a brace of Bailiffs clap
The Rascal on the back: "Here take your Fees,
"Kind Gentlemen (said I) for my release.
He would have had me Bail. "Excuse me, Sir,
"I Have made a Vow never to be Surety more:
"My Father was undone by it here^ofore.
Thus I got off, and blessed the Fates that he
Was Prisoner made, I set at liberty.
Paraphrase upon HORACE. BOOK I. ODE XXXI.
Quid dedicatum poscit Apollinem
Vates? etc. --

1.
WHat does the Poet's modest Wish require?
What Boon does he of gracious Heaven desire?
Not the large Corpse of Esham's goodly Soil,
Which tire the Mower's, and the Reaper's toil;
Not the soft Flocks, on hilly Cotswold fed,
Nor Lemster Fields with living Fleeces clad:
He does not ask the Grounds, where gentle Thames,
Or Severn spread their fat'ning Streams.
Where they with wanton windings play;
And eat their widen'd Banks insensibly away:
He does not ask the Wealth of Lombard Street,
Which Consciences, and Souls are pawned to get.
Nor those exhaustless Mines of Gold,
Which Guinny and Peru in their rich bosoms hold.
2.
Let those that live in the Canary Isles,
On which indulgent Nature ever smiles,
Take pleasure in their plenteous Vintages,
And from the juicy Grape its racy Liquor press:
Let wealthy Merchants, when they Dine,
Run over their costly names of Wine,
Their Chests of Florence, and their Mont-Alchine.
Their Mants, Champagns, Chablees, Frontiniacks tell,
Their Aums of Hock, of Backrag and Moselle:
He envies not their Luxury
Which they with so much pains, and danger buy:
For which so many Storms, and Wrecks they bear,
For which they pass the Streights so often each year,
And escape so narrowly the Bondage of Argier.
3.
He wants no Cyprus Birds, nor Ortola^s,
Nor Daintics fetched from far to please his Sense,
Cheap wholesome Herbs content his frugal Board.
The food of unfaln Innocence,
Which the mean Village Garden does afford:
Grant him; kind Heaven, the sum of his desires,
What Nature, not what Luxury requires:
He only does a Competency claim,
And, when he has it, wit to use the same:
Grant him sound Health, impaired by no Disease,
Nor by his own Excess:
Let him in strength of Mind, and Body live.
But not his Reason, nor his Sense survive:
His Age (if Age he e're must live to see)
Let it from want, Contempt, and Care be free.
But not from Mirth, and the delights of Poetry,
Grant him but this, he is amply satisfied.
And scorns whatever Fate can give beside.
Paraphrase upon HORACE. BOOK II. ODE XIV.
Eheu fugaces, Posthume, Posthume,
Labuntur anni, etc.

1.
ALas! dear Friend, alas! time hastes away,
Nor is it in our power to bribe its stay:
The rolling years with constant motion run,
Lo! while I speak, the present minute's gone,
And following hours urge the foregoing on.
It Is not thy Wealth, it is not thy Power,
It Is not thy Piety can thee secure:
They Are all too feeble to withstand
Gray Hairs, approaching Age, and thy avoidless end.
When once thy fatal Glass is run,
When once thy utmost Thread is spun,
'Twill then be fruitless to expect Reprieve:
Could thou ten thousand Kingdoms give
In purchase for each hour of longer life,
They would not buy one gasp of breath,
Not move one jot inexorable Death.
2.
All the vast stock of humane Progeny,
Which now like swarms of Insects ^wl
Upon the Surface of Earth's spacious Ball,
Must quit this Hillock of Mortality,
And in its Bowels buried lie.
The mightiest King, and proudest Potentate,
In spite of all his Pomp, and all his State,
Must pay this necessary Tribute unto Fate.
The busy, restless Monarch of the times, which now
Keeps such a pother, and so much ado
To fill Gazettes alive,
And after in some lying Annal to survive;
Even He, even that great mortal Man must die,
And stink, and rot as well as thou, and I,
As well as the poor tattered Wretch, that begs his bread,
And is with scraps out of the common Basket sed.
3.
In vain from dangers of the bloody Field we keep,
In vain we escape
The sultry Line, and stormy Cape,
And all the treacheries of the faithless Deep:
In vain for health to foreign Countries we repair,
And change our English for Mompellier Air,
In hope to leave our fears of dying there:
In vain with costly far fetched Drugs we strive
To keep the wasting vital Lamp alive:
In vain on Doctors feeble Art rely;
Against resistless Death there is no remedy:
Both we, and they for all their skill must die,
And fill alike the Bedrols of Mortality.
4.
Thou must, thou must resign to Fate, my Friend,
And leave thy House, thy Wife, and Family behind:
Thou must thy fair, and goodly Manors leave,
Of these thy Trees thou shall not with thee take,
Save just as much as will thy Coffin make:
Nor will thou be allowed of all thy Land, to have,
But the small pittance of a six-foot Grave.
Then shall thy prodigal young Heir
Lavish the Wealth, which thou for many a year
Have hoarded up with so much pains and care:
Then shall he drain thy Cellars of their Stores,
Kept sacred now as vaults of buried Ancestors:
Shall set the enlarged Butts at liberty,
Which there close Prisoners under durance lie,
And wash these stately Floors with better Wine
Than that of consecrated Prelates when they dine.
The PRAISE of HOMER. ODE.
1.
HAil God of Verse! pardon that thus I take in vain
Thy sacred, everlasting Name,
And in unhallowed Lines blaspheme:
Pardon that with strange Fire thy Altars I profane.
Hail thou! to whom we mortal Bards our Faith submit,
Whom we acknowledge our sole Text, and holy Writ:
None other Judge infallible we own,
But Thee, who art the Canon of authentic Wit alone.
Thou art the unexhausted Ocean, whence
Sprung first, and still do flow the eternal Rills of sense:
To none but Thee our Art Divine we owe;
From whom it had its Rise, and full Perfection too.
Thou art the mighty Bank, that ever do supply
Throughout the world the whole Poetic Company:
With thy vast stock alone they traffic for a name,
And send their glorious Ventures out to all the Coasts of Fame,
2.
How trulier blind was dull Antiquity,
Who fastened that unjust Reproach on Thee?
Who can the senseless Tale believe?
Who can to the false Legend credit give?
Or think thou wantedst sight, by whom all others see?
What Land, or Region, how remote soever,
Does not so well described in thy great Draughts appear,
That each thy native Country seems to be,
And each to have been surveyed, and measured out By thee?
Whatever Earth does in her pregnant Bowels bear,
Or on her fruitful Surface wear;
What e're the spacious Fields of Air contain,
Or far extended Territories of the Main;
Is by thy skilful Pencil so exactly shown,
We scarce discern where thou, or Nature best has drawn,
Nor is thy quick all-piercing Eye
Or checked, or bounded here:
But farther does surpass, and farther does descry:
Beyond the Travels of the Sun, and Year.
Beyond this glorious Scene of starry Tapestry,
Where the vast Purliews of the Sky,
And boundless waste of Nature lies,
Thy Voyages thou make, and bold Discoveries.
What there the Gods in Parliament debate,
What Votes, or Acts in the Heavenly Houses pass,
By Thee so well communicated was;
As if thou would been of that Cabal of State,
As if Thou had been sworn the Privy-Counsellor of Fate.
3.
What Chief, who does thy Warrior's great Exploits survey,
Will not aspire to Deeds as great as they?
What generous Readers would he not inspire
With the same gallant Heat, the same ambitious Fire?
Methinks from Ida's top with noble Joy I view
The warlike Squadrons by his daring Conduct led;
I see the immortal Host engaging on his side,
And him the blushing Gods outdo.
Where e're he does his dreadful Standards bear,
Horror stalks in the Van, and Slaughter in the Rere.
Whole Swarths of Enemies his Sword does mow,
And Limbs of mangled Chiefs his passage strew,
And floods of reeking Gore the Field o'reslow:
While Heaven's dread Monarch from his Throne of State,
With high concern upon the Fight looks down,
And wrinkles his Majestic Brow into a Frown,
To see bold Man, like him, distribute Fate.
4.
While the great Macedonian Youth in Nonage grew,
Not yet by Charter of his years set free
From Guardians, and their slavish tyranny,
No Tutor, but the Budg Philosophers he knew:
And well enough the grave, and useful Tools
Might serve to read him Lectures, and to please
With unintelligible Jargon of the Schools,
And airy Terms and Notions of the Colleges:
They might the Art of Prating, and of Brawling teach,
And some insipid Homilies of Virtue preach:
But when the mighty Pupil had outgrown
Their musty Discipline, when manlier Thoughts possessed
His generous Princely Breast,
Now ripe for Empire, and a Crown,
And filled with lust of Honor, and Renown;
He then learnt to contemn
The despicable things, the men of Phlegm:
Strait he to the dull Pedants gave release,
And a more noble Master strait took place:
Thou, who the Grecian Warrior so could praise,
As might in him just envy raise,
Who (one would think) had been himself too high
To envy any thing of all Mortality,
'Twas thou that taught'st him Lessons lostier far,
The Art of Reigning, and the Art of War:
And wondrous was the Progress, which he made,
While he the Acts of thy great Pattern read:
The World too narrow for his boundless Conquests grew,
He Conquered one, and wished, and wept for new:
From thence he did those Miracles produce,
And Fought, and Vanquiih'd by the Conduct of a Muse.
5.
No wonder rival Nations quarreled for thy Birth,
A Prize of greater and of higher worth
Than that which led whole Greece, and Asia forth,
Than that, for which thy mighty Hero fought,
And Troy with ten years War, and its Destruction bought.
Well did they think it noble to have bore that Name,
Which the whole world would with ambition claim:
Well did they Temples raise
To Thee, at whom Nature her self stood in amaze,
A work, she never tried to mend, nor could,
In which mistaking Man, by chance she formed a God.
How gladly would our willing Isle resign
Her fabulous Arthur, and her boasted Constantine,
And half her Worthies of the Norman Line,
And quite the honor of their Births to be ensur'd to Thine?
How justly might it the wise choice approve.
Prouder in this than Crete to have brought forth Almighty Jove?
6.
Unhappy we, thy British Off spring here,
Who strive by thy great Model Monuments to rear:
In vain for worthless Fame we toil,
That Is pent in the strait limits of a narrow Isle:
In vain our Force, and Art we spend
With noble labors to enrich our Land,
Which none beyond our Shores vouchsafe to understand.
Be the fair structure never so well designed,
The parts with never so much proportion joined;
Yet foreign Bards (such is their Pride, or Prejudice)
All the choice Wormanship for the Materials sake despise.
But happier thou thy Genius did dispense
In Language universal as thy sense:
All the rich Bullion, which thy Sovereign Stamp does wear
On every Coast of Wit does equal value bear,
Allowed by all, and current every where.
No Nation yet has been so barbarous found,
Where thy transcendent Worth was not renowned.
Throughout the World thou art with Wonder read,
Where ever Learning does its Commerce spread,
Where ever Fame with all her Tongues can speak,
Where ever the bright God of Wit does his vast Journies take,
7.
Happy above Mankind that envied Name,
Which Fare ordained to be thy glorious Theme:
What greater Gift could bounteous Heaven bestow
On its chief Favorite below?
What nobler Trophy could his high Deserts be fit,
Than these thy vast erected Pyramids of Wit?
Not Statutes cast in solid Brass,
Nor those, which Art in breathing Marble does express,
Can boast an equal Life, or lastingness
With their well-polish'd Images, which claim
A Nich in thy Majestic Mohuments of Fame.
Here their embalmed incorruptible memories
Can proudest Louvres, and Escurials despise,
And all the needless helps of AEgypts costly Vanities.
No Blasts of Heaven, or Ruin of the Spheres,
Not all the washing Tides of rolling years,
Nor the whole Race of batt'ring time shall e're wear out
The great Inscriptions, which thy Hand has wrought,
Here thou, and they shall live, and bear an endless date,
Firm, as enrolled in the eternal Register of Fate.
For ever cursed be that mad Emperor,
(And curss'd enough he is be sure)
May future Poets on his hated Name
Shed all their Gall, and foulest Infamy,
And may it here stand branded with eternal shame,
Who thought thy Works could mortal be,
And sought the glorious Fabric to destroy:
In this (could Fate permit it to be done)
His damned Successor he had out-gone,
Who Rome and all its Palaces in Ashes laid,
And the great Ruins with a savage Joy surveyed:
He bu^ht but what might be rebuilt and richer made.
But had the impious Wish succeeded here,
'T had raiz'd what Age, nor Art could e're repair.
Not that vast universal Flame,
Which at the final Doom
This beauteous Work of Nature must consume,
And Heaven and all its Glories in one Urn entomb,
Will burn a nobler, or more lasting Frame:
As firm, and strong as that it shall endure,
Through all the Injuries of Time secure,
Nor die, till the whole world its Funeral Pile become.
Two Pastorals out of the Greek.
BION. A Pastoral, in Imitation of the Greek of Moschus, bewailing the Death of
the Earl of ROCHESTER.
MOurn all ye Groves, in darker shades be seen,
Let Groans be heard, where gentle Winds have been:
Ye Albion Rivers, weep your Fountains dry,
And all ye Plants your moisture spend, and die:
Ye melancholy Flowers, which once were Men,
Lament, until you be transformed again:
Let every Rose pale as the Lilly be,
And Winter Frost seize the A^emone:
But thou, O Hyacinth, more vigorous grow
In mournful Letters thy sad glory show,
Enlarge thy grief, and flourish in thy woe:
For Bion, the beloved Bion's dead,
His voice is gone, his tuneful breath is fled.
Come all ye Muses, come, adorn the Shepherd's Hearse
With never-fading Garlands, never-dying Verse.
Mourn ye sweet Nightingales in the thick Woods,
Tell the sad news to all the British Floods:
See it to Isis, and to Cham conveyed,
To Thames, to Humber, and to utmost Tweed:
Annd bid them wast the bitter tidings on,
How Bion's dead, how the loved Swain is gone,
And with him all the Art of graceful Song.
Come all ye Muses, come, adorn the Shepherd's Hearse
With never-fading Garlands, never-dying Verse.
Ye gentle Swans, that haunt the Brooks, and Springs,
Pine with sad grief, and droop your sickly Wings:
In doleful notes the heavy loss bewail,
Such as you sing at your own Funeral,
Such as you sung when your loved Orpheus fell.
Tell it it to all the Rivers, Hills, and Plains,
Tell it to all the British Nymphs and Swains,
And bid them too the dismal tidings spread
Of Bion's fate, of England's Orpheus dead,
Come all ye Muses, come, adorn the Shepherd's Hearse
With never-fading Garlands, never-dying Verse.
No more, alas! no more that lovely Swain
Charms with his tuneful Pipe the wondering Plain:
Ceast are those Lays, ceast are those sprightly airs,
That wooed our Souls into our ravished Ears:
For which the listening streams forgot to run,
And Trees leaned their attentive branches down:
While the glad Hills, loath the sweet sounds to lose,
Lengthened in Echoes every heavenly close.
Down to the melancholy Shades he is gone,
And there to Lethe's Banks reports his moan:
Nothing is heard upon the Mountains now
But pensive Herds that for their Master low:
Straggling and comfortless about they rove,
Unmindful of their Pasture, and their Love.
Come all ye Muses, come, adorn the Shepherd's Hearse,
With never-fading Garlands, never-dying Verse.
For thee, dear Swain, for thee, his much loved Son,
Does Phoebus Clouds of mourning black put on:
For thee the Satyrs and the rustic Fauns
Sigh and lament through all the Woods and Lawns:
For thee the Fairies grieve, and cease to dance
In sportful Rings by night upon the Plains:
The water Nymphs alike thy absence mourn,
And all their Springs to tears and sorrow turn:
Sad Echo too does in deep silence moan,
Since thou art mute, since thou art speechless grown:
She finds naught worth her pains to imitate,
Now thy sweet breath's stopped by untimely fate:
Trees drop their Leaves to dress thy Funeral,
And all their Fruit before its Autumn fall:
Each Flower sades, and hangs its withered head,
And scorns to thrive, or live, now thou art dead:
Their bleating Flocks no more their Udders fill,
The painful Bees neglect their wonted toil:
Alas! what boots it now their Hives to store
With the rich spoils of every plundered Flower,
when thou, that wast all sweetness, art no more?
Come, all ye Muses, come, adorn the Shepherd's Hearse,
With never-fading Garlands, never-dying Verse.
Never did the Dolphins on the lonely Shore
In such loud plaints utter their grief before:
Never in such sad Notes did Philomel
To the relenting Rocks her sorrow tell:
Never on the Beech did poor Alcyone
So weep, when she her floating Lover saw:
Nor that dead Lover, to a Sea-fowl turned,
Upon those Waves, where he was drowned, so mourned:
Nor did the Bird of Memnon with such grief
Bedew those Ashes, which late gave him life:
As they did now with vying grief bewail,
As they did all lament dear Bion's fall.
Come all ye Muses, come, adorn the Shepherd's Hearse
With never-fading Garlands, never-dying Verse.
In every Wood, on every Tree, and Bush
The Lark, the Linnet, Nightingale, and Thrush,
And all the feathered Choir, that used to throng
In listening Flocks to learn his well-tuned Song.
Now each in the sad Consort bear a part,
And with kind Notes repay their Teachers Art:
Ye Turtles too (I charge you) here assist,
Let not your murmurs in the crowd be mist:
To the dear Swain do not ungrateful prove,
That taught you how to sing, and how to love.
Come all ye Muses, come, adorn the Shepherd's Hearse
With never-fading Garlands, never-dying Verse,
Whom have thou left behind thee, skilful Swain,
That dares aspire to reach thy matchless strain:*
Who is there after thee, that dares pretend
Rashly to take thy warbling Pipe in hand?
Thy Notes remain yet fresh in every ear,
And give us all delight, and all despair:
Pleased Echo still does on them meditate,
And to the whistling Reeds their sounds repeat:
Pan only e're can equal thee in Song,
That task does only to great Pan belong:
But Pan himself perhaps will fear to try,
Will fear perhaps to be outdone by thee.
Come all ye Muses, come, adorn the Shepherd's Hearse
With never-fading Garlands, never-dying Verse.
Fair Galatea too laments thy death:
Laments the ceasing of thy tuneful breath:
Ost she, kind Nymph, resorted heretosore
To hear thy artful measures from the shore:
Not harsh like the rude Cyclops were thy lays,
Whose grating sounds did her soft ears displease:
Such was the force of thy enchanting tongue,
That she for ever could have heard thy Song,
And chid the hours, that did so swiftly run,
And thought the Sun too hasty to go down,
Now does that lovely Nereid for thy sake
The Sea, and all her fellow Nymphs forsake:
Pensive upon the Beach, she sits alone,
And kindly tends the Flocks from which you are gone.
Come all ye Muses, come, adorn the Shepherd's Hearse
With never-fading Garlands, never-dying Verse.
With thee, sweet Bion, all the grace of Song,
And all the Muses boasted Art is gone:
Mute is thy Voice, which could all hearts command,
Whose power no Shepherdess could e're withstand:
All the soft weeping Loves about thee moan,
At once their Mothers darling, and their own:
Dearer wast thou to Venus than her Loves,
Than her charmed Girdle, than her faithful Doves,
Than the last gasping Kisses, which in death
Adonis gave, and with them gave his breath.
This, Thames, ah! this is now the second loss,
For which in tears thy weeping Current flows:
Spencer, the Muses glory, went before,
He passed long since to the Elysian shore:
For him (they say) for him, thy dear-lov'd Son,
Thy Waves did long in sobbing murmurs groan,
Long filled the Sea with their complaint, and moan:
But now, alas! thou do afresh bewail,
Another Son does now thy sorrow call:
To part with either thou alike wast loath,
Both dear to Thee, dear to the Fountains both:
He largely drank the Rills of sacred Cham,
And this no less of Isis nobler stream:
He sung of Hero's, and of hardy Knights
Far-fam'd in Battles, and renowned Exploits:
This meddled not with bloody Fights, and Wars,
Pan was his Song, and Shepherds harmless jars,
Loves peaceful combats, and its gentle cares.
Love ever was the subject of his Lays,
And his soft Lays did Venus ever please.
Come all ye Muses, come adorn the Shepherd's Hearse
With never fading Garlands, never-dying Verse.
Thou, sacred Bion, art lamented more
Than all our tuneful Bards, that died before:
Old Chaucer, who first taught the use of Verse,
No longer has the tribute of our tears:
Milton, whose Muse with such a daring flight
Led out the warring Seraphims to fight:
Blessed Cowley too, who on the banks of Cham
So sweetly sighed his wrongs, and told his flame:
And He, whose Song raised Cooper's Hill so high,
As made its glory with Parnassus vie:
And soft Orinda, whose bright shining name
Stands next great Sappho's in the ranks of fame:
All now unwept, and unrelented pass,
And in our grief no longer share a place:
Bion alone does all our tears engross,
Our tears are all too few for Bion's loss.
Come all ye Muses, come, adorn the Shepherd's Hearse
With never-fading Garlands, never-dying Verse.
Thee all the Herdsmen mourn in gentlest Lays,
And rival one another in thy praise:
In spreading Letters they engrave thy Name
On every Bark, that is worthy of the same:
Thy Name is warbled forth by every tongue,
Thy Name the Burden of each Shepherds Song;
Waller, the sweet'st of living Bards, prepares
For thee his tender'st, and his mournfull'st airs,
And I, the meanest of the British Swains,
Amongst the rest offer these humble strains:
If I am reckoned not unblest in Song.
It Is what I ow to thy all-teaching tongue:
Some of thy Art, some of thy tuneful breath
Thou did by Will to worthless me bequeath:
Others thy Flocks, thy Lands, thy Riches have,
To me thou did thy Pipe, and Skill vouch^afe.
Come all y^ Muses, come, adorn the Shepherd's H^rse
With never-fading Garlands, never-dying Verse.
Alas by what ill Fate, to man unkind,
Were we to so severe a lot designed?
The meanest Flowers which the Gardens yield,
The vilest Weeds that flourish in the Field,
Which must e're long lie dead in Winter's Snow,
Shall spring again, again more vigorous grow:
Yon Sun, and this bright glory of the day,
Which night is hasting now to snatch away,
Shall rise anew more shining and more gay:
But wretched we must harder measure find,
The great'st, the brav'st, the witt^'st of mankind,
When Death has once put out their light. in vain
Ever expect the dawn of Life again:
In the dark Grave insensible they lie,
And there sleep our endless Eternity
There tho^ to silence ever art confined,
While less deserving Swains are left behind:
So please the Fates to deal with us below,
They cull out thee, and let dull Moevius go:
Moevius still lives; still let him live for me,
He, and his Pipe shall never my envy be:
None e're that heard thy sweet, thy Artful Tongue,
Will grate their ears with his rough untuned Song
Come, all ye Muses, come, adorn the Shepherd's Hearse
With never-fading Garlands, never-dying Verse.
A fierce Disease, sent by ungentle Death,
Snatched Bion hence, and stopped his hallowed breath:
A fatal damp put out that heavenly fire,
That sacred heat which did his breast inspire.
Ah! what malignant ill could boast that power,
Which his sweet voice's Magic could not cure?
Ah cruel Fare! how could thou choose but spare?
How could thou exercise thy rigout here?
Would thou had thrown thy Dart at worthless me,
And let this dear, this valued life go free:
Better ten thousand meaner Swains had died,
Than this best work of Nature been destroyed.
Come, all ye Muses, come, adorn the Shepherd's Hearse
With never-fading Garlands, never-dying Verse.
Ah! would kind Death alike had sent me hence;
But grief shall do the work, and save its pains:
Grief shall accomplish my desired doom,
And soon dispatch me to Elysium:
There, Bion, would I be, there gladly know,
How with thy voice thou charm'st the shades below.
Sing, Shepherd, sing one of thy strains divine,
Such as may melt the fierce Elysian Queen:
She once her self was pleased with tuneful strains,
And sung, and danced on the Sicilian Plains:
Fear not, thy Song should unsuccessful prove,
Fear not, but 'twill the pitying Goddess move:
She once was won by Orpheus heavenly Lays,
And gave his fair Eurydice release.
And thine as powerful (question not, dear Swain)
Shall bring thee back to these glad Hills again.
Even I my self, did I at all excel,
Would try the utmost of my voice and skill,
Would try to move the rigid King of Hell.
The Lamentation for ADONIS. Imitated out of the Greek of Bion of Smyrna.
PASTORAL.
IMourn Adonis, fair Adonis dead,
He Is dead, and all that is lovely, with him fled:
Come all ye Loves, come hither and bemoan
The charming sweet Adonis dead and gone:
Rise from thy Purple Bed, and rich Alcove,
Throw off thy gay attire, great Queen of Love:
Henceforth in sad and mournful weeds appear,
And all the marks of grief, and sorrow wear,
And tear thy locks, and beat thy panting breast,
And cry, My dear Adonis is deceast.
I mourn Adonis, the soft Loves bemoan
The gentle sweet Adonis dead and gone.
On the cold Mountain lies the wretched Youth,
Killed by a Savage Boar's unpitying tooth:
In his white thigh the fatal stroke is found,
Nor whiter was that tooth, that gave the wound:
From the wide wound fast flows the streaming gore
And stains that skin which was all snow before:
His breath with quick short tremblings comes and goes,
And Death his fainting eyes begins to close:
From his pale lips the ruddy colour's fled,
Fled, and has left his kisses cold and dead:
Yet Venus never will his kisses leave,
The Goddess ever to his lips will cleave:
The kiss of her dear Youth does please her still,
But her poor Youth does not the pleasure feel:
Dead he feels not her love, feels not her grief,
Feels not her kiss, which might even life retrieve.
I mourn Adonis the sad Loves bemoan
The comely fair Adonis dead and gone.
Deep in his Thigh, deep went the killing smart,
But deeper far it goes in Venus heart:
His faithful Dogs about the Mountain yell,
And the hard Fate of their dead Master tell:
The troubled Nymphs alike in doleful strains
Proclaim his death through all the Fields and Plains:
But the sad Goddess, most of all forlorn,
With love distracted, and with sorrow torn,
Wild in her look, and ruful in her air,
With Garments rent, and with disheveled hair,
Through Brakes, through Thickets, and through pathless ways,
Through Woods, through Haunts, and Dens of Savages,
Undrest, unshod, careless of Honor, Fame,
And Danger, flies, and calls on his loved name.
Rude Brambles, as she goes, her body tear,
And her cut feet with blood the stones besmear.
She thoughtless of the unfelt smart flies on,
And fills the Woods, and Valleys with her moan,
Loudly does on the Stars and Fates complain,
And prays them give Adonis back again:
But he, alas! the wretched Youth, alas!
Lies cold, and stiff, extended on the grass:
There lies he steeped in gore, there lies he drowned,
In purple streams, that gush from his own wound.
All the soft band of Loves their Mother mourn,
At once of beauty, and of love forlorn.
Venus has lost her Lover, and each grace,
That sat before in triumph in her face,
By grief chased thence, has now forsook the place.
That day which snatched Adonis from her arms,
That day bereft the Goddess of her charms.
The Woods and Trees in murmuring sighs bemoan
The fate of her Adonis dead and gone.
The Rivers too, as if they would deplore
His death, with grief swell higher than before:
The Flowers weep in tears of dreary dew;
And by their drooping heads their sorrow show:
But most the Cyprian Queen with shrieks, and groans,
Fills all the neighboring Hills, and Vales, and Towns:
The poor Adonis dead! is all her cry,
Adonis dead! sad Echo does reply.
What cruel heart would not the Queen of Love
To melting tears, and soft compassion move,
When she saw how her wretched Lover fell,
Saw his deep wound, saw it ineurable?
Soon as her eyes his bleeding wounds surveyed,
With eager clips she did his Limbs invade,
And these soft, tender, mournful things she said:
"Whither, O whither fli'st thou, wretched Boy,
"Stay my Adonis, stay my only joy,
"Ostay, unhappy Youth, at least till I
"With one kind word bespeak thee, e're thou die,
"Till I once more embrace thee, till I seal
"Upon thy dying lips my last farewell.
"Look up one minute, give one parting kiss,
"One kiss, dear Youth, to dry these flowing eyes:
"One kiss as thy last Legacy I Would fain
"Preserve, no God shall take it off again.
"Kiss, while I watch thy swimming eye balls roll,
"Watch thy last gasp, and catch thy springing soul.
"I Will suck it in, I Will hoard it in my heart,
"I with that facred pledge will never part,
"But thou will part, but thou art gone, far gone
"To the dark shades, and leave me here alone.
"Thou dy'st, but hopeless I must suffer life,
"Must pine away with easless endless grief.
"Why was I born a Goddess? why was I
"Made such a wretch to want the power to die?
"If I by death my sorrows might redress,
"If the cold Grave could to my pains give ease,
"I Would gladly die, I Would rather nothing be
"Than thus condemned to immortality:
"In that vast empty void, and boundless wast,
"We mind not what is to come, nor what is past.
"Of life, or death we know no difference,
"Nor hopes, nor fears at all affect our sense:
"But those who are of pleasure once bereft,
"And must survive, are most unhappy left:
"To ravenous sorrow they are left a prey,
"Nor can they ever drive despair away.
"Take, cruel Proserpine, take my loved Boy,
"Rich with my spoils, do thou my loss enjoy.
"Take him relentless Goddess, for thy own,
"Never till now wast thou my envy grown.
"Hard Fate! that thus the best of things must be
"Always the plunder of the Grave, and thee:
"The Grave, and thou now all my hopes engross,
"And I for ever must Adonis lose.
"You Are dead, alas! alas! my Youth, you are dead,
"And with thee all my pleasures too are fled:
"They Are all like fleeting vanished dreams passed over,
"And naught but the remembrance left in store
"Of tasted joys never to be tasted more:
"With thee my Cestos, all my charms are gone,
"Thy Venus must thy absence ever moan,
"And spend the tedious live-long nights alone.
"Ah! heedless Boy, why would thou rashly choose
"Thy self to dangerous pleasures to expose?
"Why would thou hunt? why would thou any more
"Venture with Dogs to chase the foaming Boar?
"Thou wast all fair to mine, to humane eyes,
"But not (alas!) to those wild Savages.
"One would have thought thy sweetness might have charmed
"The roughest kind, the fiercest rage disarmed:
"Mine (I am sure) it could; but woe is thee!
"All wear not eyes, all wear not breasts like me.
In such sad words the Dame her grief did vent;
While the Winged Loves kept time with her complaint:
As many drops of Blood as from the wound
Of slain Adonis fell upon the ground,
So many tears, and more you might have told,
That down the cheeks of weeping Venus roul'd:
Both tears, and blood to new born flowers give rise,
Hence Roses spring, and thence Anemonies.
Cease, Venus, in the Woods to mourn thy Love,
Thou'st vented sighs, thou'st lavished tears enough:
See! Goddess, where a glorious bed of State
Does ready for thy dear Adonis wait:
This bed was once the Scene of Love, and Joy,
But now must bear the wretched, murdered Boy:
There lies he, like a pale, and withered Flower,
Which some rude hand had cropped before its hour:
Yet smiles, and beauties still live in his face,
Which death can never frighten from their place.
There let him lie upon that conscious bed,
Where you loves mysteries so often have tried:
When you have enjoyed so many an happy night,
Each lengthened into ages of delight.
There let him lie, there heaps of Flowers strew,
Roses and Lillies store upon him throw,
And myrtle Garlands lavishly bestow:
Pour Mirth, and Balm, and costliest Ointments on,
Flowers are faded, Ointments worthless grown,
Now thy Adonis, now thy Youth is gone,
Who was all sweetnesses comprised in one.
In Purple wrapped, Adonis lies in state,
A Troop of mourning Loves about him wait:
Each does some mark of their kind sorrow show,
One breaks his Shafts, the other unstrings his Bow,
A third upon his Quiver wreaks his hate,
As the sad causes of his hasty fate:
This plucks his bloody garments off, that brings
Water in Vessels from the neighboring Springs,
Some wash his Wound, some fan him with their Wings:
All equally their Mothers loss bemoan,
All moan for poor Adonis dead and gone.
Sad Hymen too the fatal loss does mourn.
His Tapers all to Funeral Tapers turn,
And all his withered Nuptial Garlands burn:
His gay, and airy Songs are heard no more,
But mournful Strains, that hopeless love deplore.
Nor do the Graces fail to bear a part
With wretched Venus in her pain and smart:
The poor Adonis dead! by turns they cry,
And strive in grief the Goddess to outvie.
The Muses too in softest Lays bewail
The hapless Youth, and his fled Soul recall:
But all in vain; -- ah! numbers are too weak
To call the lost, the dead Adonis back:
Not all the powers of Verse, or charms of Love
The deaf remorsless Proserpine can move.
Cease then, sad Queen of Love, thy plaints give over,
Till the next year reserve thy grief in store:
Reserve thy Sighs, and tears in store till then,
Then thou must sigh, then thou must weep again.
Paraphrase upon the 137. Psalm.
1.
Ver. 1. FAr from our pleasant native Palestine,
Where great Euphrates with a mighty current flows,
And does in watery limits Babylon confine,
Curss'd Babylon! the cause, and author of our woes;
There on the Rivers side
Sat wretched, Captive we.
And in sad Tears bewailed our misery.
Tears, whose vast store increased the neighboring Tide:
We wept, and strait our grief before us brought
A thousand distant Objects to our thought.
As often as we surveyed the gliding Stream,
Loved Jordan did our sad remembrance claim:
As often as we the adjoining City viewed,
Dear Sions razed Walls our Grief renewed:
We thought on all the Pleasures of our happy Land,
Late ravished by a cruel Conqu'rour's hand:
We thought on every piteous, every mournful thing,
That might access to our enlarged sorrows bring;
Deep silence told the greatness of our Grief,
Of grief too great by Vent to find relief:
Our Harps as mute and dumb, as we,
Hung useless, and neglected by,
And now and then a broken String would lend a sigh,
As if with us they selt a sympathy,
And mourned their own, and our Captivity:
The gentle River too, as if compassionate grown,
As 'twould its Natives cruelty atone,
As it passed by, in murmurs gave a pitying Groan.
2.
There the proud Conquerors, who gave us Chains,
Who all our sufferings and misfortunes gave,
Did with rude Insolence our Sorrows brave,
And with insulting Raillery thus mocked our Pains,
Play us (said they) some brisk, and airy strain,
Such as your Ancestors were wont to hear
On Shilo 's pleasant Plain,
Where all the Virgins met in Dances once a year:
Or one of those,
Which your illustrious David did compose,
While he filled Israel 's happy Throne,
Great Soldier, Poet, and Musician all in one:
Often (have we heard) he went with Harp in hand,
Captain of all (...) harmonious Band,
And vanquished all the Quire with his single skill alone:
Forbid it Heaven! sorbid thou great thrice-hallow'd Name,
We should thy Sacred Hymns defame,
Or them with impious ears profane.
No, no, inhumane slaves, is this a time
(Oh cruel, and preposterous demand!)
When every Joy, and every Smile's a crime.
A Treason to our poor unhappy native Land?
Is this a time for sprightly Airs,
When every look the Badg of sorrow wears,
And Livery of our Miseries,
Sad miseries that call for all our Breath in sighs,
And all the Tribute of our eyes,
And moisture of our Veins our very blood in tears?
When naught can claim our Thoughts, Jerusalem, but thou,
Naught, but thy sad Destruction, Fall, and Overthrow?
3.
Oh dearest City! late our Nations justest Pride!
Envy of all the wondering world beside!
Oh sacred Temple, once the Almighty's blessed abode,
Now quite forsaken by our angry God!
Shall ever distant time, or Place
Your firm Ideas from my Soul deface?
Shall they not still take up my Breast
As long as that, and Life, and I shall last?
Grant Heaven (nor shall my Prayers the Curse withstand)
That this my learned, skilful hand
(Which now over all the tuneful strings can boast command,
Which does as quick, as ready, and unerring prove,
As nature, when it would its joints or fingers move)
Grant it forget its Art and feeling too,
When I forget to think, to wish, to pray for you:
For ever tied with Dumbness be my tongue,
When it speaks ought that shall not to your Praise belong,
If that be not the constant subject of my Muse, and Song.
4.
Remember, Heaven, remember Edom on that day,
And with like sufferings their spite repay,
Who made our Miseries their cruel Mirth and Scorn,
Who laughed to see our flaming City burn,
And wished it might to Ashes turn:
Raze, raze it (was their cursed cry)
Raze all its stately Structures down,
And lay its Palaces, and Temple level with the ground,
Till Sion buried in his dismal Ruins lie,
Forgot alike its Place, its Name, and Memory.
And thou proud Babylon! just Object of our Hate,
Thou too shall feel the sad reverse of Fate,
Tho thou art now exalted high,
And with thy lofty head o'retop'st the Sky,
As if thou would the Powers above defy;
Thou (if those Powers (and sure they will) prove just,
If my Prophetic Grief can ought foresee)
Ere long shall lay that lofty head in dust,
And blush in Blood for all thy present Cruelty:
How, loudly then shall we retort these bitter Taunts!
How gladly to the Music of thy Fetters dance!
5.
A day will come (oh might I see it!) e're long
That shall revenge our mighty wrong:
Then blessed, for ever blessed be he
Whoever shall return't on thee,
And grave it deep, and pay't with bloody Usury:
May neither aged Groans, nor Infant Cries,
Nor pitious Mothers Tears, nor ravished Virgins Sighs,
Soften thy unrelenting Enemies,
Let them as thou to us inexorable prove,
Nor Age nor Sex their deaf Compassion move;
Rapes, Murders, Slaughters, Funerals,
And all thou durst attempt within our Sions Wall,
May thou endure, and more, till joyful we
Confess thy self outdone in artful cruelty.
Blessed, yea, thrice blessed be that barbarous Hand
(Oh grief, that I such dire Revenge commend!)
Who tears out Infants from their Mothers Womb,
And hurls them yet unborn unto their Tomb:
Blessed he who plucks them from their Parents Arms,
That Sanctuary from all common harms,
Who with their Skulls, and Bones shall pave thy Streets all over,
And fill thy glutted Channels with their scattered Brains and Gore.
Paraphrase upon the HYMN of St. AMBROSE.
ODE.
1.
TO Thee, O God, we thy just Praises sing,
To Thee we Thy great Name rehearse:
We are Thy Vassals, and this humble Tribute bring
To Thee, acknowledged only Lord and King,
Acknowledged sole and Sovereign Monarch of the Universe.
All parts of this wide Universe adore,
Eternal Father, thy Almighty power:
The Skies, and Stars, Fire, Air, and Earth, and Sea,
With all their numerous nameless Progeny
Confess, and their due Homage pay to thee;
For why? thou spak'st the Word, and made them all from Nothing be.
To thee all Angels, all thy glorious Court on high,
Seraph and Cherub, the Nobility,
And whatsoever Spirits be
Of lesser Honor, less Degree;
To Thee in heavenly Lays
They sing loud Anthems of immortal Praise:
Still Holy, Holy, Holy Lord of Hosts they cry,
This is their business, this their sole employ,
And thus they spend their long and blessed Eternity.
2.
Farther than Natures utmost shores and limits stretch
The streams of thy unbounded Glory reach;
Beyond the straits of scanty Time, and Place,
Beyond the ebbs and flows of matter's narrow Seas
They reach, and fill the Ocean of Eternity and Space.
Infused like some vast mighty soul,
Thon do inform and actuate this spacious whole:
Thy unseen hand does the well-joynted Frame sustain,
Which else would to its primitive Nothing shrink again.
But most thou do thy Majesty display
In the bright Realms of everlasting Day:
There is Thy residence, there do Thou reign,
There on a State of dazzling Luster sit,
There shine in Robes of pure refined Light;
Where Sun's coarse Rays are but a Foil and Stain,
And refuse Stars the sweepings of thy glorious Train.
3.
There all Thy Family of menial Saints,
Huge Colonies of blessed Inhabitants,
Which Death through countless Ages has transplanted hence,
Now on Thy Throne for ever wait,
And fill the large Retinue of thy heavenly State.
There reverend Prophets stand, a pompous goodly show.
Of old thy Envoys extraordinary here,
Who brought thy sacred Embassies of Peace and War,
That to the obedient, this the rebel world below.
By them the mighty Twelve have their abode,
Companions once of the Incarnate suff^ring God,
Partakers now of all his Triumphs there,
As they on earth did in his Miseries share.
Of Martyrs next a crowned and glorious Quire,
Illustrious Heroes, who have gained
Through dangers, and Red Seas of Blood the Promised Land,
And passed through Ordeal Flames to the Eternity in Fire.
There all make up the Consort of thy Praise,
To Thee they sing (and never cease)
Loud Hymns, and Hallelujah's of Applause:
An Angel-Laureat does the Sense and Strains compose,
Sense far above the reach of mortal Verse,
Strains far above the reach of mortal ears,
And all, a Muse unglorified can fancy, or rehearse.
4.
Nor is this Consort only kept above,
Nor is it to the Blessed alone confined;
But Earth, and all thy Faithful here are joined,
And strive to vie with them in Duty and in Love:
And, tho they cannot equal Notes and Measures raise,
Strive to return the imperfect Echoes of thy Praise.
They through all Nations own thy glorious Name,
And every where the great Three-One proclaim,
Thee, Father of the World, and Us, and Him,
Who must Mankind, whom Thou did make, Redeem,
Thee, blessed Savior, the adored, true, only Son
To man debased, to rescue Man undone:
And Thee, Eternal, Holy Power,
Who do by Grace exalted Man restore
To all, he lost by the old Fall, and Sin before:
You blessed and glorious Trinity,
Riddle to baffled Knowledge and Philosophy,
Which cannot conprehend the mighty Mystery
Of numerous One, and the unnumber'd Three
Vast topless Pile of Wonders! at whose sight
Reason it self turns giddy with the height,
Above the fluttering pitch of humane Wit,
And all, but the strong wings of Faith, that Eagle's towering flight.
5.
Blessed Jesu! how shall we enough adore,
Or thy unbounded Love, or thy unbounded Power?
Thou art the Prince of Heaven, thou are the Almighty's Heir,
Thou art the Eternal Offspring of the Eternal Sire:
Hail thou the Worlds Redeemer! whom to free
From bonds of Death and endless misery,
Thou thought it no disdain to be
Inhabiter in low mortality:
The Almighty thought it no disdain
To dwell in the pure Virgins spotless Womb,
There did the boundless Godhead, and whole Heaven find room,
And a small point the Circle of Infinity contain.
Hail Ransom of Mankind, all-great, all-good!
Who did atone us with thy Blood,
Thy self the Offering, Altar, Priest, and God:
Thy self did die to be our glorious Bail
From Death's Arrests, and the eternal Flaming Jail:
Thy self thou gav'st the inestimable Price,
To Purchase and Redeem our morgag'd Heaven and Happiness.
Thither, when thy great Work on Earth had end,
When Death it self was slain and dead,
And Hell with all its Powers captive led;
Thou did again triumphantly Ascend:
There do Thou now by Thy great Father sit on high,
With equal Glory, equal Majesty,
Joynt-Ruler of the everlasting Monarchy.
6.
Again from thence thou shall with greater triumph come,
When the last Trumpet sounds the general Doom:
And (lo!) thou come, and (lo!) the direful sound does make
Through Deaths wide Realm Mortality awake:
And (lo) they all appear
At Thy Dread Bar,
And all receive the unalterable Sentence there.
Affrighted Nature trembles at the dismal Day,
And shrinks for fear, and vanishes away:
Both that, and Time breath out their last, and now they die,
And now are swallowed up and lost in vast Eternity.
Mercy, O mercy, angry God!
Stop, stop thy flaming Wrath, too fierce to be withstood,
And quench it with the Deluge of thy Blood;
Thy precious Blood which was so freely spilt
To wash us from the stains of Sin and Guilt:
O write us with it in the Book of Fate
Amongst thy Chosen, and Predestinate,
Free Denizens of Heaven, of the Immortal State.
7.
Guide us, O Savior! guide thy Church below,
Both Way, and Star, Compass, and Pilot Thou:
Do thou this frail and t^tt'ring Vessel steer
Through Life's tempestuous Ocean here,
Through all the tossing Waves of Fear,
And dangerous Rocks of black Despair.
Safe under Thee we shall to the wished Haven move,
And reach the undiscovered Lands of Bliss above,
Thus low (behold!) to thy great Name we bow,
And thus we ever wish to grow:
Constant, as Time does thy fixed Laws obey,
To Thee our Worship and our Thanks we pay:
With these we wake the cheerful Light,
With these we Sleep, and Rest invite;
An^ thus we spend our Breath, and thus we spend our Days,
And never cease to Sing, and never cease to Praise.
8.
While thus each Breast, and Mouth, and Ear
Are filled with thy Praise, and Love, and Fear,
Let never Sin get room, or entrance there:
Vouchsafe, O Lord, through this and all our days
To guard us with Thy powerful Grace:
Within our hearts let no usurping Lust be found,
No rebel Passion tumult raise,
To break thy Laws, or break our Peace,
But set thy Watch of Angels on the Place,
And keep the Tempter still from that forbidden ground.
Ever, O Lord, to us thy mercies grant,
Never, O Lord, let us thy mercies want,
Never want Thy Favor, Bounty, Liberality,
But let them ever on us be,
Constant as our own Hope and Trust on Thee:
On Thee we all our Hope and Trust repose;
O never leave us to our Foes,
Never, O Lord, desert our Cause:
Thus aided and upheld by Thee,
We'll fear no Danger, Death, nor Misery;
Fearless we thus will stand a falling world
With crushing Ruins all about us hurled,
And face wide gaping Hell, and all its slighted Powers defy.
A Letter from the Country to a Friend in Town, giving an Account of the
Author's Inclinations to Poetry.
Written in July, 1678.
AS to that Poet (if so great a one, as he,
May suffer in comparison with me)
When heretofore in Scythian exile pent,
To which he to ungrateful Rome was sent.
If a kind Paper from his Country came.
And wore subscribed some known, and faithful Name;
That like a powerful Cordial, did infuse
New life into his speechless gasping Muse,
And strait his Genius, which before did seem
Bound up in Ice, and frozen as the Clime,
By its warm force, and friendly influence thawed,
Dissolved apace, and in soft numbers flowed:
Such welcome here, dear Sir, your Letter had
With me shut up in close constraint as bad:
Not eager Lovers, held in long suspense,
With warmer Joy, and a more tender sense
Meet those kind Lines, which all their wishes bless'
And Sign, and Seal delivered Happiness:
My grateful Thoughts so throng to get abroad,
They over run each other in the crowd:
To you with hasty flight they take their way,
And hardly for the dress of words will stay.
Yet pardon, if this only fault^ find,
That while you praise too much, you are less kind:
Consider, Sir, it is ill and dangerous thus
To over-lay a young and tender Muse:
Praise, the fine Diet, which we are apt to love,
If given to excess, does hurtful prove:
Where it does weak, distempered Stomachs mee^
That surfeits, which should nourishment create.
Your rich Perfumes such fragrancy dispense,
Their sweetness overcomes, and palls my sense;
On my weak head you heap so many Bays,
I sink beneath 'em, quite oppressed with Praise,
And a resembling fate with him receive,
Who in too kind a triumph found his Grave,
Smothered with Garlands, which Applauders gave,
To you these Praises justlier all belong,
By alienating which, your self you wrong:
Whom better can such commendations fit
Than you, who so well teach and practice Wit?
Verse, the great boast of drudging Fools, from some,
May most of Scriblers with much straining come:
They void 'em dribling, and in pain they write,
As if they had a Strangury of Wit:
Your Pen uncalled they readily obey,
And scorn your Ink should flow so fast as they:
Each strain of yours so easy does appear,
Each such a graceful negligence does wear,
As shows you have none, and yet want no care.
None of your serious pains or time they cost,
But what thrown by, you can afford for lost:
If such the fruits of your loose leisure be,
Your careless minutes yield such Poetry;
We guess what proofs your Genius would impart,
Did it employ you, as it does divert:
But happy you, more prudent, and more wise,
With better aims have fixed your noble choice.
While silly I all thriving Arts refuse,
And all my hopes, and all my vigor lose,
In service on that worst of Jilts, a Muse,
For gainful business court ignoble ease,
And in gay Trisles wast my ill-spent days.
Little I thought, my dearest Friend, that you
Would thus contribute to my Ruin too:
O're-run with filthy Poetry, and Rhyme,
The present reigning evil of the time,
I lacked, and (well I did my self assure)
From your kind hand I should receive a cure:
When (lo!) instead of healing Remedies,
You cherish, and encourage the Disease:
Inhumane you help the Distemper on,
Which was before but too inveterate grown.
As a kind looker on, who interest shares,
Tho not in's stake, yet in his hopes and fears,
Would to his Friend a pushing Gamester do,
Recall his Elbow when he hastes to throw;
Such a wise course you should have took with me.
A rash and vent'ring fool in Poetry.
Poets are Cullies, whom Rook Fame draws in,
And wheadles with deluding hopes to win:
But, when they hit, and most successful are,
They scarce come off with a bare saving share.
Often (I remember) did wise Friends dissuade,
And bid me quit the trisling barren Trade.
Often have I tried (Heaven knows) to mortify
This vile, and wicked lust of Poetry:
But still unconquered it remains within,
Fixed as an Habit, or some darling Sin.
In vain I better studies there would sow,
Often I Have tried, but none will thrive, or grow:
All my best thoughts, when I Would most serious be,
Are never from its foul infection free:
Nay (God forgive me) when I say my Prayers,
I scarce can help polluting them with Verse:
That fabulous Wretch of old reversed I seem,
Who turn whatever I touch to Dross and Rhyme.
Often to divert the wild Caprice, I try
If Sovereign Wisdom and Philosophy
Rightly applied, will give a remedy:
Strait the great Stagyrite I take in hand,
Seek Nature, and my Self to understand:
Much I reflect on his vast Worth and Fame,
And much my low, and grovelling aims condemn,
And quarrel, that my ill-pack'd Fate should be
This vain, this worthless thing called Poetry:
But when I find this unregarded Toy
Could his important Thoughts, and Pains employ,
By reading there I am but more undone,
And meet that danger, which I went to shun.
Often when ill Humor, Shagrin, Discontent
Give leisure my wild Follies to resent,
I thus against my self my Passion vent.
"Enough, mad rhiming Sot, enough for shame,
"Give over, and all thy Quills to Tooth-picks Damn;
"Did ever thou the Altar rob, or worse,
"Kill the Priest there, and Maids receiving force?
"What else could merit this so heavy Curse?
"The greatest Curse, I can, I wish on him,
"If there be any greater than to rhyme)
"Who first did of the lewd invention think,
"First made two lines with sounds resembling clink,
"And, swerving from the easy paths of Prose,
"Fetters, and Chains did on free Sense impose:
"Curss'd too be all the fools, who since have went
"Misled in steps of that ill President:
"Want be entailed their lot: -- and on I go;
Wreaking my spite on all the jingling Crew:
Scarce the beloved Cowley scapes, tho I
Might sooner my own curses fear, than he:
And thus resolved against the scribbling vein,
I deeply swear never to write again.
But when bad Company and Wine conspire
To kindle, and renew the foolish Fire,
Straitways relapsed, I feel the raving fit
Return, and strait I all my Oaths forget:
The Spirit, which I thought cast out before,
Enters again with stronger force, and power,
Worse than at first, and tyrannizes more.
No sober good advice will then prevail,
Nor from the raging Frenzy me recall:
Cool Reason's dictates me no more can move
Than men in Drink, in Bedlam, or in Love:
Deaf to all means which might most proper seem
Toward my cure, I run stark mad in Rhyme:
A sad poor haunted wretch, whom nothing less
Than Prayers of the Church can dispossess.
Sometimes, after a tedious day half spent,
When Fancy long has hunted on cold Scent,
Tired in the dull, and fruitless chase of Thought,
Despairing I grow weary, and give out:
As a dry Lecher pumped of all my store,
I loath the thing, 'cause I can do it no more:
But, when I once begin to find again,
Recruits of matter in my pregnant Brain,
Again more eager I the haunt pursue,
And with fresh vigor the loved sport renew:
Tickled with some strange pleasure, which I find,
And think a secrecy to all mankind,
I please my self with the vain, false delight,
And count none happy, but the Fops that write.
It Is endless, Sir, to tell the many ways,
Wherein my poor deluded self I please:
How, when the Fancy laboring for a Birth,
With unfelt Throws brings its rude issue forth:
How after, when imperfect shapeless Thought
Is by the Judgment into Fashion wrought.
When at first search I traverse over my mind,
Naught but a dark, and empty Void I find:
Some little hints at length, like sparks, break thence,
And glimmering Thoughts just dawning into sense:
Co^fus'd a while the mixed Idea's lie,
With naught of mark to be discovered by,
Like colors undistinguished in the night,
Till the dusk Images, moved to the light,
Teach the discerning Faculty to choose,
Which it had best adopt, and which refuse.
Here rougher strokes, touched with a careless dash,
Resemble the first sitting of a face:
There finished draughts in form more full appear,
And to their justness ask no further care.
Mean while with inward joy I proud am grown,
To see the work successfully go on:
And prize my self in a creating power,
That could make something, what was naught before*
Sometimes a stiff, unwieldy thought I meet,
Which to my Laws will scarce be made submit:
But, when, after expense of pains and time,
It Is managed well, and taught to yoke in Rhyme,
I triumph more, than joyful Warriors would,
Had they some stout, and hardy Foe subdued:
And idly think, less goes to their Command,
That makes armed Troops in well-plac'd order stand,
Than to the conduct of my words, when they
March in due ranks, are set in just array.
Sometimes on wings of Thought I seem on high,
As men in sleep, though motionless they lie,
Fledged by a Dream, believe they mount and fly:
So Witches some enchanted Wand bestride,
And think they through the airy Regions ride,
Where Fancy is both Traveller, Way, and Guide:
Then strait I grow a strange exalted thing,
And equal in conceit, at least a King:
As the poor Drunkard, when Wine stums his brains,
Anointed with that Liquor, thinks he reigns.
Bewitched by these Delusions it is I write,
(The tricks some pleasant Devil plays in spite)
And when I Am in the freakish Trance, which I
Fond silly Wretch, mistake for Ecstasy,
I find all former Resolutions vain,
And thus recant them, and make new again.
"What was it, Irashly vowed* shall ever I
"Quit my beloved Mistress, Poetry?
"Thou sweet beguiler of my lonely hours,
"Which thus glide unperceived with silent course:
"Thou gentle Spell, which undisturbed do keep
"My Breast, and charm intruding care asleep:
"They say, you are poor, and unendow'd, what tho?
"For thee I this vain, worthless world sorgo:
"Let Wealth, and Honor be for Fortunes Slaves,
"The Alms of Fools, and Prize of crafty Knaves:
"To me thou art, whatever the ambitious crave,
"And all that greedy Misers want, or have:
"In Youth, or Age, in Travel, or at Home,
"Here, or in Town, at London, or at Rome,
"Rich, or a Beggar, free, or in the Fleet,
"Whatever my Fate is, it is my Fate to write.
Thus I have made my shrifted Muse consess,
Her secret Feebless, and her Weaknesses:
All her hid Faults she sets exposed to view,
And hopes a gentle Confessor in you:
She hopes an easy pardon for her sin,
Since it is but what she is not wilful in,
Nor yet has scandalous nor open been.
Try if your ghostly counsel can reclaim
The heedless wanton from her guilt and shame:
At least be not ungenerous to reproach
That wretched frailty, which you have helped debauch.
It Is now high time to end, for fear I grow
More tedious than old Doaters, when they woo.
Than traveled Fops, when far fetched lies they prate.
Or flattering Poets, when they dedicate.
No dull forgiveness I presume to crave,
Nor vainly for my tiresom length ask leave
Lest I, as often formal Coxcombs use.
Prolong that very fault, I would excuse
May this the same kind welcome find with you
As yours did here, and ever shall; Adieu.
Upon a Printer that exposed him by Printing a Piece of his grossly mangled, and
faulty.
DUll, and unthinking! had thou none but me
To plague, and urge to thine own Infamy?
Had I some tame and sneaking Author been,
Whose Muse to Love, and softness did incline,
Some small Adventurer in Song, that whines
Chloris and Phyllis out in charming lines,
Fit to divert mine Hostess, and mislead
The heart of some poor tawdry Waiting Maid;
Perhaps I might have then forgiven thee,
And thou had escaped from my resentments free.
But I whom spleen, and manly rage inspire,
Brook no affront, at each offense take fire:
Born to chastise the Vices of the Age,
Which Pulpits dare not, nor the very Stage:
Sworn to lash Knaves of all degrees, and spare
None of the kind, however great they are:
Satyr's my only Province, and delight,
For whose dear sake alone I Have vowed to write:
For this I seek occasions, court Abuse,
To show my Parts, and signalize my Muse:
Fond of a Quarrel, as young Bullies are
To make their Mettle, and their Skill appear:
And did thou think I would a wrong acquit,
That touched my tender'st part of Honor, Wit?
No, Villain, may my Sins never pardoned be
By Heaven it self, if e're I pardon thee.
Members from breach of Privilege deter
By threatening Topham and a Messenger:
Scroggs, and the Brothers of the Coif oppose,
By force and dint of Statutes, and the Laws:
Strumpets of Billingsgate redress their wrongs
By the sole noise, and foulness of their Tongues:
And I go always armed for my defense,
To punish, and revenge an insolence.
I wear my Pen, as others do their Sword,
To each affronting Sot, I meet, the word
Is Satisfaction: strait to Thrusts I go,
And pointed Satyr runs him through and through.
Perhaps thou hop'dst that thy obscurity
Should be thy safeguard, and secure thee free.
No, wretch, I mean from thence to fetch thee out,
Like sentence'd Felons, to be dragged about:
Torn, mangled, and exposed to scorn, and shame,
I mean to hang, and Gibbet up thy Name.
If thou to live in Satyr so much thirst,
Enjoy thy wish, and Fame, till envy burst,
Renowned, as he, whom banished Ovid cursed:
Or he, whom old Archilochus so stung
In Verse, that he for shame, and madness hung:
Deathless in infamy, do thou so live,
And le^my Rage, like his, to Halters drive.
Thou thoughtst perhaps my Gall was spent and gone,
My Venom drained, and Ia stingless Drone:
Thou thoughtst I had no Curses left in store;
But to thy sorrow know, and find I Have more,
More, and more dreadful yet, able to scare,
Like Hell, and urge to Daggers, and Despair:
Such thou shall feel, are still reserved by me,
To vex and force thee to thy Destiny:
Since thou have braved my vengeance thus; prepare,
And tremble from my Pen thy Doom to hear.
Thou, who with spurious Nonsense durst profane
The genuine issue of a Poets Brain,
May thou hereafter never deal in Verse,
But what hoarse Bell-men in their Walks rehearse,
Or Smithfield Audience sung on Crickets hears:
May thou print H --, or some duller Ass,
Jordan, or Him, that wrote Dutch Hudibrass:
Or next vile Scribler of the House, whose Play
Will scarce for Candles, and their snuffing pay:
May you each other Curse; thy self undone,
And he the laughing stock of all the Town.
May thou never rise to History, but what
Poor Grubstreet Penny Chroniclers relate,
Memoirs of Tyburn, and the mournful State
Of Cut-purses in Holborn Cavalcade,
Till thou thy self be the same subject made.
Compelled by want, may thou Print Popery,
For which be the Carts Arse, and Pillory,
Turnips, and rotten Eggs thy destiny.
Mauled worse than Reading, Christian, or Cellier,
Till thou daubed over with loathsome filth, appear
Like Brat of some vile Drab in Privy found,
Which there has lain three months in Ordure drowned.
The Plague of Poets, Rags, and Poverty,
Debts, Writs, Arrests, and Sergeants light on thee:
For others bound, may thou to Durance go,
Condemned to Scraps, and begging with a Shoo:
And may thou never from the Jail get free,
Till thou swear out thy self by Perjury:
Forlorn, abandoned, pitiless, and poor,
As a pawned Cully, or a mortgaged Whore,
May thou an Halter want for thy Redress,
Forced to steal Hemp to end thy miseries,
And damn thy self to balk the Hangmans Fees.
And may no faucy Fool have better Fate
That dares pull down the Vengeance of my Hate.
FINIS.
POEMS, AND Translations.

By the AUTHOR of The Satyrs upon the Jesuits.

LONDON, Printed for Jos. Hindmarsh, Bookseller to his Royal Highness, at the
Black Bull in Cornhill, 1684.

Advertisement.
THE Author of the following Pieces must be excused for their being hudled out
so confusedly. They are Printed just as he finished them off, and some things
there are which he designed not ever to expose, but was fain to do it, to keep
the Press at work, when it was once set a going. If it be their Fate to perish,
and go the way of all mortal Rhimes, it is no great matter in what method they
have been placed, no more than whether Ode, Elegy, or Satyr have the honor of
Wiping first. But if they, and what he has formerly made Public, be so happy
as to live, and come forth in an Edition all together; perhaps he may then
think them worth the sorting in better Order. By that time belike he means to
have ready a very Sparkish Dedication, if he can but get himself known to some
Great Man, that will give a good parcel of Guinnies for being handsomely
flattered. Then likewise the Reader (for his farther comfort) may expect to see
him appear with all the Pomp and Trappings of an Author; his Head in the Front
very finely cut, together with the Year of his Age, Commendatory Verses in
abundance, and all the Hands of the Poets of the Quorum to confirm his Book,
and pass it for Authentic. This at present is content to come abroad naked,
Undedicated, and unprefaced, without one kind Word to shelter it from Censure;
and so let the Critics take it amongst them.

THE TABLE.
MOnfieur Boileau's Satyr upon Man, imitated, Page 1 Juvenal's thirteenth
Satyr, imitated 25 David's Lamentation for the Death of Saul and Jonathan,
paraphrased. Ode 49 The Ode of Aristotle in Athenaeus, paraphrased 66 Upon the
Works of Ben. Johnson. Ode 69 The ninth Ode of the third Book of Horace,
imitated 87 Upon a Lady, who by overturning of a Coach had her Coats behind
flung up, and what was under shown to the view of the Company 90 Catullus,
Epigram 7. imitated 97 The fourth Elegy of the second Book of Ovid's Amors,
imitated 99 The fifth Elegy of the same Book, imitated 104 The tenth Elegy of
the same Book, imitated 110 A Fragment of Petronius, paraphrased 114 An Ode of
Anacreon, paraphrased 116 An Allusion to Martial, Book 1. Epigr. 118. 120 The
Dream, an Elegy 122 A Satyr, touching Nobility. Out of French 127 A Satyr,
addressed to a Friend that is about to leave the University and come abroad in
the world 137 Presenting a Book to Cosmelia. Elegy 149 The Parting. Elegy 153
Complaining of Absence. Elegy 156 Promising a Visit. Elegy 158 The careless
Good Fellow. Song 160 A Satyr concerning Poetry 164 The third Satyr of Juvenal,
imitated 180 A Dithyrambick. The Drunkards Speech in a Mask 206
THE EIGHTH SATYR OF Monsieur BOILEAU, Imitated.
Written in October, 1682.
The POET brings himself in, as discoursing with a Doctor of the University
upon the Subject ensuing.

OF all the Creatures in the world that be,
Beast, Fish, or Fowl, that go, or swim, or fly
Throughout the Globe from London to Japan,
The arrant'st Fool in my opinion's Man.
What? (strait I Am taken up) an Ant, a Fly,
A tiny Mite, which we can hardly see
Without a Perspective, a silly Ass,
Or freakish Ape? Dare you affirm, that these
Have greater sense than Man? Ay, questionless.
Doctor, I find you're shocked at this discourse:
Man is (you cry) Lord of the Universe;
For him was this fair frame of Nature made,
And all the Creatures for his use, and aid:
To him alone of all the living kind,
Has bounteous Heaven the reasoning gift assigned.
True Sir, that Reason ever was his lot,
But thence I argue Man the greater Sot.
This idle talk, (say you) and rambling stuff
May pass in Satyr, and take well enough
With Sceptick Fools, who are disposed to jeer
At serious things: but you must make it appear
By solid proof. Believe me, Sir, I Will do it:
Take you the Desk, and let us dispute it out.
Then by your favor, tell me first of all,
What it is, which you grave Doctors Wisdom call?
You answer: It Is an evenness of Soul,
A steady temper, which no cares control,
No passions ru^le, nor desires inflame,
Still constant to its self, and still the same,
That does in all its slow Resolves advance,
With graver steps, than Benchers, when they dance.
Most true; yet is not this, I dare maintain,
Less used by any, than the Fool, called Man.
The wiser Emmet, quoted just before,
In Summer time ranges the Fallows over
With pains, and labor, to lay in his store:
But when the blustering North with ruffling blasts
Saddens the year, and Nature overcasts;
The prudent Insect, hid in privacy,
Enjoys the fruits of his past industry.
No Ant of sense was e're so awkard seen,
To drudg in Winter, loiter in the Spring.
But sillier man, in his mistaken way,
By Reason, his false guide, is led astray:
Tossed by a thousand gusts of wavering doubt,
His restless mind still rolls from thought to thought:
In each resolve unsteady, and unfixt,
And when he one day loathes, desires the next.
Shall I, so famed for many a tuant jest
On wiving, now go take a jilt at last?
Shall I turn Husband, and my station choose,
Amongst the reverend Martyrs of the Noose?
No, there are fools enough besides in Town,
To surnish work for Satyr, and Lampoon:
Few months before cried the unthinking Sot,
Who quickly after, hampered in the knot,
Was quoted for an instance by the rest,
And bore his Fate, as tamely as the best,
And thought, that Heaven from some miraculous side,
For him alone had drawn a faithful Bride.
This is our image just: such is that vain,
That foolish, fickle, motly Creature, Man:
More changing than a Weathercock, his Head
N^'r wakes with the same thoughts, he went to bed,
Irksome to all beside, and ill at ease,
He neither others, nor himself can please:
Each minute round his whirling humors run,
Now he is a Trooper, and a Priest anon,
To day in Buff, to morrow in a Gown.
Yet, pleased with idle whimsies of his brain,
And puffed with pride, this haughty thing would fain
Be thought himself the only stay, and prop,
That holds the mighty frame of Nature up:
The Skies and Stars his properties must seem,
And turn-spit Angels tread the Spheres for him:
Of all the Creatures he is the Lord (he cries)
More absolute, than the French King of his.
And who is there (say you) that dares deny
So owned a truth? That may be, Sir, do I.
But to omit the controversy here,
Whether, if met, the Passenger and Bear,
This or the other stands in greater fear.
Or if an Act of Parliament should pass
That all the Irish Wolves should quit the place,
They Would strait obey the Statutes high command,
And at a minutes warning rid the Land:
This boasted Monarch of the world, that aw^
The Creatures here, and with his beck gives Laws;
This titular King, who th^s pretends to be
The Lord of all, how many Lords has he?
The lust of Money, and the lust of Power,
With Love, and Hate, and twenty passions more,
Hold him their slave, and chain him to the Oar.
Scarce has soft sleep in silence closed his eyes,
Up! (strait says Avarice) it is time to rise.
Not yet: one minute longer. Up! (she cries)
The Exchange, and Shops are hardly open yet.
No matter: Rise! But after all, for what?
Do You ask* go, cut the Line, double the Cape,
Traverse from end to end the spacious deep:
Search both the Indies, Bantam, and Japan:
Fetch Sugars from Barbados, Wines from Spain.
What needs all this? I Have wealth enough in store,
I thank the Fates, nor care for adding more.
You cannot have too much, this point to gain,
You must no Crime, no Perjury refrain,
Hunger you must endure, Hardship, and Want,
Amidst full Barns keep an eternal Lent,
And tho you have more than B -- m has spent,
Or C -- n got, like stingy B -- el save,
And grudg your self the charges of a Grave,
And the small Ransom of a single Groat,
From Sword, or Halter to redeem your Throat.
And pray, why all this sparing? Don't you know?
Only to enrich a spendthrift Heir, or so:
Who shall, when you are timely dead, and gone,
With his gilt Coach, and Six amuse the Town,
Keep his gay brace of Punks, and vainly give
More for a night, than you to fine for Shrieve.
But you lose time! the Wind, and Vessel waits,
Quick, let us aboard! Hey for the Downs, and Streights.
Or, if all-powerful Money fail of charms:
To tempt the wretch, and push him on to harms:
With a strong hand does fierce Ambition seize,
And drag him forth from soft repose and ease:
Amidst ten thousand dangers spurs him on,
With loss of Blood and Limbs to hunt renown.
Who for reward of many a wound and maim,
Is paid with naught but wooden Legs, and Fame;
And the poor comfort of a grinning Fate,
To stand recorded in the next Gazette.
But hold (cries one) your paltry gibing wit,
Or learn henceforth to aim it more aright:
If this be any; it is a glorious fault,
Which through all Ages has been ever thought
The Hero's virtue, and chief excellence:
Pray, what was Alexander in your sense?
A Fool belike. Yes, faith, Sir, much the same:
A crack brained Huff, that set the world on flame:
A Lunatic broke loose, who in his fit
Fell foul on all, invaded all, he met:
Who, Lord of the whole Globe, yet not content,
Lacked elbow-room, and seemed too closely pent.
What madness was it, that, born to a fair Throne,
Where he might rule with Justice, and Renown,
Like a wild Robber, he should choose to roam,
A pitied wretch, with neither house, nor home,
And hurling War, and Slaughter up and down,
Through the wide world make his vast folly known?
Happy for ten good reasons had it been,
If Macedon had had a Bedlam then:
That there with Keepers under close restraint
He might have been from frantic mischief pent.
But that we may not in long digressions now
Discourse all Rainolds, and the Passions through,
And ranging them in method stiff, and grave,
Rhyme on by Chapter, and by Paragraph;
Let Us quit the present Topic of dispute,
For More and Cudworth to enlarge about;
And take a view of man in his best light,
Wherein he seems to most advantage set,
It Is he alone (you will say) it is happy he,
That Is framed by Nature for Society:
He only dwells in Towns, is only seen
With Manners and Civility to shine;
Does only Magistrates, and Rulers choose,
And live secured by Government, and Laws.
It Is granted, Sir; but yet without all these,
Without your boasted Laws, and Policies,
Or fear of Judges, or of Justices;
Who ever saw the Wolves, that he can say,
Like more inhumane Us, so bent on prey,
To rob their fellow Wolves upon the way?
Who ever saw Church and Fanatic Bear,
Like savage Mankind one another tear?
What Tiger e're, aspiring to be great,
In Plots and Factions did embroil the State?
Or when was it heard upon the Libian Plains,
Where the stern Monarch of the Desert reigns,
That Whig and Tory Lions in wild jars
Madly engaged for choice of Shrieves and May'rs?
The fiercest Creatures, we in Nature find,
Respect their figure still in the same kind;
To others rough, to these they gentle be,
And live from Noise, from Feuds, from Actions free.
No Eagle does upon his Peerage sue,
And strive some meaner Eagle to undo:
No Fox was e're suborned by spite, or hire,
Against his brother Fox his life to swear:
Nor any Hind, for Impotence at Rut,
Did e're the Stag into the Arches put;
Where a grave Dean the weighty Case might state,
What makes in Law a carnal Job complete:
They fear no dreadful Quo Warranto Writ,
To shake their ancient privilege and right:
No Courts of Sessions, or Assize are there,
No Common Pleas, King's Bench, or Chancery-Bar:
But happier they, by Natures Charter free,
Secure, and safe in mutual peace agree,
And know no other Law, but Equity.
It Is Man, it is Man alone, that worst of Brutes,
Who first brought up the trade of cutting Throats,
Did Honor first, that barbarous term, devise,
Unknown to all the gentler Savages;
And, as 'twere not enough to have fetched from Hell,
Powder, and Guns, with all the arts to kill,
Farther to plague the World, he must ingross
Huge Codes, and bulky Pandects of the Laws,
With Doctors Glosses to perplex the Cause,
Where darkened Equity is kept from light,
Under vast Reams of non sense buried quite.
Gently, good Sir! (cry you) why all this rant?
Man has his freaks, and passions; that we grant:
He has his frailties, and blind sides; who doubts?
But his least Virtues balance all his Faults.
Pray, was it not this bold, this thinking Man,
That measured Heaven, and taught the Stars to scan,
Whose boundless wit, with soaring wings durst fly,
Beyond the flaming borders of the sky;
Turned Nature over, and with a piercing view
Each cranny searched, and looked her through and through:
Which of the Brutes have Universities?
When was it heard, that they e're took Degrees,
Or were Professors of the Faculties?
By Law, or Physic were they ever known
To merit Velvet, or a Scarlet Gown?
No questionless; nor did we ever read,
Of Quacks with them, that were Licentiates made,
By Patent to profess the poys'ning Trade:
No Doctors in the Desk there hold dispute
About Black-pudding, while the wondering Rout
Listen to hear the knotty Truth made out:
Nor Virtuoso's teach deep mysteries
Of Arts for pumping Air, and smothering Flies.
But not to urge the matter farther now,
Nor search it to the depth, what it is to know,
And whether we know any thing or no.
Answer me only this, What man is there
In this vile thankless Age, wherein we are,
Who does by Sense and Learning value bear?
Would thou get Honor, and a fair Estate,
And have the looks and favors of the Great?
Cries an old Father to his blooming Son,
Take the right course, be ruled by me, it is done.
Leave moldy Authors to the reading Fools,
The poring crowds in Colleges and Schools:
How much is threescore Nobles? Twenty pound.
Well said; my Son, the Answer's most profound:
Go, thou know all that is requisite to know;
What Wealth on thee, what Honors haste to flow!
In these high Sciences thy self employ,
Instead of Plato, take thy Hodder, Boy.
Learn there the art to audit an Account,
To what the Kings Revenue does amount:
How much the Customs, and Excise bring in,
And what the Managers each year purloin.
Get a case-harden'd Conscience, Irish proof,
Which naught of pity, sense, or shame can move:
Turn Algerine, Barbarian, Turk, or Jew,
Unjust, inhumane, treacherous, base, untrue;
Never stick at wrong; hang Widows sighs and tears,
The cant of Priests to frighten Usurers:
Boggle at nothing to increase thy Store,
Nor Orphans Spoils, nor plunder of the Poor:
And scorning paltry rules of Honesty,
By surer methods raise thy Fortune high.
Then shoals of Poets, Pedants, Orators,
Doctors, Divines, Astrologers, and Lawyers,
Authors of every sort, and every size,
To thee their Works, and Labors shall address,
With pompous Lines their Dedications fill,
And learnedly in Greek and Latin tell
Lies to thy face, that thou have deep insight,
And art a mighty Judge of what they write.
He that is rich, is every thing, that is,
Without one grain of Wisdom he is wise,
And knowing naught, knows all the Sciences:
He Is witty, gallant, virtuous, generous, stout,
Well-born, well-bred, well-shap'd, well-drest, what not?
Loved by the Great, and courted by the Fair,
For none that e're had Riches, found despair:
Gold to the loathsom'st object gives a grace,
And sets it off, and makes even Bovey please:
But tattered Poverty they all despise,
Love stands aloof, and from the Scarecrow flies.
Thus a stanch Miser to his hopeful Brat
Chalks out the way that leads to an Estate;
Whose knowledge often with utmost stretch of Brain
No high'r than this vast secret can attain,
Five and four's nine, take two, and seven remain,
Go, Doctor, after this, and rack your Brains,
Unravel Scripture with industrious pains:
On musty Fathers waste your fruitless hours,
Correct the Critics, and Expositors:
Outvie great Stilling fleet in some vast Tome,
And there confound both Bellarmine and Rome;
Or glean the Rabbis of their learned store;
To find what Father Simon has past over:
Then at the last some bulky piece compile,
There lay out all your time, and pains, and skill?
And when it is done and finished for the Press,
To some great name the mighty Work address:
Who for a full reward of all your toil,
Shall pay you with a gracious nod or smile:
Just recompense of life too vainly spent!
An empty Thank you Sir, and Complement.
But, if to higher Honors you pretend,
Take the advice and counsel of a Friend;
Here quit the Desk, and throw your Scarlet by,
And to some gainful course your self apply.
Go, practice with some Banker how to cheat,
There Is choice in Town, enquire in Lombard street.
Let Scot and Ockam wrangle as they please,
And thus in short with me conclude the case,
A Doctor is no better than an Ass.
A Doctor, Sir? your self: Pray have a care,
This is to push your Raillery too far.
But not to lose the time in trifling thus,
Beside the point, come now more home and close:
That Man has Reason is beyond debate,
Nor will your self, I think, deny me that:
And was not this fair Pilot given to steer,
His tottering Bark through Life's rough Ocean here?
All this I grant: But if in spite of it
The Wretch on every Rock he sees will split,
To what great purpose does his Reason serve,
But to misguide his course, and make him swerve?
What boots it H. when it says, Give over
Thy scribbling itch, and play the fool no more.
If her vain counsels, purposed to reclaim,
Only avail to harden him in shame?
Lampoon'd, and hissed, and damned the thousandth time,
Still he writes on, is obstinate in Rhyme:
His Verse, which he does every where recite,
Put all his Neighbors, and his Friends to flight:
Scared by the rhiming Fiend, they have away,
Nor will his very Groom be hired to stay.
The Ass, whom Nature Reason has denied,
Content with Instinct for his surer guide,
Still follows that, and wiselier does proceed:
He never aspires with his harsh braying Note,
The Songsters of the Wood to challenge out:
Nor like this awkard smatterer in Arts,
Sets up himself for a vain Ass of parts;
Of reason void, he sees, and gains his end,
While Man, who does to that false light pretend,
Wildly gropes on, and in broad day is blind.
By whimsie led he does all things by chance,
And acts in each against all common sense.
With every thing pleased, and displeased at once,
He knows not what he seeks, nor what he shuns:
Unable to distinguish good, or bad,
For nothing he is gay, for nothing sad:
At random loves, and loathes, avoids, pursues,
Enacts, repeals, makes, alters, does, undoes.
Did we, like him, ever see the Dog, or Bear,
Chimera's of their own devising fear?
Frame needless doubts, and for those doubts forego
The Joys which prompting Nature calls them to?
And with their Pleasures awkardly at strife,
With scaring Fantoms pall the sweets of Life?
Tell me, grave Sir, did ever Man see Beast
So much below himself, and sense debased,
To worship Man with superstitious Fear,
And fondly to his Idol Temples rear?
Was he ever seen with Prayers, and Sacrifice
Approach to him, as Ruler of the Skies,
To beg for Rain, or Sunshine on his knees?
No never: but a thousand times has Beast
Seen Man, beneath the meanest Brute debased,
Fall low to Wood, and Metal heretofore,
And madly his own Workmanship adore:
In Egypt often has seen the Sot bow down,
And reverence some deified Baboon:
Has often seen him on the Banks of Nile
Say Prayers to the Almighty Crocodile:
And now each day in every street abroad
Sees prostrate Fools adore a breaden God.
But why (say you) these spiteful Instances
Of Egypt, and its gross Idolatries?
Of Rome, and hers as much ridiculous?
What are these lewd Buffooneries to us?
How gather you from such wild proofs as these,
That Man, a Doctor is beneath an Ass?
An Ass! that heavy, stupid, lumpish Beast,
The Sport, and mocking-stock of all the rest?
Whom they all spurn, and whom they all despise,
Whose very name all Satyr does comprize?
An Ass, Sir? Yes: Pray what should make us laugh?
Now he unjustly is our jeer, and scoff.
But, if one day he should occasion find
Upon our Follies to express his mind;
If Heaven, as once of old, to check proud Man,
By miracle should give him Speech again;
What would he say, do you think, could he speak out,
Nay, Sir, betwixt us two, what would he not?
What would he say, were he condemned to stand
For one long hourin Fleetstreet, or the Strand,
To cast his eyes upon the motly throng,
The two-leg'd Herd, that daily pass along;
To see their odd Disguises, Furs, and Gowns,
Their Cassocks, Cloaks, Lawn-sleeves, and Pantaloons?
What would he say to see a Velvet Quack
Walk with the price of forty killed on's Back;
Or mounted on a Stage, and gaping loud,
Commend his Drugs, and Ratsbane to the Crowd?
What would he think, on a Lord Mayor's day,
Should he the Pomp and Pageantry survey?
Or view the Judges, and their solemn Train,
March with grave decency to kill a Man?
What would he think of us, should he appear
In Term amongst the Crowds at Westminster,
And there the hellish din, and Jargon hear,
Where S. and his Pack with deep mouthed Notes
Drown Billingsgate, and all its Oyster-Boats?
There see the Judges, Sergeants, Barristers,
Attorneys, Counselors, Solicitors,
Cricrs, and Clerks, and all the Savage Crew
Which wretched man at his own charge undo?
If after prospect of all this, the Ass
Should find the voice he had in Esop's days;
Then, Doctor, then, casting his eyes around
On human Fools, which every where abound.
Content with Thistles, from all envy free,
And shaking his grave head, no doubt he would cry
Good faith, Man is a Beast as much as we.
THE THIRTEENTH SATYR OF JUVENAL, Imitated.
Written in April, 1682.
ARGUMENT.
The POET comforts a Friend, that is overmuch concerned for the loss of a
considerable Sum of Money, of which he has lately been cheated by a person, to
whom he entrusted the same. This he does by showing, that nothing comes to pass
in the world without Divine Providence, and that wicked Men (however they seem
to escape its Punishment here) yet suffer abundantly in the torments of an evil
Conscience. And by the way takes occasion to lash the Degeneracy, and Villainy
of the present Times.

THere is not one base Act, which men commit,
But carries this ill sting along with it,
That to the Author it creates regret:
And this is some Revenge at least, that he
Can never acquit himself of Villainy.
Tho a Bribed Judge and Jury set him free.
All people, Sir, abhor (as it is but just)
Your faithless Friend, woe lately broke his Trust,
And curse the treacherous Deed: But, thanks to Fate,
That has not blessed you with so small Estate,
But that with patience you may bear the Cross,
And need not sink under so mean a Loss.
Besides your Case for less concern does call,
Because it is what does usually befall:
Ten thousand such might be alleged with ease,
Out of the common crowd of Instances.
Then cease for shame, immoderate regret,
And don't your Manhood, and your sense forget:
It Is womanish, and silly to lay forth
More cost in Grief than a Misfortune's worth,
You scarce can bear a puny trifling ill,
It goes so deep; pray Heaven! it does not kill:
And all this trouble, and this vainado,
Because a Friend (forsooth) has proved untrue.
Shame o'your Beard! can this so much amaze?
Were you not born in good King Jemmy's days?
And are not you at length yet wiser grown,
When threescore Winters on your head have snown;
Almighty Wisdom gives in Holy Writ
Wholesome Advise to all, that follow it:
And those, that will not its great Counsels hear,
May learn from mere experience how to bear
(Without vain struggling) Fortune's yoke, and how
They ought her rudest shocks to undergo,
There Is not a day so solemn through the year,
Not one red Letter in the Calendar,
But we of some new Crime discovered hear.
Theft, Murder, Treason, Perjury, what not?
Moneys by Cheating, Padding, Poisoning got.
Nor is it strange; so few are now the Good,
That fewer scarce were left at Noah's Flood:
Should Sodom's Angel here in Fire descend,
Our Nation wants ten Men to save the Land,
Fate has reserved us for the very Lees
Of Time, where Ill admits of no degrees:
An Age so bad old Poets never could frame,
Nor find a Metal out to give't a name.
This your Experience knows; and yet for all
On faith of God, and Man aloud you call,
Louder than on Queen Bess's day the Rout
For Antichrist burnt in Effigy shout:
But, tell me, Sir, tell me, grey-headed Boy,
Do you not know what Lech'ry men enjoy
In stolen Goods? For Gods sake don't you see
How they all laugh at your simplicity,
When gravely you forewarn of Perjury?
Preach up a God, and Hell, vain empty names,
Exploded now for idle thredbare shams,
Devised by Priests, and by none else believed,
Ever since great Hobbs the World has undeceived?
This might have past with the plain simple Race
Of our Forefathers in King Arthur's days:
E're, mingling with corrupted foreign Seed,
We learned their Vice, and spoiled our native Breed.
E're yet blessed Albion, high in ancient Fame,
With her first Innocence resigned her Name.
Fair dealing then, and downright Honesty,
And plighted Faith were good Security:
No vast Ingrossments for Estates were made,
Nor Deeds, large as the Lands, which they conveyed:
To bind a Trust there lacked no formal ties
Of Paper, Wax, and Seals, and Witnesses,
Nor ready Coin, but sterling Promises:
Each took the other's word, and that would go
For current then, and more than Oaths do now:
None had recourse to Chanc'ry for defense,
Where you forego your Right with less Expense:
Nor traps were yet set up for Perjurers,
That catch men by the Heads, and whip off Ears.
Then Knave, and Villain, things unheard of were,
Scarce in a Century did one appear,
And he more gazed at than a Blazing-Star:
If a young Stripling put not off his Hat
In high respect to every Beard he met,
Tho a Lord's Son, and Heir, 'twas held a crime,
That scarce deserved its Clergy in that time:
So venerable then was four years odds,
And gray old Heads were r^verenc'd as Gods.
Now if a Friend once in an Age prove just,
If he miraculously keep his Trust,
And without force of Law deliver all
That Is due, both Interest, and Principal;
Prodigious wonder! fit for Stow to tell,
And stand recorded in the Chronicle;
A thing less memorable would require
As great a Monument as London Fire.
A man of Faith and Uprightness is grown
So strange a Creature both in Court and Town,
That he with Elephants may well be shown.
A Monster, more uncommon than a Whale
At Bridge, the last great Comet, or the Hail,
Than Thames his double Tide, or should he run
With Streams of Milk, or Blood to Gravesend down.
You're troubled that you have lost five hundred pound
By treacherous Fraud: another may be found,
Has lost a thousand: and another yet,
Double to that; perhaps his whole Estate.
Little do folks the heavenly Powers mind,
If they but escape the knowledge of Mankind:
Observe, with how demure, and grave a look
The Rascal lays his hand upon the Book:
Then with a praying Face, and lifted Eye
Claps on his Lips, and Seals the Perjury:
If you persist his Innocence to doubt,
And boggle in Belief; he will strait rapout
Oaths by the volley, each of which would make
Pale Atheists start, and trembling Bullies quake;
And more than would a whole Ships Crew maintain
To the East Indies hence, and back again.
As God shall pardon me, Sir, I am free
Of what you charge me with: let me never see
His Face in Heaven else: may these hands rot,
These eyes drop out; if Ie'er had a Groat
Of yours, or if they ever touched, or saw't.
Thus he will run on two hours in length, till he
Spin out a curse long as the Litany:
Till Heaven has scarce a Judgment left in store
For him to wish, deserve, or suffer more.
These are, who disavow all Providence,
And think the world is only steered by chance:
Make God at best an idle looker on,
A lazy Monarch lolling in his Throne:
Who his Affairs does neither mind, or know,
And leaves them all at random here below:
And such as every foot themselves will damn,
And Oaths no more than common Breath esteem:
No shame, nor loss of Ears can frighten these,
Were every Street a Grove of Pillories.
Others there be, that own a God, and fear
His Vengeance to ensue, and yet forswear:
Thus to himself, says one, Let Heaven decree
What Doom soever, its pleasure will, of me:
Strike me with Blindness, Palsies, Leprosies,
Plague, Pox, Consumption, all the Maladies
Of both the Spittles; so I get my Prize,
And hold it sure; I Will suffer these, and more;
All Plagues are light to that of being poor.
There Is not a begging Cripple in the streets
(Unless he with his Limbs has lost his Wits,
And is grown fit for Bedlam) but no doubt,
To have his Wealth would have the Rich man's Gout.
Grant Heavens Vengeance heavy be; what tho?
The heaviest things move slowliest still we know:
And, if it punish all, that guilty be,
'Twill be an Age before it come to me:
God too is merciful, as well as just;
Therefore I Will rather his forgiveness trust,
Than live despised, and poor, as thus I must:
I Will try, and hope, he is more a Gentleman
Than for such trivial things as these, to damn.
Besides, for the same Fact we have often known
One mount the Cart, another mount the Throne:
And foulest Deeds, attended with success,
No longer are reputed wickedness,
Disguised with Virtues Livery, and Dress.
With these weak Arguments they fortify,
And harden up themselves in Villainy:
The Rascal now dares call you to account,
And in what Court you please, join issue on it:
Next Term he will bring the Action to be tried,
And twenty Witnesses to swear on's side:
And, if that Justice to his Cause be found,
Expects a Verdict of five hundred pound.
Thus he, who boldly dares the Guilt outface,
For innocent shall with the Rabble pass:
While you, with Impudence, and sham run down,
Are only thought the Knave by all the Town.
Mean time, poor you at Heaven exclaim, and rail,
Louder than I -- at the Bar does Bawl:
Is there a Power above? and does he hear?
And can he tamely Thunder bolts ferbear?
To what vain end do we with Prayers adore?
And on our bended knees his aid implore?
Where is his Rule, if no respect be had,
Of Innocence, or Guilt, of Good, or Bad?
And who henceforth will any credit show
To what his lying Priests teach here below?
If this be Providence; for ought I see,
Blessed Saint, Vaninus! I shall follow thee:
Little's the odds 'twixt such a God, and that,
Which Atheist Lewis used to wear in's Hat.
Thus you blaspheme, and rave: But pray, Sir, try
What Comforts my weak Reason can apply,
Who never yet read Plutarch, hardly saw,
And am but meanly versed in Seneca.
In cases dangerous and hard of cure
We have recourse to Scarborough, or Lower:
But if they don't so desperate appear,
We trust to meaner Doctors skill, and care.
If there were never in the world before
So foul a deed; I Am dumb, not one word more:
A God's name then let both your sluices flow,
And all the extravagance of sorrow show;
And tear your Hair, and thump your mournful Breast,
As if your dearest Firstborn were deceased.
It Is granted that a greater Grief attends
Departed Moneys than departed Friends:
None ever counterfeits upon this score,
Nor need he do it: the thought of being poor
Will serve alone to make the eyes run over.
Lost Money's grieved with true unfeigned Tears,
More true, than Sorrow of expecting Heirs
At their dead Father's Funerals, tho here
The Back, and Hands no pompous Mourning wear.
But if the like Complaints be daily found
At Westminster, and in all Courts abound;
If Bonds, and Obligations cannot prevail,
But men deny their very Hand and Seal,
Signed with the Arms of the whole Pedigree
Of their dead Ancestors to vouch the Lie,
If Temple-Walks, and Smithfield never fail
Of plying Rogues, that set their Souls to sale
To the first Passenger, that bids a price,
And make their livelihood of Perjuries;
For God's sake why are you so delicate,
And think it hard to share the common Fate?
And why must you alone be Favorite thought
Of Heaven, and we sor Reprobates castout?
The wrong you bear, is hardly worth regard,
Much less your just resentment, if compared
With greater outrages to others done,
Which daily happen, and alarm the Town:
Compare the Villains who cut Throats for Bread,
Or Houses fire, of late a gainful Trade,
By which our City was in Ashes laid:
Compare the sacrilegious Burglary,
From which no place can Sanctuary be,
That rifles Churches of Communion-Plate,
Which good King Edward's days did dedicate:
Think, who durst fteal S. Alban's Font of Brass,
That Christened half the Royal Scottish Race:
Who stole the Chalices at Chichester,
In which themselves received the day before:
Or that bold daring hand, of fresh Renown,
Who, scorning common Booty, stole a Crown:
Compare too, if you please, the horrid Plot,
With all the Perjuries to make it out,
Or make it nothing, for these last three years;
Add to it Thinne's and Godfrey's Murderers:
And if these seem but slight, and trivial things,
Add those, that have, and would have murdered Kings.
And yet how little's this of Villainy
To what our Judges often in one day try?
This to convince you, do but travel down,
When the next Circuit comes, with Pemberton,
Or any of the Twelve, and there but mind,
How many Rogues there are of Humane kind,
And let me hear you, when you're back again,
Say, you are wronged, and, if you dare, complain.
None wonder, who in Essex Hundreds live,
Or Sheppy Island, to have Agues rife:
Nor would you think it much in Africa,
If you great Lips, and short flat Noses saw:
Because it is so by Nature of each place;
And therefore there for no strange things they pass.
In Lands, where Pigmies are, to see a Crane
(As Kites do Chickens here) sweep up a Man,
In Armor clad, with us would make a show,
And serve for entertain at Bartholmew:
Yet there it goes for no great Prodigy,
Where the whole Nation is but one foot high:
Then why, fond Man, should you so much admire,
Since Knave is of our Growth, and common here?
But must such Perjury escape (say you)
And shall it ever thus unpunished go?
Grant, he weredragg'd to Jail this very hour,
To starve, and rot; suppose it in your Power
To rack, and torture him all kind of ways,
To hang, or burn, or kill him, as you please;
*And what would your Revenge it self have more?)
Yet this, all this would not your Cash restore:
And where would be the Comfort, where the Good.
(...) you could wash your Hands in's reaking Blood?
But, Oh, Revenge more sweet than Life! It Is true,
So the unthinking say, and the mad Crew
Of hect'ring Blades, who for slight cause, or none,
At every turn are into Passion blown:
Whom the least Trifles with Revenge inspire,
And at each spark, like Gunpowder, take fire:
These unprovoked kill the next Man they meet,
For being so saucy, as to walk the Street;
And at the summons of each tiny Drab,
Cry, Damme! Satisfaction! draw, and Stab.
Not so of old, the mild good Socrates,
(Who showed how high without the help of Grace,
Well-cultivated Nature might be wrought)
He a more noble way of suffering taught,
And, tho he Guiltless drank the poisonous Dose,
Never wished a drop to his accufing Foes.
Not so our great good Martyred King of late
(Could we his blessed Example imitate)
Who, tho the great'st of mortal sufferers.
Yet kind to his rebellious Murderers,
Forgave, and blessed them with his dying Prayers.
Thus, we by sound Divinity, and Sense
May purge our minds, and weed all Errors thence:
These lead us into right, nor shall we need
Other than them through Life to be our Guide.
Revenge is but a Frailty, incident
To crazed, and sickly minds, the poor Content
Of little Souls, unable to surmount
An Injury, too weak to bear Affront:
And this you may infer, because we find,
It Is most in poor unthinking Womankind,
Who wreak their feeble spite on all they can,
And are more kin to Brute than brayer Man.
But why should you imagine, Sir, that those
Escape unpunished, who still feel the Throes
And Pangs of a racked Soul, and (which is worse
Than all the Pains, which can the Body curse)
The secret gnawings of unseen Remorse?
Believe't, they suffer greater Punishment
Than Rome's Inquisitor's could e're invent:
Not all the Tortures, Racks, and Cruelties,
Which ancient Persecutors could devise,
Nor all, that Fox his Bloody Records tell,
Can match what Bradshaws, and Ravilliacs feel,
Who in their Breasts carry about their Hell.
I Have read this story, but I know nor where,
Whether in Hackwel, or Beard's Theater:
A certain Spartan, whom a Friend, like you,
Had trusted with a Hundred pound or two,
Went to the Oracle to know if he
With safety might the Sum in trust deny.
'Twas answered, No, that if he durst forswear,
He should e're long for's knavery pay dear:
Hence Fear, not Honesty, made him refund;
Yet to his cost the Sentence true he found:
Himself, his Children, all his Family,
Even the remotest of his whole Pedigree,
Perished (as there it is told) in misery.
Now to apply: if such be the sad end
Of Perjury, tho but in Thought designed,
Think, Sir, what Fate awaits your treacherous Friend,
Who has not only thought, but done to you
All this, and more; think, what he suffers now,
And think, what every Villain suffers else,
That dares, like him, be faithless, base, and false.
Pale Horror, ghastly Fear, and black Despair
Pursue his steps, and dog him wheresoever
He goes, and if from his loathed self he fly,
To Herd, like wounded Deer, in company,
These strait creepin and pale his mirth, and joy.
The choicest Dainties, even by Lumly dressed,
Afford no Relish to his sickly Taste,
Insipid all, as Damocles his Feast.
Even Wine, the greatest Blessing of Mankind,
The best support of the dejected mind,
Applied to his dull spirits, warms no more
Than to his Corpse it could past Life restore.
Darkness he fears, nor dares he trust his Bed
Without a Candle watching by his side:
And, if the wakeful Troubles of his Breast
To his tossed Limbs allow one moments Rest,
Straitways the groans of Ghosts, and hideous Screams
Of tortured Spirits haunt his frightful Dreams:
Strait there return to his tormented mind
His perjured Act, his injured God, and Friend:
Strait he imagines you before his Eyes,
Ghastly of shape, prodigious of size.
With glaring Eyes, cleft Foot, and monstrous Tail,
And bigger than the Giants at Guild hall,
Stalking with horrid strides across the Room,
And guards of Fiends to drag him to his Doom:
Hereat he falls in dreadful Agonies,
And dead cold Sweats his trembling Members seize:
Then starting wakes, and with a dismal cry,
Calls to his aid his frighted Family;
There owns the Crime, and vows upon his knees
The sacred Pledge next morning to release.
These are the men, whom the least Terrors daunt,
Who at the sight of their own shadows faint;
These, if it chance to Lighten, are aghast,
And quake for fear, lest every Flash should blast:
These swoon away at the first Thunderclap,
As if 'twere not, what usually does hap,
The casual cracking of a Cloud, but sent
By Angry Heaven for their Punishment:
And, if unhurt they 'scape the Tempest now,
Still dread the greater Vengeance to ensue:
These the least Symptoms of a Fever fright,
Water high colored, want of rest at night,
Or a disordered Pulse strait makes them shrink,
And presently for fear they are ready sink
Into their Graves: their time (think they) is come,
And Heaven in judgment now has sent their Doom.
Nor dare they, though in whisper, waft a Prayer,
Left it by chance should reach the Almighty's ear,
And wake his sleeping Vengeance, which before
So long has their impieties forbore.
These are the thoughts which guilty Wretches haunt,
Yet entered, they still grow more impudent:
After a Crime perhaps they now and then
Feel pangs and strugglings of Remorse within,
But straitreturn to their old course again:
They, who have once thrown Shame, and Conscience by,
Never after make a stop in Villainy:
Hurried along, down the vast steep they go,
And find, it is all a Precipice below.
Even this perfidious Friend of yours, no doubt
Will not with single wickedness give out;
Have patience but a while, you will shortly see
His hand held up at Bar for Felony:
You Will see the sentenced wretch for Punishment
To Scilly Isles, or the Caribbes sent;
Or (if I may his surer Fate divine)
Hung like Boroski, for a Gibbet-Sign:
Then may you glut Revenge, and feast your Eyes
With the dear object of his Miseries:
And then at length convinced, with joy you will find
That the just God is neither deaf, nor blind.
DAVID'S LAMENTATION For the DEATH of SAUL and JONATHAN, PARAPHRASED.
Written in September, 1677.
ODE.
I.
AH wretched Israel! once a blessed, and happy State,
The Darling of the Stars, and Heavens Care,
Then all the bord'ring world thy Vassals were,
And thou at once their Envy and their Fear,
How soon art thou (alas!) by the sad turn of Fate
Become abandoned and forlorn?
How art thou now become their Pity, and their scorn?
Thy Luster all is vanished, all thy Glory fled,
Thy Sun himself set in a blood red,
Too sure Prognostic! which does ill portend
Approaching Storms on thy unhappy Land,
Left naked, and defenseless now to each invading Hand.
A fatal Battle, lately fought,
Has all these Mis'ries, and Misfortunes brought,
Has thy quick Ruin, and Destruction wrought:
There fell we by a mighty Overthrow
A Prey to an enraged, relentless Foe,
The toil and labor of their wearied Cruelty,
Till they no more could kill, and we no longer die:
Vast slaughter all around the enlarged Mountain swells,
And numerous Deaths increase its former Hills.
II.
In Gath let not the mournful News be known,
Nor published in the streets of Askalon;
May Fame it self be quite struck dumb!
Oh may it never to Philistia come,
Nor any live to bear the cursed Tidings home!
Lest the proud Enemies new Trophies raise,
And loudly triumph in our fresh Disgrace:
No captive Israelite their pompous Joy adorn,
Nor in sad Bondage his lost Country mourn:
No Spoils of ours be in their Temples hung,
No Hymns to Ashdod's Idol sung,
Nor thankful Sacrifice on his glad Altars burn,
Kind Heaven forbid! lest the base Heathen Slaves blaspheme
Thy sacred and unutterable Name,
And above thine extol their Dagon's Fame.
Lest the vile Fish's Worship spread abroad,
Who fell a prostrate Victim once before our conquering God:
And you, who the great Deeds of Kings and Kingdoms write,
Who all their Actions to succeeding Age transmit,
Conceal the blushing Story, ah! conceal
Our Nations loss, and our dread Monarch's fall:
Conceal the Journal of this bloody Day,
When both by the ill Play of Fate were thrown away:
Nor let our wretched Infamy, and Fortune's Crime
Be ever mentioned in the Registers of future Time.
III.
For ever, Gilboa, be cursed thy hated Name,
The eternal Monument of our Disgrace, and shame!
For ever curss'd be that unhappy Scene,
Where Slaughter, Blood, and Death did lately reign!
No Clouds henceforth above thy barren top appear.
But what may make thee mourning wear:
Let them never shake their dewy Fleeces there,
But only once a year
On the sad Anniverse drop a remembering Tear:
No Flocks of Offerings on thy Hills be known,
Which may by Sacrifice our Guilt and thine atone
No Sheep, nor any of the gentler kind hereafter stay
On thee, but Bears, and Wolves, and Beasts of prey,
Or men more savage, wild, and fierce than they;
A Desert may thou prove, and lonely wast,
Like that, our sinful, stubborn Fathers past,
Where they the Penance trod for all, they there transgressed:
Too dearly wast thou drenched with precious Blood
Of many a Jewish Worthy, spilt of late,
Who suffered there by an ignoble Fate,
And purchased foul Dishonor at too high a rate:
Great Readiness ran there amongst the common Flood,
His Royal self mixed with the baser Crowd:
He, whom Heavens high and open suffrage chose,
The Bulwark of our Nation to oppose
The Power and Malice of our Foes;
Even He, on whom the Sacred Oil was shed,
Whose mystic drops enlarged his hallowed Head,
Lies now (oh Fa^e, impartial still to Kings!)
Huddled, and undistinguished in the heap of meaner Things.
IV.
Lo! there the mighty Warrior lies,
With all his Laurels, all his Victories,
To rav^nous Fowls, or worse, to his proud Foes, a Prize:
How changed from that great Saul! whose generous And.
A conquering Army to distressed Jabesh led,
At whose approach Ammon's proud Tyrant fled:
How changed from that great Saul! whom we saw bring
From vanquished Amalek their captive Spoils, and ^ing:
When unbid Pity made him Agag spare;
Ah Pity! more ^an Cruelty found guilty there:
Often has he made these conquered Enemies bow,
By whom himself lies conquered now:
At Micmash his great Might they felt, and knew,
The same they felt at Dammi^ too:
Well I remember, when from Helah's Plain
He came in triumph, met by a numerous Crowd,
Who with glad shouts proclaimed their Joy aloud;
A dance of beauteous Virgins led the solemn Train,
And sung, and praised the man that had his thousands slain.
Seir, Moab, Zobab felt him, and where ever
He did his glorious Standards bear,
Officious Victory followed in the rere:
Success attended still his brandished Sword,
And, like the Grave, the gluttonous Blade devoured:
Slaughter upon its point in triumph sat,
And scattered Death, as quick, and wide as Fare.
V.
Nor less in high Repute, and Worth was his great Son,
Sole Heir of all his Valor, and Renown,
Heir too (if cruel Fate had suffered) of his Throne:
The matchless Jonathan 'twas, whom loud* tongued Fame
Amongst her chiefest Heroes joys to name,
E're since the wondrous Deeds of Seneh done,
Where he, himself an Host, o'recame a War alone:
The trembling Enemies fled, they tried to fly,
But fixed amazement stopped, and made them die.
Great Archer he! to whom our dreadful skill me owe,
Dreaded by all, who Israel's warlike Prowess know;
As many Shafts, as his full Quiver held,
So many Fates he drew, so many killed:
Quick, and unerring they, as darted Eye-beams, flew,
As if he gave 'em sight, and swiftness too.
Death took her Aim from his, and by it her Arrows threw.
VI.
Both excellent they were, both equally allied
On Nature, and on Valor's side:
Great Saul, who scorned a Rival in Renown,
Yet envied not the Fame of's greater Son,
By him endured to be surpassed alone:
He gallant Prince, did his whole Father show,
And fast, as he could set, the well-writ Copies drew
And blushed, that Duty bid him not out-go:
Together they did both the paths to Glory trace,
Together hunted in the noble Chase,
Together finished their united Race:
There only did they prove unfortunate,
Never till then unblessed by Fate,
Yet there they ceased not to be great;
Fearless they met, and braved their threatened fall,
And fought when Heaven revolted, Fortune durst rebel.
When public safety, and their Countries care
Required their Aid, and called them to the toils of War;
As Parent-Eagles, summoned by their Infants cries
Whom some rude hands would make a Prize,
Haste to Relief, and with their Wings out-fly their eyes;
So swift did they their speedy succor bear,
So swift the bold Aggressors seize,
So swift attack, so swift pursue the vanquished enemies:
The vanquished enemies with all the wings of Fear
Moved not so quick as they,
Scarce could their souls fly fast enough away.
Bolder than Lions, they thick Dangers met,
Through Fields with armed Troops, and pointed Harvests set,
Nothing could tame their Rage, or quench their Generous Heat:
Like those, they marched undaunted, and like those,
Secure of Wounds, and all that durst oppose,
So to Resisters fierce, so gentle to their prostrate Foes.
VII.
Mourn, wretched Israel, mourn thy Monarch's fall,
And all thy plenteous stock of sorrow call,
To Attend his pompous Funeral:
Mourn each, who in this loss an interest shares,
Lavish your Grief, exhaust it all in Tears:
You Hebrew Virgins too,
Who once in lofty strains did his glad Triumphs sing,
Bring all your Artful Notes, and skilful Measures now,
Each charming air of Breath, and string,
Bring all to grace the Obsequies of your dead King,
And high, as then your Joy, let now your Sorrow flow.
Saul, your great Saul is dead,
Who you with Natures choicest Dainties fed,
Who you with Natures gayest Wardrobe clad,
By whom you all her Pride, and all her Pleasures had:
For you the precious Worm his Bowels spun,
For you the Tyrian Fish did Purple run,
For you the blessed Arabia's Spices grew,
And Eastern Quarries hardened Pearly dew;
The Sun himself turned Labourer for you:
For you he hatched his golden Births alone,
Wherewith you were array'ed, whereby you him out-shone.
All this and more you did to Readiness great Conduct owe,
All this you lost in his unhappy overthrow.
VIII.
Oh Death! how vast an Harvest have thou reaped of late!
Never before had thou so great,
Never drunk'st before so deep of Jewish Blood,
Never since the embattled Hosts at Gibeah stood;
When three whole days took up the work of Fate,
When a large Tribe entered at once thy Bill,
Ane threescore thousand Victims to thy Fury fell.
Upon the fatal Mountains Head,
Lo! how the mighty Chiefs lie dead:
There my beloved Jonathan was slain,
The best of Princes, and the best of Men;
Cold Death hangs on his Cheeks like an untimely Frost
On early Fruit, there sits, and smiles a sullen Boast,
And yet looks pale at the great Captive, she has taken.
My Jonathan is dead! (oh dreadful'st word of Fame!
Oh grief! that I can speak't, and not become the same!)
He Is dead, and with him all our blooming Hopes are gone,
And many a wonder, which he must have done,
And many a Conquest which he must have won.
They Are all to the dark Grave, and Silence sled
And never now in story shall be read,
And never now shall take their date,
Snatched hence by the preventing hand of envious Fate.
IX.
Ah worthy Prince! would I for thee had died!
Ah, would I had thy fatal place supplied!
I Would then repaid a Life, which to thy gift I owe,
Repaid a Crown, which Friendship taught thee to forgo;
Both Debts, Ine'er can cancel now:
Oh, dearer than my Soul! if I can call it mine,
For sure we had the same, 'twas very thine,
Dearer than Light, or Life, or Fame,
Or Crowns, or any thing, that I can wish, or think, or name:
Brother thou wast, but wast my Friend before,
And that new Title then could add no more:
Mine more than Blood, Alliance, Natures self could make,
Than I, or Fame it self can speak:
Not yearning Mothers, when first Throes they feel
To their young Babes in looks a softer Passion tell:
Nor artless undissembling Maids express
In their last dying sighs such Tenderness:
Not thy fair Sister, whom strict Duty bids me wear
First in my Breast, whom holy Vows make mine,
Tho all the Virtues of a loyal Wife she bare,
Could boast an Union so near,
Could boast a Love so firm, so lasting, so Divine.
So pure is that which we in Angels find
To Mortals here, in Heaven to their own kind:
So pure, but not more great must that blessed Friendship prove
(Could, ah, could I to that wished Place, and Thee remove)
Which shall for ever join our mingled Souls above,
X.
Ah wretched Israel! ah unhappy state!
Exposed to all the Bolts of angry Fate!
Exposed to all thy Enemies revengeful hate!
Who is there left their fury to withstand?
What Champions now to guard thy helpless Land?
Who is there left in listed Fields to head
Thy valiant Youth, and lead them on to Victory?
Alas! thy valiant Youth are dead,
And all thy brave Commanders too:
Lo! how the Glut, and Riot of the Grave they lie,
And none survive the fatal Overthrow,
To right their injured Ghosts upon the barbarous Foe!
Rest, ye blessed shades, in everlasting Peace,
Who fell your Country's bloody Sacrifice:
For ever Sacred be your Memories,
And may e're long some dread Avenger rise
To wipe of Heavens and your Disgrace:
May then these proud insulting Foes
Wash off our stains of Honor with their Blood.
May they ten thousand-fold repay our loss.
For every Life a Myriad, every Drop a Flood.
THE ODE OF Aristotle in Athenaeus, PARAPHRASED.
I.
Honor! thou greatest Blessing in the gift of Heaven,
Which only art to its chief Darlings given:
Cheaply with Blood and Dangers art thou sought,
Nor can at any rate be over-bought.
Thou, shining Honor, are the noblest chase
Of all the braver part of Humane Race:
Thou only art worth living for below,
And only worth our dying too.
For thee, bright Goddess, for thy charming sake,
Does Greece such wondrous Actions undertake;
For thee no Toils, nor Hardships she forgoes,
And Death amidst ten thousand ghastly Terrors wooes.
So powerfully do thou the mind inspire,
And kindlest there so generous a fire,
As makes thy zealous Votaries
All things, but Thee despise;
Makes them the love of Thee prefer
Before the enchantments of bewitching Gold,
Before the embraces of a Parent's arms,
Before soft ease, and Love's enticing Charms,
And all, that Men on Earth most valuable hold.
II.
For Thee the Heaven born Hercules
And Leda's faithful Twins, in Birth no less,
So many mighty Labors underwent,
And by their God-like Deeds proclaimed their high Descent.
By thee they reached the blessed Abode,
The worthy Prize, for which in Glory's path they trod.
By thee great Ajax, and the greater Son
Of Peleus were exalted to Renown:
Envied by the Immortals did they go,
Laden with triumph to the shades below.
For thee, and thy dear sake
Did the young Worthy of Atarna lately stake
His Life in Battle to the chance of Fate,
And bravely lost, what he so boldly set:
Yet lost he not his glorious aim,
But by short Death purchased eternal Fame:
The grateful Muses shall embalm his Memory,
And never let it die:
They shall his great Exploits rehearse,
And consecrate the Hero in immortal Verse.
Upon the WORKS of BEN. JOHNSON.
Written in 1678.
ODE.
I.
GReat Thou! whom it is a Crime almost to dare to praise,
Whose firm established, and unshaken Glories stand,
And proudly their own Fame command,
Above our power to lessen or to raise,
And all, but the few Heirs of thy brave Genius, and thy Bays;
Hail mighty Founder of our Stage! for so I dare
Entitle thee, nor any modern Censures fear,
Nor care what thy unjust Detractors say;
They Will say perhaps, that others did Materials bring,
That others did the first Foundations lay,
And glorious 'twas (we grant) but to begin,
But thou alone could finish the design,
All the fair Model, and the Workmanship was thine:
Some bold Advent'rers might have been before,
Who durst the unknown world explore,
By them it was surveyed at distant view,
And here and there a Cape, and Line they drew,
Which only served as hints, and marks to thee,
Who wast reserved to make the full Discovery:
Art's Compass to thy painful search we owe,
Whereby thou went so far, and we may after go,
By that we may Wit's vast, and trackless Ocean try,
Content no longer, as before,
Dully to coast along the shore,
But steer a course more unconfined, and free,
Beyond the narrow bounds, that pent Antiquity.
II.
Never till thee the Theater possessed
A Prince with equal Power, and Greatness blessed,
No Government, or Laws it had
To strengthen, and establish it,
Till thy great hand the Scepter swayed,
But groaned under a wretched Anarchy of Wit:
Unformed, and void was then its Poesy,
Only some pre-existing Matter we
Perhaps could see,
That might foretell what was to be;
A rude, and undigested Lump it lay,
Like the old Chaos, e're the birth of Light, and Day,
Till thy brave Genius like a new Creator came,
And undertook the mighty Frame:
No shuffled Atoms did the well built work compose,
It from no lucky hit of blund'ring Chance arose
(As some of this great Fabric idly dream)
But wise, all-seeing Judgment did contrive,
And knowing Art its Graces give:
No sooner did thy Soul with active Force and Fire
The dull and heavy Mass inspire,
But strait throughout it let us see
Proportion, Order, Harmony,
And every part did to the whole agree,
And strait appeared a beauteous new-made world of Poetry.
III.
Let dull, and ignorant Pretenders Art condemn
(Those only Foes to Art, and Art to them)
The mere Fanatics, and Enthusiasts in Poetry
(For Schismatics in that, as in Religion be)
Who make it all Revelation, Trance, and Dream,
Let them despise her Laws, and think
That Rules and Forms the Spirit stint:
Thine was no mad, unruly Frenzy of the brain,
Which justly might deserve the Chain,
'Twas brisk, and mettled, but a managed Rage,
Sprightly as vigorous Youth, and cool as temperate Age:
Free, like thy Will, it did all Force disdain,
But suffered Reason's loose, and easy rein,
By that it suffered to be led,
Which did not curb Poetic liberty, but guide:
Fancy, that wild and haggard Faculty,
Untamed in most, and let at random fly,
Was wisely governed, and reclaimed by thee,
Restraint, and Discipline was made endure,
And by thy calm, and milder Judgment brought to lure;
Yet when 'twas at some nobler Quarry sent,
With bold, and towering wings it upward went,
Not lessened at the greatest height,
Not turned by the most giddy flights of dazzling Wit.
IV.
Nature, and Art together met, and joined,
Made up the Character of thy great Mind.
That like a bright and glorious Sphere,
Appeared with numerous Stars embellished over,
And much of Light to thee, and much of Influence bore,
This was the strong Intelligence, whose power
Turned it about, and did the unerring motions steer:
Concurring both like vital Seed, and Heat,
The noble Births they jointly did beget,
And hard 'twas to be thought,
Which most of force to the great Generation brought:
So mingling Elements compose our Bodies frame,
Fire, Water, Earth, and Air
Alike their just Proportions share,
Each undistinguished still remains the same,
Yet cannot we say that either's here, or there,
But all, we know not how, are scattered every where.
V.
Sober, and grave was still the Garb thy Muse put on,
No tawdry careless slattern Dress,
Nor starched, and formal with Affectedness,
Nor the cast Mode, and Fashion of the Court, and Town;
But neat agreeable, and janty 'twas,
Well-fitted, it sat close in every place,
And all became with an uncommon Air, and Grace:
Rich, costly and substantial was the stuff,
Not barely smooth, nor yet too coarsly rough:
No refuse, ill-patch'd Shreds of the Schools,
The motly wear of read, and learned Fools,
No French Commodity which now so much does take,
And our own better Manufacture spoil,
Nor was it ought of foreign Soil;
But Staple all, and all of English Growth, and Make:
What Flowers soever of Art it had, were found
No tinsel'd slight Embroideries.
But all appeared either the native Ground,
Or twisted, wrought, and interwoven with the Piece.
VI.
Plain Humor, shown with her whole various Face,
Not masked with any antic Dress,
Nor screwed in forced, ridiculous Grimace
(The gaping Rabbles dull delight,
And more the Actor's than the Poet's Wit)
Such did she enter on thy Stage,
And such was represented to the wondering Age:
Well wast thou skilled, and read in humane kind,
In every wild fantastic Passion of his mind,
Did into all his hidden Inclinations dive,
What each from Nature does receive,
Or Age, or Sex, or Quality, or Country give;
What Custom too, that mighty Sorceress,
Whose powerful Witchcraft does transform
Enchanted Man to several monstrous Images,
Makes this an odd, and freakish Monky turn,
And that a grave and solemn Ass Appear,
And all a thousand beastly shapes of Folly wear:
Whatever Caprice or Whimsie leads awry
Perverted, and seduced Mortality,
Or does incline, and bias it
From what is Discreet, and Wise, and Right, and Good, and Fit;
All in thy faithful Glass were so expressed,
As if they were Reflections of thy Breast,
As if they had been stamped on thy own mind,
And thou the universal vast Idea of Mankind.
VII.
Never did thou with the same Dish repeated cloy.
Tho every Dish, well cooked by thee,
Contained a plentiful Variety
To all that could sound relishing Palates be,
Each Regale with new Delicacies did invite,
Courted the Taste, and raised the Appetite:
Whatever fresh dainty Fops in season were
To garnish, and set out thy Bill of fare
(Those never found to fail throughout the year,
For seldom that ill-natured Planet rules,
That plagues a Poet with a dearth of Fools)
What thy strict Observation e're surveyed,
From the fine, luscious Spark of high, and courtly Breed.
Down to the dull, insipid Cit,
Made thy pleased Audience entertainment fit,
Served up with all the grateful Poignances of Wit.
VIII.
Most Plays are writ like Almanacks of late,
And serve one only year, one only State;
Another makes them useless, stale, and out of date;
But thine were wisely calcu^ed ^it
For each Meridian, every (...),
For all succeeding time, and after-age,
And all Mankind might thy vast Audience sit,
And the whole world be justly made thy Stage:
Still they shall taking be, and ever new,
Still kept in vogue in spite of all the damning Crew;
Till the last Scene of this great Theater,
Closed, and shut down,
The numerous Actors all retire,
And the grand Play of humane Life be done.
IX.
Beshrew those envious Tongues, who seek to blast thy Bays,
Who Spots in thy bright Fame would find, or raise,
And say, it only shines with borrowed Rays;
Rich in thy self, to whose unbounded store
Exhausted Nature could vouchsafe no more,
Thou could alone the Empire of the Stage maintain,
Could all its Grandeur, and its Port sustain,
Nor neededst others Subsidies to pay,
Neededst no Tax on foreign, or thy native Country lay,
To bear the charges of thy purchased Fame,
But thy own Stock could raise the same,
Thy sole Revenue all the vast Expense defray,
Yet like some mighty Conqueror in Poetry,
Designed by Fate of choice to be
Founder of its new universal Monarchy,
Boldly thou did the learned World invade,
Whilst all around thy powerful Genius swayed,
Soon vanquished Rome, and Greece were made submit,
Both were thy humble Tributaries made,
And thou return'dst in Triumph with their captive Wit.
X.
Unjust, and more ill-natured those,
Thy spiteful, and malicious For,
Who on thy happiest Talent fix ^lye,
And call that Slowness, which w^ ^are, and Industry.
Let me (with Pride so to be guilty thought)
Share all thy wished Reproach, and share th shame,
If Diligence be deemed a fault,
If to be faultless must deserve their Blame:
Judge of thy self alone (for none there were,
Could be so just, or could be so severe)
Thou thy own Works did strictly try
By known and uncontested Rules of Poetry,
And gav'st thy Sentence still impartially:
With rigor thou arraign'dst each guilty Line,
And spar'dst no criminal Sense, because 'twas thine:
Unbrib'd with Favor, Love, or Self-conceit,
(For never, or too seldom we,
Objects too near us, our own Blemishes can see)
Thou did no small'st Delinquencies acquit,
But saw them to Correction all submit,
Saw execution done on all convicted Crimes of Wit.
XI.
Some curious Painter, taught by Art to dare
(For they with Poets in that Title share)
When he would undertake a glorious Frame
Of lasting Worth, and fadeless as his Fame;
Long he contrives, and weighs the bold Design,
Long holds his doubting hand ere he begin,
And justly then proportions every stroke, and line,
And often he brings it to review.
And often he does deface, and dashes often anew,
And mixes Oils to make the flitting Colors dure,
To keep 'em from the tarnish of injurious Time secure;
Finished at length in all that Care, and Skill can do
The matchless Piece is set to public View,
And all surpised about it wondering stand,
And tho no name be found below,
Yet strait discernth' unimitable hand,
And strait they cry it is Titian, or it is Angelo:
So thy brave Soul, that scorned all cheap, and easy ways,
And trod no common road to Praise,
Would not with rash, and speedy Negligence proceed,
(For who e're saw Perfection grow in haste?
Or that soon done, which must for ever last?)
But gently did advance with wary heed,
And showed that mastery is most in justness read:
Naught ever issued from thy teeming Breast,
But what had gone full time, could write exactly best,
And stand the sharpest Censure, and def^e the rigid'st Test.
XII.
'Twas thus the Almighty Poet (if we dare
Our weak, and meaner Acts with his compare)
When he the Worlds fair Poem did of old design,
That Work, which now must boast no longer date than thine;
Tho 'twas in him alike to will, and do,
Tho the same Word that spoke, could make it too,
Yet would he not such quick, and hasty methods use,
Nor did an instant (which it might) the great effect produce,
But when the All-wise himself in Council sat,
Vouchsafed to think and be deliberate,
When Heaven considered, and the Eternal Wit, and sense,
Seemed to take time, and care, and pains,
It showed that some uncommon Birth,
That something worthy of a God was coming forth;
Naught uncorrect there was, naught faulty there,
No point amiss did in the large voluminous Piece appear,
And when the glorious Author all surveyed,
Surveyed whatever his mighty Labors made,
Well-pleased he was to find
All answered the great Model, and Idea of his Mind
Pleased at himself He in high wonder stood,
And much his Power, and much his Wisdom did applaud,
To see how all was perfect, all transcendent Good.
XIII.
Let meaner spirits stoop to low precarious Fame,
Content on gross and coarse Applause to live,
And what the dull, and senseless Rabble give,
Thou did it still with noble scorn contemn,
Nor would that wretched Alms receive,
The poor subsistence of some bankrupt, sordid name:
Thine was no empty Vapor, raised beneath,
And formed of common Breath,
The false, and foolish Fire, that is whisk'd about
By popular Air, and glares a while, and then goes out;
But 'twas a solid, whole, and perfect Globe of light,
That shone all over, was all over bright,
And dared all sullying Clouds, and feared no darkning night;
Like the gay Monarch of the Stars and Sky,
Who wheresoever he does display
His sovereign Luster, and majestic Ray,
Strait all the less, and petty Glories nigh
Vanish, and shrink away.
Overwhelmed, and swallowed by the greater blaze of Day;
With such a strong, an awful and victorious Beam
Appeared, and ever shall appear, thy Fame,
Viewed, and adored by all the undoubted Race of Wit,
Who only can endure to look on it.
The rest overcome with too much light,
With too much brightness dazzled, or extinguished quite:
Restless, and uncontrolled it now shall pass
As wide a course about the World as he,
And when his long-repeated Travels cease
Begin a new, and vaster Race,
And still tread round the endless Circle of Eternity.
THE NINTH ODE Of the Third Book of HORACE, IMITATED.
A Dialogue betwixt the Poet and Lydia.
Donec Gratus eram tibi, etc.

I.
Hor. WHile you for me alone had Charms,
And none more welcome filled your Arms,
Proud with content, I slighted Crowns,
And pitied Monarchs on their Thrones.
II.
Lyd. While you thought Lydia only fair,
And loved no other Nymph but her,
Lydia was happier in your Love,
Than the blessed Virgins are above.
III.
Hor. Now Chloes charming Voice, and Art
Have gained the conquest of my Heart:
For whom, ye Fates, I Would wish to die,
If mine the Nymphs dear Life might buy.
IV.
Lyd. Thyrsis by me has done the same,
The Yough burns me with mutual Flame:
For whom a double Death I Would bear;
Would Fate my dearest Thyrsis spare.
V.
Hor. But say, fair Nymph, if I once more
Become your Captive as before?
Say, I throw off my Chloes chain,
And take you to my Breast again?
VI.
Lyd. Why then, tho he more bright appear,
More constant than a fixed Star;
Tho you than Wind more fickle be,
And rougher than the stormy Sea.
By Heaven, and all its Powers I vow
I Would gladly live, and die with you.
UPON A LADY, Who by overturning of a Coach, had her Coats behind flung up, and
what was under shown to the View of the Company.
Out of Voiture.
I.
PHillis, it is owned, I am your Slave,
This happy moment dates your Reign;
No force of Humane Power can save
My captive Heart, that wears your chain:
But when my Conquest you designed;
Pardon, bright Nymph, if I declare,
It was unjust, and too severe,
Thus to attack me from behind.
II.
Against the Charms, your Eyes impart,
With care I had secured my Heart;
On all the wonders of your Face
Could safely, and unwounded gaze:
But now entirely to enthral
My Breast, you have exposed to view
Another more resistless Foe,
From which I had no guard at all.
III.
At first assault constrained to yield,
My vanquished Heart resigned the Field,
My Freedom to the Conqueror
Became a prey that very hour:
The subtle Traitor, who unspied
Had lurked till now in close disguise,
Lay all his life in ambush hid
At last to kill me by surprise.
IV.
A sudden Heat my Breast inspired,
The piercing Flame, like Lightning, sent
From that new dawning Firmament
Through every Vein my Spirits fired;
My Heart, before averse to Love,
No longer could a Rebel prove;
When on the Grass you did display
Your radiant B^M to my survey,
And shamed the Luster of the Day.
V.
The Sun in Heaven, abashed to see
A thing more gay, more bright than He,
Struck with disgrace, as well he might,
Thought to drive back the Steeds of Light:
His Beams he now thought useless grown,
That better were by yours supplied,
But having once seen your Back side,
For shame he durst not show his own.
VI.
Forsaking every Wood, and Grove,
The Sylvans ravished at the sight,
In pressing Crowds about you strove,
Gazing, and lost in wonder quite:
Fond Zephyr seeing your rich store
Of Beauty, undescried before,
Enamored of each lovely Grace,
Before his own dear Flora's face,
Could not forbear to kiss the place.
VII.
The beauteous Queen of Flowers, the Rose,
In blushes did her shame disclose:
Pale Lillies drooped, and hung their heads,
And shrunk for fear into their Beds:
The amorous Narcissus too,
Reclaimed of fond self-love by you,
His former vain desire cashiered,
And your fair Breech alone admired.
VIII.
When this bright Object greets our sight,
All others lose their Luster quite:
Your Eyes that shoot such pointed Rays,
And all the Beauties of your Race,
Like dwindling Stars, that fly away
At the approach of brighter Day,
No more regard, or value bear,
But when its Glories disappear.
IX.
Of some ill Qualities they tell,
Which justly give me cause to fear;
But that, which most begets despair,
It has no sense of Love at all:
More hard than Adamant it is,
They say, that no Impression takes,
It has no Ears, nor any Eyes,
And rarely, very rarely speaks.
X.
Yet I must love't, and own my Flame,
Which to the world I thus rehearse,
Throughout the spacious coasts of Fame
To stand recorded in my Verse:
No other subject, or design
Henceforth shall be my Muses Theme,
But with just Praises to proclaim
The fairest ARSE, that e're was seen.
XI.
In pity gentle Phillis hide
The dazzling Beams of your Back side;
For should they shine unclouded long.
All humane kind would be undone.
Not the bright Goddesses on high,
That reign above the starry Sky,
Should they turn up to open view
All their immortal Tails, can show
An Arse-h -- so divine as you.
CATULLUS EPIGR. VII. IMITATED.
Quaeris quot mihi basiationes, etc.

NAY, Lesbia, never ask me this,
How many Kisses will suffice?
Faith, it is a question hard to tell,
Exceeding hard; for you as well
Man ask what sums of Gold suffice
The greedy Miser's boundless Wish:
Think what drops the Ocean store,
With all the Sands, that make its Shore:
Think what Spangles deck the Skies,
When Heaven looks with all its Eyes:
Or think how many Atoms came
To compose this mighty Frame:
Let all these the Counters be,
To tell how ost I Am kissed by thee:
Till no malicious Spy ca^ guess
To what vast height the Scores arise;
Till weak Arithmetic grow scant,
And numbers for the reckoning want:
All these will hardly be enough
For me stark staring mad with Love.
SOME ELEGIES OUT OF OVID'S Amors, IMITATED.
BOOK II. ELEGY IV. That he loves Women of all sorts and sizes.
Non ego mendosos ausim defendere mores, etc.

NOt I, I never vainly durst pretend
My Follies, and my Frailties to defend:
I own my Faults, if it avail to own,
While like a graceless Wretch I still go on:
I hate my self, but yet in spite of Fate
Am fain to be that loathed thing I hate:
In vain I would shake off this load of Love,
Too hard to bear, yet harder to remove:
I want the strength my fierce Desires to stem,
Hurried away by the impetuous stream.
It Is not one Face alone subdues my Heart,
But each wears Charms, and every Eye a Dart:
And wheresoever I cast my Looks abroad,
In every place I find Temptations strow'd,
The modest kills me with her down cast Eyes,
And Love his ambush lays in that disguise.
The Brisk allures me with her gaity,
And shows how Active she in Bed will be:
If Coy, like cloistered Virgins, she appears,
She but dissembles, what she most desires:
If she be versed in Arts, and deeply read,
I long to get a Learned Maidenhead:
Or if Untaught, and Ignorant she be,
She takes me then with her simplicity:
One likes my Verses, and commends each Line,
And swears that Cowley's are but dull to mine:
Her in mere Gratitude I must approve,
For who, but would his kind Applauder love?
Another damns my Poetry, and me,
And plays the Critic most judiciously:
And she too fires my Heart, and she too charms,
And I Am agog to have her in my arms.
One with her soft and wanton Trip does please,
And prints in every step, she sets, a Grace:
Another walks with stiff ungainly tread;
But she may learn more pliantness abed,
This sweetly sings; her Voice does Love inspire,
And every Breath kindles, and blows the fire:
Who can forbear to kiss those Lips, whose sound
The ravished Ears does with such softness wound?
That sweetly plays: and while her Fingers move,
While over the bounding Strings their touches* rove,
My Heart leaps too, and every Pulse beats Love:
What Reason is so powerful to withstand
The Magic force of that resistless Hand?
Another Dances to a Miracle,
And moves her numerous Limbs with graceful skill:
And she, or else the Devil's in it, must charm,
A touch of her would bed rid Hermits warm.
If tall; I guess what plenteous Game she will yield,
Where Pleasure ranges over so wide a Field:
If low; she is pretty: both alike invite,
The Dwarf, and Giant both my wishes fit,
Undressed; I think how killing she would appear,
If armed with all Advantages she were:
Richly attired; she is the gay Bait of Love,
And knows with Art to set her Beauties off.
I like the Fair, I like the Red hair'd one,
And I can find attractions in the Brown:
If curling Jet adorn her snowy Neck,
The beauteous Leda is reported Black:
If curling Gold; Aurora's painted so:
All sorts of Histories my Love does know.
I like the Young with all her blooming Charms,
And Age it self is welcome to my Arms:
There uncropt Beauty in its flower assails,
Experience here, and riper sense prevails.
In fine, whatever of the Sex are known
To stock this spacious and well furnished Town;
Whatever any single man can find
Agreeable of all the numerous kind:
At all alike my haggard Love does fly,
And each is Game, and each a Miss for me.
BOOK II. ELEGY V. To his Mistress that jilted him.
Nullus amor tanti est: abeas pharetrate Cupido, etc.

NAY then the Devil take all Love! if I
So often for its damned sake must wish to die:
What can I wish for but to die, when you.
Dear faithless Thing, I find, could prove untrue?
Why am I cursed with Life? why am I fain
For thee, false Jilt, to bear eternal Pain?
It Is not thy Letters, which thy Crimes reveal,
Nor secret Presents, which, thy Falsehood tell:
Would God! my just suspicions wanted cause,
That they might prove less fatal to my ease:
Would God! less color for thy guilt there were,
But that (alas!) too much of proof does bear:
Blessed he, who what he loves can justify,
To whom his Mistress can the Fact deny,
And boldly give his Jealousy the lie,
Cruel the Man, and uncompassionate,
And too indulgent to his own Regret,
Who seeks to have her guilt too manifest,
And with the murdering secret stabs his Rest.
I saw, when little you suspected me,
When sleep, you thought, gave opportunity,
Your Crimes I saw, and these unhappy eyes
Of all your hidden stealths were Witnesses:
I saw in signs your mutual Wishes read,
And Nods the message of your Hearts conveyed:
I saw the conscious Board, which writ all over
With scrawls of Wine, Love's mystic Cipher bore:
Your Glances were not mute, but each bewrayed,
And with your Fingers Dialogues were made:
I understood the Language out of hand,
(For what is too hard for Love to understand?)
Full well I understood for what intent
All this dumb Talk, and silent Hints were meant:
And now the Ghests were from the Table fled,
And all the Company retired to bed.
I saw you then with wanton Kisses greet,
Your Tongues (I saw) did in your Kisses meet:
Not such as Sisters to their Brothers give,
But Lovers from their Mistrisses receive:
Such as the God of War, and Paphian Queen
Did in the height of their Embraces join.
Patience, ye Gods! (I cried) what is it I see?
Unfaithful! why this Treachery to me?
How dare you let another in my sight
Invade my native Property, and Right?
He must not, shall not do it: by Love I swear
I Will seize the bold usurping Ravisher:
T^ are my Free hold, and the Fates design,
That you should be unalienably mine:
These Favors all to me impropriate are:
How comes another then to trespass here?
This, and much more I said, by Rage inspired,
While conscious shame her Cheeks with Blushes fired:
Such lovely stains the face of Heaven adorn,
When Light's first blushes paint the bashful Morn:
So on the Bush the flaming Rose does glow,
When mingled with the Lillies neighboring Snow:
This, or some other Color much like these,
The semblance then of here Complexion was:
And while her Looks that sweet Disorder wore
Chance added Beauties undisclos'd before:
Upon the ground she cast her jetty Eyes,
Her Eyes shot fiercer Darts in that Disgulse:
Her Face a sad and mournful Air expressed,
Her Face more lovely seemed in sadness dressed:
Urged by Revenge, I hardly could forbear,
Her braided Locks, and tender Cheeks to tear:
Yet I no sooner had her Face surveyed,
But strait the tempest of my Rage was laid:
A look of her did my Resentments charm,
A look of her did all their Force disarm:
And I, that fierce outrageous thing e're-while,
Grow calm as Infants, when in sleep they smile:
And now a Kiss am humbly fain to crave,
She smiled, and strait a throng of Kisses pressed,
The worst of which, should Jove himself but taste,
The brandished Thunder from his Hand would wrest:
Well-pleased I was, and yet tormented too,
For fear my envied Rival felt them so:
Better they seemed by far than I ere taught,
And she in them showed something new methought:
Fond jealous I my self the Pleasure grutch,
And they displeased, because they pleased too much:
When in my mouth I felt her darting Tongue,
My wounded Thoughts it with suspicion stung:
Nor is it this alone afflicts my mind,
More reason for complaint remains behind:
I grieve not only that she Kisses gave,
Tho that affords me cause enough to grieve:
Such never could be taught her but in Bed,
And Heaven knows what Reward her Teacher had.
BOOK II. ELEGY X. To a Friend, Acquainting him, that he is in Love with two at
one time.
Tu mihi, tu certe (memini) Graecine, negabas, etc.

I HAVE heard, my Friend, and heard it said by you,
No man at once could ever well love two:
But I was much deceived upon that score,
For single I at once love one, and more:
Two at one time reign jointly in my Breast,
Both handsome are, both charming, both welldress'd,
And hang me, if I know, which takes me best:
This Fairer is thao that, and that than this,
That more than this: and this than that does please:
Tossed, like a Ship, by diffrent gusts of Love,
Now to this Point, and now to that I move.
Why, Love, why do thou double thus my pains?
Was It not enough to bear one Tyrant's chains?
Why, Goddess, do thou vainly lavish more
On one, that was top-full of Love before?
Yet thus I Would rather love, than not at all,
May that ill Curse my Enemies befall:
May my worst Foe be damned to love of none,
Be damned to Continence, and lie alone:
Let Loves alarms each night disturb my Rest,
And drowsy sleep never approach my Breast,
Or strait-way thence be by new Pleasure chased.
Let Pleasure in succession keep my Sense
Ever awake, or ever in a Trance:
Let me lie melting in my fair One's Arms,
Riot in Bliss, and surfeit on her Charms:
Let her undo me there without control,
Drain nature quite, suck out my very Soul:
And, if by one I cannot enough be drawn,
Give me another, clap more Leeches on.
The Gods have made me of the sporting kind,
And for the Feat my Pliant Limbs designed:
What Nature has in Bulk to me denied,
In Sinews, and in vigor is supplied:
And should my Strength be wanting to Desire,
Pleasure would add new Fuel to the Fire:
Often in soft Battles have I spent the Night,
Yet rose next Morning vigorous for the Fight,
Fresh as the Day, and active as the Light:
No Maid, that ever under me took pay,
From my Embrace went unoblig'd away.
Blessed he, who in Loves service yields his Breath,
Grant me, ye Gods, so sweet, to wished a Death!
In bloody Fields let Soldiers meet their Fate,
To purchase dear bought Honor at the rate:
Let greedy Merchants trust the faithless Main,
And shipwreck Life and Soul for sordid gain:
Dying, let me expire in gasps of Lust,
And in a gush of Joy give up the Ghost:
And some kind pitying Friend shall say of me,
So did he live, and so deserved to die.
A FRAGMENT of PETRONIUS, PARAPHRASED.
Foeda est in coitu, and brevis voluptas, etc.

I Hate Fruition, now it is past,
It Is all but nastiness at best;
The homeliest thing, that man can do,
Besides, it is short, and fleeting too:
A squirt of slippery Delight,
That with a moment takes its flight:
A fulsom Bliss, that soon does cloy,
And makes us loath what we enjoy.
Then let us not too eager run,
By Passion blindly hurried on,
Like Beasts, who nothing better know,
Than what mere Lust (...) them to:
For when in Floods of Love we are dronch'd,
The Flames are by enjoyment quenched:
But thus, let us thus together lie,
And kiss out long Eternity:
Here we dread no conscious Spies,
No blushes stain our guiltless Joys:
Here no Faintness dulls Desires,
And Pleasure never flags, nor tires:
This has pleased, and pleases now,
And for Ages will do so:
Enjoyment here is never done,
But fresh, and always but begun.
AN ODE OF ANACREON, PARAPHRASED.
The CUP.
(...), etc.

MAke me a Bowl, a mighty Bowl,
Large, as my capacious Soul,
Vast, as my thirst is; let it have
Depth enough to be my Grave;
I mean the Grave of all my Care,
For I intend to bury't there,
Let it of Silver fashioned be,
Worthy of Wine, worthy of me,
Worthy to adorn the Spheres,
As that bright Cup amongst the Stars:
That Cup which Heaven deigned a place:
Next the Sun its greatest Grace.
Kind Cup! that to the Stars did go,
To light poor Drunkards her below:
Let mine be so, and give me light,
That I may drink, and revel by it:
Yet draw no shapes of Armor there,
No Cask, nor Shield, nor Sword, nor Spear,
Nor Wars of Thebes, nor Wars of Troy,
Nor any other martial Toy:
For what do I vain Armor prize,
Who mind not such rough Exercise,
But gentler Sieges, softer Wars,
Fights, that cause no Wounds, or Scars?)
I Will have no Battles on my Plate,
Lest sight of them should Brawls create,
Lest that provoke to Quarrels too,
Which Wine it self enough can do.
Draw me no Constellations there,
No Ram, nor Bull, nor Dog, nor Bear,
Nor any of that monstrous fry
Of Animals, which stock the sky:
For what are Stars to my Design,
Stars, which I, when drunk, outshine,
Out-shone by every drop of Wine?
I lack no Pole Star on the Brink,
To guide in the wide Sea of Drink,
But would for ever there be tossed;
And wish no Haven, seek no Coast.
Yet, Gentle Artist, if thou wilt try
Thy Skill, then draw me (let me see)
Draw me first a spreading Vine,
Make its Arms the Bowl entwine,
With kind embraces, such as I
Twist about my loving she.
Let its Boughs o're-spread above
Scenes of Drinking, Scenes of Love:
Draw next the Patron of that Tree,
Draw Bacchus and sost Cupid by;
Draw them both in toping Shapes,
Their Temples crowned with clustered Grapes:
Make them lean against the Cup,
As 'twere to keep their Figures up:
And when their reeling Forms I view,
I Will think them drunk, and be so too:
The Gods shall my examples be,
The Gods, thus drunk in Effigy.
An Allusion to MARTIAL. BOOK I. EPIG. 118.
AS often, Sir Tradewel, as we meet,
You're sure to ask me in the street,
When you shall send your Boy to me,
To fetch my Book of Poetry,
And promise you will but read it over,
And faithfully the Loan restore:
But let me ye as a Friend,
You need not take the pains to send:
It Is a long way to where I dwell,
At farther end of Clarkenwel:
There in a Garret near the Sky,
Above five pair of Stairs I lie.
But, if you would have, what you pretend,
You may procure it nearer hand:
In Cornhil, where you often go,
Hard by the Exchange, there is, you know,
A Shop of Rhyme, where you may see
The Posts all clad in Poetry;
There H -- lives of high renown,
The noted'st TORY in the Town:
Where, if you please, enquire for me,
And he, or's Prentice, presently
From the next Shelf will reach you down
The Piece well bound for half a Crown:
The Price is much too dear, you cry,
To give for both the Book, and me:
Yes doubtless, for such vanities,
We know, Sir, you are too too wise.
THE DREAM.
Written, March 10. 1677.
LAte as I on my Bed reposing lay,
And in soft sleep forgot the Toils of Day,
My self, my Cares, and Love, all charmed to Rest,
And all the Tumults of my waking Breast,
Quiet and calm, as was the silent Night,
Whose stillness did to that blessed sleep invite;
I dreamt, and strait this visionary Scene
Did with Delight my Fancy entertain.
I saw, methought, a lonely Privacy,
Remote alike from man's, and Heavens Eye,
Girt with the covert of a shady Grove,
Dark as my thoughts, and secret as my Love:
Hard by a Stream did with that softness creep,
As 'twere by its own murmurs hushed asleep;
On its green Bank under a spreading Tree,
At once a pleasant, and a sheltering Canopy,
There I, and there my dear Cosmelia sat,
Nor envied Monarchs in our safe Retreat:
So heretofore were the first Lovers laid
On the same Turf of which themselves were made.
A while I did her charming Glories view,
Which to their former Conquests added new;
A while my wanton hand was pleased to rove
Through all the hidden Labyrinths of Love;
Ten thousand Kisses on her Lips I fixed,
Which she with interfering Kisses mixed,
Eager as those of Lovers are in Death,
When they give up their Souls too with the Breath.
Love by these Freedoms first became more bold,
At length unruly, and too fierce to hold:
See then (said I) and pity, charming Fair,
Yield quickly, yield; I can no longer bear
The impatient Sallies of a Bliss so near:
Tou must, and you alone these storms appease,
And lay those Spirits which your Charms could raise;
Come, and in equal Floods let us quench our Flame,
Come let us -- and unawares I went to name
The Thing, but stopped and blushed methought in Dream.
At first she did the rude Address disown,
And checked my Boldness with an angry Frown,
But yielding Glances, and consenting Eyes
Proved the soft Traitors to her forced Disguise;
And soon her looks, with anger rough e're while,
Sunk in the dimples of a calmer smile:
Then with a sigh into these words she broke,
And printed melting Kisses as she spoke:
Too strong, Philander, is thy powerful Art
To take a feeble Maids ill-guarded Heart:
Too long I Have struggled with my Bliss in vain,
Too long opposed what Ioft wished to gain,
Loath to consent, yet loather to deny,
At once I court, and shun Felicity:
I cannot, will not yield; -- and yet I must,
Lest to my own Desires I prove unjust:
Sweet Ravisher! what Love commands thee, do;
Tho I Am displeased, I shall forgive thee too,
Too well thou know -- and there my hand she pressed,
And said no more, but blushed and smiled the rest
Ravished at the new grant, fierce eager I
Leaped furious on, and seized my trembling Prey;
With guarding Arms she first my Force repelled,
Shrunk, and drew back, and would not seem to yield;
Unwilling to overcome, she faintly strove,
One hand pulled to, what the other did remove:
So feeble are the struglings, and so weak
In sleep we seem, and only seem to make:
Forbear! (she said) ah, gentle Youth, forbear,
(and still she hugged, and clasped me still more near)
Ah! will you? will you force my Rui^ so?
Ah? do not, do not, do not; -- let me go.
What followed was above the power of Verse,
Above the reach of Fancy to rehearse:
Not dying Saints enjoy such Ecstasies,
When they in Vision antedate their Bliss;
Not Dreams of a young Prophet are so blessed,
When holy Trances first inspire his Breast,
And the God enters there to be a Guest.
Let duller Mortals other Pleasures prize,
Pleasures which enter at the waking Eyes,
Might I each Night such sweet Enjoyments find,
I Would wink for ever, be for ever blind.
A SATYR TOUCHING NOBILITY.
Out of Monsieur BOILEAU.
IT IS granted, that Nobility in Man,
Is no wild fluttering Notion of the Brain,
Where he, descended of an ancient Race,
Which a long train of numerous Worthies grace,
By Virtues Rules guiding his steady Course,
Traces the steps of his bright Ancestors.
But Yet I cannot endure an haughty Ass,
Debauched with Luxury and slothful Ease.
Who besides empty Titles of high Birth,
Has no pretense to any thing of Worth,
Should proudly wear the Fame, which others sought,
And boast of Honor which himself never got.
I grant, the Acts which his Forefathers did
Have furnished matter for old Hollinshead,
For which their Scutcheon, by the Conqu'ror graced
Still bears a Lion Rampant for its Crest:
But what does this vain mass of Glory boot
To be the branch of such a noble Root,
If he of all the Heroes of his Line
Which in the Registers of Story shine,
Can offer nothing to the World's regard,
But moldy Parchments which the Worms have spared?
If sprung, as he pretends, of noble Race,
He does his own Original disgrace,
And, swollen with selfish Vanity and Pride,
To greatness has no other claim beside,
But squanders life, and sleeps away his days,
Dissolved in Sloth, and steeped in sensual ease:
Mean while to see how much the Arrogant
Boasts the false Luster of his high Descent,
You Would fancy him Comptroller of the Sky,
And framed by Heaven of other Clay than me.
Tell me, great Hero, you, that would be thought
So much above the mean, and humble Rout.
Of all the Creatures which do men esteem?
And which would you your self the noblest deem?
Put case of Horse: No doubt, you will answer strait,
The Racer, which has often'st won the Plate:
Who full of mettle, and of sprightly Fire,
Is never distanc'd in the sleet Career:
Him all the Rivals of New Market dread,
And crowds of Vent'rers stake upon his Head:
But if the Breed of Dragon, often cast,
Degenerate, and prove a Jade at last;
Nothing of Honor, or respect (we see)
Is had of his high Birth, and Pedigree:
But maugre all his great Progenitors.
The worthless Brute is banished from the Course,
Condemned for Life to ply the dirty Road,
To drag some Cart, or bear some Carrier's Load.
Then how can you with any sense expect
That I should be so silly to respect
The ghost of Honor, perished long ago,
That Is quite extinct, and lives no more in you?
Such gaudy Trifles with the Fools may pass,
Caught with mere show, and vain Appearances:
Virtue's the certain Mark, by Heaven designed,
That Is always stamped upon a noble mind:
If you from such illustrious Worthies came,
By copying them your high Extract proclaim:
Show us those generous Heats of Gallantry,
Which Ages past did in those Worthies see,
That zeal for Honor, and that brave Disdain,
Which scorned to do an Action base, or mean:
Do you apply your Interest aright,
Not to oppress the Poor with wrongful Might?
Would you make Conscience to pervert the Laws,
Tho bribed to do it, or urged by your own Cause?
Dare you, when justly called, expend your Blood
In service for your King's and Countries good?
Can you in open Field in Armor sleep,
And there meet danger in the ghastliest shape?
By such illustrious Marks as these, I find,
You're truly issued of a noble kind:
Then fetch your Line from Albanact, or Knute,
Or, if these are too fresh, from older Brute:
At leisure search all History to find
Some great and glorious Warrior to your mind:
Take Caesar, Alexander, which you please,
To be the mighty Founder of your Race;
In vain the World your Parentage belly,
That was, or should have been your Pedigree.
But, if you could with ease derive your Kin
From Hercules himself in a right Line;
If yet there nothing in your Actions be,
Worthy the name of your high Progeny;
All these great Ancestors, which you disgrace,
Against you are a cloud of Witnesses:
And all the Luster of their tarnish'd Fame
Serves but to light, and manifest your Shame:
In vain you urge the merit of your Race,
And boast that Blood, which you your selves debase.
In vain you borrow, to adorn your Name,
The Spoils, and Plunder of another's Fame;
If, where I looked for something Great, and Brave,
I meet with nothing but a Fool, or Knave,
A Traitor, Villain, Sycophant, or Slave,
A freakish Madman, fit to be confined,
Whom Bedlam only can to order bind,
Or (to speak all at once) a barren Limb,
And rotten Branch of an illustrious Stem.
But I am too severe, perhaps you will think,
And mix too much of Satyr with my Ink:
We speak to men of Birth, and Honor here,
And those nice Subjects must be touched with care:
Cry mercy, Sirs! Your Race, we grant, is known;
But how far backwards can you trace it down?
You answer: For at least a thousand year,
And some odd hundreds you can make it appear:
It Is much: But yet in short the proofs are clear:
All Books with your Forefathers Titles shine,
Whose names have escaped the general wreck of Time:
But who is there so bold, that dares engage
His Honor, that in this long Tract of Age
No one of all his Ancestors deceased
Had e're the fate to find a Bride unchaste?
That they have all along Lucretia's been,
And nothing e're of spurious Blood crept in,
To mingle and defile the Sacred Line?
Curss'd be the day, when first this vanity
Did primitive simplicity destroy,
In the blessed state of infant time, unknown,
When Glory sprung from Innocence alone*
Each from his merit only Title drew,
And that alone made Kings, and Nobles too:
Then, scorning borrowed Helps to prop his Name,
The Hero from himself derived his Fame:
But Merit by degenerate time at last,
Saw Vice ennobled, and her self debased:
And haughty Pride false pompous Titles feigned,
T'amuse the World, and Lord it over Mankind:
Thence the vast Herd of Earls and Barons came,
For Virtue each brought nothing but a Name:
Soon aster Man, fruitful in Vanities,
Did Blazoning and Armory devise,
Founded a College for the Herald's Art,
And made a Language of their Terms apart,
Composed of frightful words, of Chief, and Base,
Of Chevron, Saltier, Canton, Bend, and Fess,
And whatsoever of hideous Jargon else
Mad Guillim, and his barbarous Volume fills.
Then farther the wild Folly to pursue,
Plain down right Honor out of fashion grew:
But to keep up its Dignity, and Birth,
Expense, and Luxury must set it forth:
It must inhabit stately Palaces,
Distinguish Servants by their Liveries,
And carrying vast Retinues up and down.
The Duke and Earl be by their Pages known.
Thus Honor to support it self is brought
To its last shifts, and thence the Art has got
Of borrowing every where, and paying naught:
It Is now thought mean, and much beneath a Lord
To be an honest man, and keep his Word;
Who, by his Peerage, and Protection safe,
Can plead the privilege to be a Knave:
While daily Crowds of starving Creditors
Are forced to dance attendance at his doors,
Till he at length with all his mortgaged Lands.
Are forfeited into the Banker's hands:
Then to redress his wants, the bankrupt Peer
To some rich trading Sot, turns Pensioner:
And the next News, you're sure to hear that he
Is nobly wed into the Company:
Where for a Portion of ill gotten Gold,
Himself and all his Ancestors are sold:
And thus repairs his broken Family
At the expense of his own Infamy.
For if you want Estate to set it forth,
In vain you boast the splendour of your Birth:
Your prized Gentility for madness goes,
And each your Kindred shuns and disavows:
But he that is rich is praised at his full rate,
And tho he once cried Small coal in the street,
Tho he, nor none of his e're mentioned were,
But in the Parish Book, or Register.
D -- le by help of Chronicle shall trace
An hundred Barons of his ancient Race.
A SATYR. Addressed to a Friend, that is about to leave the University, and
come abroad in the World.
IF you're so out of love with Happiness,
To quit a College life, and learned ease;
Convince me first, and some good Reasons give,
What methods and designs you will take to live:
For such Resolves are needful in the Case,
Before you tread the worlds Mysterious Maze:
Without the Premises in vain you will try
To live by Systems of Philosophy:
Your Aristotle, Carts, and Le-Grand,
And Euclid too in little stead will stand.
How many men of choice, and noted parts,
Well fraught with Learning, Languages, and Arts,
Designing high Preferment in their mind,
And little doubting good success to find,
With vast and towering thoughts have flocked to Town,
But to their cost soon found themselves undone,
Now to repent, and starve at leisure left,
Of miseries last Comfort, Hope bereft?
These failed for want of good Advice, you cry,
Because at first they fixed on no employ:
Well then, let us draw the Prospect, and the Scene
To all advantage possibly we can:
The world lies now before you, let me hear,
What course your Judgment counsels you to steer:
Always considered, that your whole Estate,
And all your Fortune lies beneath your Hat:
Were you the Son of some rich Usurer,
That starved, and damned himself to make his Heir,
Left naught to do, but to inter the Sot,
And spend with ease what he with pains had got;
'Twere easy to advise how you might live,
Nor would there need instruction then to give:
But you, that boast of no Inheritance,
Save that small Stock, which lies within your Brains,
Learning must be your Trade, and therefore weigh
With heed, how you your Game the best may play;
Bethink your self a while, and then propose
What way of Life is fitt'st for you to choose.
If you for Orders, and a Gown design,
Consider only this, dear Friend of mine,
The Church is grown so over-stock'd of late,
That if you walk abroad, you will hardly meet
More Porters now than Parsons in the street.
At every Corner they are forced to ply,
For Jobs of hawkering Divinity:
And half the number of the Sacred Herd
Are fain to strowl, and wander unpreferr'd:
If this, or thoughts of such a weighty Charge
Make you resolve to keep your self at large;
For want of better opportunity,
A School must your next Sanctuary be:
Go, wed some Grammar-Bridewel, and a Wife,
And there beat Greek, and Latin^ for your life:
With Birchen Scepter there command at will,
Greater than Busby's self, or Doctor Gill,
But who would be to the vile Drudg'ry bound
Where there so small encouragement is found?
Where you for recompense of all your pains
Shall hardly reach a common Fidler's gains?
For when you have toiled, and labored all you can,
To dung, and cultivate a barren Brain:
A Dancing Master shall be better paid,
Tho he instructs the Heels, and you the Head:
To such Indulgence are kind Parents grown,
That naught costs less in Breeding than a Son:
Nor is it hard to find a Father now,
Shall more upon a Setting-dog allow:
And with a freer hand reward the Care
Of training up his Spaniel, than his Heir.
Some think themselves exalted to the Sky,
If they light in some noble Family;
Diet, an Horse, and thirty pounds a year,
Besides the advantage of his Lordships ear,
The credit of the business, and the State,
Are things that in a Younster's Sense sound great.
Little the unexperienced Wretch does know,
What slavery he often must undergo:
Who tho in silken Skarf, and Cassock dressed,
Wears but a gayer Livery at best:
When Dinner calls the Implement must wait
With holy Words to consecrate the Meat:
But hold it for a Favor seldom known,
If he be deigned the Honor to sit down.
Soon as the Tarts appear, Sir Crape, withdraw!
Those Dainties are not for a spiritual Maw:
Observe your distance, and be sure to stand
Hard by the Cistern with your Cap in hand:
There for diversion you may pick your Teeth,
Till the kind Voider comes for your Relief:
For mere Board-wages such their Freedom sell,
Slaves to an Hour, and Vassals to a Bell:
And if the enjoyment of one day be stole,
They are but Prisoners out upon Parole:
Always the marks of slavery remain,
And they, tho loose, still drag about their Chain.
And where is the mighty Prospect after all,
A Chaplainship served up, and seven years Thrall?
The menial thing perhaps for a Reward
Is to some slender Benefice preferred,
With this Proviso bound, that he must wed
My Ladies antiquated Waiting-maid,
In Dressing only skilled, and Marmalade,
Let others who such meannesses can brook,
Strike Countenance to every Great man's Look:
Let those that have a mind, turn slaves to ear,
And live contented by another's Plate:
I rate my Freedom higher, nor will I
For Food and Raiment truck my Liberty.
But, if I must to my last shifts be put,
To fill a Bladder, and twelve yards of Gut;
Rather with counterfeited wooden Leg,
And my right Arm tied up, I Will choose to beg:
I Will rather choose to starve at large, than be
The gawdiest Vassal to Dependency.
'T has ever been the top of my Desires,
The utmost height to which my wish aspires.
That Heaven would bless me with a small Estate,
Where I might find a close obscure retreat;
There, free from Noise, and all ambitious ends,
Enjoy a few choice Books, and fewer Friends,
Lord of my self, accountable to none,
But to my Conscience, and my God alone:
There live unthought of, and unheard of, die,
And grudge Mankind my very memory.
But since the Blessing is (I find) too great
For me to wish for, or expect of Fate:
Yet, maugre all the spite of Destiny,
My Thoughts, and Actions are, and shall be free.
A certain Author, very grave, and sage,
This Story tells: no matter, what the Page.
One time, as they walked forth e're break of day,
The Wolf, and Dog encountered on the way:
Famished the one, meager, and lean of plight,
As a cast Poet, who for Bread does write:
The other fat, and plump, as Prebend, was,
Pampered with Luxury, and holy Ease,
Thus met, with Complements, too long to tell,
Of being glad to see each other well:
How now, Sir Towzer? (said the Wolf) I pray,
Whence comes it, that you look so sleek, and gay?
While I, who do as well (I Am sure) deserve,
For want of Livelihood am like to starve?
Troth Sir (replied the Dog) 'thas been my Fate,
I thank the friendly Stars, to hap of late
On a kind Master, to whose care I owe
All this good Flesh, wherewith you see me now:
From his rich Voider every day I Am fed
With Bones of Fowl, and Crusts of finest Bread:
With Fricassee, Ragoust, and whatsoever
Of costly Kickshaws now in fashion are,
And more variety of Boiled and Roast,
Than a Lord Mayor's Waiter e're could boast.
Then, Sir, it is hardly credible to tell,
How I Am respected, and beloved by all:
I Am the Delight of the whole Family,
Not darling Shock more Favorite than I:
I never sleep abroad, to Air exposed,
But in my warm apartment am enclosed:
There on fresh Bed of Straw, with Canopy
Of Hutch above, like Dog of State I lie.
Besides, when with high Fare, and Nature fired,
To generous Sports of Youth I am inspired,
All the proud she is are soft to my Embrace,
From Bitch of Quality down to Turn-spit Race:
Each day I try new Mistrisses and Loves,
Nor envy Sovereign Dogs in their Alcoves.
Thus happy I of all enjoy the best,
No mortal Cur on Earth yet half so blessed,
And farther to enhance the Happiness,
All this I get by idleness, and ease.
Troth! (said the Wolf) I envy your Estate
Would to the Gods it were but my good Fate,
That I might happily admitted be
A member of your blessed Society!
I would with Faithfulness discharge my place
In any thing that I might serve his Grace:
But, think you, Sir, it mould be feasible,
And that my Application might prevail?
Do but endeavor, Sir, you need not doubt;
I make no question but to bring't about:
Only rely on me, and rest secure,
I Will serve you to the utmost of my Power;
As I Am a Dog of Honor, Sir: -- but this
I only take the Freedom to advise,
That you would a little lay your Roughness by,
And learn to practice Complaisance, like me.
For that let me alone: I Will have a care,
And top my part, I warrant, to a hair:
There Is not a Courtier of them all shall vie
For Fawning, and for Suppleness with me.
And thus resolved at last, the Travelers
Toward the House together shape their course:
The Dog, who Breeding well did understand,
In walking gives his Ghest the upper hand:
And as they walk along, they all the while
With Mirth, and pleasant Raillery beguile
The tedious Time, and Way, till Day drew near,
And Light came on; by which did soon appear
The Mastiffs Neck to view all worn and bare.
This when his Comrade spied, What means (said he)
This Circle bare, which round your Neck I see?
If I may be so bold; -- Sir, you must know,
That I at first was rough, and fierce, like you,
Of Nature cursed, and often apt to bite
Strangers, and else, who ever came in sight:
For this I was tied up, and underwent
The Whip sometimes, and such light Chastisement:
Till I at length by Discipline grew tame,
Gentle, and tractable, as now I am:
'Twas by this short, and slight severity
I gained these Marks and Badges, which you see:
But what are they? Allons Monsieur! let us go.
Not one step farther: Sir, excuse me now.
Much joy to ye of your envied, blessed Estate:
I will not buy Preferment at that rate:
A Gods name, take your golden Chains for me:
Faith, I Would not be a King, not to be free:
Sir Dog, your humble Servant, so Godbw'y.
SOME VERSE Written in September. 1676.
Presenting a Book to COSMELIA.
GO, humble Gift, go to that matchless Saint,
Of whom thou only wast a Copy meant:
And all, that is read in thee, more richly find
Comprised in the fair Volume of her mind;
That living System, where are fully writ
All those high Morals, which in Books we meet:
Easy, as in soft Air, there writ they are,
Yet firm, as if in Brass they graven were.
Nor is her Talent lazily to know
As dull Divines, and holy Canters do;
She acts what they only in Pulpits prate,
And Theory to Practice does translate:
Nor her own Actions more obey her Will,
Than that obeys strict Virtues dictates still:
Yet does not Virtue from her Duty flow,
But she is good, because she will be so:
'Her Virtue scorns at a low pitch to fly,
It Is all free Choice, naught of Necessity:
By such soft Rules are Saints above confined,
Such is the Tie, which them to Good does bind.
The scattered Glories of her happy Sex
In her bright Soul as in their Center mix:
And all that they possess but by Retail,
She hers by just Monopoly can call:
Whose sole Example does more Virtues show,
Than Schoolmen ever taught, or ever knew.
No Act did e're within her Practice fall,
Which for the atonement of a Bush could call:
No word of hers e're greeted any ear,
But what a Saint at her last gasp might hear:
Scarcely her Thoughts have ever sullied been
With the least print, or stain of native Sin:
Devout she is, as holy Hermits are,
Who share their time 'twixt Ecstasy, and Prayer:
Modest, as infant Roses in their Bloom,
Who in a Blush their fragrant Lives consume:
So chaste, the Dead themselves are only more,
Who lie divorced from Objects, and from Power:
So pure, could Virtue in a Shape appear,
'Twould choose to have no other Form, but Her:
So much a Saint, I scarce dare call her so,
For fear to wrong her with a name too low:
Such the Seraphick Brightness of her mind,
I hardly can believe her Womankind:
But think some nobler Being does appear,
Which to instruct the World, has left the Sphere,
And condescends to wear a Body here.
Or, if she mortal be, and meant to show
The greater Art by being formed below;
Sure Heaven preserved her by the Fall uncurs'd,
To tell how good the Sex was made at first.
THE PARTING.
TOO happy had I been indeed, if Fate
Had made it lasting, as she made it great;
But 'twas the Plot of unkind Destiny,
To lift me to, then snatch me from my Joy:
She raised my Hopes, and brought them just in view,
And then in spite the pleasing Scene withdrew.
So He of old the promised Land surveyed,
Which he might see, but never was to tread:
So Heaven was by that damned Caitiff seen,
He saw't, but with a mighty Gulf between,
He saw't to be more wretched, and despair again:
Not Souls of dying Sinners, when they go,
Assured of endless Miseries below,
Their Bodies more unwillingly desert,
Than I from you, and all my Joys did part.
As some young Merchant, whom his Sire unkind
Resigns to every faithless Wave, and Wind;
If the kind Mistress of his Vows appear,
And come to bless his Voyage with a Prayer,
Such Sighs he vents as may the Gale increase,
Such Floods of Tears as may the Billows raise:
And when at length the launching Vessel flies,
And severs first his Lips, and then his Eyes;
Long he looks back to see what he adores,
And while he may, views the beloved Shores.
Such just concerns I at your Parting had,
With such sad Eyes your turning Face surveyed:
Reviewing, they pursued you out of sight,
Then sought to trace you by left Tracks of Light:
And when they could not Looks to you convey,
Toward the loved Place they took delight to stray,
And aimed uncertain Glances still that way.
Complaining of ABSENCE.
TEN days (if I forget not) wasted are
(A year in any Lover's Calendar)
Since I was forced to part, and bid adieu
To all my Joy, and Happiness in you:
And still by the same Hindrance am detained,
Which me at first from your loved Sight constrained*
Often I resolve to meet my Bliss, and then
My Tether stops, and pulls me back again?
So when our raised Thoughts to Heaven aspire,
Earth stifles them, and choaks the good desire.
Curse on that Man, who Business first designed,
And by it enthralled a freeborn Lover's mind!
A curse on Fate, who thus subjected me,
And made me slave to any thing but thee!
Lovers should be as unconfined as Air,
Free as its wild Inhabitants from Care:
So free those happy Lovers are above,
Exempt from all Concerns but those of Love:
But I, poor Lover militant below,
The Cares, and Troubles of dull Life must know;
Must toil for that, which does on others wait,
And undergo the drudgery of Fate:
Yet I Will no more to her a Vassal be,
Thou now shall make, and rule my Destiny:
Hence troublesome Fatigues! all Business hence!
This very hour my Freedom shall commence:
Too long that Jilt has thy proud Rival been,
And made me by neglectful Absence sin;
But I Will no more obey its Tyranny,
Nor that, nor Fate it self shall hinder me
Henceforth from seeing, and enjoying thee.
Promising a VISIT.
SOoner may Art, and easier far divide
The soft embracing waters of the Tide,
Which with united Friendship still rejoyn,
Than part my Eyes, my Arms, or Lips from thine:
Sooner it may Time's headlong motion force,
In which it marches with unaltered course,
Or sever this from the succeeding Day,
Than from thy happy Presence force my stay.
Not the touched Needle (emblem of my Soul)
With greater Reverence trembles to its Pole,
Nor Flames with surer instinct upwards go,
Than mine, and all their motions tend to you.
Fly swift, ye minutes, and contract the space
Of Time, which holds me from her dear Embrace:
When I am there I Will bid you kindly stay,
I Will bid you rest, and never glide away.
Thither when Business gives me a Release
To lose my Cares in soft, and gentle Ease,
I Will come, and all arrears of Kindness pay,
And live over my whole Absence in one day.
Not Souls, released from humane Bodies, move
With quicker haste to meet their Bliss above:
Than I, when freed from Clogs, that bind me now,
Eager to seize my Happiness, will go.
Should a fierce Angel armed with Thunder stand,
And threaten Vengeance with his brandished hand,
To stop the entrance to my Paradise;
I Will venture, and his slighted Bolts despise.
Swift as the wings of Fear, shall be my Love,
And me to her with equal speed remove:
Swift, as the motions of the Eye, or Mind,
I Will thither fly, and leave slow Thought behind.
THE CARELESS Good Fellow.
Written, March 9. 1680.
SONG.
I.
APox of this sooling, and plotting of late,
What a pother, and stir has it kept in the State?
Let the Rabble run mad with Suspicions, and Fears,
Let them scuffle, and jar, till they go by the ears:
Their Grievances never shall trouble my pate,
So I can enjoy my dear Bottle at quiet.
II.
What Coxcombs were those, who would barter their ease
And their Necks for a Toy, a thin Wafer and Mass?
At old Tyburn they never had needed to swing,
Had they been but true Subjects to Drink, and their King;
A Friend, and a Bottle is all my design;
He has no room for Treason, that is top-full of Wine.
III.
I mind not the Members and makers of Laws,
Let them sit or Prorogue, as his Majesty please:
Let them damn us to Woollen, I Will never repine
At my Lodging, when dead, so alive I have Wine:
Yet often in my Drink I can hardly forbeat
To curse them for making my Claret so dear.
IV.
I mind not grave Asses, who idly debate
About Right and Succession, the Trifles of State;
We Have a good King already: and he deserves laughter
That will trouble his head with who shall come after:
Come, here is to his Health, and I wish he may be
As free from all Care, and all Trouble, as we.
V.
What care I how Leagues with the Hollander go?
Or Intrigues betwixt Sidney, and Monsieur D'Avaux?
What concerns it my Drinking, if Casal be sold,
If the Conqueror take it by Storming, or Gold?
Good Bordeaux alone is the place that I mind,
And when the Fleet's coming, I pray for a Wind.
VI.
The Bully of France, that aspires to Renown
By dull cutting of Throats, and vent'ring his own;
Let him fight and be damned, and make Matches, and Treat,
To afford the News-mongers, and Coffee-house Chat:
He Is but a brave Wretch, while I am more free,
More safe, and a thousand times happier than He.
VII.
Come He, or the Pope, or the Devil to boot,
Or come Faggot, and Stake; I care not a Groat;
Never think that in Smithfield I Porters will heat:
No, I swear, Mr Fox, pray excuse me for that.
I Will drink in defiance of Gibbet, and Halter,
This is the Profession, that never will alter.
A SATYR.
The Person of Spencer is brought in, Dissuading the Author from the Study of
POETRY, and showing how little it is esteemed and encouraged in this present
Age.
ONE night, as I was pondering of late
On all the mis'ries of my hapless Fate,
Cursing my rhiming Stars, raving in vain
At all the Powers, which over Poets reign:
In came a ghastly Shape, all pale, and thin,
As some poor Sinner, who by Priest had been,
Under a long Lent's Penance, starved, and whipped,
Or par-boil'd Lecher, late from Hot-house crept:
Famished his Looks appeared, his Eyes sunk in,
Like Morning-Gown about him hung his Skin:
A Wreath of Laurel on his Head he wore,
A Book, inscribed the Fairy Queen, he bore.
By this I knew him, rose, and bowed, and said,
Hail reverend Ghost! all hail most sacred Shade!
Why this great Visit? why vouchsafed to me,
The meanest of thy British Progeny?
Come thou in my uncalled, unhallowed Muse,
Some of thy mighty Spirit to infuse?
If so; lay on thy Hands, ordain me fit
For the high Cure, and Ministry of Wit:
Let me (I beg) thy great Instructions claim,
Teach me to tread the glorious paths of Fame:
Teach me (for none does better know than thou)
How, like thy self, I may immortal grow.
Thus did I speak, and spoke it in a strain,
Above my common rate, and usual vein;
As if inspired by presence of the Bard,
Who with a Frown thus to reply was heard,
In style of Satyr, such wherein of old
He the famed Tale of Mother Hubberd told.
I come, fond Idiot, e're it be too late,
Kindly to warn thee of thy wretched Fate:
Take heed betimes, repent, and learn of me
To shun the dangerous Rocks of Poetry:
Had I the choice of Flesh and Blood again,
To act once more in Life's tumultuous Scene:
I Would be a Portcr, or a Scavenger,
A groom, or any thing, but Poet here:
Have thou observed some Hawker of the Town,
Who through the Streets with dismal Scream and Tone,
Cries Matches, Small-coal, Brooms, Old Shoes and Boots,
Socks, Sermons, Ballads, Lies, Gazetts, and Votes?
So unrecorded to the Grave I Would go,
And nothing but the Register tell, who:
Rather that poor unheard of Wretch I Would be,
Than the most glorious Name in Poetry,
With all its boasted Immortality:
Rather than He, who sung on Phrygia's Shore,
The Grecian Bullies fighting for a Whore:
Or He of Thebes, whom Fame so much extols
For praising Jockies, and New Market Fools.
So many now, and bad the Scriblers be,
It Is scandal to be of the Company:
The foul Disease is so prevailing grown,
So much the Fashion of the Court and Town,
That scarce a man well bred in either's deemed,
But who has killed, been often clapped, and often has rhim'd:
The Fools are troubled with a Flux of Brains,
And each on Paper squirts his filthy sense:
A leash of Sonnets, and a dull Lampoon
Set up an Author, who forthwith is grown
A man of Parts, of Rhiming, and Renown:
Even that vile Wretch, who in lewd Verse each year
Describes the Pageants, and my good Lord May'r,
Whose Works must serve the next Election-day
For making Squibs, and under Pies to lay,
Yet counts himself of the inspired Train,
And dares in thought the sacred Name profane.
But is it naught (thou wilt say) in Front to stand,
With Laurel crowned by White, or Loggan 's hand?
Is it not great, and glorious to be known,
Marked out, and gazed at through the wondering Town,
By all the Ra^le passing up and down?
So Oats and Bedloe have been pointed at,
And every busy Coxcomb of the State:
The meanest Felons who through Holborn go,
More eyes, and looks than twenty Poets draw:
If this be all, go, have thy posted Name
Fixed up with Bills of Quack, and public Sham;
To be the stop of gaping Prentices,
And read by reeling Drunkards, when they piss;
Or else to lie exposed on trading Stall,
While the bilk'd Owner hires Gazetts to tell,
Among Spaniels lost, that Authors does not sell.
Perhaps, fond Fool, thou sooth'st thy self in dream,
With hopes of purchasing a lasting Name?
Thou think perhaps thy Trifles shall remain,
Like sacred Cowley, and immortal Ben?
But who of all the bold Adventurers,
Who now drive on the trade of Fame in Verse
Can be ensur'd in this unfaithful Sea,
Where there so many lost and shipwrack'd be?
How many Poems writ in ancient time,
Which thy Forefathers had in great esteem,
Which in the crowded Shops bore any rate,
And sold like News Books, and Affairs of State,
Have grown contemptible, and slighted since,
As Pordage, Fleckno, or the British Prince?
Quarles, Chapman, Heywood, Withers had Applause,
And Wild, and Ogilby in former days;
But now are damned to wrapping Drugs, and Wares,
And cursed by all their broken Stationers:
And so may thou perchance pass up and down,
And please a while the admiring Court, and Town,
Who after shall in Duck-lane Shops be thrown,
To mould with Silvester, and Shirley there,
And truck for Pots of Ale next Stourbridg-Fair.
Then who will not laugh to see the immortal Name
To vile Mundungus made a Martyr Flame?
And all thy deathless Monuments of Wit,
Wipe Porters Tails, or mount in Paper-kite?
But, grant thy Poetry should find success,
And (which is rare) the squeamish Critics please;
Admit* it read* and praised* and courted be
By this nice Age, and all Posterity;
If thou expectest ought but empty Fame;
Condemn thy Hopes, and Labors to the Flame:
The Rich have now learned only to admire,
He, who to greater Favors does aspire,
Is mercenary thought, and writes to hire:
Would thou to raise thine, and thy Countries Fame,
Choose some old English Hero for thy Theme,
Bold Arthur, or great Edward's greater Son,
Or our fifth Harry, matchless in Renown,
Make Agincourt, and Cressy F^ields outvie
The famed Lavinian Shores, and Walls of Troy;
What Scipio, what Moecenas would thou find,
What Sidney now to thy great Project kind?
Bless me! how great Genius! how each Line
Is big with Sense! how glorious a Design
Does through the whole, and each Proportion shine!
How losty all his Thoughts, and how inspired!
Pity, such wondrous Parts are not preferred:
Cries a gay wealthy Sot, who would not bail
For bare five Pounds the Author out of Jail,
Should he starve there, and rot; who if a Brief
Came out the needy Poets to relieve,
To the whole Tribe would searce a Tester give.
But fifty Guinnies for a Whore and Clap;
The Peer's well used, and comes off wondrous cheap:
A Poet would be dear, and out of the way.
Should he expect above a Coach man's pay:
For this will any dedicate, and lie,
And dawb the gaudy Ass with Flattery?
For this will any prostitute his Sense
To Coxcombs void of Bounty, as of Brains?
Yet such is the hard Fate of Writers now,
They Are forced for Alms to each great Name to bow:
Fawn, like her Lap-dog, on her tawdry Grace,
Commend her Beauty, and belly her Glass,
By which she every morning primes her Face:
Sneak to his Honor, call him Witty, Brave,
And Just, tho a known Coward, Fool, or knave,
And praise his Lineage, and Nobility,
Whose Arms at first came from the Company.
It Is so, 'twas ever so, since heretofore
The blind old Bard, with Dog and Bell before,
Was fain to sing for Bread from door to door;
The needy Muses all turned Gypsies then,
And of the begging Trade ever since have been:
Should mighty Sappho in these days revive,
And hope upon her stock of Wit to live;
She must to Creswel's trudg to mend her Gains,
And let her Tail to hire, as well as Brains.
What Poet ever fined for Sheriff? or who
By Wit and Sense did ever Lord Mayors grow?
My own hard Usage here I need not press,
Where you have every day before your face
Plenty of fresh resembling Instances:
Great Cowley's Muse the same ill Treatment had,
Whose Verse shall live for ever to upbraid
The ungrateful World, that left such Worth unpaid.
Waller himself may thank Inheritance
For what he else had never got by Sense.
On Butler who can think without just Rage,
The Glory, and the Scandal of the Age?
Fair stood his hopes, when first he came to Town,
Met every where with welcomes of Renown,
Courted, and loved by all, with wonder read,
And promises of Princely Favor fed:
But what Reward for all had he at last,
After a Life in dull expectance passed?
The Wretch at summing up his misspent days
Found nothing left, but Poverty, and Praise:
Of all his Gains by Verse he could not save
Enough to purchase Flannel, and a Grave:
Reduced to want, he in due time fell sick,
Was fain to die, and be interred on tick:
And well might bless the Fever that was sent,
To rid him hence, and his worse Fate prevent.
You Have seen what fortune other Poets share;
View next the Factors of the Theater:
That constant Mart, which all the year does hold,
Where Staple wit is bartered, bought, and sold;
Here trading Scriblers for their Maintenance,
And Livelihood trust to a Lott'ry chance:
But who his Parts would in the Service spend,
Where all his hopes on Vulgar Breath depend?
Where every Sot, for paying half a Crown,
Has the Prerogative to cry him down?
Sidley indeed may be content with Fame,
Nor care should an ill-judging Audience damn:
But Settle, and the Rest, that writ for Pence,
Whose whole Estate's an ounce, or two of Brains,
Should a thin House on the third day appear,
Must starve, or live in Tatters all the year.
And what can we expect that is brave and great,
From a poor needy Wretch, that writes to eat?
Who the success of the next Play must wait
For Lodging, Food, and Clothes, and whose chief care
Is how to sponge for the next Meal, and where?
Had thou of old in flourishing Athens lived,
When all the learned Arts in Glory thrived,
When mighty Sephocles the Stage did sway,
And Poets by the State were held in pay;
'Twere worth thy Pains to cultivate thy Muse,
And daily wonders then it might produce;
But who would now write Hackney to a Stage,
That Is only thought the Nuisance of the Age?
Go after this, and beat thy wretched Brains,
And toil to bring in thankless Idiots means:
Turn over dull Horace, and the Classick Fools,
To poach for Sense, and hunt for idle Rules:
Be free of Tickets, and the Play Houses,
To make some tawdry Act'ress there by Prize,
And spend thy third Days gains 'twixt her clapped Thighs.
All Trades, and all Professions here abound,
And yet Encouragement for all is found:
Here a vile Emp'rick, who by License kills,
Who every Week helps to increase the Bills,
Wears Velvet, keeps his Coach, and Whore beside,
For what less Villains must to Tyburn ride.
There a dull trading Sot, in Wealth o regrown
By thriving Knavery, can call his own.
A dozen Manors, and if Fate still bless,
Expect as many Counties to possess.
Punks, Panders, Bawds, all their due Pensions gain,
And every day the Great Men's Bounty drain:
Lavish expense on Wit, has never yet
Been taxed amongst the Grievances of State.
The Turkey, Guinny, India Gainers be,
And all but the Poetic Company:
Each place of Traffic, Bantam, Smyrna, Zant,
Greenland, Virginia, Sevil, Alicant,
And France, that sends us Dildoes, Lace, and Wine,
Vast profit all, and large Returns bring in:
Parnassus only is that barren Coast,
Where the whole Voyage, and Adventure's lost.
Then be advised, the slighted Muse forsake,
And Coke, and Dalton for thy study take:
For Fees each Term sweat in the crowded Hall,
And there for Charters, and cracked Titles bawl:
Where M -- d thrives, and pockets more each year
Than forty Laureats of the Theater,
Or else to Orders, and the Church betake
Thy self, and that thy future Refuge make:
There fawn on some proud Patron to engage
The Advowson of cast Punk, and Parsonage:
Or sooth the Court* and preach up Kingly Right,
To gain a Prebend'ry, and Mitre by it.
In fine, turn Pettifogger, Canonist,
Civilian, Pedant, Mountebank, or Priest,
Soldier, or Merchant, Fiddler, Painter, Fencer,
Jack-pudding, Juggler, Player, or Rope-dancer:
Preach, Plead, Cure, Fight, Game, Pimp, Beg, Cheat, or Thieve;
Be all but Poet, and there is way to live.
But why do I in vain my Counsel spend
On one whom there is so little hope to mend?
Where I perhaps as fruitlesly exhort,
As Lenten Doctors, when they Preach at Court?
Not entered Punks from Lust they once have tried,
Not Fops, and Women from Conceit, and Pride,
Not Bawds from Impudence, Cowards from Fear,
Nor seared unfeeling Sinners past Despair,
Are half so hard, and stubborn to reduce,
As a poor Wretch, when once poss^ss'd with Mus^.
If therefore, what I Have said, cannot avail,
Nor from the Rhiming Folly thee recall,
But spite of all thou will be obstinate,
And run thy self upon avoidless Fate;
May thou go on unpitied, till thou be
Brought to the Parish, Bridge, and Beggary:
Till urged by want, like broken Scriblers, thou
Turn Poet to a Booth, a Smithfield-Show,
And write Heroic Verse for Bartholmew:
Then slighted by the very Nursery,
May thou at last be forced to starve, like me.
A SATYR, In Imitation of the Third of JUVENAL.
Written, May, 1682.
The Poet brings in a Friend of his, giving him an account why he removes from
London to live in the Country.

THO much concerned to leave my dear old Friend,
I must however his Design commend
Of fixing in the Country: for were I
As free to choose my Residence, as he;
The Peake, the Fens, the Hundreds, or Lands-end,
I would prefer to Fleetstreet, or the Strand.
What place so desert, and so wild is there,
Whose Inconveniences one would not bear,
Rather than the Alarms of midnight Fire,
The falls of Houses, Knavery of Cits,
The Plots of Factions, and the noise of Wits,
And thousand other Plagues, which up and down
Each day and hour infest the cursed Town?
As Fate would have't, on the appointed day
Of parting hence, I met him on the way,
Hard by Mile-end, the place so famed of late,
In Prose, and Verse for the great Factions Treat;
Here we stood still, and after Complements
Of course, and wishing his good Journey hence,
I asked what sudden causes made him sly
The once-lov'd Town, and his dear Company:
When, on the hated Prospect looking back,
Thus with just rage the good old Timon spoke.
Since Virtue here in no repute is had,
Since Worth is scorned, Learning and Sense un paid,
And Knavery the only thriving Trade;
Finding my slender Fortune every day
Dwindle, and waste insensibly away,
I, like a losing Gamester, thus retreat,
To manage wiselier my last stake of Fate:
While I have strength, and want no staff to prop
My tottering Limbs, e're Age has made me stoop
Beneath its weight, e're all my Thread be spun,
And Life has yet in store some Sands to run,
It Is my Resolve to quit the nauseous Town.
Let thriving Morecraft choose his dwelling there,
Rich with the Spoils of some young spend-thrist Heir:
Let the Plot-mongers stay behind, whose Art
Can Truth to Sham, and Sham to Truth convert:
Who ^ver has an House to Build, or Set,
His Wife, his Conscience, or his Oath to let:
Who ever has, or hopes for Offices,
A Navy, Guard, or Custom-house's Place:
Let sharping Courtiers stay, who there are great
By putting the false Dice on King, and State.
Where they, who once were Grooms, and Foot-Boys known,
Are now to fair Estates, and Honors grown;
Nor need we envy them, or wonder much
At their fantastic Greatness, since they are such,
Whom Fortune often in her capricious freaks
Is pleased to raise from Kennels, and the Jakes,
To Wealth, and Dignity above the rest,
When she is frolic, and disposed to jest.
I live in London? What should I do there?
I cannot lie, nor flatter, nor forswear:
I cannot commend a Book, or Piece of Wit,
(Tho a Lord were the Author) dully writ:
I Am no Sir Sydrophel to read the Stars,
And cast Nativities for longing Heirs,
When Fathers shall drop off: no Gadbury
To tell the minute, when the King shall die,
And you know what -- come in: nor can I steer,
And tack about my Conscience, whensoe're,
To a new Point, I see Religion veer.
Let others pimp to Courtier's Lechery,
I Will draw no City-Cuckold's Curse on me:
Nor would I do it, tho to be made great,
And raised to the chief Ministry of State.
Therefore I think it fit to rid the Town
Of one, that is an useless member grown.
Besides, who has pretense to Favor now,
But he, who hidden Villainy does know,
Whose Breast does with some burning Secret glow?
By none thou shall preferred, or valued be,
That trusts thee with an honest Secrecy:
He only may to great men's Friendship reach,
Who Great Men, when he pleases, can impeach.
Let others thus aspire to Dignity;
For me, I Would not their envied Grandeur buy
For all the Exchange is worth, that Paul's will cost,
Or was of late in the Scotch Voyage lost.
What would it boot, if I, to gain my end,
Forgo my Quiet, and my ease of mind,
Still feared, at last betrayed by my great Friend.?
Another Cause, which I must boldly own,
And not the least, for which I quit the Town,
Is to behold it made the Common-shore,
Where France does all her Filth, and Ordure pour:
What Spark of true old English rage can bear
Those, who were Slaves at home, to Lord it here?
We Have all our Fashions, Language, Complements,
Our Music, Dances, Curing, Cooking thence;
And we shall have their Pois'ning too e're long,
If still in the improvement we go on.
What would thou say, great Harry, should thou view
Thy gaudy fluttering Race of English now,
Their tawdry Clothes, Pulvilio's, Essences,
Their Chedreux Perruques, and those Vanities,
Which thou, and they of old did so despise?
What Would thou say to see the infected Town
With the fowl Spawn of Foreiners o're-run?
Hither from Paris, and all Parts they come,
The Spue, and Vomit of their Goals at home;
To Court they flock, and to St. James his Square,
And wriggle into Great Men's Service there:
Foot-boys at first, till they, from wiping Shoes,
Grow by degrees the Masters of the House:
Ready of Wit, hardened of Impudence,
Able with ea^e to put down either H --
Both the King's Player, and King's Evidence:
Flippant of Talk, and voluble of Tongue,
With words at will, no Lawyer better hung;
Softer than flattering Court-Parasite,
Or City-Trader, when he means to cheat:
No Calling, or Profession comes amiss,
A needy Monsieur can be what he please,
Groom, Page, Valet, Quack, Operator, Fencer,
Perfumer, Pimp; Jack-pudding, Juggler, Dancer:
Give but the word; the Cur will fetch and bring,
Come over to the Emperor, or King:
Or, if you please, fly over the Pyramid,
Which J -- n and the rest in vain have tried,
Can I have patience, and endure to see
The paltry Foreign Wretch take place of me,
Whom the same Wind, and Vessel brought ashore,
That brought prohibited Goods, and Dildoes over?
Then, pray, what mighty Privilege is there
For me, that at my Birth drew English Air?
And where is the Benefit to have my Veins
Run British Blood, if there is no difference
'Twixt me, and him, the Statute Freedom gave,
And made a Subject of a true-born Slave?
But nothing shocks, and is more loathed by me,
Than the vile Rascal's fulsom Flattery:
By help of this false Magnifying Glass,
A Louse, or Flea shall for a Camel pass:
Produce an hideous Wight, more ugly far
Than those ill Shapes, which in old Hangings are,
He Will make him strait a Beau Garzon appear:
Commend his Voice, and Singing, tho he bray
Worse than Sir Martin Marr-all in the Play:
And if he Rhyme; shall praise for Standard Wit,
More scurvy sense than Pryn, and Vickars Writ.
And here is the mischief, tho we say the same,
He is believed, and we are thought to sham:
Do you but smile, immediately the Beast
Laughs out aloud, tho he never heard the Jest;
Pretend, you're sad, he is presently in Tears,
Yet grieves no more than Marble, when it wears
Sorrow in Metaphor: but speak of Heat;
O God! how sultry it is? he will cry, and sweat
In depth of Winter: strait, if you complain
Of Cold; the Weather glass is sunk again:
Then he will call for his Frize-Campaign, and swear
It Is beyond Eighty, he is in Greenland here.
Thus he shifts Scenes, and oft'ner in a day
Can change his Face, than Actors at a Play:
There Is naught so mean, can escape the flattering Sot,
Not his Lord's Snuff Box, nor his Powder-Spot:
If he but Spit, or pick his Teeth; he will cry,
How every thing becomes you? let me die,
Your Lordship does it most judiciously:
And swear, it is fashionable, if he Sneeze,
Extremely taking, and it needs must please.
Besides, there is nothing sacred, nothing free
From the hot Satyr's rampant Lechery:
Nor Wife, nor Virgin-Daughter can escape,
Scarce thou thyself, or Son avoid a Rape:
All must go pad-lock'd: if naught else there be,
Suspect thy very Stables Chastity.
By this the Vermin into Secrets creep,
Thus Families in awe they strive to keep.
What living for an English man is there,
Where such as these get head, and domineer,
Whose use and custom it is, never to share.
A Friend, but love to reign without dispute,
Without a Rival, full, and absolute?
Soon as the Insect gets his Honor's ear,
And fly-blows some of's poisonous malice there,
Strait I Am turned off, kicked out of doors, discarded,
And all my former Service disregarded.
But leaving these Messieurs, for fear that I
Be thought of the Silk-Weavers Mutiny,
From the loathed subject let us hasten on,
To mention other Grievances in Town:
And further, what Respect at all is had
Of poor men here? and how is their Service paid,
Tho they be never so diligent to wait,
To sneak, and dance attendance on the Great?
No mark of Favor is to be obtained
By one, that sues, and brings an empty hand:
And all his merit is but made a Sport,
Unless he glut some Cormorant at Court.
It Is now a common thing, and usual here,
To see the Son of some rich Usurer
Take place of Nobles, keep his first-rate Whore,
And for a Vaulting bout, or two give more
Than a Guard-Captains Pay: mean while the Breed
Of Peers, reduced to Poverty, and there
Are fain to trudg to the Bank-side, and there
Take up with Porters leavings, Suburb-Ware,
There spend that Blood, which their great Ancestor
So nobly shed at Cressy heretofore,
At Brothel-Fights in some foul Common-shore.
Produce an Evidence, tho just he be,
As righteous Job, or Abraham, or He,
Whom Heaven, when whole Nature shipwrack'd was,
Thought worth the saving, of all humane Race,
Or the other, who the flaming Deluge escaped,
When Sodom's Lechers Angels would have raped;
How rich he is, must the first question be,
Next for his Manners, and Integrity:
They Will ask, what Equipage he keeps, and what
He Is reckoned worth in Money, and Estate,
For Shrieve how often he has been known to fine,
And with how many Dishes he does dine:
For look what Cash a person has in store,
Just so much Credit has he, and no more:
Should I upon a thousand Bibles Swear,
And call each Saint throughout the Calendar:
To vouch my Oath; it will not be taken here;
The Poor flight Heaven, and Thunderbolts (they think)
And Heaven it self does at such Trifles wink.
Besides, what store of gibing scoffs are thrown
On one, that is poor, and meanly clad in Town;
If his Apparel seem but overworn,
His Stockings out at heel, or Breeches torn?
One takes occasion his ripped Shoe to flout,
And swears 'thas been at Prison-Grates hung out:
Another shrewdly jeers his coarse Crevat,
Because himself wears Point: a third his Hat,
And most unmercifully shows his Wit,
If it be old, or does not cock aright:
Nothing in Poverty so ill is born,
As its exposing men to grinning scorn,
To be by tawdry Coxcombs pissed upon,
And made the jesting-stock of each Buffoo^.
Turn out there, Friend! (cries one at Church) the Pew
Is not for such mean scoundrel Curs, as you:
It Is for your Betters kept: Belike, some Sot,
That knew no Father, was on Bulks begot:
But now is raised to an Estate, and Pride,
By having the kind Proverb on his side:
Let Gripe and Cheatwel take their Places there,
And Dash the S^riv'ners gaudy sparkish Heir,
That wears three ruined Orphans on his back:
Mean while you in the Alley stand, and sneak:
And you therewith must rest contented, since
Almighty Wealth does put such difference.
What Citizen a Son-in-law will take,
Bred never so well, that cannot a Joynter make?
What man of sense, that is poor, e're summoned is
Amongst the Common Council to advise?
At Vestry-Consults when does he appear,
For choosing of some Parish-Officer,
Or making Leather-Buckets for the Choir?
It Is hard for any man to rise, that feels
His Virtue clogged with Poverty at heels:
But harder it is by much in London, where
A sorry Lodging, coarse, and slender Fare,
Fire, Water, Breathing, every thing is dear:
Yet such as these an earthen Dish disdain,
With which their Ancestors, in Edgar's Reign,
Were served, and thought it no disgrace to dine,
Tho they were rich, had store of Leather-Coin.
Low as their Fortune is, yet they despise
A man that walks the streets in homely Frize:
To speak the truth, great part of England now
In their own Cloth will scarce vouchsafe to go:
Only, the Statutes Penalty to save,
Some few perhaps wear Woollen in the Grave.
Here all go gaily dressed, although it be
Above their Means, their Rank, and Quality:
The most in borrowed Gallantry are clad;
For which the Tradesmen's Books are still unpaid:
This Fault is common in the meaner sort,
That they must needs affect to bear the Port
Of Gentlemen, though they want Income for it.
Sir, to be short, in this expensive Town
There Is nothing without Money to be done:
What will you give to be admitted there,
And brought to speech of some Court-Minister?
What will you give to have the quarter face,
The squint and nodding go-by of his Grace?
His Porter, Groom, and Steward must have Fees;
And you may see the Tombs, and Tower for less:
Hard Fate of Suitors! who must pay, and pray
To Livery-slaves, yet often go scorned away.
Who e'reat Barnet, or S. Albans fears
To have his Lodging drop about his ears,
Unless a sudden Hurricane besal,
Or such a Wind as blew old Noll to Hell?
Here we build slight, what scarce out-lasts the Lease,
Without the helps of Props, and Buttresses:
And Houses now adays as much require
To be ensur'd from Falling, as from Fire.
There Buildings are substantial, tho less neat,
And kept with care both Wind, and Water-tight:
There you in safe security are blessed,
And naught, but Conscience to disturb your Rest,
I am for living where no Fires affright,
No Bells rung backward break my sleep at night:
I scarce lie down, and draw my Curtains here,
But strait I Am roused by the next House on Fire:
Pale, and half dead with Fear, my self I raise,
And find my Room all over in a blaze:
By this 'thas seized on the third Stairs, and I
Can now discern no other Remedy,
But leaping out at Window to get free:
For if the Mischief from the Cellar came,
Be sure the Garret is the last, takes flame.
The movables of P ge were a Bed
For him, and's Wise, a Piss-pot by its side,
A Looking-glass upon the Cupboards Head,
A Comb-case, Candlestick, and Pewter-spoon,
For want of Plate, with Desk to write upon:
A Box without a Lid served to contain
Few Authors, which made up his Vatican:
And there his own immortal Works were laid,
On which the barbarous Mice for hunger preyed:
P -- had nothing, all the world does know;
And yet should he have lost this Nothing too,
No one the wretched Bard would have supplied
With Lodging, House-room, or a Crust of Bread.
But if the Fire burn down some Great Man's House,
All strait are interessed in the loss:
The Court is strait in Mourning sure enough,
The Act, Commencement, and the Term put off:
Then we Mischances of the Town lament,
And Fasts are kept, like Judgments to prevent.
Out comes a Brief immediately, with speed
To gather Charity as far as Tweed.
Nay, while it is burning, some will send him in
Timber, and Stone to build his House again:
Others choice Furniture: here some rare piece
Of Rubens, or Vandike presented is:
There a rich Suit of Moreclack-Tapestry,
A Bed of Damask, or Embroidery:
One gives a fine Scritore, or Cabinet,
Another a huge massy Dish of Plate,
Or Bag of Gold; thus he at length gets more
By kind misfortune than he had before:
And all suspect it for a laid Design,
As if he did himself the Fire begin.
Could you but be advised to leave the Town,
And from dear Plays, and drinking Friends be drawn,
An handsome Dwelling might be had in Kent,
Surrey, or Essex, at a cheaper Rent
Than what you're forced to give for one half year
To lie, like Lumber, in a Garret here:
A Garden there, and Well, that needs no Rope,
Engine, or Pains to Crane its Waters up:
Water is there through Natures Pipes conveyed,
For which no Custom, or Excise is paid:
Had I the smallest Spot of Ground, which scarce
Would Summer half a dozen Grasshoppers,
Not larger than my Grave, tho hence remote,
Far as St. Michaels Mount, I would go to it,
Dwell there content, and thank the Fates to boot.
Here want of Rest a nights more People kills
Than all the College, and the weekly Bills:
Where none have privilege to sleep, but those,
Whose Purses can compound for their Repose:
In vain I go to bed, or close my eyes,
Methinks the place the middle Region is,
Where I lie down in Storms, in Thunder rise:
The restless Bells such Din in Steeples keep,
That scarce the Dead can in their Churchyards sleep:
Huzza's of Drunkards, Bell-mens midnight-Rhimes,
The noise of Shops, with Hawkers early Screams,
Besides the Brawls of Coach-men, when they meet,
And stop in turnings of a narrow Street,
Such a loud Medly of confusion make,
As drowsy A -- r on the Bench would wake.
If you walk out in Business never so great,
Ten thousand stops you must expect to meet:
Thick Crowds in every Place you must charge through,
And storm your Passage, wheresoe'r you go:
While Tides of Followers behind you throng,
And, pressing on your heels, shove you along:
One with a Board, or Rafter hits your Head,
Another with his Elbow bores your side;
Some tread upon your Corns, perhaps in sport;
Mean while your Legs are cased all over with Dirt.
Here you the March of a slow Funeral wait,
Advancing to the Church with solemn State:
There a Sedan, and Lacquies stop your way,
That bears some Punk of Honor to the Play:
Now you some mighty piece of Timber meet,
Which tottering threatens ruin to the Street:
Next a huge Portland Stone, for building Paul's,
If self almost a Rock, on Carriage rowls:
Which, if it fall, would cause a Massacre,
And serve at once to murder, and interr.
If what I Have said cannot from the Town affright,
Consider other dangers of the Night:
When Brickbats are from upper Stories thrown,
And emptied Chamber pots come pouring down
From Garret Windows: you have cause to bless
The gentle Stars, if you come off with Piss:
So many Fates attend, a man had need,
Never walk without a Surgeon by his side:
And he can hardly now discreet be thought,
That does not make his Will, ere he go out.
If this you escape, twenty to one, you meet
Some of the drunken Scowrers of the Street,
Flushed with success of warlike Deeds performed,
Of Constables subdued, and Brothels stormed:
These, if a Quarrel, or a Fray be mist,
Are ill at ease a nights, and want their Rest.
For mischief is a Lechery to some,
And serves to make them sleep like Laudanum.
Yet heated, as they are, with Youth, and Wine,
If they diseern a Train of Flamboes shine,
If a Great Man with his gilt Coach appear,
And a strong Guard of Foot-boys in the rear,
The Rascals sneak, and shrink their Heads for fear.
Poor me, who use no Light to walk about,
Save what the Parish, or the Skies hang out,
They value not: it is worth your while to hear
The scuffle, if that be a scuffle, where
Another gives the Blows, I only bear:
He bids me stand: of force I must give way,
For 'twere a senseless thing to disobey,
And struggle here, where I Would as good oppose
My self to P -- and his Mastiffs loose.
Who Is there? he cries, and takes you by the Throat,
Dog! are you dumb? Speak quickly, else my Foot
Shall march about your Buttocks: whence do you come,
From what Bulk-ridden Strumpet reeking home?
Saving your reverend Pimpship, where do you ply?
How may one have a Job of Lechery?
If you say any thing, or hold your peace,
And silently go off; it is all a case:
Still he lays on: nay well, if you escape so:
Perhaps he will clap an Action on you too
Of Battery: nor need he fear to meet
A Jury to his turn, shall do him right,
And bring him in large Damage for a Shoe
Worn out, besides the pains, in kicking you.
A Poor Man must expect naught of redress,
But Patience: his best way in such a case
Is to be thankful for the Drubs, and beg
That they would mercifully spare one leg,
Or Arm unbroke, and let him go away
With Teeth enough to eat his Meat next day.
Nor is this all, which you have cause to fear,
Often we encounter midnight Padders here:
When the Exchanges, and the Shops are close,
And the rich Tradesman in his Counting House
To view the Profits of the day withdraws.
Hither in flocks from Shooters-Hill they come,
To seek their Price, and Booty nearer home:
Your Purse! they cry; it is madness to resist,
Or strive with a cocked Pistol at your Breast:
And these each day so strong and numerous grow,
The Town can scarce afford them Jail-room now.
Happy the times of the old Heptarchy,
Ere London knew so much of Villainy:
Then fatal Carts through Holborn seldom went,
And Tyburn with few Pilgrims was content:
A less, and single Prison then would do,
And served the City, and the County too.
These are the Reasons, Sir, which drive me hence,
To which I might add more; would Time dispense,
To hold you longer; but the Sun draws low,
The Coach is hard at hand, and I must go:
Therefore, dear Sir, farewell; and when the Town
From better Company can spare you down,
To make the Country with your Presence blessed,
Then visit your old Friend amongst the rest;
There I Will find leisure to unlade my mind
Of what Remarques I now must leave behind:
The Fruits of dear Experience, which with these
Improved will serve for hints, and notices;
And when you write again, may be ofuse
To furnish Satyr for your daring Muse.
A Dithyrambick. The Drunkards Speech in a Mask.
Written in Aug. 1677.
(...).

I.
YES, you are mighty wise, I warrant, mighty wise!
With all your godly Tricks, and Artifice,
Who think to chouse me of my dear and pleasant Vice.
Hence holy Sham! in vain your fruitless Toil*
Go, and some unexperienced Fop beguile,
To some raw entering Sinner cant, and Whine,
Who never knew the worth of Drunkenness and Wine.
I Have tried and proved, and found it all Divine:
It is resolved, I will drink on, and die,
I Will not one minute lose, not I,
To hear your troublesome Divinity:
Fill me a top-full Glass, I Will drink it on the Knee,
Confusion to the next that spoils good Company.
II.
That Gulp was worth a Soul, like it, it went,
And thorowout new Life, and Vigor sent:
I feel it warm at once my Head, and Heart,
I feel it all in all, and all in every part.
Let the vile Slaves of Business toil, and strive,
Who want the Leisure, or the Wit to live;
While we Life's tedious journey shorter make,
And reap those Joys which they lack sense to take.
Thus live the Gods (if ought above our selves there be)
They live so happy, unconcerned, and free:
Like us they sit, and with a careless Brow
Laugh at the petty Jars of Humane kind below:
Like us they spend their Age in gentle Ease,
Like us they drink; for what were all their Heaven, alas!
If sober, and compelled to want that Happiness.
III.
Assist almighty Wine, for thou alone have Power,
And other I Will invoke no more,
Assist, while with just Praise I thee odore;
Aided by thee, I dare thy worth rehearse,
In Flights above the common pitch of grovelling Verse.
Thou art the Worlds great Soul, that heavenly Fire,
Which do our dull half-kindled mass inspire.
We nothing gallant, and above our selves produce,
Till thou do finish Man, and Reinfuse.
Thou art the only source of all, the world calls great,
Thou did the Poets first, and they the Gods create:
To thee their Rage, their Heat, their Flame they owe,
Thon runst half share with Art, and Nature too.
They owe their Glory, and Renown to thee;
Thou giv'st their Verse, and them Eternity.
Great Alexander, that big'st Word of Fame,
That fills her Throat, and almost rends the same,
Whose Valor found the World too strait a Stage
For his wide Victories, and boundless Rage,
Got not Repute by War alone, but thee,
He knew, he never could conquer by Sobriety,
And drunk as well as fought for universal Monarchy.
IV.
Pox of that lazy Claret! how it stays?
Were it again to pass the Seas;
'Twould sooner be in Cargo here,
It Is now a long East India Voyage, half a year.
'Sdeath! here is a minute lost, an Age, I mean,
Slipped by, and never to be retrieved again.
For pity suffer not the precious Juice to die,
Let us prevent our own, and its Mortality:
Like it, our Life with standing and Sobriety is palled,
And like it too, when dead, can never be recalled.
Push on the Glass, let it measure out each hour,
For every Sand an Health let us pour:
Swift as the rolling Orbs above,
And let it too as regularly move:
Swift as Heavens drunken red-fac'd Traveller, the Sun,
And never rest, till his last Race be done,
Till time it self be all run out, and we
Have drunk our selves into Eternity.
V.
Six in a hand begin! we'll drink it twice a piece.
A Health to all that love, and honor Vice.
Six more as often to the great Founder of the Vine,
(A God he was, I Am sure, or should have been)
The second Father of Mankind I meant,
He, when the angry Powers a Deluge sent,
When for their Crimes our sinful Race was drowned,
The only bold, and venurous man was found,
Who durst be drunk again, and with new Vice the World replant.
The mighty Patriarch 'twas of blessed Memory,
Who escaped in the great Wreck of all Mortality,
And stocked the Globe afresh with a brave drinking Progeny,
In vain would spightful Nature us reclaim,
Who to small Drink our Isle thought fit to damn,
And set us out of the reach of Wine,
In hope strait Bounds could our vast Thirst confine.
He taught us first with Ships the Seas to roam,
Taught us from Foreign Lands to fetch supply,
Rare Art! that makes all the wide world our home,
Makes every Realm pay Tribute to our Luxury,
VI.
Adieu poor tottering Reason! tumble down!
This Glass shall all thy proud usurping Powers drown,
And Wit on thy cast Ruins shall erect her Throne:
Adieu, thou fond Disturber of our Life!
That check'st our Joys, with all our Pleasure art at strife:
I Have something brisker now to govern me,
A more exalted noble Faculty,
Above thy Logic, and vain boasted Pedantry.
Inform me, if you can, ye reading Sots, what it is,
That guides the unerring Deities:
They no base Reason to their Actions bring,
But move by some more high, more heavenly thing,
And are without Deliberation wise:
Even such is this, at least it is much the same,
For which dull Schoolmen never yet could find a name,
Call ye this madness? damn that sober Fool,
('It Was sure some dull Philosopher, some reasoning Tool)
Who the reproachful Term did first devise,
And brought a scandal on the best of Vice.
Go, ask me, what is the rage young Prophets feel,
When they with holy Frenzy reel:
Drunk with the Spirits of infused Divinity,
They rave, and stagger, and are mad, like me.
VII.
Oh, what an Ebb of Drink have we?
Bring us a Deluge, fill us up the Sea,
Let the vast Ocean be our mighty Cup;
We'll drink't, and all its Fishes too like Loaches up.
Bid the Canary Fleet land here: we'll pay
The Freight, and Custom too defray:
Set every man a Ship, and when the Store
Is emptied; let them strait dispatch, and Sail for more:
It Is gone: and now have at the Rhine,
With all its petty Rivulets of Wine:
The Empire's Forces with the Spanish well combine,
We'll make their Drink too in confederacy join.
'Ware France the next: this Round Bourdeaux shall swallow,
Champagn, Langon, and Burgundy shall follow.
Quick let us forestal Lorain;
We'll starve his Army, all their Quarters drain,
And without Treaty put an end to the Campagn,
Go, set the Universe a tilt, turn the Globe up,
Squeeze out the last, the slow unwilling Drop:
A pox of empty Nature! since the World's drawa dry,
It Is time we quit mortality,
It Is time we now give out, and die,
Lest we are plagued with Dullness and Sobriety.
Beset with Link boys, we'll in triumph go,
A Troop of stagg'ring Ghosts down to the Shades below:
Drunk we'll march off, and reel into the Tomb,
Natures convenient dark Retiring Room;
And there, from Noiso removed, and all tumultuous strife,
Sleep out the dull Fatigue, and long Debauch of Life.
[Tries to go off, but tumbles down, and falls asleep.

FINIS.
REMAINS OF Mr. John Oldham IN VERSE and PROSE.

LONDON: Printed for Jo. Hindmarsh, Bookseller to his Royal Highness, at the
Black Bull in Cornil, 1684.

Advertisement.
THe Author of these following Poems being dead, the Publisher thought fit to
acquaint the World, that the reason why he exposed them now in Print, was not
so much for his own Interest (tho a Bookseller that disclaims Interest for a
pretense, will no more be believed now adays, than a thorough paced Phanatick,
that pretends he makes a journey to New England purely for conscience sake) but
for securing the reputation of Mr. Oldham; which might otherwise have suffered
from worse hands, and out of a desire he has to print the last Remains of his
friend since he had the good fortune to publish his first Pieces.

He confesses that it is the greatest piece of injustice to publish the
posthumous Works of Authors, especially such, that we may suppose they had
brought to the file and sent out with more advantages into the World, had they
not been prevented by untimely death; and therefore assures you he had never
presumed to print these following Miscellanies, had they not already been
countenanced by men of unquestionable repute and esteem.

He is not of the same persuasion with several others of his own profession,
that never care how much they lessen the reputation of the Poet, if they can
but inhance the value of the Book; that ransackt he Studies of the deceased,
and print all that passed under the Author's hands, from Fifteen to Forty, and
upwards: and (as the incomparable Mr. Cowley has expressed it) think a rude heap
of ill placed Stones a better Monument than a neat Tomb of Marble.

For the Description of the Country P -- (the only part in this Book that he
judges liable to exception) he makes you no Apology at all; For to men of
candor and judgment any thing that comes from Mr. Oldham will certainly be
acceptable; to others that are resolved to damn at first sight he thinks a
defense of this nature signifies no more than a Plantiffs persuasions to a
hungry Judge after twelve. However he is very confident that the rest of Mr.
Oldham's pieces will abundantly atone for one unfinished draught, and that no
man of sense and reason will quarrel at one bad half Crown, in a good, round,
substantial lump of Money.

To the MEMORY of Mr. OLDHAM.
Farewell, too little and too lately known,
Whom I began to think and call my own;
For sure our Souls were near allied; and thine
Cast in the same Poetic mould with mine.
One common Note on either Lyre did strike,
And Knaves and Fools we both abhorred alike:
To the same Goal did both our Studies drive,
The last set out the soonest did arrive.
Thus Nisus fell upon the slippery place,
While his young Friend performed and won the Race.
O early ripe! to thy abundant store
What could advancing Age have added more?
It might (what Nature never gives the young)
Have taught the numbers of thy native Tongue.
But Satyr needs not those, and Wit will shine
Through the harsh cadence of a rugged line.
A noble Error, and but seldom made,
When Poets are by too much force betrayed,
Thy generous fruits, though gathered ere their prime
Still showed a quickness; and maturing time
But mellows what we write to the dull sweets of Rhyme.
Once more, hail and farewell; farewell thou young,
But ah too short, Marcellus of our Tongue;
Thy Brows with Ivy, and with Laurels bound;
But Fate and gloomy Night encompass thee around.
JOHN DRYDEN.
Authori Epitaphium.
HOc, o Viator, marmore conditae
Charae recumbunt Exuviae brevem
Viventis (oh! sors dura) vitam,
Praecoce coelum anima petentis.
Nec praepedita est Men's celeris diu,
Quin Pustularum mill tumoribus
Eff^oruit, portisque mill
Praepes iter patefecit altum.
Musarum Alumnus jam fuit, artibus
Instructus almis, quas, studio pio,
Atque aure quam fida repostas,
Oxonij coluit Parentis.
Hic quadriennis praemia Filii
Dignus recepit, Vellera candida,
Collati Honoris signa, necnon
Innocui simulacra cordis.
Sed mane montis summa cacumina
Ascendit ardens, Pierio jugo
Insedit, atque errore multo
Ipsum Helicona scatere vidit.
Nunc pura very Flumina perspicit,
Nunc mira Mundi semina concipit,
Pulchrasque primaevi figuras,
In speculo species creante.
At Tu, Viator, Numina poscito,
Ut dissolutis reliquijs, vaga
Dum men's remigret, detur -- ah! su
Terra levis, placidusque somnus.
On the Death of Mr. John Oldham, A Pindarique Pastoral Ode.
Stanza I.
UNdoubtedly it is thy peculiar Fate,
Ah, miserable Astragon!
Thou art condemned alone
To bear the Burden of a wretched Life,
Still in this howling Wilderness to roam,
While all thy Bosom-friends unkindly go,
And leave thee to lament them here below.
Thy dear Alexis would not stay,
Joy of thy Life, and Pleasure of thine Eyes,
Dear Alexis went away
With an invincible Surprise;
The Angel-like Youth early disliked this State,
And cheerfully submitted to his Fate.
Never did Soul of a Celestial Birth
Inform a purer piece of Earth.
O that 'twere not in vain
To wish what is past might be retrieved again!
Thy Dotage, thy Alexis, then
Had answered all thy Vows and Prayers,
And Crowned with pregnant Joys thy silver Hairs,
Loved to this day among the living Sons of Men.
II.
And thou, my Friend, have left me too,
Menalcas! poor Menalcas! even thou,
Of whom so loudly Fame has spoke
In the Records of her immortal Book,
Whose disregarded Worth Ages to come
Shall wail with Indignation over thy Tomb.
Worthy were thou to live, as long as Vice
Should need a Satyr, that the frantic Age
Might tremble at the Lash of thy poetic Rage.
The untutored World in after Times
May live uncensur'd for their Crimes,
Freed from the Dreads of thy reforming Pen,
Turn to old Chaos once again.
Of all the instructive Bards, whose more than Theban Lyre.
Could savage Souls with manly Thoughts inspire,
Menalcas worthy was to live.
Say, you his Fellow-Shepherds that survive,
Tell me, you mournful Swains,
Has my adored Menalcas left behind;
In all these pensive Plains
A gentler Shepherd with a braver mind:
Which of you all did more Majestic Show,
Or wore the Garland on a sweeter Brow?
III.
-- But wayward Astragon resolves no more
The Loss of his Menalcas to deplore:
The place to which he wisely is withdrawn
Is altogether blessed;
There no Clouds overwhelm his Breast,
No Midnight Cares can break his Rest;
For all is everlasting cheerful Dawn.
The Poet's Bliss there shall he long possess,
Perfect Ease and soft Recess;
The treacherous World no more shall him deceive;
Of Hope and Fortune he has taken Leave:
And now in mighty Triumph does he reign,
(His Head adorned with Beams of Light)
Over the unthinking Rabble's Spite,
And the dull wealthy Fool's disdain.
Thrice happy he that dies the Muses Friend,
He needs no Obelisque, no Pyramid
His sacred Dust to hide;
He needs not for his Memory to provide;
For he might well foresee his Praise can never end.
Thomas Flatman.
In memory of the Author.
TAke this short-summon'd loose unfinisht Verse
Cold as thy Tomb, and suddainas thy Hears
From my sick Thoughts thou can no better crave,
Who scarce drag Life, and envy thee thy Grave.
Me Phoebus always faintly did inspire,
And gave my narrow Breast more scanty Fire.
My Hybla-Muse through humble Meads sought Spoil,
Collecting little Sweets with mighty Toil;
Yet when some Friend's just Fame did Theme afford,
Her Voice amongst the tow' ring Swans was heard.
In vain for such Attendance now I call,
My Ink overflows with Spleen, my Blood with Gall,
Yet, sweet Alexis, my Esteem of thee
Was equal to thy Worth and Love for me.
Death is thy Gain -- that Thought affects me most,
I care not what the ill-natured World has lost.
For Wit with thee expired, how shall I grieve?
Who grudge the ungrateful Age what thou did leave,
The Tribute of their Verse let others send,
And mourn the Poet gone, I mourn the Friend.
Enjoy thy Fate -- thy Predecessors come,
Cowley and Butler to conduct thee home.
Who would not (Butler cries) like me engage
New Worlds of Wit to serve a grateful Age?
For such Rewards what Tasks will Authors shun?
I pray, Sir, is my Monument begun?
Enjoy thy Fate, thy Voice in Anthems raise;
So well tuned here on Earth to our Apollo's Praise:
Let me retire, while some sublimer Pen
Performs for thee what thou have done for Homer and for Ben.
N. T.
On the ensuing Poems of Mr. John Oldham, and the Death of his good Friend the
ingenious Author.
OBscure and cloudy did the day appear,
As Heaven designed to blot it from the year;
The Elements all seemed to disagree,
At least, I Am sure, they were at strife in me:
Possessed with Spleen, which Melancholy bred,
When Rumor told me that my Friend was dead,
That Oldham honored for his early Worth,
Was cropped, like a sweet Blossom from the Earth,
Where late he grew, delighting every Eye
In his rare Garden of Philosophy.
The fatal Sound new Sorrows did infuse,
And all my Griefs were doubled at the News:
For we with mutual Arms of Friendship strove,
Friendship the true and solid part of Love;
And he so many Graces had in store,
That Fame or Beauty could not bind me more.
His Wit in his immortal Verse appears,
Many his Virtues were, though few his Years;
Which were so spent as if by Heaven contrived,
To lash the Vices of the longer lived.
None was more skilful, none more learned than he,
A Poet in its sacred Quality:
Inspired above, and could command each Passion,
Had all the Wit without the Affectation.
A Calm of Nature still possessed his Soul,
No cankered Envy did his Breast control:
Modest as Virgins that have never known
The jilting Breeding of the nauseous Town;
And easy as his Numbers that sublime
His lofty Strains, and beautify his Rhyme,
Till the Time's Ignomy inspired his Pen,
And rowz'd the drowsy Satyr from his Den;
Then fluttering Fops were his Aversion still,
And felt the Power of his Satyrick Quill.
The Spark whose Noise proclaims his empty Pate,
That struts along the Mall with antic Gate;
And all the Phyllis and the Chloris Fools
Were damned by his invective Muse in Shoals.
Who on the Age looked with impartial Eyes,
And aimed not at the Person, but the Vice.
To all true Wit he was a constant Friend,
And as he well could judge, could well commend.
The mighty Homer he with Care perused,
And that great Genius to the World infused;
Immortal Virgil, and Lucretius too,
And all the Seeds of the Soul his Reason knew:
Like Ovid, could the Ladies Hearts assail,
With Horace sing, and lash with Juvenal.
Unskilled in naught that did with Learning dwell,
But Pride to know he understood it well.
Adieu thou modest Type of perfect Man;
Ah, had not thy Perfections that began
In Life's bright Morning been eclipsed so soon,
We all had bask'd and wantoned in thy Noon;
But Fate grew envious of thy growing Fame,
And knowing Heaven from whence thy Genius came,
Assigned thee by immutable Decree
A glorious Crown of Immortality,
Snatched thee from all thy mourning Friends below,
Just as the Bays were planting on thy Brow.
Thus worldly Merit has the Worlds Regard;
But Poets in the next have their Reward;
And Heaven in Oldham's Fortune seemed to show,
No Recompense was good enough below:
So to prevent the Worlds ungrateful Crimes,
Enriched his Mind, and bid him die betimes.
T. Durfey.
On the Death of Mr. John Oldham.
Hark! is it only my prophetic Fear,
Or some Death's sad Alarm that I hear?
By all my Doubts it is Oldham's fatal Knell;
It rings aloud, eternally farewell:
Farewell thou mighty Genius of our Isle,
Whose forward Parts made all our Nation smile,
In whom both Wit and Knowledge did conspire,
And Nature gazed as if she did admire
How such few years such Learning could acquire:
Nay seemed concerned that we should hardly find
So sharp a Pen, and so serene a Mind.
Oh then lament; let each distracted Breast
With universal Sorrow be possessed.
Mourn, mourn, ye Muses, and your Songs give over;
For now your loved Adonis is no more.
He whom ye tutored from his Infant-years,
Cold, pale and ghastly as the Grave appears:
He whom ye bathed in your loved murmuring Stream,
Your daily pleasure, and your mighty Theme
Is now no more; the Youth, the Youth is dead,
The mighty Soul of Poetry is fled;
Fled ever his Worth or Merit was half known;
No sooner seen, but in a Moment gone:
Like to some tender Plant, which reared with Care,
At length becomes most fragrant, and most fair;
Long does it thrive, and long its Pride. maintain,
Esteemed secure from Thunder, Storm or Rain;
Then comes a Blast, and all the Work is vain.
But Oh! my Friend, must we no more rehearse
Thy equal Numbers in thy pleasing Verse?
In Love how soft, in Satyr how severe?
In Passion moving, and in Rage austere!
Virgil in Judgment, Ovid in Delight,
An easy Thought with a Meonian Flight;
Horace in Sweetness, Juvenal in Rage,
And even Biblis must each Heart engage!
Just in his Praises, and what most desire,
Would flatter none for Greatness, Love or Hire;
Humble, though courted, and what is rare to see,
Of wondrous Worth, yet wondrous Modesty.
So far from ostentation he did seem,
That he was meanest in his own Esteem.
Alas, young man, why were thou made to be
At once our Glory and our Misery?
Our Misery in losing thee is more
Than could thy Life our Glory be before:
For should a Soul celestial Joys possess,
And straight be banished from that Happiness,
Oh, where would be its Pleasure? where its' Gain?
TheBliss once tasted but augments the Pain:
So having once so great a Prize in thee,
How much the heavier must our Sorrows be?
For if such Flights were in thy younger Days,
What if thou would lived, O what had been thy Praise?
Eternal Wreaths of never-dying Bays:
But those are due already to thy Name,
Which stands enrolled in the Records of Fame;
And though thy great Remains to Ashes turn,
With lasting Praises we'll supply thy Urn,
Which like Sepulchral Lamps shall ever burn.
But hold! methinks, great Shade, I see thee rove
Through the smooth Path of Plenty, Peace and Love;
Where Ben. salutes thee first, o'erjoy'd to see
The Youth that sung his Fame and Memory:
Great Spencer next, with all the learned Train,
Do greet thee in a Panegyric Strain:
Adonis is the Joy of all the Plain.
Tho. Andrews.
DAMON, an ECLOGUE On the untimely Death of Mr. Oldham.
Corydon. Alexis.
BEneath a dismal Yew the Shepherds sat,
And talked of Damon's Muse and Damon's Fate:
Their mutual Lamentations gave them Ease;
For sometimes Melancholy it self does please:
Like Philomel abandoned to distress,
Yet even their Griefs in Music they express.
Cor. I Will sing no more since Verses want a Charm,
The Muses could not their own Damon arm:
At least I Will touch this useless Pipe no more,
Unless, like Orpheus, I could Shades restore.

A. Rather, like Orpheus, celebrate your Friend,
And with your Music Hell it self suspend:
Tax Proserpine of Cruelty and Hate,
And sing of Damon's Muse, and Damon's Fate.

C. When Damon sung, he sung with such a Grace,
Lord, how the very London-brutes did gaze!
Sharp was his Satyr, nor allayed with Gall;
'Twas Rage, 'twas generous Indignation all.

A. Oh had he lived, and to Perfection grown,
Not like Marcellus, only to be shown;
He would have charmed their Sense a nobler way,
Taught Virgins how to sigh, and Priests to pray.

C. Let Priests and Virgins then to him address,
And in their Songs their Gratitude express,
While we that know the Worth of easy Verse,
Secure the Laurel to adorn his Hearse.

A. Codrus, you know, that sacred Badge does wear,
And 'twere injurious not to leave it there;
But since no Merit can strike Envy dumb,
Do you with Baccar, guard and grace his Tomb.

C. While you (dear Swain) with unaffected Rhyme,
Majestic, sad, and suited to the Time,
His Name to future Ages consecrate,
By praising of his Muse, and mourning of his Fate.

A. Alas, I never must pretend to this,
My Pipe scarce knows a Tune but what is his:
Let future Ages then for Damon's sake,
From his own Works a just Idaea take.
Yet then, but like Alcides he will be shown,
And from his meanest part his Size be known.

C. 'Twill be your Duty then to set it down.

A. Once and but once (so Heaven and Fate ordain)
I met the gentle Youth upon the Plain,
Kindly, cries he, if you Alexis be,
And though I know you not you must be he,
Too long already we have Strangers been;
This Day, at least, our Friendship must begin.
Let Business, that perverse Intruder, wait,
To be above it is poetical and great.
Then with Assyrian Nard our Heads did shine,
While rich Sabaean Spice exalts the Wine;
Which to a just Degree our Spirits fired;
But he was by a greater God inspired:
Wit was the Theme, which he did well describe,
With Modesty unusual to his Tribe.
But as with ominous Doubts, and aching Heart,
When Lovers after first Enjoyment part,
Not half content; for this was but a Taste,
And wondering how the Minutes flew so fast,
They vow a Friendship that shall ever last.
So we -- but Oh how much am I accursed!
To think that this last Office is my first.

Occasioned by the present Edition of the ensuing Poems, and the Death of the
ingenious Author.
Cursed be the day when first this goodly Isle
Vile Books, and useless thinking did defile.
In Greek and Latin-Boggs our Time we waste,
When all is Pain and Weariness at best:
Mountains of Whims and Doubts we travel over,
While treacherous Fancy dances on before:
Pleased with our Danger still we stumble on,
To late repent, and are too soon undone.
Let Bodley now in its own Ruins lie,
By th'common Hangman burnt for Heresy.
Avoid the nasty learned Dust, 'twill breed
More Plagues than ever Jakes or Dunghils did.
The want of Dullness will the World undo,
It Is Learning makes us mad and Rebels too.
Learning, a Jilt which while we do enjoy,
Slily our Rest and Quiet steals away;
That greedily the Blood of Youth receives,
And naught but Blindness and a Dotage gives.
Worse than the Pox, or scolding Woman fly
The awkward Madness of Philosophy.
That Bedlam Bess, Religion never more
Fantastic pie-ball'd, antic Dresses wore:
Opinion, Pride, Moroseness gives a Fame;
It Is Folly, christened with a modish Name.
Let dull Divinity no more delight;
It spoils the Man, and makes an Hypocrite.
The chief Professors to Preferment fly,
By Cringe and Scrape, the basest Simony.
The humble Clown will best the Gospel teach,
And inspired Ignorance sounder Doctrines preach.
A way to Heaven mere Nature well does show,
Which reasoning and Disputes can never know.
Yet still proud Tyrant Sense in Pomp appears,
And claims a Tribute of full threescore Years.
Sewed in a Sack, with Darkness circl'd round,
Each man must be with Snakes and Monkeys drowned.
Laborious Folly, and compendious Art,
To waste that Life whose longest Date's too short.
Laborious Folly, to wind up with Pain
What Death unravels soon, and renders vain.
We blindly hurry on in mystic ways,
Nor wisely tread the Paths of solid Praife.
There Is naught deserves one precious drop of sweat,
But Poetry, the noblest Gift of Fate,
Which after Death does a more lasting Life beget.
Not that which sudden, frantic Heats produce,
Where Wine and Pride, not Heaven shall raise the Muse.
Not that small Stock which does Translators make;
That Trade poor Bankrupt-Poetasters take:
But such, when God his Fiat did express,
And powerful Numbers wrought an Universe.
With such great David tuned his charming Lyre,
That even Saul and Madness could admire.
With such Great Oldham bravely did excel,
That David's Lamentation sung so well.
Oldham! the Man that could with Judgment writ,
Our Oxford's Glory, and the World's Delight.
Sometimes in boundless keenest Satyr bold,
Sometimes a soft as those Love-tales he told.
That Vice could praise, and Virtue too disgrace;
The first Excess of Wit that ever did please.
Scarce Cowley such Pindarique soaring knew,
Yet by his Reader still was kept in view.
His Fancy, like Jove's Eagle lived above,
And bearing Thunder still would upward move.
Oh Noble Kingston! had thy lovely Guest
With a large stock of Youth and Life been Blessed;
Not all thy Greatness, and thy Virtues store
Had surer Comforts been, or pleased thee more.
But Oh! the date is short of mighty Worth,
And Angels never tarry long on Earth.
His soul, the bright, the pure Etherial Flame
To those loved Regions flew, from whence it came.
And spite of what Mankind had long believed,
My Creed says only Poets can be saved.
That God has only for a number staid,
To stop the breach, which Rebel Angels made
For none their absence can so well supply;
They are all over Seraphick Harmony.
Then, and not that till then the World shall burn
And its base Dross, Mankind their fortune mourn,
While all to their old nothing quick return.
The peevish Gritick then shall be ashamed,
And for his Sins of Vanity be damned.
Oxon, May the 26th. 1684. T. Wood.

CONTENTS.
COunterpart to the Satyr against Virtue, Page 1 Virg. Eclogue VIII. The
Enchantment 13 To Madam L. E. upon her Recovery from a fit of Sickness 22 On
the Death of Mrs. Katharine Kingscourt, a Child of excellent Parts and Piety 31
A Sunday-thought in Sickness 34 To the Memory of Mr. Charles Morwent 49 To the
Memory of that worthy Gentleman Mr. Harman Atwood. 95 Character of a certain
ugly Old P -- 111
COUNTERPART TO THE SATYR against VIRTUE.
In Person of the Author.
I.
PArdon me, Virtue, whatsoever thou art,
(For sure thou of the Godhead art a part,
And all that is of him must be
The very Deity.)
Pardon, if I in ought did thee blaspheme,
Or injure thy pure Sacred Name:
Accept unfeigned Repentance, Prayers and Vows,
The best Atonement of my penitent humble Muse,
The best that Heaven requires, or Mankind can produce.
All my Attempts hereafter shall at thy Devotion be,
Ready to consecrate my Ink and very Blood to thee.
Forgive me, ye blessed Souls that dwell above,
Where you by its reward the worth of Virtue prove.
Forgive (if you can do it) who know no Passion now but Love.
And you unhappy happy few,
Who strive with Life, and Humane Miseries below,
Forgive me too,
If I in ought disparaged them, or else discouraged you.
II.
Blessed Virtue! whose Almighty Power
Does to our fallen Race restore
All that in Paradise we lost, and more,
Lifts us to Heaven, and makes us be
The Heirs and Image of the Deity.
Soft gentle Yoke! which none but resty Fools refuse,
Which before Freedom I would ever choose.
Easy are all the Bonds that are imposed by thee;
Easy as those of Lovers are,
(If I with ought less pure may thee compare)
Nor do they force, but only guide our Liberty:
By such soft Ties are Spirits above confined;
So gentle is the Chain which them to Good does bind.
Sure Card, whereby this frail and tottering Bark we steer
Through Life's tempestuous Ocean here;
Through all the tossing Waves of Fear,
And dangerous Rocks of black Despair.
Safe in thy Conduct unconcerned we move,
Secure from all the threatening Storms that blow,
From all Attacks of Chance below,
And reach the certain Haven of Felicity above.
III.
Best Mistress of our Souls! whose Charms and Beauties last,
And are by very Age encreast,
By which all other Glories are defaced.
You Are thy own Dowry, and a greater far
Than All the Race of Womankind ever brought,
Though each of them like the first Wife were fraught,
And half the Universe did for her Portion share.
That tawdry Sex, which giddy senseless we
Through Ignorance so vainly Deifie,
Are all but glorious Brutes when un-endow'd with thee.
It Is Vice alone, the truer Jilt, and worse,
In whose Enjoyment though we find
A flitting Pleasure, yet it leaves behind
A Pain and Torture in the Mind,
And claps the wounded Conscience with incurable Remorse,
Or else betrays us to the great Trepans of Humane Kind.
IV.
It Is Vice, the greater Thraldom, harder Drudgery,
Whereby deposing Reason from its gentle Sway,
(That rightful Sovereign which we should obey)
We undergo a various Tyranny,
And to un-number'd servile Passions Homage pay.
These with Egyptian Rigor us enslave,
And govern with unlimited Command;
They make us endless Toil pursue,
And still their doubled Tasks renew,
To push on our too hasty Fate, and build our Grave,
Or which is worse, to keep us from the Promised Land.
Nor may we think our Freedom to retrieve,
We struggle with our heavy Yoke in vain:
In vain we strive to break that Chain,
Unless a Miracle relieve;
Unless the Almighty Wand enlargement give,
We never must expect Delivery,
Till Death, the universal Writ of Ease, does set us free.
V.
Some sordid Avarice in Vassallage confines,
Like Roman Slaves condemned to the Mimes;
These are in its harsh Bridewel lashed and punished,
And with hard Labor scarce can earn their Bread.
Others Ambition, that Imperious Dame,
Exposes cruelly, like Gladiators, here
Upon the World's Great Theater.
Through Dangers and through Blood they wade to Fame,
To purchase grinning Honor and an empty Name.
And some by Tyrant-Lust are Captive led,
And with false Hopes of Pleasure fed;
'Till tired with Slavery to their own Desires,
Life's o'er-charg'd Lamp goes out, and in a Snuff expires.
VI.
Consider we the little Arts of Vice,
The Stratagems and Artifice
Whereby she does attract her Votaries:
All those Allurements and those Charms
Which pimp Transgressors to her Arms,
Are but foul Paint, and counterfeit Disguise,
To palliate her own concealed Deformities,
And for false empty Joys betray us to true solid Harms.
In vain she would her Dowry boast,
Which clogged with Legacies we never gain,
But with unvaluable Cost;
Which got we never can retain;
But must the greatest part be lost,
To the great Bubbles, Age or Chance, again.
It Is vastly over-balanc'd by the Jointure which we make,
In which our Lives, our Souls, our All is set at Stake,
Like silly Indians, foolish we
With a known Cheat, a losing Traffic hold,
Whilst led by an ill-judging Eye,
W' admire a trifling Pageantry,
And merchandise our Jewels and our Gold,
For worthless Glass and Beads, or an Exchange's Frippery.
If we a while maintain the expensive Trade,
Such mighty Impost on the Cargo's laid,
Such a vast Custom to be paid,
We Are forced at last like wretched Bankrupts to give out,
Clapped up by Death, and in Eternal Durance shut.
VII.
What art thou, Fame, for which so eagerly we strive?
What art thou but an empty Shade
By the Reflection of our Actions made?
Thou, unlike others, never follow'st us alive;
But, like a Ghost, walk'st only after we are dead.
Posthumous Toy! vain aster-Legacy!
Which only ours can be,
When we our selves no more are we!
Fickle as vain! who do on vulgar Breath depend,
Which we by dear Experience find
More changeable, more veering than the unconstant Wind.
What art thou, Gold, that cheat'st the Miser's Eyes?
Which he does so devoutly idolize;
For whom he all his Rest and Ease does sacrifice.
It Is Use alone can all thy Value give,
And he from that no Benefit can ever receive.
Cursed Mineral! near Neighboring Hell begot,
Which all the Infection of thy damned Neighborhood have brought.
Thou Bawd to Murders, Rapes and Treachery,
And every greater Name of Villainy;
From thee they all derive their Stock and Pedigree.
Thou the lewd World with all its crying Crimes do store,
And hardly wilt allow the Devil the cause of more.
And what is Pleasure which does most beguile?
That Siren which betrays us with a flattering Smile.
We listen to the treacherous Harmony,
Which sings but our own Obsequy.
The Danger unperceived till Death draw nigh;
Till drowning we want Power to 'scape the fatal Enemy.
VIII.
How frantic is the wanton Epicure!
Who a perpetual Surfeit will endure?
Who places all his chiefest Happiness
In the Extravagancies of Excess,
Which wise Sobriety esteems but a Disease?
O mighty envied Happiness to eat!
Which fond mistaken Sots call Great!
Poor Frailty of our Flesh! which we each day
Must thus repair for fear of ruinous Decay!
Degrading of our Nature, where vile Brutes are fain
To make and keep up Man!
Which, when the Paradise above we gain,
Heaven thinks too great an Imperfection to retain!
By each Disease the sickly Joy's destroyed;
At every Meal it is nauseous and cloyed,
Empty at best, as when in Dream enjoyed;
When, cheated by a slumbering Imposture, we
Fancy a Feast, and great Regalio's by;
And think we taste, and think we see,
And riot on imaginary Luxury.
IX.
Grant me, O Virtue, thy more solid lasting Joy;
Grant me the better Pleasures of the Mind,
Pleasures, which only in pursuit of thee we find,
Which Fortune cannot mar, nor Chance destroy.
One Moment in thy blessed Enjoyment is
Worth an Eternity of that tumultuous Bliss,
Which we derive from Sense,
Which often cloys, and must resign to Impotence.
Grant me but this, how will I triumph in my happy State?
Above the Changes and Reverse of Fate;
Above her Favors and her Hate.
I Will scorn the worthless Treasures of Peru,
And those of to other Indies too.
I Will pity Caesar's Self with all his Trophies and his Fame,
And the vile brutish Herd of Epicures contemn,
And all the Under-shrievalties of Life not worth a Name.
Nor will I only owe my Bliss,
Like others, to a Multitude,
Where Company keeps up a forced Happiness;
Should all Mankind surcease to live,
And none but individual I survive,
Alone I would be happy, and enjoy my Solitude.
Thus shall my Life in pleasant Minutes wear,
Calm as the Minutes of the Evening are,
And gentle as the motions of the upper Air;
Soft as my Muse, and unconfined as she,
When flowing in the Numbers of Pindarique Liberty.
And when I see pale ghastly Death appear,
That grand inevitable Test which all must bear,
Which best distinguishes the blessed and wretched here;
I Will smile at all it Horrors, court my welcome Destiny,
And yield my willing Soul up in an eafie Sigh;
And Epicures that see shall envy and confess,
That I, and those who dare like me be good, the chiefest Good possess.
Virg. ECLOGUE VIII. The Enchantment.
Poet, Damon, Alpheus, Speakers.
DAmon and Alpheus, the two Shepherds Strains
I mean to tell, and how they charmed the Plains.
I Will tell their charming Numbers which the Herd,
Unmindful of their Grass, in Throngs admired.
At which fierce Savages astonished stood,
And every River stopped its listening Flood.
For you, Great Sir, whether with Cannons Roar
You spread your Terror to the Holland Shore,
Or with a gentle and a steady Hand
In Peace and Plenty rule your Native Land.
Shall ever that auspicious Day appear,
When I your glorious Actions shall declare?
It shall, and I throughout the World rehearse
Their Fame, fit only for a Spencer's Verse.
With you my Muse began, with you shall end:
Accept my Verse that waits on your Command;
And deign this Ivy Wreath a place may find
Amongst the Laurels which your Temples bind.
'Twas at the time that Night's cool shades withdrew,
And left the Grass all hung with Pearly Dew;
When Damon, leaning on his Oaken Wand,
Thus to his Pipe in gentle Lays complained.

D. Arise, thou Morning, and drive on the Day,
While wretched I with fruitless words inveigh
Against false Nisa, while the Gods I call
With my last Breath, though hopeless to avail,
Though they regard not my Complaints at all.
Strike up my Pipe, play me in tuneful Strains
What I heard sung on the Maenalian Plains.
Maenalus ever has its warbling Groves,
And talking Pines, it ever hears the Loves
Of Shepherds, and the Notes of Mighty Pan,
The first that would not let the Reeds untuned remain.
Strike up my Pipe, play me in tuneful Strains
What I heard sung on the Maenalian Plains.
Mopsus weds Nisa, Gods! what Lover ever
Need after this have reason to despair?
Griffins shall now leap Mares, and the next Age
The Deer and Hounds in Friendship shall engage.
Go, Mopsus, get the Torches ready soon;
Thou, happy Man, must have the Bride anon.
Go, Bridegroom, quickly, the Nut-scramble make,
The Evening-star quits Oeta for thy sake.
Strike up my Pipe, play me in tuneful Strains
What I heard sung on the Maenalian Plains.
How fitly art thou matched who wast so nice!
Thou haughty Nymph who did all else despise!
Who slight'st so scornfully my Pipe, my Herd,
My rough-grown Eyebrows, and unshaven Beard,
And think no God does mortal things regard.
Strike up my Pipe, play me in tuneful Strains
What I heard sung on the Maenalian Plains.
I saw thee young, and in thy Beauty's Bloom,
To gather Apples with thy Mother, come,
'Twas in our Hedge-rows, I was there with Pride,
To show you to the best, and be your Guide.
Then I just entering my twelfth Year was found,
I then could reach the tender Boughs from Ground.
Heavens! when I saw, how soon was I undone!
How to my Heart did the quick Poison run!
Strike up my Pipe, play me in tuneful Strains
What I heard sung on the Maenalian Plains.
Now I Am convinced what Love is; the cold North
Sure in its craggy Mountains brought him forth,
Or Africk's wildest Deserts gave him Birth,
Amongst the Cannibals and Savage Race;
He never of our Kind, or Country was.
Strike up my Pipe, play me in tuneful Strains
What I heard sung on the Maenalian Plains.
Dire Love did once a Mother's Hand embrue
In Childrens Blood; a cruel Mother, thou;
Hard it is to say of both which is the worst,
The cruel Mother, or the Boy accursed.
He a cursed Boy, a cruel Mother thou;
The Devil a whit to choose betwixt the two.
Strike up my Pipe, play me in tuneful Strains
What I heard sung on the Maenalian Plains.
Let Wolves by Nature shun the Sheep-folds now:
On the rough Oaks let Oranges now grow:
Let the coarse Alders bear the Daffadill,
And costly Amber from the Thorn distill:
Let Owls match Swans, let Tyt'rus Orpheus be,
In the Woods Orpheus, and Arion on the Sea.
Strike up my Pipe, play me in tuneful Strains
What I heard sung on the Maenalian Plains.
Let all the World turn Sea, ye Woods adieu!
To some high Mountain's top I Will get me now,
And thence my self into the Waters throw.
There quench my Flames, and let the cruel She
Accept this my last dying Will and Legacy.
Cease now my Pipe, cease now those warbling Strains
Which I heard sung on the Maenalian Plains.
This Damon's Song; relate ye Muses now
Alpheus Reply: All cannot all things do.

A. Bring Holy Water, sprinkle all around,
And see these Altars with soft Fillets bound:
Male-Frankincense, and juicy Vervain burn,
I Will try if I by Magic Force can turn here.
My stubborn Love: I Will try if I can fire
His frozen Breast: Nothing but Charms are wanting
Bring Daphnis from the Town, ye Magic Charms;
Bring home loved Daphnis to my longing Arms.
Charms in her wonted Course can stop the Moon,
And from her well-fix'd Orb can call her down.
By Charms the mighty Circe (we are told)
Ulysses famed Companions changed of old.
Snakes by the Virtue of Enchantment forced,
Often in the Meads with their own Poison burst.
Bring Daphnis from the Town, ye Magic Charms,
Bring home loved Daphnis to my longing Arms.
First, these three several Threads I compass round
Thy Image, thus in Magic Fetters bound:
Then round these Altars thrice thy Image bear:
Odd Numbers to the Gods delightful are.
Bring Daphnis from the Town, ye Magic Charms,
Bring home loved Daphnis to my longing Arms.
Go tie me in three knots three Ribands now,
And let the Ribands be of diffrent Hue:
Go, Amaryllis, tie them strait, and cry,
At the same time, "They Are true-love-knots, I tie.
Bring Daphnis from the Town, ye Magic Charms,
Bring home loved Daphnis to my longing Arms.
Look how this Clay grows harder, and look how
With the same Fire this Wax does softer grow;
So Daphnis, let him with my Love do so.
Strew Meal and Salt (for so these Rites require)
And set the crackling Laurel Boughs on fire:
This naughty Daphnis sets my Breast on flame,
And I this Laurel burn in Daphnis's Name.
Bring Daphnis from the Town, ye Magic Charms,
Bring home loved Daphnis to my longing Atms.
As a poor Heifer, wearied in the Chase,
Of seeking her loved Steer from place to place.
Through Woods, through Groves, through Arable, and Wast,
On some green River's bank lies down at last.
There Lows her Moan, despairing, and forlorn,
And, though belated, minds not to return:
Let Daphnis's Case be such, and let not me
Take any care to give a Remedy.
Bring Daphnis from the Town, ye magic Charms,
Bring home loved Daphnis to my longing Arms.
These Garments erst the faithless Traitor left,
Dear Pledges of his Love, of which I Am reft:
Beneath the Threshold these I bury now,
In thee, O Earth; these Pledges Daphnis owe.
Bring Daphnis from the Town, ye Magic Charms,
Bring home loved Daphnis to my longing Arms.
Of Maeris I these Herbs and Poisons had,
From Pontus brought: in Pontus store are bred:
With these I Have often seen Maeris Wonders do,
Turn himself Wolf, and to the Forest go:
I Have often seen him Fields of Corn displace,
From whence they grew, and Ghosts in Churchyards raise.
Bring Daphnis from the Town, ye Magic Charms,
Bring home loved Daphnis to my longing Arms.
Go, Maid, go, bear the Ashes out at door,
And then forthwith into the neighboring current pour,
Over thy Head, and don't look back be sure:
I Will try, what these on Daphnis will prevail,
The Gods he minds not, nor my Charms at all.
Bring Daphnis from the Town, ye Magic Charms,
Bring home loved Daphnis to my longing Arms.
Behold! the Ashes while we lingering stay,
While we neglect to carry them away,
Have reached the Altar, and have fired the Wood,
That lies upon it: Heaven send it be for good!
Something I know not what is the matter: Hark!
I hear our Lightfoot in the Entry bark.
Shall I believe, or is it only Dream,
Which Lovers fancies are too apt to frame?
Cease now ye Magic Charms, behold him come!
Cease needless Charms, my Daphnis is at home!

To Madam L. E. upon her Recovery from a late Sickness.
Madam,
PArdon, that with slow Gladness we so late
Your wished return of Health congratulate:
Our Joys at first so thronged to get abroad,
They hindered one another in the crowd;
And now such haste to tell their Message make,
They only stammer what they meant to speak.
You the fair Subject which I am to sing,
To whose kind Hands this humble joy I bring:
Aid me, I beg, while I this Theme pursue,
For I invoke no other Muse but you.
Long time had you here brightly shone below
With all the Rays kind Heaven could bestow.
No envious Cloud e're offered to invade
Your Luster, or compel it to a Shade:
Nor did it yet by any Sign appear,
But that you thoroughout Immortal were.
Till Heaven (if Heaven could prove so cruel) sent
To interrupt the Growth of your content.
As if it grudged those Gifts you did enjoy,
And would that Bounty which it gave, destroy:
'Twas since your Excellence did envy move
In those high Powers and made them jealous prove.
They thought these Glories should they still have
shined
Unsullied, were too much for Womankind.
Which might they write as lasting, as they are Fair,
Too great for ought, but Deities appear:
But Heaven (it may be) was not yet complete,
And lackt you there to fill your empty Seat.
And when it could not fairly woo you hence,
Turned Ravisher, and offered Violence.
Sickness did first a formal siege begin,
And by sure slowness tried your Life to win.
As if by lingering methods Heaven meant
To chase you hence and tire you to consent.
But, this in vain, Fate did to force resort,
And next by Storm shove to attack the fort.
A Sleep, dull as your last, did you Arrest,
And all there Magazines of life possessed.
No more the Blood its circling course did run,
But in the veins, like Isicles, it hung.
No more the Heart (now void of quickening heat)
The tuneful March of vital Motion beat.
Stiffness did into all the Sinews climb,
And a short Death crept cold through every Limb.
All Signs of Life from sight so far withdrew,
'Twas now thought Popery to pray for you.
There might you (were not that sense lost) have seen
How your true Death would have resented been:
A Lethargy, like yours, each breast did seize,
And all by Sympathy caught your Disease.
Around you silent Imagery appears,
And naught in the Spectators moves, but Tears.
They pay what grief were to your Funeral due,
And yet dare hope Heaven would your Life renew.
Mean while, all means, all drugs prescribed are,
Which the decays of Health, or Strength repair,
Medicines so powerful they new Souls would save,
And Life in long-dead Carcasses retrieve:
But these in vain, they rougher Methods try,
And now your'e Martyred that you may not die;
Sad Scene of Fate! when Tortures were your gain:
And it was a kindness thought to wish you pain!
As if the slackned string of Life run down,
Could only by the Rack be screwed in tune.
But Heaven at last (grown conscious that its power
Could scarce what was to die with you restore.)
And loath to see such Glories overcome,
Sent a post Angel to repeal your doom;
Strait Fate obeyed the Charge which Heaven sent,
And gave this first dear Proof, it could Repent:
Triumphant Charms! what may not you subdue,
When Fate's your Slave, and thus submits to you!
It now again the new-broke Thread does knit,
And for another Clew her spindle fit:
And life's hid spark which did unquencht remain,
Caught the fled light and brought it back again:
Thus you revived, and all our Joy with you,
Revived and found their Resurrection too:
Some only grieved, that what was Deathless thought
They saw so near to Fatal ruin brought:
Now crowds of Blessings on that happy hand,
Whose, kill could cager Destiny withstand;
Whose learned Power has rescued from the Grave,
That Life which 'twas a Miracle to save;
That Life which were it thus untimely lost,
Had been the ^est Spoil Death ere could boast:
May he henceforth be God of healing thought,
By whom such good to you and us was brought:
Altars and shrines to him are justly due,
Who showed himself a God by raising you:
But say, fair Saint, for you alone can know,
Whither your Soul in this short flight did go;
Went it to antedate that Happiness,
You must at last (though late we hope) possess?
Inform us lest we should your Fate belie,
And call that Death which was but Ecstasy,
The Queen of Love (we are told) once let us see:
That Goddesses from wounds could not be free;
And you by this unwish'd Occasion show
That they like Mortal us can Sickness know:
Pity! that Heaven should all its Titles give,
And yet not let you with them ever live.
You Would lack no point that makes a Deity,
If you could like it too Immortal be.
And so you are; half boasts a Deathless State;
Although your frailer part must yield to Fate.
By every breach in that fair lodging made,
Its blessed Inhabitant is more displaid:
In that white Snow which overspreads your skin,
We trace ye whiter Soul which dwells within;
Which while you through this shining Hue display
Looks like a Star placed in the Milky way:
Such the bright Bodies of the Blessed are,
When they for Raiment clothed with Light appear,
And should you visit now the Seats of Bliss,
You need not wear another form but this.
Never did Sickness in such pomp appear,
As when it thus your Livery did wear,
Disease it self looked amiable here.
So Clouds which would obscure the Sun often gilded be,
And Shades are taught to shine as bright as he.
Grieve not fair Nymph, when in your Glass you trace
The marring footsteps of a pale Disease.
Regret not that your cheeks their Roses want,
Which a few Days shall in full store replant,
Which, whilst your Blood withdraws its guilty Red,
Tells that you own no faults that blushes need:
The Sun whose Bounty does each Spring restore
What Winter from the rifled Meadows tore,
Which every Morning with an early ray
Paints the young Blushing Cheeks of instant Day:
Whose skill (inimitable here below,)
Limns those gay Clouds which form Heaven's colored bow,
That Sun shall soon with Interest repay,
All the lost Beauty Sickness snatched a way.
Your Beams like his shall hourly now advance,
And every minute their swift Growth enhance.
Mean while (that you no helps of healths refuse)
Accept these humble Wishes of the Muse:
Which shall not of their Just Petition fail,
If she (and she is a Goddess) ought prevail.
May no profane Disease henceforth approach,
This sacred Temple with unhallowed touch,
Or with rude sacrilege its frame debauch.
May these fair Members always happy be
In as full Strength and well-set Harmony,
As the new Foundress of your sex could boast,
Ere she by Sin her first Persecution lost:
May Destiny, just to your Merits, twine,
All your smooth Fortunes in a Silken Line.
And that you may at Heaven late arrive,
May it to you its largest Bottom give.
May Heaven with still repeated Favors bless,
Till it its Power below its Will confess;
Till wishes can no more exalt your Fate,
Nor Poets fancy you more Fortunate.
On the Death of Mrs. Katharine Kingscourt a Child of Excellent Parts and Piety.
SHE did, She did -- I saw her mount the Sky,
And with new Whiteness paint the Galaxy.
Heaven her methought with all its Eyes did view,
And yet acknowledged all its Eyes too few.
Methought I saw in crowds blessed Spirits meet,
And with loud Welcomes her arrival greet;
Which could they grieve, had gone with grief away
To see a Soul more white, more pure than they.
Earth was unworthy such a prize as this,
Only a while Heaven let us share the Bliss:
In vain her stay with fruitless Tears we'd woo,
In vain we'd court, when that our Rival grew.
Thanks, ye kind Powers! who did so long dispense,
(Since you so wished her) with her absence thence:
We now resign, to you alone we grant
The sweet Monopoly of such a Saint;
So pure a Saint, I scarce dare call her so,
For fear to wrong her with a Name too low:
Such a Seraphick brightness in her shined,
I hardly can believe her Womankind.
'Twas sure some noble Being left the Sphere,
Which deigned a little to inhabit here,
And cannot be said to die, but disappear.
Or if she Mortal was and meant to show
The greater skill by being made below;
Sure Heaven preserved her by the fall uncurst,
To tell how all the Sex were formed at first:
Never did yet so much Divinity
In such a small Compendium crowded lie.
By her we credit what the Learned tell,
That many Angels in one point can dwell.
More damned Fiends did not in Mary rest,
Than lodged of Blessed Spirits in her Breast;
Religion dawned so early in her mind,
You Would think her Saint whilst in the Womb enshrined:
Nay, that bright ray which did her Temples paint,
Proclaimed her clearly, while alive, a Saint.
Scarce had she learnt to lisp Religion's Name,
Ever she by her Example preached the same,
And taught her Cradle-like the Pulpit to reclaim.
No Action did within her Practice fall
Which for the Atonement of a Blush could call:
No word of hers ever greeted any Ear,
But what a dying Saint confessed might hear.
Her Thoughts had scarcely ever sullied been
By the least Footsteps of Original Sin.
Her Life did still as much Devotion breath
As others do at their last Gasp in Death.
Hence on her Tomb of her let not be said,
So long she lived; but thus, so long she prayed.
A Sunday-Thought in Sickness.
LOrd, how dreadful is the Prospect of Death at the remotest Distance! How the
smallest Apprehension of it can pall the most gay, airy and brisk Spirits! Even
I, who thought I could have been merry in sight of my Coffin, and drink a
Health with the Sexton in my own Grave, now tremble at the least Envoy of the
King of Terrors. To see but the shaking of my Glass makes me turn pale, and
fear is like to prevent and do the Work of my Distemper. All the Jollity of my
Humor and Conversation is turned on a sudden into shagrin and melancholy,
black as Despair, and dark as the Grave. My Soul and Body seem at once laid
out, and I fancy all the Plummets of Eternal Night already hanging upon my
Temples. But whence proceed these Fears? Certainly they are not idle Dreams,
nor the accidental Product of my Disease, which disorders the Brains, and fills
'em with odd Chimaera's. Why should my Soul be averse to its Enlargement? Why
should it be content to be knit up in two Yards of Skin, when it may have all
the World for its Purliew? It Is not that I Am unwilling to leave my Relations
and present Friends: I Am parted from the first already, and could be severed
from both the length of the whole Map, and live with my Body as far distant
from them as my Soul must when I Am dead. Neither is it that I Am loath to leave
the Delights and Pleasures of the World; some of them I have tried, and found
empty, the others covet not, because unknown. I Am confident I could despise 'em
all by a Greatness of Soul, did not the Bible oblige me, and Divines tell me,
it is my Duty. It is not neither that I Am unwilling to go hence before I Have
established a Reputation, and something to make me survive my self. I could
have been content to be Still-born, and have no more than the Register, or
Sexton to tell that I Have ever been in the Land of the Living. In Fine, it is not
from a Principle of Cowardice, which the Schools have called Self-preservation,
the poor Effect of Instinct and dull pretense of a Brute as well as me. This
Unwillingness therefore, and Aversion to undergo the general Fate, must have a
juster Original, and flow from a more important Cause. I Am well satisfied that
this other Being within, that moves and actuates my Frame of Flesh and Blood,
has a Life beyond it and the Grave; and something in it prompts me to believe
its immortality. A Residence it must have somewhere else, when it has left this
Carcass, and another State to pass into, unchangeable and everlasting as it
self after its Separation. This Condition must be good or bad according to its
Actions and Deserts in this Life; for as it ows its Being to some Infinite
Power that created it, I well suppose it his Vassal, and obliged to live by his
Law; and as certainly conclude, that according to the keeping or breaking of
that Law, it is to be rewarded or punished hereafter. This Diversity of Rewards
and Punishments, makes the two Places, Heaven and Hell, so often mentioned in
Scripture, and talked of in Pulpits: Of the later my Fears too cruelly convince
me, and the Anticipation of its Torment, which I already feel in my own
Conscience. There is, there is a Hell, and damned Fiends, and a never-dying
Worm, and that Sceptick that doubts of it, may find 'em all within my single
Breast. I dare not any longer with the Atheist disbelieve them, or think 'em
the Clergy's Bugbears, invented as Nurses do frightful Names for their
Children, to scare 'em into Quietness and Obedience. How often have I triumphed
in my unconcerned, and seared insensibility? How often boasted of that unhappy
suspected Calm, which, like that of the dead Sea, proved only my Curse, and
(...) treacherous Ambush to those Storms, which at presenc (and will for ever
(...) dread) shipwreck my Quiet and Hopes* How often have I rejected the Advice
of that Bosom-friend, and drowned its Alarms in the Noise of a tumultuous
Debauch, or by stupifying Wine (like some condemned Malefactor) armed my self
against the Apprehensions of my certain Doom? Now, now the Tyrant awakes, and
comes to pay at once all Arrears of Cruelty. At last, but too late (like
drowning Mariners) I see the gay Monsters, which inveigled me into my Death and
Destruction. Oh the gnawing Remorse of a rash unguarded, unconsidering Sinner!
Oh how the Ghosts of former Crimes affright my haunted Imagination, and make me
suffer a thousand Racks and Martyrdoms! I see, methinks, the Jaws of
Destruction gaping wide to swallow me; and I, (like one sliding on Ice) though I
see the Danger, cannot stop from running into it. My Fancy represents to me a
whole Legion of Devils, ready to tear me in pieces, numberless as my Sins or
Fears; and whither, Alas! whither shall I fly for Refuge? Where shall I
retreat and take Sanctuary? Shall I call the Rocks and Mountains to cover me,
or bid the Earth yawn wide to its Center, and take me in? Poor shift of
escaping Almighty Justice! Distracting Frenzy! that would make me believe
Contradictions, and hope to fly out of the Reach of him whose Presence is every
where, not excluded Hell it self; for he is there in the Effects of his
Vengeance. Shall I invoke some Power infinite as that that created me, to
reduce me to nothing again, and rid me at once of my Being and all that
tortures it? Oh no, it is in vain, I must be forced into Being, to keep me fresh
for Torment, and retain Sense only to feel Pain. I must be a dying to all
Eternity, and live ever, to live ever wretched. Oh that Nature had placed me in
the Rank of things that have only a bare Existence, or at best an Animal Life,
and never given me a Soul and Reason, which now must contribute to my Misery,
and make me envy Brutes and Vegetables! Would the Womb that bare me had been my
Prison till now, or I stepped out of it into my Grave, and saved the Expenses
and Toil of a long and tedious Journey, where Life affords nothing of
Accommodations to invite one's Stay. Happy had I been if had expired with my
first Breath, and entered the Bill of Mortality as soon as the World: Happy if
I had been drowned in my Font, and that Water which was to regenerate, and give
me New Life, had proved mortal in another sense! I had then died without any
Guilt of my own but what I brought into the World with me, and that too atton'd
for; I mean that which I contracted from my first Parents, my unhappiness
rather than Fault, inasmuch as I was fain to be born of a sinning Race: Then I
had never enhaunc'd it with acquired Guilt, never added those innumerable
Crimes which must make up my Indictment at the grand Audit. Ungrateful Wretch!
I Have made my Sins as numerous as those Blessings and Mercies the Almighty
Bounty has conferred upon me, to oblige and lead me to Repentance. How have I
abused and misimployed those Parts and Talents which might have rendered me
serviceable to Mankind, and repaid an interest of Glory to their Donor? How ill
do they turn to account which I have made the Patrons of Debauchery, and Pimps
and Panders to Vice? How often have I broke my Vows to my Great Creator, which I
would be conscientious of keeping to a silly Woman, a Creature beneath my self?
What has all my Religion been but an empty Parade and show? Either an useful
Hypocrisy taken up for Interest, or a gay specious Formality worn in
Complaisance to Custom and the Mode, and as changeable as my Cloths and their
Fashion. How often have I gone to Church (the place where we are to pay him
Homage and Duty) as to an Assignation or Play, only for Diversion; or at best,
as I must ever long (for ought I know) with my Soul severed from my Body? How I
tremble at the Remembrance! as if I could put the sham upon Heaven, or a God
were to be imposed on like my Fellow Creature: And dare I, convicted of these
High Treasons against the King of Glory, dare I expect a Reprieve or Pardon?
Has he Thunder, and are not all his Bolts levelled at my Head, to strike me
through the very Center? Yes, I dare appeal to thee, boundless pity and
compassion! My own Instances already tells me, that thy Mercy is infinite; for
I Have done enough to shock Long-sufferance it self, and weary out an Eternal
Patience. I beseech thee by thy soft and gentle Attributes of Mercy and
Forgiveness, by the last dying Accents of my suffering Deity, have Pity on a
poor, humble, prostrate and confessing Sinner: And thou great Ransom of lost
Mankind, who offered'st thy self a Sacrifice to atone our Guilt, and redeem
our mortgaged Happiness, do thou be my Advocate, and intercede for me with the
angry Judge.

My Prayers are heard, a glorious Light now shone,
And (lo!) an Angel-Post comes hastening down:
From Heaven I see him cut the yielding Air;
So swift, he seems at once both there and here;
So quick, my sight in the pursuit was slow,
And Thought could scarce so soon the Journey go.
No angry Message in his Look appears,
His Face no signs of threatening Vengeance wears.
Comely his shape, of Heavenly Mien and Air,
Kinder than Smiles of beauteous Virginsare.
Such he was seen by the blessed Maid of Old
When he the Almighty Infant's Birth foretold.
A mighty Volume in one hand is born,
Whose opened Leaves the other seems to turn:
Vast Annals of my Sins in Scarlet writ,
But now ^as'd, blot out, and cancelled quite.
Hark how the Heavenly Whisper strikes mine Ear,
Mortal, behold thy Crimes all pardoned here!
Hail Sacred Envoy of the Eternal King!
Welcome as the blessed Tidings thou do bring.
Welcome as Heaven from whence thou came but now,
Thus low to thy great God and mine I bow,
And might I here, O might I ever grow,
Fixed an unmoved and endless Monument
Of Gratitude to my Creator sent.
TO THE MEMORY OF Mr. CHARLES MORWENT.

A PINDARIQUE.

Ignis utique quo clarius effulsit, citius extinguitur, eripit se aufertque ex
oculis subito perfecta virtus: quicquid est absoluti facilius transfluit, and
optimi neutiquam diurnant.

Cambden. de Phil. Syd. O celeres hominum bonorum dies.
Apul. LONDON, Printed in the Year, 1684.

To the Memory of my Dear Friend, Mr. Charles Morwent: A PINDARIQUE.
Ostendunt terris hunc tantum fata, nec ultra
Esse sinunt. --
Virg.
I.
BEst Friend! could my unbounded Grief but rate
With due proportion thy too cruel Fate;
Could I some happy Miracle bring forth,
Great as my Wishes and thy greater Worth,
All Helicon should soon be thine,
And pay a Tribute to thy Shrine.
The learned Sisters all transformed should be,
No longer nine, but one Melpomene:
Each should into a Niobe relent,
At once thy Mourner and thy Monument.
Each should become
Like the famed Memnon's speaking Tomb,
To sing thy well-tuned Praise;
Nor should we fear their being dumb,
Thou still would make 'em vocal with thy Rays.
II.
O that I could distill my vital Juice in Tears!
Or waste away my Soul in sobbing Airs!
Were I all Eyes,
To flow in liquid Elegies:
That every Limb might grieve,
And dying Sorrow still retrieve;
My Life should be but one long mourning day,
And like moist Vapors melt in Tears away.
I Would soon dissolve in one great Sigh,
And upwards fly,
Glad so to be exhaled to Heaven and thee.
A Sigh which might well-nigh reverse thy death,
And hope to animate thee with new Breath;
Powerful as that which heretofore did give
A Soul to well-form'd Clay, and made it live.
III.
Adieu, blessed Soul! whose hasty Flight away
Tells Heaven did never display
Such Happiness to bless the World with stay.
Death in thy Fall betrayed her utmost spice,
And showed her shafts most times are levelled at the white.
She saw thy blooming Ripeness time prevent;
She saw, and envious grew, and straight her arrow sent.
So Buds appearing ever the Frosts are past,
Nip'd by some unkind Blast,
Wither in Penance for their forward haste.
Thus have I seen a Morn so bright,
So decked with all the Robes of Light,
As if it scorned to think of Night,
Which a rude Storm ever Noon did shroud,
And buried all its early Glories in a Cloud.
The day in funeral Blackness mourned,
And all to Sighs, and all to Tears it turned.
IV.
But why do we thy Death untimely deem;
Or Fate blaspheme?
We should thy full ripe Virtues wrong,
To think thee young.
Fate, when she did thy vigorous Growth behold,
And all thy forward Glories told,
Forgot thy tale of Years, and thought thee old.
The brisk Endowments of thy Mind
Scorning in the Bud to be confined,
Out-ran thy Age, and left slow Time behind;
Which made thee reach Maturity so soon,
And at first Dawn present a full-spread Noon.
So thy Perfections with thy Soul agree,
Both knew no Nonage, knew no Infancy.
Thus the first Pattern of our Race began
His Life in middle-age, at's Birth a perfect Man.
V.
So well thou acted'st in thy Span of Days,
As calls at once for Wonder and for Praise.
Thy prudent Conduct had so learnt to measure
The different whiles of Toil and Leisure,
No time did Action want, no Action wanted Pleasure.
Thy busy Industry could Time dilate,
And stretch the Thread of Fate:
Thy careful Thrift could only boast the Power
To lengthen Minutes, and extend an Hour.
No single Sand could ever flip by
Without its Wonder, sweet as high:
And every teeming Moment still brought forth
A thousand Rarities of Worth.
While some no other Cause for Life can give,
But a dull Habitude to live:
Thou scorn'dst such Laziness while here beneath,
And Liv'dst that time which others only Breath.
VI.
Next our just Wonder does commence,
How so small Room could hold such Excellence.
Nature was proud when she contrived thy Frame,
In thee she labored for a Name:
Hence 'twas she lavished all her Sto^te,
As if she meant hereafter to be poor,
And, like a Bankrupt, run o'th Score.
He ^rious Hand here drew in Straights and joined
All the Perfections lodge^in Humane kind;
Teaching her numerous Gifts to lie
Crampt in a short Epitome.
So Stars contracted in a Diamond shine,
And Jewels in a narrow Point confine
The Riches of an Indian Mine
Thus subtle Artists can
Draw Nature's larger self within a Span:
A small Frame holds the World, Earth, Heavens and all
Shrunk to the scant Dimensions of a Ball.
VII.
Those Parts which never in one Subject dwell,
But some uncommon Excellence foretell,
Like Stars did all constellate here,
And met together in one Sphere.
Thy Judgment, Wit and Memory conspired
To make themselves and thee admired:
And could thy growing Height a longer Stay have known,
Thou had all other Glories, and thy self outdone.
While some to Knowledge by Degrees arrive,
Through tedious Industry improved,
Thine scorned by such pedantick Rules to thrive;
But swift as that of Angels moved,
And made us think it was intuitive.
Thy pregnant Mind never struggled in its Birth,
But quick, and while it did conceive, brought forth;
The gentle Throes of thy prolifick Brain
Were all unstrain'd, and without Pain.
Thus when Great Jove the Queen of Wisdom bare
So easy and so mild his Travels were.
VIII.
Nor were these Fruits in a rough Soil bestown
As Gemms are thick'st in rugged Quarries sown.
Good Nature and good parts so shat'd thy mind,
A Muse and Grace were so combined,
Twashard to guess which with most Luster shined.
A Genius did thy whole Comportment act,
Whose charming Complaisance did so attract,
As every Heart attacked.
Such a soft Air thy well-tuned Sweetness swayed,
As told thy Soul of Harmony was made;
All rude Affections that Disturbers be,
That mar or disunite Society,
Were Foreiners to thee.
Love only in their stead took up its Rest;
Nature made that thy constant Guest,
And seemed to form no other Passion for thy Breast
IX.
This made thy Courteousness to all extend,
And thee to the whole Universe a Friend.
Those which were Strangers to thy native Soil and thee
No Strangers to thy Love could be,
Whose Bounds were wide as all Mortality.
Thy Heart no Island was, disjoined
(Like thy own Nation) from all human kind;
But 'twas a Continent to other Countries fixed
As firm by Love, as they by Earth annexed.
Thou scorn'dst the Map should thy Affection guide,
Like theirs who love by dull Geography,
Friends but to whom by Soil they are allied:
Thine reached to all beside,
To every member of the world's great Family.
Heavens Kindness only claims a Name more general,
Which we the nobler call,
Because it is common, and vouchsas'd to all.
X.
Such thy Ambition of obliging was,
Thou seem'dst corrupted with the very Power to please.
Only to let thee gratify,
At once did bribe and pay thy Courtesy.
Thy Kindness by Acceptance might be bought,
It for no other Wages sought,
But would its own be thought.
No Suitors went unsatisfied away;
But left thee more unsatisfied than they.
Brave Titus! thou might here thy true Portraicture find,
And view thy Rival in a private mind.
Thou heretofore deserv'dst such Praise,
When Acts of Goodness did compute thy days,
Measured not by the Sun's, but thine own kinder Rays.
Thou thoughtst each hour out of Life's Journal lost,
Which could not some fresh Favor boast,
And reckon'dst Bounties thy best Clepsydras.
XI.
Some Fools who the great Art of giving want,
Deflower their Largess with too slow a Grant;
Where the deluded Suitor dearly buys
What hardly can defray
The Expense of Importunities,
Or the Suspense of torturing Delay.
Here was no need of tedious Prayers to sue,
Or thy too backward Kindness woo.
It moved with no formal State,
Like theirs whose Pomp does for entreaty wait:
But met the swift'st Desires half way;
And Wishes did well nigh anticipate;
And then as modestly withdrew,
Nor for its due Reward of Thanks would stay.
XII.
Yet might this Goodness to the happy most accrue;
Somewhat was to the miserable due,
Which they might justly challenge too.
Whatever mishap did a known Heart oppress,
The same did thine as wretched make;
Like yielding Waxthine did the Impressions take,
And paint its Sadness in as lively Dress.
Thou could afflictions from another Breast translate,
And foreign Grief impropriate;
Oft-times our Sorrows thine so much have grown,
They scarce were more our own;
We seemed exempt, thou suffer'dst all alone.
XIII.
Our small'st Misfortunes scarce could reach thy Ear,
But made thee give in Alms a Tear;
And when our Hearts breathed their regret in sighs,
As a just Tribute to their Miseries,
Thine with their mournful Airs did symbolize.
Like throngs of sighs did for its Fibers crowd,
And told thy Grief from our each Grief aloud:
Such is the secret Sympathy
We may betwixt two neighboring Lutesdesery,
If either by unskilful hand too rudely bent
Its soft Complaint in pensive murmurs vent,
As if it did that Injury resent:
Untoucht the other strait returns the Moan,
And gives an Echo to each Groan.
From its sweet Bowels a sad Note's conveyed,
Like those which to condole are made,
As if its Bowels too a kind Compassion had.
XIV.
Nor was thy goodness bounded with so small extent,
Or in such narrow Limits pent.
Let Female Frailty in fond Tears distill,
Who think that Moisture which they spill
Can yield Relief,
Or shrink the Current of another Grief,
Who hope that Breath which they in sighs convey,
Should blow Calamities away.
Thine did a manlier Form express,
And scorned to whine at an Unhappiness;
Thou thought it still the noblest Pity to redress.
So friendly Angels their Relief bestow
On the unfortunate below
For whom those purer minds no Passion know:
Such Nature in that generous Plant is found,
Whose every Breach does with a Salve abound,
And wounds it self to cure another's Wound.
In pity to Mankind it sheds its Juice,
Glad with expense of Blood to serve their Use.
First with kind Tears our Maladies bewails,
And after heals;
And makes those very Tears the remedy produce.
XV.
Nor did thou to thy Foes less generous appear,
(If there were any durst that Title wear.)
They could not offer Wrongs so fast,
But what were pardoned with like haste;
And by thy acts of Amne^ty defaced.
Had he who wished the Art how to forget,
Discovered its new Worth in thee,
He had a double Value on it set,
And justly scorned th'ignobler Art of Memory.
No Wrongs could thy great Soul to Grief expose
'Twas placed as much out of the reach of those,
As of material Biows.
No Injuries could thee provoke,
Thy Softness always dampt the stroke:
As Flints on Feather-beds are easiest broke.
Affronts could never thy cool Complexion heat,
Or chase thy temper from its settled State:
But still thou stoodst unshockt by all,
As if thou had unlearnt the Power to hate,
Or, like the Dove, were born without a Gall.
XVI.
Vain Stoics who disclaim all Human Sense,
And own no Passions to resent Offense,
May pass it by with unconcerned Neglect,
And Virtue on those Principles erect,
Where it is not a Perfection, but Defect.
Let these themselves in a dull Patience please,
Which their own Statues may possess,
And they themselves when Carcasses.
Thou only could to that high pitch arrive,
To court Abuses, that thou might forgive:
Wrongs thus in thy Esteem seemed Courtesy,
And thou the first was ever obliged by Injury.
XVII.
Nor may we think these God-like Qualities
Could stand in need of Votaries,
Which heretofore had challenged Sacrifice.
Each Assignation, each Converse
Gained thee some new Idolaters.
Thy sweet Obligingness could supple Hate,
And out of it its Contrary create.
Its powerful Influence made Quarrels cease,
And Fewds dissolved into a calmer Peace.
Envy resigned her Force, and vanquished Spite
Became thy speedy Proselyte.
Malice could cherish Enmity no more;
And those which were thy Foes before,
Now wished they might adore.
Caesar may tell of Nations took,
And Troops by Force subjected to his Yoke:
We read as great a Conqueror in thee,
Who could by milder ways all Hearts subdue,
The nobler Conquest of the two;
Thus thou whole Legions mad'ft the Captives be,
And like him too could look, and speak thy Victory.
XVIII.
Hence may we Calculate the Tenderness
Thou did Express
To all, whom thou did with thy Friendship bless:
To think of Passion by new Mothers bore
To the young Offspring of their Womb,
Or that of Lovers to what they Adore,
Ere Duty it become:
We should too mean Ideas frame,
Of that which thine might justly claim,
And injure it by a degrading Name:
Conceive the tender Care,
Of guardian Angels to their Charge assigned,
Or think how dear
To Heaven Expiring Martyrs are;
These are the Emblems of thy mind,
The only Types to show how thou wast kind.
XIX.
On whom soever thou did confer this Tie
'Twas lasting as Eternity,
And firm as the unbroken Chain of Destiny,
Embraces would faint shadows of your Union show
Unless you could together grow.
That Union which is from Alliance bred,
Does not so fastly wed,
Though it with Blood be cemented:
That Link wherewith the Soul and Body's joined
Which twists the double Nature in Mankind
Only so close can bind.
That holy Fire which Romans to their Vesta paid,
Which they immortal as the Goddess made,
Thy noble Flames most fitly parallel;
For thine were just so pure, and just so durable.
Those feigned Pairs of Faithfulness which claim
So high a place in ancient Fame,
Had they thy better Pattern seen,
They Would made their Friendship more divine
And strove to mend their Characters by thine.
XX.
Yet had this Friendship no advantage been,
Unless'twere exercised within;
What did thy Love to other Objects tie,
The same made thy own Powers agree,
And reconciled thy self to thee.
No Discord in thy Soul did rest,
Save what its Harmony increast.
Thy mind did with such regular Calmness move,
As held resemblance with the greater Mind above.
Reason there fixed its peaceful Throne,
And reigned alone.
The Will its easy Neck to Bondage gave,
And to the ruling Faculty became a Slave.
The Passions raised no Civil Wars,
Nor discomposed thee with intestine Jars:
All did obey,
And paid Allegiance to its rightful Sway.
All threw their resty Tempers by,
And gentler Figures drew,
Gentle as Nature in its Infancy,
As when themselves in their first Beings grew.
XXI.
Thy Soul within such silent Pomp did keep,
As if Humanity were lulled asleep.
So gentle was thy Pilgrimage beneath,
Time's unheard Feet scarce make less Noise
Or the soft Journey which a Planet goes.
Life seemed all calm as its last Breath.
A still Tranquillity so hushed thy Breast,
As if some Halcyon were its Guest,
And there had built her Nest;
It hardly now enjoys a greater Rest.
As that smooth Sea which wears the Name of Pea^
Still with one even Face appears,
And feels no Tides to change it from its place,
No Waves to alter the fair Form it bears:
As that unspotted Sky,
Where Nile does want of Rain supply,
Is free from Clouds, from Storms is ever free.
So thy unvary'd mind was always one,
And with such clear Serenity still shone,
As caused thy little World to seem all temperate Zone.
XXII.
Let Fools their high Extraction boast,
And Greatness, which no Travel, but their Mothers, cost.
Let 'em extol a swelling Name,
Which theirs by Will and Testament became;
At best but mere Inheritance,
As often the Spoils as Gift of Chance.
Let some ill-plac't Repute on Scutcheons rear
As fading as the Colors which those bear;
And prize a painted Field,
Which Wealth as soon as Fame can yield.
Thou scorn'dst at such low rates to purchase worth,
Nor could thou owe it only to thy Birth.
Thy self-born Greatness was above the Power
Of Parents to entail, or Fortune to deflower.
Thy Soul, which like the Sun, Heaven molded bright,
Disdained to shine with borrowed Light.
Thus from himself the Eternal Being grew,
And from no other Cause his Grandeur drew.
XXIII.
However if true Nobility
Rather in Souls than in the Blood does lie:
If from thy better part we Measures take;
And that the Standard of our Value make,
Jewels and Stars become low Heraldry
To blazon thee.
Thy Soul was big enough to pity Kings,
And looked on Empires as poor humble things.
Great as his boundless mind,
Who thought himself in one wide Globe confined,
And for another pined.
Great as that Spirit whose large Powers roll
Through the vast Fabric of this spacious Bowl,
And tell the World as well as Man can boast a Soul.
XXIV.
Yet could not this an Haughtiness beget,
Or thee above the common Level set.
Pride, whose Alloy does best Endowments mar,
(As things most lofty smaller still appear)
With thee did no Alliance bear.
Low Meritsoft are by too high Esteem belied,
Whose owners lessen while they raise their Price;
Thine were above the very Guilt of Pride,
Above all others, and thy own Hyperbole:
In thee the wid'st Extremes were joined
The loftiest, and the lowliest Mind.
Thus tho some part of Heavens vast Round,
Appear but low, and seem to touch the Ground.
Yet it is well known almost to bound the Spheres,
It Is truly held to be above the Stars.
XXV.
While thy brave Mind preserved this noble Frame,
Thou stoodst at once secure
From all the Flattery and Obloquy of Fame,
Its rough and gentler Breath were both to thee the same:
Nor this could thee exalt, nor that depress thee lower;
But thou from thy great Soul on both look'dst down
Without the small concernment of a smile or frown.
Heaven lessdreads that it should fired be
By the weak flitting Sparks that upwards fly,
Less the bright Goddess of the Night
Fears those loud howlings that revile her Light
Than thou malignant Tongues thy Worth should blast,
Which was too great for Envy's Cloud to overcast.
'Twas thy brave Method to despise Contempt,
And make what was the Fault the Punishment.
What more Assaults could weak Detraction raise,
When thou could Saint disgrace,
And turn Reproach to Praise.
So Clouds which would obscure the Sun, often gilded be,
And Shades are taught to shine as bright as he.
So Diamonds, when envious Night
Would shroud their Splendour, look most bright,
And from its Darkness seem to borrow Light.
XXVI.
Had Heaven composed thy mortal Frame,
Free from Contagion as thy Soul or Fame:
Could Virtue been but Proof against Death's Arms,
Thou Had stood unvanquisht by these Harms,
Safe in a Circle made by thy own Charms.
Fond Pleasure, whose soft Magic often beguiles
Raw unexperienced Souls,
And with smooth Flattery cajoles,
Could never ensnare thee with her Wiles,
Or make thee Captive to her soothing Smiles.
In vain that Pimp of Vice assayed to please,
In hope to draw thee to its rude Embrace.
Thy Prudence still that Siren past
Without being pinioned to the Mast:
All its Attempts were ineffectual found;
Heaven senc'd thy heart with its own Mound,
And forced the Tempter still from that forbidden Ground.
XXVII.
The mad Capricio's of the doting Age
Could never in the same Frenzy thee engage;
But moved thee rather with a generous Rage.
Gallants, who their high Breeding prize,
Known only by their Gallanture and Vice,
Whose Talent is to court a fashionable Sin,
And act some fine Transgression with a janty Mien,
May by such Methods hope the Vogue to win.
Let those gay Fops who deem
Their Infamies Accomplishment,
Grow scandalous to get Esteem;
And by Disgrace strive to be eminent.
Here thou disdainst the common Road,
Nor would by ought be wood
To wear the vain Iniquities of the Mode.
Vice with thy Practice did so disagree,
Thou scarce could bear it in thy Theory.
Thou did such Ignorance 'bove Knowledge prize,
And here to be unskilled, is to be wise.
Such the first Founders of our Blood,
While yet untempted, stood
Contented only to know Good.
XXVIII.
Virtue alone did guide thy Actions here,
Thou by no other Card thy Life did steer:
No sly decoy would serve,
To make thee from its rigid Dictates swerve,
Thy Love never thought her worse
Because thou had so few Competitors.
Thou could adore her when adored by none
Content to be her Votary alone:
When 'twas proscribed the unkind World
And to blind Cells, and Grotto's hurld,
When thought the Fantom of some crazy Brain,
Fit for grave Anchorets to entertain,
A thin Chimaera, whom dull Gown-Men frame
To gull deluded Mortals with an empty Name.
XXIX.
Thou own'dst no Crimes that shunned the Light,
Whose Horror might thy Blood affright,
And force it to its known Retreat.
While the pale Cheeks do Penance in their White,
And tell that Blushes are too weak to expiate:
Thy Faults might all be on thy Forehead wore
And the whole World thy Confessor.
Conscience within still kept Assize,
To punish and deter Impieties:
That inbred Judge, such strict Inspection bore,
So traversed all thy Actions ore;
The Eternal Judge could scarce do more:
Those little Escapades of Vice,
Which pass the Cognizance of most
In The Crowd of following Sins forgot and lost,
Could never its Sentence or Arraignment miss:
Thou did prevent the young desires of ill,
And them in their first Motions kill:
The very thoughts in others unconfined
And lawless as the Wind,
Thou could to Rule and Order bind.
They durst not any stamp, but that of Virtue bear,
And free from stain as thy most public Actions were.
Let wild Debauches hug their darling Vice
And court no other Paradise,
Till want of Power
Bids 'em discard the stale Amor,
And when disabled strength shall force
A short Divorce,
Miscall that weak forbearance Abstinence,
Which wise Morality and better Sense
Styles but at best a sneaking Impotence.
Thine far a Nobler Pitch did fly
'Twas all free choice, naught of Necessity.
Thou did that puny Soul disdain
Whose half strain Virtue only can restrain;
Nor would that empty Being own
Which springs from Negatives alone,
But truly thoughst it always Virtues Skeleton.
XXX.
Nor did thou those mean Spirits more approve,
Who Virtue, only for its Dowry love,
Unbrib'd thou did her sterling self espouse:
Nor would a better Mistress choose.
Thou could Affection to her bare Idaea pay
The first that ever caressed her the Platonic way.
To see her in her own Attractions dressed
Did all thy Love arrest,
Nor lacked there new Efforts to storm thy Breast.
Thy generous Loyalty
Would never a Mercenary be,
But chose to serve her still without a Livery.
Yet wast thou not of Recompense debarred,
But countedst Honesty its own Reward;
Thou did not wish a greater Bliss to accrue,
For to be good to thee was to be happy too,
That secret Triumph of thy mind,
Which always thou in doing well did find,
Were Heaven enough, were there no other Heaven designed.
XXXI.
What Virtues few possess but by Retail
In gross could thee their Owner call;
They all did in thy single Circle fall.
Thou wast a living System where were wrote
All those high Morals which in Books are sought.
Thy Practice did more Virtues share
Than heretofore the learned Porch ever knew,
Or in the Stagyrites scant Ethics grew:
Devout thou wast as holy Hermits are,
Which share their time 'twixt Ecstasy and Prayer.
Modest as Infant Roses in their bloom,
Which in a Blush their Lives consume.
So Chaste, the Dead are only more,
Who lie divorced from Objects, and from Power.
So pure, that if blessed Saints could be
Taught Innocence, they would gladly learn of thee.
Thy Virtues height in Heaven alone could grow
Nor to ought else would for Accession owe:
It only now is more perfect than it was below.
XXXII.
Hence, though at once thy Soul lived here and there,
Yet Heaven alone its Thoughts did share;
It owned no home, but in the active Sphere.
Its Motions always did to that bright Center roll,
And seemed t'inform thee only on Parole.
Look how the Needle does to its dear North incline,
As were not fixed 'twould to that Region climb;
Or mark what hidden force
Bids the Flame upwards take its course,
And makes it with that Swiftness rise,
As if 'twere winged by the Air through which it flies.
Such a strong Virtue did thy Inclinations bend,
And made 'em still to the blessed Mansions tend.
That mighty Slave whom the proud Victor's Rage
Shut Prisoner in a golden Cage,
Condemned to glorious Vassalage,
Never longed for dear Enlargement more,
Nor his gay Bondage with less Patience bore,
Than this great Spirit brookt its tedious Stay,
While fettered here in brittle Clay,
And wished to disengage and fly away.
It vexed and chafed, and still desired to be
Released to the sweet Freedom of Eternity.
XXXIII.
Nor were its Wishes long unheard,
Fate soon at its desire appeared.
And strait for an Assault prepared.
A sudden and a swift Disease
First on thy Heart Life's chiefest Fort does seize,
And then on all the Suburb-vitals preys:
Next it corrupts thy tainted Blood,
And scatters Poison through its purple Flood.
Sharp Aches in thick Troops it sends,
And Pain, which like a Rack the Nerves extends.
Anguish through every Member flies,
And all those inward Gemonies
Whereby frail Flesh in Torture dies.
All the staid Glories of thy Face,
Where sprightly Youth lay checked with manly Grace,
Are now impaired,
And quite by the rude hand of Sickness marred.
Thy Body where due Symmetry
In just proportions once did lie,
Now hardly could be known,
Its very Figure out of Fashion grown;
And should thy Soul to its old Seat return,
And Life once more adjourn,
'Twould stand amazed to see its altered Frame,
And doubt (almost) whether its own Carcass were the same.
XXXIV.
And here thy Sickness does new matter raise
Both for thy Virtue and our Praise;
'Twas here thy Picture looked most neat,
When deep'st in Shades 'twas set.
Thy Virtues only thus could fairer be
Advantaged by the Foil of Misery.
Thy Soul which hastened now to be enlarged,
And of its grosser Load discharged,
Began to act above its wonted rate,
And gave a Praelude of its next unbody'd State.
So dying Tapers near their Fall,
When their own Luster lights their Funeral,
Contract their Strength into one brighter Fire,
And in that Blaze triumphantly expire.
So the bright Globe that rules the Skies,
Though he guild Heaven with a glorious Rise,
Reserves his choicest Beams to grace his Set;
And then he looks most great,
And then in greatest Splendour dies.
XXXVI.
Thou sharpest pains did with that Courage bear,
And still thy Looks so unconcerned did wear:
Beholders seemed more indisposed than thee;
For they were sick in Effigy.
Like some well-fashion'd Arch thy Patience stood.
And purchased Firmness from its greater Load.
Those Shapes of Torture, which to view in Paint
Would make another faint;
Thou could endure in true Reality,
And feel what some could hardly bear to see.
Those Indians who their Kings by Torture chose,
Subjecting all the Royal Issue to that Test
Could never thy Sway refuse,
If he deserves to reign that suffers best.
Had those fierce Savages thy Patience viewed,
Thou Would claimed their Choice alone*
They with a Crown had paid thy Fortitude,
And turned thy Death bed to a Throne
XXXVII.
All those Heroic Pieties,
Whose Zeal to Truth made them its Sacrifice:
Those nobler Scaevola's, whose holy Rage
Did their whole selves in cruel Flames engage,
Who did amidst their Force unmoved appear,
As if those Fires but lambent were;
Or they had found their Empyreum there.
Might these repeat again their Days beneath,
They Would seen their Fates out-acted by a natural Death,
And each of them to thee resign his Wreath.
In spite of Weakness and harsh Destiny,
To relish Torment, and enjoy a Misery:
So to caress a Doom,
As make its Sufferings Delights become:
So to triumph over Sense and thy Disease,
As amongst Pains to revel in soft Ease:
These wonders did thy Virtues worth enhance,
And Sickness to dry Martyrdom advance.
XXXVIII.
Yet could not all these Miracles stern Fate avert,
Or make it withold the Dart.
Only she paused a while with Wonder struck,
A while she doubted if that Destiny was thine,
And turned over again the dreadful Book,
And hoped she had mistook;
And wished she might have cut another Line.
But dire Necessity
Soon cried 'twas thee,
And bad her give the fatal Blow.
Strait she obeys, and strait the vital Powers grow
Too weak to grapple with a stronger Foe,
And now the feeble Strife forgo.
Life's sap'd Foundation every Moment sinks,
And every Breath to lesser compass shrinks;
Last panting Gasps grow weaker each Rebound,
Like the faint Tremblings of a dying Sound:
And doubtful Twilight hovers over the Light,
Ready to usher in Eternal Night.
XXXIX.
Yet here thy Courage taught thee to out-brave
All the slight Horrors of the Grave:
Pale Death's Arrest
Never shocked thy Breast;
Nor could it in the dreadfulst Figure dressed.
That ugly Skeleton may guilty Spirits daunt,
When the dire Ghosts of Crimes departed haunt,
Armed with bold Innocence thou could that Mormo dare,
And on the barefaced King of Terrors stare,
As free from all Effects as from the Cause of Fear.
Thy Soul so willing from thy Body went,
As if both parted by Consent.
No Murmur, no Complaining, no Delay,
Only a Sigh, a Groan, and so away.
Death seemed to glide with Pleasure in,
As if in this Sense too 't had lost her Sting.
Like some well-acted Comedy Life swiftly past,
And ended just so still and sweet at last.
Thou, like its Actors, seem'dst in borrowed Habit here
And could, as easily beneath,
As they do that, put off Mortality.
Thou breathedst out thy Soul as free as common Breath,
As unconcerned as they are in a feigned Death.
XL.
Go happy Soul, ascend the joyful Sky,
Joyful to shine with thy bright Company:
Go mount the spangled Sphere,
And make it brighter by another Star:
Yet stop not there, till thou advance yet higher,
Till thou art swallowed quite
In the vast unexhausted Ocean of Delight:
Delight which there alone in its true Essence is,
Where Saints keep an eternal Carnival of Bliss:
Where the Regalio's of refined Joy,
Which fill, but never cloy.
Where Pleasures ever growing, ever new,
Immortal as thy self, and boundless too.
There may thou learned by Compendium grow;
For which in vain below
We so much time, and so much pains bestow.
There may thou all Idaea's see,
All wonders which in Knowledge be
In that fair beatifick mirror of the Deity.
XLI.
Mean while thy Body mourns in its own Dust,
And puts on Sables for its tender Trust.
Though dead, it yet retains some untoucht Grace,
Wherein we may thy Soul's fair Footsteps trace;
Which no Disease can frighten from its wonted place:
Even its Deformities do thee become,
And only serve to consecrate thy Doom.
Those marks of Death which did its Surface stain
Now hallow, not profane.
Each Spot does toa Ruby turn;
What soiled but now, would now adorn^
Those Asterisks placed in the Margin of thy Skin
Point out the nobler Soul that dwelt within:
Thy lesser, like the greater World appears
All over bright, all over stuck with Stars.
So Indian Luxury when it would be trim,
Hangs Pearls on every Limb.
Thus amongst ancient Picts Nobility
In Blemishes did lie;
Each by his Spots more honorable grew,
And from their Store a greater Value drew:
Their Kings were known by the Royal Stains they bore,
And in their Skins their Ermin wore.
LXII.
Thy Blood where Death triumphed in greatest State,
Whose Purple seemed the Badge of Tyrant-Fate,
And all thy Body over
Its ruling Colors bore:
That which infected with the noxious Ill
But lately helped to kill,
Whose Circulation fatal grew.
And through each part a swifter Ruin threw.
Now conscious, its own Murder would arraign,
And throngs to sally out at every Vein.
Each Dropa redder than its native Dye puts on,
As if in its own Blushes 'twould its Guilt atone.
A sacred Rubric does thy Carcass paint,
And Death in every Member writes thee Saint.
So Phoebus clothes his dying Rays each Night,
And blushes he can live no longer to give Light.
LXIII.
Let Fools, whose dying Fame requires to have
Like their own Carcasses a Grave,
Let them with vain Expense adorn
Some costly Urn,
Which shortly, like themselves, to Dust shall turn.
Here lacks no Carian Sepulcher,
Which Ruin shall ever long in its own Tomb interr.
No fond Egyptian Fabric built so high
As if 'twould climb the Sky,
And thence reach Immortality.
Thy Virtues shall embalm thy Name,
And make it lasting as the Breath of Fame.
When frailer Brass
Shall moulder by a quick Decrease;
When brittle Marble shall decay,
And to the Jaws of Time become a Prey.
Thy Praise shall live, when Graves shall buried lie,
Till Time it self shall die,
And yield its triple Empire to Eternity.
To the Memory of that worthy Gentleman, Mr. Harman Atwood.
PINDARIQUE.
I.
No, I Will no more repine at Destiny,
Now we poor common Mortals are content to die.
When thee, blessed Saint, we cold and breathless see,
Thee, who if ought that is great and brave,
Ought that is excellent might save,
Had justly claimed Exemption from the Grave,
And cancelled the black irreversible Decree.
Thou did alone such Worth, such Goodness share
As well deserved to be immortal here;
Deserve a Life as lasting as the Fame thou art to wear.
At least, why went thy Soul without its Mate?
Why did they not together undivided go?
So went (we are told) the famed Illustrious Two.
(Nor could they greater Merits show,
Although the best of Patriarchs that,
And this the best of Prophets was)
Heaven did alive the blessed Pair translate;
Alive they launched into Life's boundless Happiness,
And never past Death's Straights and narrow Seas;
Never entered the dark gloomy Thorowfare of Fate.
II.
Long time had the Profession under Scandal lain,
And felt a general though unjust Disdain,
An upright Lawyer Contradiction seemed,
And was at least a Prodigy esteemed.
If one perhaps did in an Age appear,
He was recorded like some Blazing Star;
And Statues were erected to the wondrous Man,
As heretofore to the strange honest Publican.
To thee the numerous Calling all its thanks should give,
To thee who could alone its lost Repute retrieve.
Thou the vast wide extremes did reconcile,
The first, almost, ever taught it was not to beguile.
To each thou did distribute Right so equally,
Even Justice might her self correct her Scales by thee.
And none did now regret,
Her once bewailed Retreat,
Since all enjoyed her better Deputy.
Henceforth succeeding Time shall bear in mind,
And Chronicle the best of all the kind:
The best ever since the man that gave
Our suffering God a Grave;
(That God who living no Abode could find,
Though he the World had made, and was to save)
Embalming him, he did embalm his Memory,
And make it from Corruption free:
Those Odors kindly lent perfumed the Breath of Fame,
And fixed a lasting Fragrancy upon his Name;
And raised it with his Savior to an Immortality.
III.
Hence the stale musty Paradox of equal Souls,
That ancient vulgar Error of the Schools,
Avowed by dull Philosophers and thinking Fool.
Here might they find their feeble Arguments overthrown:
Here might the grave Disputers find
Themselves all baffled by a single Mind,
And see one vastly larger than their own,
Though all of theirs were mixed in one.
A Soul as great as ever vouchsafed to be
Inhabiter in low Mortality;
As ever the Almighty Artist labored to infuse,
Through all his Mint he did the brightest choose;
With his own Image stamped it fair,
And bid it ever the Divine Impression wear;
And so it did, so pure, so well,
We hardly could believe him of the Race that fell:
So spotless still, and still so good,
As if it never lodged in Flesh and Blood.
Hence conscious too, how high, how nobly born:
It never did reproach its Birth,
By valuing ought of base or meaner worth,
But looked on earthly Grandeur with Contempt and Scorn.
IV.
Like his All-great Creator, who
Can only by diffusing greater grow:
He made his chiefest Glory to communicate,
And chose the fairest Attribute to imitate.
So kind, so generous, and so free,
As if he only lived in Courtesy.
To be unhappy did his Pity claim,
Only to want it did deserve the same:
Nor lacked there other Rhetoric than Innocence and Misery.
His unconfined unhoarded Store
Was still the vast Exchequer of the poor;
And whatsoever in pious Acts went out
He did in his own Inventory put:
For well the wise and prudent Banker knew
His Gracious Sovereign above would all repay,
And all the expenses of his Charity defray;
And so he did, both Principal and Interest too,
And he by holy Prodigality more wealthy grew.
Such, and so universal is the Influence
Which the kind bounteous Sun does here dispense:
With an unwearied indefatigable Race,
He travels round the World each day,
And visits all Mankind, and every place,
And scatters Light and Blessings all the way.
Though he each hour new Beams expend,
Yet does he not like wasting Tapers spend.
Though he ten thousand years disburse in Light,
The boundless Stock can never be exhausted quite.
V.
Nor was his Bounty stinted or designed,
As theirs who only partially are kind;
Or give where they Return expect to find:
But like his Soul, its fair Original:
'Twas all in all,
And all in every part,
Silent as his Devotion, open as his Heart.
Bribed with the Pleasure to oblige and gratify,
As Air and Sunshine he disposed his Kindness free,
Yet scorned Requitals, and worse hated Flattery,
And all obseouious Pomp of vain formality.
Thus the Almighty Bounty does bestow
Its Favors on our undeserving Race below;
Conferred on all its loyal Votaries;
Conferred alike on its rebellious Enemies.
To it alone our All we owe,
All that we are and are to be,
Each Art and Science to its Liberality,
And this same trifling jingling thing called Poetry.
Yet the great Donor does no costly Gratitude require,
No Charge of Sacrifice desire;
Nor are w' expensive Hecatombs to raise,
As heretofore,
To make his Altars float with reeking Gore.
A small Return the mighty Debt and Duty pays,
Even the cheap humble Offering of worthless Thanks and Praise.
VI.
But how, blessed Saint, shall I thy numerous Virtues sum,
If one or two take up this room?
To what vast Bulk must the full Audit come?
As that bold Hand that drew the fairest Deity,
Had many naked Beauties by,
And took from each a several Grace, and Air, and Line,
And all in one Epitome did join
To paint his bright Immortal in a Form Divine:
So must I do to frame thy Character.
I Will think whatever Men can good and lovely call,
And then abridge it all,
And crowd, and mix the various Idaeas there;
And yet at last of a just Praise despair.
Whatever ancient Worthies boast,
Which made themselves and Poets their Describers great,
From whence old Zeal did Gods and Shrines create;
Thou had thy self alone engrost,
And all their scattered Glories in thy Soul did meet:
And future Ages, when they eminent Virtues see,
(If any after thee
Dare the Pretense of Virtue own,
Without the Fear of being far outdone)
Shall count 'em all but Legacy,
Which from the Strength of thy Example flow,
And thy fair Copy in a less correct Edition show.
VII.
Religion over all did a just Conduct claim,
No false Religion which from Custom came,
Which to its Font and Country only owed its Name:
No Issue of devout and zealous Ignorance,
Or the more dull Effect of Chance;
But 'twas a firm well-grounded Piety,
That knew all that it did believe, and why;
And for the glorious Cause durst die,
And durst out-suffer ancient Martyrology.
So knit and interwoven with its being so,
Most thought it did not from his Duty, but his Nature flow.
Exalted far above the vain small Attacks of Wit,
And all that vile gay lewd Buffoons can bring,
Who try by little Railleries to ruin it,
And jeer't into an unreguarded poor defenseless thing,
The Men of Sense who in Confederacy join,
To damn Religion had they viewed but thine,
They Would have confessed it pure, confessed it all divine,
And free from all Pretenses of Imposture or Design.
Powerful enough to counter-act lewd Poets and the Stage,
And Proselyte as fast as they debauch the Age;
So good, it might alone a guilty condemned World reprieve,
Should a destroying Angel stand
With brandished Thunder in his Hand,
Ready the bidden Stroke to give;
Or a new Delugethreaten this and every Land.
VIII.
Religion once a quiet and a peaceful Name,
Which all the Epithets of Gentleness did claim,
Late proved the Source of Faction and intestine Jars:
Like the Fair teeming Hebrew, she
Did travel with a wrangling Progeny,
And harbor'd in her Bowels Fewds and Civil Wars.
Surly, uncomplaisant, and rough she grew,
And of a soft and easy Mistress turned a Shrew.
Passion and Anger went for marks of Grace,
And looks deformed and sullen sanctified a Face.
Thou first its meek and primitive Temper did restore,
First shew'dst how men were pious heretofore:
The gaul-less Dove, which other where could find no Rest,
Early retreated to its Ark, thy Breast,
And straight the swelling Waves decreast
And straight tempestuous Passions ceast,
Like Winds and Storms where some fair Halcyon builds her Nest.
No overheating Zeal did thee inspire,
But 'twas a kindly gentle Fire,
To warm, but not devour,
And only did refine, and make more pure:
Such is that Fire that makes thy present blessed Abode
The Residence and Palace of our God.
And such was that bright unconsuming Flame,
So mild, so harmless and so tame,
Which heretofore in the Bush to Moses came:
At first the Vision did the wondering Prophet scare,
But when the voice had checked his needless Fear
He bowed and worshipped and confessed the Deity was there.
IX.
Hail Saint Triumphant! hail Heavens happy Guest.
Hail new Inhabitant amongst the blessed!
Methinks I see kind Spirits in convoy meet.
And with loud Welcomes thy Arrival greet.
Who, could they grieve, would go with Grief away
To see a Soul more white, more pure than they:
By them you are led on high
To the vast glorious Apartment of the Deity.
Where circulating Pleasures make an endless Round
To which scant Time or Measure sets no Bound,
Perfect unmixt Delights without Alloy,
And whatsoever does earthly Bliss annoy,
Which often does in Fruition Pall and oft'ner Cloy:
Where being is no longer Life but Ecstasy,
But one long Transport of unutterable Joy.
A Joy above the boldest Flights of daring verse,
And all a Muse unglorifyed can fancy or rehearse:
There happy Thou
From Troubles and the bustling toil of Business free,
From noise and tracas of tumultuous Life below,
Enjoy'st the still and calm Vacation of Eternity.
CHARACTER OF A Certain Ugly Old P --

-- Deformem and tetrum ante omnia Vultum,
Dissimilemque sui, desormem pro cute pellem,
Pendentesque genas, ac tales aspice rugas,
Quales, umbriferos ubi pandit Tabraca saltus,
In vetula scalpit jam matter simia bucca, etc.
Juv. Sat. 10 Assist ye nasty Powers
To describe him thorowout,
I Will dip my Pen in Turd,
And write upon a shitten Clout.
Tartaret. de modo Cacandi. p. 9. LONDON, Printed in the Year, 1684.

CHARACTER.
NO wonder if I am at a Loss to describe him, whom Nature was as much puzzled
to make. It Is here as in Painting, where the most misshapen. Figures are the
greatest Proofs of Skill. To draw a Thersites or AEsop well, requires the
Pencil of Vandike or Titian, more than the best Features and Lineaments. All
the Thoughts I can frame of him are as rude and indigested as himself. The very
Idaea and Conception of him are enough to cramp Grammar, to disturb Sense, and
confound Syntax. He Is a Solecism in the great Construction, therefore the best
Description of him is Nonsense, and the fittest Character to write it in, that
Pot-hook-hand the Devil used at Oxford in Queens Colledge-Library. He were
Topic enough for convincing an Atheist that the World was made by Chance. The
first Matter had more of Form and Order, the Chaos more of Symmetry and
Proportion. I could call him Nature's By-blow, Miscarriage and Abortive, or
say, he is her Embryo slink'd before Maturity; but that is stale and flat, and
I must fly a higher Pitch to reach his Deformity. He is the ugliest she ever
took Pains to make so, and Age to make worse. All the Monsters of Africa lie
kennell'd in his single Skin. He Is one of the Grotesques of the Universe, whom
the grand Artist drew only (as Painters do uncouth ugly Shapes) to fill up the
empty Spaces and Cantons of this* great Frame. He Is Man anagrammatiz'd: A
Mandrake has more of Humane Shape: His Face carries Libel and Lampoon in it.
Nature at its Composition wrote Burlesque, and showed him how far she could
outdo Art in Grimace. I wonder it is not hired by the Play Houses to draw
Antic Vizards by. Without doubt he was made to be laughed at, and designed for
the Scaramuchio of Mankind. When I see him, I can no more forbear than at sight
of a Zany or Nokes; but am like to run the Risque of the Philosopher, looking
on an Ass mumbling Thistles. He Is more ill-favored than the Picture of Winter
drawn by a Fellow that dawbs Sign-Posts, more lowering than the last day of
January. I have seen a handsomer Mortal carved in Monumental Gingerbread, and
woven in Hangings at Mortlock. If you have ever viewed that wooden Gentleman
that peeps out of a Country Barber's Window, you may fancy some Resemblance of
him. His damned squeezing Close-stool. Face can be liken'd to nothing better
than the Buttocks of an old wrinkled Baboon, straining upon an Hillock. The
very Sight of him in a morning would work with one beyond Jalap and Rhubarb. A
Doctor (I Am told) once prescribed him to one of his Parishioners for a Purge:
he wrought the Effect, and gave the Patient fourteen Stools. It Is pity he is
not drawn at the City Charges, and hung up in some public Forica as a Remedy
against Costiveness.

Indeed by his Hue you might think he had been employed to that use: One would
take him for the Picture of Scoggin or Tarleton on a Privy-house Door, which by
long standing there has contracted the Color (...) the neighboring Excrements.
Reading lately how Garagantua came into the World at his Mother's Ear, it put
an unlucky thought into my Head concerning him: I presently fancied that he was
v^ided, not brought forth; that his Dam was delivered of him on the other side,
beshit him coming out, and he has ever since retained the Stains. His filthy
Countenance looks like an old Chimney-piece in a decayed Inn, sullied with
Smoke, and the sprinkling of Ale-pots. It Is dirtier than an ancient thumb'd
Record, greasier than a Chandler's Shop-book, You Would imagine* Snails had crawled
the Hay upon it. The Case of it is perfect Vellum, and has often been mistaken
for it: A Scrivener was like to cheapen it for making Indentures and Deeds:
Besides it is as wrinkled as a walking Buskin: It has more Furrows then all
Cotswold. You may resemble it to a Gammon of Bacon with the Swerd off. I
believe the Devil travels over it in his Sleep with Hob-nails in his Shoes. By
the Maggot-eaten Sur-face, you would swear he had been dug out of his Grave again
with all his Worms about him to bait Eel-hooks. But enough of it in General, I
think it time to descend to Particulars; I wish I could divide his Face, as he
does his Text, i. e. tear it asunder: It Is fit I* begin with the most
remarkable part of it. His Mouth (saving your presence Christian Readers) is
like the Devils Arse of Peak, and is just as large. By the Scent you would take it
for the Hole of a Privy: He may be winded by a good Nose at twelve-score; I
durst have ventured at first being in Company that he dieted on Assa-foetida.
His very Discourse stinks in a Literal Sense; it is breaking-Wind, and you would
think he talked at the other End. Last New-years-day he tainted a Loin of Veal
with saying Grace: All the Guests were fain to use the Fanatical Posture in
their own Defense, and stand with their Caps over their Eyes like Malefactors
going to be turned off. That too that renders it the more unsupportable is that
it cannot be stopped: The Breach is too big ever to be closed. Were he a
Milliner, he might measure Ribbon by it without the help of his Yard or
Counter. It reaches so far backwards, those, that have seen him with his Peruke
off, say it may be discerned behind. When he gapes, 'twould stretch the
Duchess of Cl to straddle over: I had almost said, it is as wide as from Dover
to Calice. Could he shut it, the Wrinkles round about would represent the Form
of the Seamens Compass, and should he bluster; 'twere a pretty Emblem of those
swelling Mouths, at the Corners of Maps puffing out Storms. When he Smoaks, I
am always thinking of Mongibel and its Eruptions. His Head looks exactly like a
Device on a Kitchen Chimney; His Mouth the Vent and his Nose the Fane. And now
I talk of his Snout, I dare not mention the Elephants for fear of speaking too
little: I Would make bold with the old Wit, and compare it to the Gnomon of a Dial;
but that he has not Teeth enough to stand for the twelve Hours. It Is so long,
that when he rides a Journey, he makes use of it to open Gates. He Is fain to
snite it with both Hands. It cannot be wiped under as much as the Royal Breech.
A Man of ordinary Bulk might find Shelter under its Eves, were it not for the
Droppings. One protested to me in Raillery that when he looks against the Sun,
it shadows his whole Body, as some story of the Sciopodes Feet. Another
Hyperbolical Rascal would make me believe that the Arches of it are as large as
any two of London Bridge, or the great Rialto at Venice. Not long ago I met a
one-leg'd Tarpawlin that had been begging at his Door, but could get nothing:
The witty Whoreson (I remember) swore that his Bow-sprit was as long as that of
the Royal Sovereign. I confess, stood he in my way: I durst not venture round
by his Foreside, for fear of going half a mile about. It Is perfec^ doubling the
Cape: He has this Privilege for being unmannerly that it will not suffer him
to put off his Hat: And therefore ('it is said) at home he has a Cord fastened to
it, and draws it off with a Pully, and so receives the Addresses of those that
visit him. This I Am very confident, he has not heard himself sneeze these seven
Years: And that leads me to his Tools of Hearing: His Ears resemble these of a
Country Justices Black Jack, and are of the same matter, hue, and size: He Is
as well hung as any Hound in the Country; but by their Bulk and growing
upward, he deserves to be ranked with a graver of Beasts: His single self might
have shown with Smeck, and all the Club Divines. You may pare enough from the
sides of his Head to have furnished a whole Regiment of Roundheads: He wears
more there then all the Pillories in England ever have done. Man-devile tells
us of a People somewhere, that use their Ears for Cushions: He has reduced the
Legend to Probability: A Servant of his (that could not conceal the Midas) told
me lately in private, that going to Bed he binds them on his Crown, and they
serve him instead of Quilt Night-caps. The next observable that falls under my
Consideration is his Back: Nor need I go far out of my way to meet it, for it
peeps over his Shoulders: He was built with a Buttress to support the weight of
his Nose; and help balance it. Nature hung on him a Knapsack, and made him
represent both Tinker and Budget too. He looks like the Visible Tie of AEneas
bolstring up his Father, or like a Beggar-Woman, endorst with her whole Litter,
and with Child behind. You may take him for Anti-Christopher with the Devil at
his Back. I believe the Atlas in Wadham-Garden at Oxford was carved by him.
Certainly he was begot in a Cupping-Glass: His Mother longed for Pumpions, or
went to see some Camel shown while she was conceiving him. One would think a
Mole has crept into his Carcass before it is laid in the Churchyard, and Rooted
in it, or that an Earthquake had disordered the Symmetry of the Microcosm, sunk
one Mountain and put up another. And now I should descend lower, if I durst
venture: But I Will not defile my Pen: My Ink is too cleanly for a farther
Description. I must beg my Reader 's Distance: as if I were going to Untruss.
Should I mention what is beneath, the very Jakes would suffer by the
Comparison, and 'twere enough to bring a Bog-house in Disgrace. Indeed he ought
to have been drawn, like the good People on the Parliament House, only from the
Shoulders upwards. To me it is a greater Prodigy then himself, how his Soul has
so long endured so nasty a Lodging. Were there such a thing as a
Metempsychosis, how gladly would it exchange its Carcass for that of the worst
and vilest Brute: I Am sufficiently persuaded against the whim of Praeexistence;
for any thing that had the Pretense of Reason would never have entered such a
Durance of Choice: Doubtless it must have been guilty of some unbeard of Sin,
for which Heaven dooms it Penance in the present Body, and ordains it its first
Hell here. And it is disputable which may prove the worst, for 't has suffered
half an Eternity already. Men can hardly tell which of the two will outlive
the other. By his Face you would guess him one of the Patriarchs, and that he lived
before the Flood: His Head looks as if it had worn out three or four Bodies, and
were Legacied to him by his Great-Grand-father. His Age is out of Knowledge, I
believe he was born before Registers were invented. He should have been a Ghost
in Queen Mary's Days. I wonder Holingshead does not speak of him. Every Limb
about him is Chronicle: Par and John of the Times were short-Livers to him.
They say, he can remember when Paul's was Founded, and London Bridge built. I my
self have heard him tell all the Stories of York and Lancaster upon his own
Knowledge. His very Cane and Spectacles are enough to set up an Antiquary. The
first was the Walking-staff of Lanfranc Archbishop of Canterbury which is to
he seen by-his Arms upon the Head of it: The the other belonged to the Chaplain
of William the Conqueror; was of Norman make, and traveled over with him. It Is
strange the late Author of M. Fickle forgot to make his Sir Arthur Oldlove
swear by them, the Oath had been of as good Antiquity as St. Austin's
Nightcap, or Mahomet's Threshold. I have often wondered he never set up for a
Conjurer: His very Look would bring him in Vogue, draw Custom, and undo Lilly
and Gadbury. You Would take him for the Ghost of Old Haly or Albumazar, or the
Spirit Friar in the Fortune Book, his Head for the enchanted brazen one of
Friar Bacon. 'Twould pose a good Physiognomist to give Names to the Lines in
his Face. I Have observed all the Figures and Diagrams in Agrippa and Ptolomy's
Centiloquies there upon strict view. And the other day a Linguist of my
Acquaintance showed me all the Arabic Alphabet betwixt his Brow and Chin. Some
have admired how he came to be admitted into Orders, since his very Face is
against the Canon: I guess he pleaded the Qualicfiation of the Prophets of Old,
to be withered, Toothless and deformed. He can pretend to be an Elisha only by
his Baldness. The Devils Oracles heretofore were uttered from such a Mouth.
'Twas then the Candidates for the Tripus were fain to plead Wrinkles and Gray
Hairs; a Splay Mouth, and a goggle Eye were the cheapest Simony, and the ugly
and crippled were the only men of Preferment. And this leads me to consider him
a little in the Pulpit. And there it is hard to distinguish whether that or his
Skin be the coarser Wainscoat: He represents a Cracked Weather-Glass in a Frame.
You Would take him by his Looks and Posture for Muggleton doing Penance and
paulted with rotten Eggs. Had his Hearers the trick of Writing Shorthand, I
should fancy him an Offender upon a Sca^old, and them Penning his Confession.
Not a fluxt Debauch in a sweating Tub makes worse Faces. He makes Doctrine as
Folks do their Water in the Stone or Strangury. Balaams Ass was a better
Divine, and had a better Delivery. The Thorn at Glastenbury had more Sense and
Religion, and would make more Converts. He speaks not, but grunts, like one of
the Gadaren Hogs after the Devils entered. When I came first to his Church and
saw him perched on high against a Pillar, I took him by his gaping for some
Juggler going to swallow Bibles and Hour-Glasses. But I was soon convinced that
other Feats were to be played, and on a sudden lost all my Senses in Noise. A
Drunken Huntsman reeling in while he was at Prayer, asked if he were giving his
Parishoners a Hollow: He has preached half his Parish deaf: His Din is beyond
the Catadupi of Nile. All his Patrons Pigeons, are frighted from their
Apartment, and he is generally believed the Occasion. He may be heard father
then Sir Samuel Moorlands Flagelet. Nay one damned mad Rogue swore: Should he
take a Text concerning the Resurrection, he might serve for the last Trumpet.
And yet in one Respect he is fitted for the Function. His Countenance, if not
Doctrine can scare men into Repentance, like an Apparition: Should he walk
after he is dead, he would not be more dreadful, then now while he is alive.

A Maid meeting him in the Dark in a Churchyard, was frighted into
Phanaticism. (...) is in Bedlam upon the same Occasion I dare not approach him
without (...) Exorcism. In the Name, etc. is the fittest Salutation: Some have
thought the Parsonage House haunted since he dwelt there. In Yorkshire ('it is
reported) they make use of his Name instead of Raw-Head and Bloody-bones to
fright Children. He is more terrible then those Phantoms Country Folks tell of
by the Fire side, and pretend to have seen, with Leathern-wings, Cloven-feet,
and Sawcer-eyes: If he go to Hell (as it is almost an Article of my Creed, he
will) the Devils will quake for all their warm Dwelling, and crowd up into a
Nook for fear of him.

FINIS.

