EBEN-EZER: OR, A SMALL MONUMENT OF GREAT MERCY, APPEARING IN THE Miraculous
Deliverance OF William Okeley, Williams Adams, John Anthony, John Jephs, John
-- Carpenter,
From the Miserable Slavery of ALGIERS, with the wonderful Means of their
Escape in a Boat of Canvas; the great Distress, and utmost Extremities which
they endured at Sea for Six Days and Nights; their safe Arrival at Mayork; With
several Matters of Remarque during their long Captivity, and the following
Providence of God which brought them safe to ENGLAND.

By me William Okeley.

The Second Edition, with a Further Narrative of James Deane and others.

London, Printed for Nath. Ponder, at the Peacock in the Poultrey, over against
Stocks-Market 1684.

depiction of two ships Turks taking the English
depiction of slave market Selling slaves in Algers
depiction of execution Execution with A batvone

depiction of burning Turks burning of A Friar er

depiction of torture Diverse Cruelties

depiction of escape Making the boat and their, Escape to Mayork



Upon this Book, and its Author.
THis Author never was in Print before,
And (let this please or not) will never more.
If all the Press-Oppressors of this Age
Would so Resolve, 'twould Happiness presage:
He should as soon another Voyage take,
As be Obliged another Book to make.
His Canvas Boat Escaped Seas and Wind,
He fears this Paper-Vessel will not find
Such gentle Gales, when every Reader has
Power with a puff to sink the Writers Faith.
For who so Prints a Book, goes off from Shore,
To hazard that which was his own before:
As one poor Pinnace Over-match'd, that fights
With an Armado, so does he who Writes:
If Books (like goodly Merchant-Ships) set forth,
Laden with Riches of the greatest worth;
With Councels, Fathers, Text-men, Schoolmen Manned,
With Sacred Canon Mounted at each Hand;
Are hard beset, and forced to make Defense
Against Armed Atheism, Pride and Impudence.
How can this little Cock-Boat hope and Escape,
When Scripture Suffers Piracy and Rape?
Noe's Ark (wherein the World Epitomized,
And Mankind in Octavo was Comprised.)
Though in the Deluge 'twas preserved sound,
By Infidelity it self lies drowned.
That Moses with a Rod the Sea should Cane,
And Beat the Coward streams into a Plain;
With the same Cane should broach a Flint, and bring
Out of its Fiery Womb a flowing Spring:
That a dry stick assigned for Levie's share,
Should Bud, and Blossom, and Ripe Almonds bear;
That Sampson with the Jaw Bone of an Ass
(And Atheists think Him one that lets it pass
Without a Scomme) should slay a Thousand Men,
And being weary with the Slaughter; then
The kind Jaw Bone, that was his Faulchion first,
Should turn a Flaggon, and allay his Thirst.
These Miracles, and all the Sacred store.
Which Faith should grasp, and Piety adore,
Met with Arrests, Arraignments, and a Doom
More harsh than Tales of Heathen Greece or Rome.
Yet O the Folly of Confounded Man!
Who cannot Truth believe, but Fathers can.
When Truth that cannot Lie, shall be belied,
Its Power defy`d, and Weakness Deify'd:
When our Diseased Appetite shall Lust
For Egyts Leek, or Gibeons Moldy Crust;
Ephraim will feed on Ashes, and disdain
The Manna Comfits, and the Candy'd Rain.
An Heaven-born Truth (like poor Men's Infants) may
For lack of Godfathers, unchrist'ned stay,
And find no Priest; when every stander by
Will be a Gossip to a Great Man's Lie.
O Miracle of Love! God-Man was fain
Each Miracle he wrought, to make it twain,
The Fact, and Faith too, else the Fact in vain.
There is a Generation alive,
That Live on Lying Miracles and thrive,
There is a Guild of Priests will undertake
To make that God who does all Wonders make:
Can make Him, Bake Him, Break Him, Eat him too,
And with a Thought can All again undo.
Had but some Monk this History to Dress,
He would have made the Iron-Teeth of the Press
Turn Edge, and grin, to chew the stuff and style;
Compared with which, all is Pap in Mandevile.
Had these Five Comrades been good Sons of Rome,
Nothing but Miracles had brought them home.
Okely hae been inspired; Jephs had Seen
An Apron dropped down from Heavens Virgin-Queen
To make a Sail; Carpenter should have prayed
Saint Joseph to assist him at his Trade;
And the next Morn did in the Cellar find
The Keel, Ribbs, Pins; all Modeled to his Mind.
An Holy Sea-Calf in St. Peter's Coat,
Had then appeared, and danced before the Boat:
Saint Christopher with a Sweet Babe on's Back,
Had stalkt along to save from Rock and Wrack:
Saint Nicholas (or in his Shape, Old Nick)
Had with a straw steered the Boat Catholic.
The Tortoise taken napping in the Flood,
Had first said Grace, and then become their Food:
Yea, and his Sacred Shell had been preferred
To make fine Combs for Wilgefortu Beard.
And who can tell (for now it is Thirty Years
Since this strange Expedition from Algiers)
What Use the Friars of Mayork have made
Of the poor Skiff to raise their Legend Trade?
But, be it as it will; Buy, or not Buy;
This Book is Protestant, and hates a Lie.
The Reader shall find in this Breviary
All Pater Nosters, not one Ave Mary.
If Gentleman and Christian may avail,
If Honor and Religion can be bail
For this poor Pilgrims Truth and Faithfulness,
It may with Leave and safety past the Press.
Let him who scorns to Read, or Reads to Scorn,
And thinks this Story might have been forborne;
First, buy the Book, theu give Security
To do the like; The Bookseller and I
Will give him Bond, when he Returns to Land,
To pay a Thousand pounds into his Hand.
Mean while this Narative (all plain and True)
Is worth its Shilling to a Turk or Jew;
But to a Christian (were the Story gone)
The Preface is a Pennyworth alone.
The whole has no Errata's or Mistakes,
Save what the Printer and the Poet makes.
To his Ingenions Friend, Mr. William Okely, upon his Miraculous Deliverance in
his Canvas Boat.
THY Boat, thy Coffin call; and Greet
The Canvas as thy Winding Sheet:
From Coffin, Shroud Delivered,
Called Resurrectiod from the Dead!
And since thy Life's the Great, thy Lines present,
As God's Great Mercies Lesser Monument.
A PREFACE To the following NARRATIVE.
Courteous Reader,
I DO readily agree with thee, that there is no sort of Writings more liable to
abuse than this of the Narrative: Lying much at the Mercy of the Composer to be
Corrupted; and as much in danger to be mis-improved by the Reader: The Reader
therefore I am sure will demand good Security that he is not imposed upon in
the ensuing Relation, and the Writer craves leave too, to maintain a modest
Jealousy, lest the Reader should miss the benefit that is designed to him in
it: The Author will engage, and pawn his Credit not to wrong the Narrative, and
he would take some care also that the Reader may not wrong himself.

It is very true, that every Narrator is under a strong Temptation to Season
his Discourse to the Gusto of the Time, not imposing a severe Law upon himself,
to Report what is true, but accomodating his Story to the Liquorish Appetite of
others: I have observed that some Men are ashamed to Recount mean and humble
Matters; if they bring us any thing below Prodigy and Miracle; if they stuff
not their Farces with Gorgons, Harpies, Centaures, and Enchanted Islands, they
neither please themselves, nor hope to take their Readers by the Heart Strings.
Hence it is, that we have so many lean, barren Stories, larded with the
Additaments of Fruitful Invention, as if they had been Penned by the Pattern of
Xenophon's Cyrus. Non ad Historiae fidem, sed ad justi Imperii Exemplar: Not
for Counter-panes of Truth, but Counterfeits of Fancy: They tell us not what
was really done, but what they would have had done, if they might have had the
Contrivance of the Scene and Tragedy: They first form Idaea's of Ingenious
Romances in their own Heads, and then obtrude them upon the World for
Historical Verieties.

Just as our Hydrographers in the Delineating of Countries, with one wanton
Extravagant Frolic of their Graver can raise Mountains, where Nature left us
Valleys; and sink deep Valleys, where God has stretched out a Champagn; can
create Bays, and Creeks, where the Creator made firm Land; and jut out
Promontories, and Capes, where there is nothing in Nature to answer them; and to
fill up Vacuities (out of pure good Husbandry, that not an inch of Ground may
be lost) present us with Flying Fishes, Tritons, and Mermaids, which spend
their hours inter Pectinem and Speculum; and lest Mare del zur should still be
a Desolate Wilderness, have courteously stocked it with the Painter's Wifes
Island, and Terra Incognita; at this rate are we dealt with, by this kind of
Men, who love to blow up lank sttories into huge Bladders, and then put
something in them to make them Rattle to please Children, and yet they are but
Bladders still, though swelled with the Tympany, and Wind-Cholick.

There are also a sort of Stories, which, by the way of Courtesy, we mis-call
Histories, that scorn to give us an account of any thing but dreadful, and
terrible Battles, and how one great Man above all the rest, chopped off Heads and
Arms, and cut off some sheer by the Waste, and with his Trenchant-blade mowed
down whole Files of Armed Enemies; the Fields all this while running with
streams of Blood, and purple Gore; and all this, with as much confidence, and
exactness in every Minute Circumstance, as if, like the Familiar Demon of
Paracelsus, they had been enclosed in the pommel of the General's Sword; or had
hovered, like Victory with her doubtful Wings, over both the Armies, where they
might securely take notes of all that was said or done, in Shelton's
Brachygraphy: but from what Principles or Interests these Warriers were Acted;
by what Rules they proceeded, with what Councels and Intrigues, designs were
managed; and to what Point all these Policies steered; is as much below their
Spirits as above their Abilities, to inform us.

To secure the Reader against the fear of such Entertainment in this Narrative,
let him know, that he shall meet with nothing in Fact but what is precisely
true; what of wonderment he may Encounter, was of God's own working, not of
Man's inventing; let others make Tragedies to gratify the Bookseller, and
cheat the simple Buyer; we need not Peter Lillicrap's Essex Serpent, nor
Livewell Chapman's Greater Monsters, to Aggrandize our Title Page; God's Works
need no foyl to set them off, the greatest Beauty of Truth, is its nakedness,
and Symmetry.

There is a vast difference between the most elaborate products of Art, and the
most homely pieces of Nature; for though the former will needs Ape the latter,
yet how pitifully does she bungle in the imitation! Look upon the subtle Point
of the finest Needle through a Microscope, and you will soon be satisfied that
Art is but a Dunce, for the Needle will appear as blunt, and dull as a
Drum-stick; but come and view one of Gods Handy-works in the same Glass, V. G.
The sting of a Be, and you shall see it perpetually Acuminated till it ends in
something, which the Eye must either confess to be a Point, or Nothing; The
same difference we may observe between those Romances, which are the Issues of
fine Wits, and the serious, grave Contrivances of Divine Providence; what
clumz'd things are the Cassandra's to one of those pieces of proportion, to be
seen in God's Government of this lower World! So that it were unpardonable to
strive to Recommend the wonderful Providence of God to the Genius of this Age,
by a Lie, or to talk deceitfully for him; whatever therefore this Narrative is,
yet it is a naked Account of his own workings; and Gold needs no Gilding.

But now the Readers great danger lies in running over some of God's Works, and
yet not seeing God in his Works: Little Children, we see, do hugely please
themselves with the Gilded Covers, and Marbled Leaves of Books, but concern not
themselves, what is within; and if they chance to look a little overly upon the
forms and shapes of the Letters, yet understand not the sublime matter, that
may be coucht in them: Now, to divide the words from the meaning, is morally to
Annihilate them, and so whilst they see Letters, and Words only, they see just
Nothing: There are a great many such (...), such Old Children in the World,
that gaze upon the surface of Gods Works, but never are led by them to admire
the Wisdom, Power, Goodness, and Holiness of God: They deal with the Works of
Providence, just as they do with the Works of Creation: God has Engraven his
own Name in Legible Characters upon the Heavenly Bodies. The Stars in their
single Beauties, their Combined Asterisms, their Mutual Aspects, their
Intricate, yet Regular Motions, speak their Author; nay, upon the lowest
Recreations, the Leisure-sports of Nature, there is written, Deus fecit. But
now the common observer, whose thoughts are terminated by his Eye, and his Eye
with the visible Heavens, as it is bespangled with glittering things, called
Planets, and Stars, loses quite their main design, which is to conduct and
argue our thoughts up to a first Cause; for they were not so much out who cried
up the Music of the Sphaeres to be so Ravishing: and we should confess it,
could we but hear them Sing this Antheme, Glory be to God on High. Can we be so
Brutish, as once to imagine, that the wise God, who creates nothing little,
nor for a little end, should create such great, and glorious Bodies only to be
the Objects of Ignorant, and Blind Amazement? Surely no; but that by the
contemplation of them, we might be led into the Admiration of Him, whose Being,
Wisdom, Power must needs be infinitely Glorious, when his very works are
excellently so: Here then will be the Readers danger, lest all his Spirits
should evaporate in a confused Admiration, that a Boat, a little, a Canvas Boat
should, like the Ark, convey so many Persons so many Leagues safe a Shore,
whilst he misses the true intent, and meaning of it, to behold a watchful
Providence (as well as the Being of a Deity,) over all Affairs. Now, that he
may not split upon this dangerous Rock, but improve the Narrative to his best
Advantage, I shall submissively lay before him a few Directions.

1. Sect. Learn from this Narrative to trust, and in all thy ways to
acknowledge God, who by the most contemptible means, can effect the most
considerable things. Created Beings, as they cannot act beyond the Sphere of
their Activity, so neither can they Operate further than the suitableness of
their Instruments will enable them; it were ridiculous to attempt to cut down a
Forest with a Penknife, or Lave the Ocean with a Spoon; but if the great God
can make the dullest Tool to cut, can serve himself of the most unfit
Instruments, and accomplish the most Noble Works with the most Wooden Engines,
he will sure deserve our greatest trust and confidence. As great Princes are
attended with a numerous Train of Servants, more for State, than absolute
Necessity; so God uses second causes, not because he cannot work without them,
but to teach us to admire his strength, in their weakness, his All Sufficiency
in their insufficiency.

The Grand Seignior had heard of the famous Atchievemen of Castriots Scimitar,
and was very desirous to make an Experiment, whether its excellency answered
the Report; he sends for it, proves it, it does no Execution; he sends it back
with scorn, and indignation, that lying Fame should magnify a sorry Ammunition
Sword so far above its merits, but Scanderbeg, before the Messenger's Face,
hews in pieces Helmets, Corslets; Go now (says he) and tell your Master,
Though I sent him my Sword, I did not send him my Arm; none can work with God's
means, that has not God's Arm: Have thou an Arm like God? Job 40. 9. Here then
the Reader may see, (and if he sees not, he forfeits his Eyes) the same God who
in an Ark of Bulrushes preserved Moses, and in another Ark saved Noah, in a
small Canvas Sculler (which was our Ark, though in a lesser Volume) waft us
over the Ocean, and bring us all safe to Land: As God is seen in the smallest
works of Creation, so in the smallest Instruments of his Providence. The little
Fly, or Ant, expresses Creative Power, and Omnipotency in Miniature, as well as
the great, Castle-bearing Elephant: I have read somewhere of a Goldsmith that
made a Lock, and Key, and Chain so small, and subtle, that a Fly would draw
them all about a Table, and never be stalled; surely the Spectator would not
praedicate the strength of the poor Fly, but the skill of the Artist.

Est in tenuibus, and Pusillis Reculis
Laus Optimique Maximique Maxima. Gaz.
Pia hilar.
The Glory of the Great wise King,
Shines greatly in the smallest thing.
Indeed our whole passage was wonder; suppose we had met with one Night of Hazy
Weather, we might have plied back into the jaws of that Destruction which we
had so far escaped. Had we met with one Storm (and an ordinary puff of wind had
been a Storm to us) it had presently over-set us; but the same God that
commands a calm for the Halcyon, commanded Halcyon Days and Nights for us, till
under the wings of his Gracious care he had hatched his own purposes of Mercy,
into perfect Deliverance. It was a wonder too, that in our six Days Voyage, in
the Mediterranean, the very High Road of Navigation, both for honest Men and
Knaves, Merchants and Pirates, we should not meet with one Vessel, Friend or
Foe: Had we met with a Friend's Vessel, they had pityed us, taken us up, and
then the Power of God had not been so signalized in our Preservation; had we
fallen in with an Enemy, we had immediately become a Prey to their Teeth, they
had swallowed us up quick, we had made but one poor Morsel to their greedy
Stomachs, and thereby defeated a work of God gloriously begun, and robbed him of
the Revenue of his praise.

If then they that go down to the Sea in Ships, see the works of the Lord, and
his wonders in the deep, Psalm. 107. 23, 24. What Wonders, what Miracles of
Providence have we seen, and many others see in us, who went down to the Sea,
not in a Ship, but in a Canoe, which for want of a better Name we call a Boat!
Let the Reader therefore admire God with me; and both of us with the Psalmist,
Psalm. 86. 8. Among the Gods there is none like unto thee, O Lord; neither are
there any works like thy works.

He deals unrighteously with God, who measures him: by the smallness of the
means that he uses, and not by the greatness of those effects he produces by
those means. And therefore, Disce a Cymbula, quisquises; and Deo
Da pro tenuibus, and pusillis Reculis,
Laudem Optimoque Maximoque Maximam.
Gaz. Piahilar.
Let this our little Sciff thy Spirits raise,
To give to this great God, thy greatest Praise.


2. Sect. Let the Reader improve this Relation to fortisie his Faith against
the little Cavils of Atheistical Spirits, who lay out their ill placed wit in
forgeing Objections against Him that gave it. There is a Creature famous in
Prove. 6. Qui lacte Materno impletus calcibus petit Lactantem, that being filled
with the liberal Dug, ungratefully kicks his Dam. Thus this sort of Men are
ambitious to be accounted witty, in creating knots and difficulties in the
Historical passages of Gods great Providence Recorded in Scripture, and
particularly in his preservation of Noah, and his Family in the Ark: But he
that had seen with us the watchful Eye of God superintended, and the steady
hand of God to hold a poor Canvas Boat, built without Regular proportion, ill
Victualled, without Anchor, Helm, Compass, or Tackle, and thereby preserve the
Lives of five inconsiderable persons, of no great use in the World, and after
six Days great extremity and distress, Land them all safe, may easily Credit
the Report, how the same God should preserve eight Persons, upon whose Lives
the re-peopling of the whole World did depend, in a Vessel of most exact
proportions, strong built, and well laid in with all manner of Provisions. He
that can see a Creator in the works of Creation, and a Governor in the works of
Providence, may reasonably believe all Divine Revelations.

3. Sect. Let all that would not abuse this Narrative beware, lest whilst they
are admiring Providence in this instance, if our preservation, they do not
overlook those eminent appearances of God toward themselves every moment,
which, though perhaps they carry not so much of Rarity in them, yet may have in
them, as much of real power, wisdom, and goodness. We are apt to deal with our
Mercies, just as we do with our Sins, where the commonness and frequency of
either, abates and takes off from the Observation and Notice which we owe them;
we gaze, and wonder at Comets, and their Flaming Beards, but seldom admire the
Sun, a far more Glorious Body, because he rises and sets every Morning and
Evening upon the just and the unjust; Do thou admire God in our preservation,
learn to admire him in thy own: Art thou surprised with wonder, that we were
kept a few Days, when there was not half an inch between us and Death?
Consider, God has kept thee many Days, and many Years,, and every minute of
those many Days and Years, when there was but a hairs breadth between thee and
Death: Do thou then admire God preserved us alive in a Vessel of Cloth?
Admire that God that holds thy Soul in Life, and that in a more frail Vessel,
a Vessel of Clay: Do thou still wonder we were not blown over with every
breath of Wind? Admire also that the Lamp of thy Life which thou carriest in a
Paper-Lanthorn, is not blown out by every blast of Sickness: But if thou will
still wonder how such a Boat should carry us? Then wonder also how thy Food
nourishes thee, how thy Clothes keep thee warm, how thy sleep refreshes thee:
There Is not a moment in our Lives but is filled with real Miracle and Wonder. I
will Praise thee (says the Psalmist, Psalm. 139. 14.) for I am fearfully and
wonderfully made: Let us all Praise God, for we are fearfully and wonderful
preserved. If Preservation be but a continued Creation, how should we adore
that Power that Created us once, but preserves us always! God expects that we
should equally magnify his skill in making us out of Nothing, and securing us
that we drop not into Nothing: and as much admire his goodness, that we crumble
not, moulder not into our Dust, as that we were at first formed out of Dust.

4. Sect. Let the Reader learn from our Slavery, to prize, and improve his own
Liberty. If we serve not our God sincerely, and cheerfully in plenty, he can
send us where we shall serve our Enemies in want. If we glorify him not with
our Liberty, but turn it into licentiousness, he can clap us up close, where we
shall learn to prize it higher, and wish we had improved it better. It argues
great disinginuity and baseness in our Spirits, that we provoke our God to
teach us the worth of Mercies by the want of them: The Lord does not willingly
afflict, nor grieve the Children of Men, Lam. 3. 33. but we provoke him to take
his Rod into his hand, and lay it smartly upon our backs, because that Folly
which is bound up in our Hearts will not otherwise be lasht out of us. Thus God
threatened his people of Old, Deuteronomy. 28. 48. Because thou servedst not the Lord
thy God with joyfulness and gladness of Heart, for the abundance of all things,
therefore shall thou serve thine Enemies, in hunger, thirst, and nakedness, and
in the want of all things. Thus he taught Judah by the Captivity of Babylon, to
prize the freedom of Canaan; we might learn our Duty much cheaper from Gods
Word, but we like Truants, will not learn it there, till God sends us to School
with a Rod at our backs.

5. Sect. Let all Learn from hence, in what State soever the Providence of God
shall place them, therewith to be content: Perhaps thou art a Servant to a
Christian; do thou murmur? It shows, thou little know what it is to be a
Slave to an imperious Turk. Thou servest him that Prays with thee, and for
thee: do thou repine? God might have made thee serve one who would Curse and
Torture thee, and make little Provision for thy Body, and none at all for thy
Soul: The Christian Religion is surely the most excellent Religion in the
World, because it holds the balance so even between Superiors and Inferiors:
It enjoins the one to give the most full Obedience, and yet prohibits the other
to exercise Rigor. It is peremptory for Duty, and yet abhors Tyranny: whoever
has known Turkish Slavery, is obliged to become a more Loyal Subject, a more
Dutiful Child, a more Faithful Servant; and whoever has not known it, is yet
obliged to become all these, lest God make him know it, and whip out of him
that Restiff Spirit of grumbling, and Disobedience with the Briars, and Thorns
of the Wilderness.

God commanded all Masters among the Jews, to allow their Servants a Day of
Rest, Deuteronomy. 5. 14. and he gives this Reason for it, Remember that thou wast a
Servant in the Land of Egypt. The Equity of which Reason holds stronger for the
Christian: Remember thou wast a Servant to the worst of Masters, a Drudge in
the basest of works, and liable to receive the worst of Wages: Has Christ set
thee free? And art thou become a Servant to the best of Masters? Employed in
the most reasonable, and honorable Services? And in expectation of the most
glorious Rewards? Let it teach thee if thou be a Master, to command gently;
and if a Servant, to obey cheerfully.

6. Sect. Let all Learn to walk worthy of the Gospel. It is that which sweetens
all our mercies, and mitigates the bitterness of all Afflictions; and if we sin
away that, we either sin away all the rest, or whatever is useful, and
desirable in all the rest. If we enjoy the Light, and yet walk in darkness,
it is righteous with God, to overspread our Habitations with Egyptian, or
Babylonish, Turkish, or Popish darkness. God can carry us to Rome, or Algiers;
or else send Rome, and Algiers home to us: For what should a a People do with
Light, that only intend to play, or fight by it? The once Famous Churches of
Asia, are now swallowed up by the Ottoman Sword, and the Mahumetan Unbelief;
and those sometimes Famous Cities, Carthage, and Hippo, which knew those
burning and shining Lights, Cyprian, and Augustine, are now possessed with Moors,
and defiled with the Abominations of the greatest Impostor that ever seduced
the Nations, but One. And think thou, O Man, O Christian, that do these
things, so Alien from the Gospel of Christ; that art drunk in the day, and
cursest that God whom thou Worshippest, that thou shall escape the Judgment of
God? I tell thee, nay; and I tell all those that read these lines, and are
guilty; and I tell my self, so far as I am guilty, that except we repent, we
shall all likewise perish.

The Lord Jesus Christ, in his Epistle to the Church of Ephesus, gives her this
Memorial, Rev. 2. 5. Remember therefore from whence thou art fallen, and
Repent, and do thy first work, or else I will come unto thee quickly, and
remove thy Candlestick out of its place, except thou Repent: But Ephesus would
none of his Counsel, none of his Caution; and Christ was as good as his word,
he put out her Candle, and removed her Candlestick. I have often wondered, what
should be the grounds of their confidence, who speak as if the Gospel were
entailed upon England, by virtue of some Ancient Charter; as if God would make
us Exceptions from his General Rule, which is to take away abused, despised
means, and mercies, and we must own much of prerogative in our case; but yet
let us Rejoice with trembling, lest when Profaneness and Debauchery dog
Religion so close at the heels, she fly not thither, where she may find better
Quarter: It has made great Impression upon me when I read the Divine Herbert,
in his Church Militant;

Religion stands on Tip-toe in onr Land,
Ready to pass to the American Strand;
When height of Malice, and Prodigious Lusts
Impudent sinning; Witchcrafts, and Distrusts,
(The Marks of future bane) shall fill our Cup
Unto the Brim, and make our Measure up, etc.
7. Sect. Let it be every Man's care to be found in Gods way: The Promise of
Protection is annexed to Gods way, Psalm. 91. 11. He shall give his Angels charge
over thee to keep thee in all thy ways: And the Blessing of God is annexed to to
his own way too, Psalm. 128. 1. Blessed is every one that fears God, and
walks in his ways. When we are over-taken with the evil of Affliction, let
the first Question we propound to our selves be this. Am I not in the way of
Transgression? Did this danger find me in my Duty? Was I in Gods Highway, or
in some by path of my own? Was I doing his work? Serving his Glory? If we
observe not the way of his Precepts, I know no Reason we should plead the
Promise of his Protection. There are two things upon which I look upon it as my
great Duty to Reflect; First, whether we were in the way Gods Precepts when we
fell into our Enemies Hands? Secondly, whether we were in the way of Gods
Promise when we escaped out of their Hands? For the former, I am abundantly
satisfied, that we were in the way of our Duty; for we were sent out by
Commission from the Right Honor, able, Robert, Earl of Warwick, the Lord Say,
and the Lord Brook, who by Patent from Hi^ Majesty King Charles the First, were
Governors of the Isle of Providence, whither we were bound: For the latter, If
the more severe Reader shall make it a Question, Whether we could in Faith
expect Protection in an Adventure visibly so rash, and praecipitous? And shall
determine it against us, that we tempted God by casting our selves upon
extraordinary Protection, expecting deliverance without warrant, in a way
little on this side miracle: I shall first say, Let him shun that Rock in his
own Conversation, upon which he supposes us to have dashed: Let our Shipwreck
be a Buoy to warn him of the like presumption, and let him learn more wisdom,
at our cost and charges. I shall further say, let him not discover greater
rashness in censuring our Adventure, then he charges upon our Adventure, but
modestly consider himself, lest he also be tempted: and if we were guilty of
folly, he may thus gain wisdom by our folly. But I shall add, Extremity of
Misery is none of the best Counselors; let him put himself under our
Circumstances, and if Cowardice did not hinder him from making our Attempt, I
am confident Conscience would not: Our Lives were bitter to us by Reason of
cruel Bondage, and (though mine was at that time much mitigated) yet there is a
secret Magnetisme in a Native Soil, with which our Hearts being once strongly
touched, could never admit of the leact variation, but still pointed directly
Homewards; and such a Land too, as was like Goshen, all Light, when the Land of
our Captivity was like Egypt, both for Slavery and Darkness, that might both be
felt; and we thought it below Men, for the Love of Life, to lose the Reasons of
our Lives, for

All may have (If they dare try) a Glorious Life or Grave. Herb. Chapter Porch. In
a word, though success will not warrant an evil Action, yet there is much of
justification in it, on the behalf of those which are not so; nor did we tempt
God to work Miracles, but trusted him to afford us special Protection; But if
this will not satisfy, let none imitate us wherein we failed, but rather
admire Divine Condescension, that engaged in our Deliverance, notwithstanding
our failing.

8. Sect. Let all that read this Narrative be instructed never to promise them
selves great matters from Men: I have observed it in the whole course of our
Captivity, and constant Tenor of those Gracious Providence which brought us
thence, and the Series of Mercy, Wisdom, and Power, that was our Convoy Home,
that we ever found most of Favor from God, when we expected least from Men:
and the least of kindness from those where we might, or thought we might in
Reason have promised our selves most. When we met with unexpected Friendship,
God would teach us to own himself. When we met with dis-appointment, God would
teach us the folly of Idolizing the Creature: I have seriously admired the
Compassion and Relief we found at Mayork, and yet we knew them to be Romanists,
and they knew us to be Protestants, and haw little respect we found from some
of our own Country, at Alicant, Cadiz, and St. Lucars, and yet we were tied
together in the strictest Triple Bonds of Un Dieu, Un Roy, Un Ley, One God, One
King, One Law: But God was seen in both. I could Relate a Passage during our
Captivity in Algiers, that had more of bitterness in it, than in all our
Slavery; and yet they were Christians, not Algerines; Protestants, not Papists;
Englishmen, not Strangers, that were the cause of it: But I have put a force
upon my self, and am resolved not to publish it. In our Return homewards, we
met with some who would talk to the grief of those whom God had wounded, and
was now in a way to heal again. Some would interpretatively say, with the
Churlish Nabal, 1 Samuel 25. 10. Who are these? And whence come they? There are
many Servants now adays that break away, every one from his Master. But then
was the season when we had most Experience of Gods faithfulness: And I shall
never cease to own before the World the great Respect we found from some
English Merchants, to whom we were perfect Strangers; and the Civilities of
Captain Goodson, Captain Smith, his Mate, and his Son, are not to be forgotten.

Perhaps, after all this, the Reader will be earnest to be satisfied, why this
Narrative has lain so long Dormant, and appeared no sooner in the World? And I
shall herein also endeavor to give him all Reasonable satisfaction.

1. When we returned into England, we found our Native Country embroyled in a
Civil War, and most Men had enough to do, to bear their own personal
Calamities, and had little need to be troubled with the miseries of others;
they were other kind of Declarations that flew abroad then, and that was enough
to super-sede a Narrative of this Nature, for some Years.

2. The great Mercies of God have not always their due weight upon our Hearts
at first; and I have received signal Deliverances from eminent dangers since
that great one; and it is well if all the mercies of our Lives, all our
Deliverances put together, will amount to an Argument strong enough to overcome
our backwardness to make public acknowledgments.

3. I thought a long while that it was not worth the while, to trouble the
World with my particular Concerns, till the Importunity of several Ministers,
and others, both in City and Country, overcame my reluctance, in whose Reasons
I did acquiesce.

4. I was conscious to my self of great unfitness to recommend it to public
view, in such a garb as might vindicate it from Contempt; for though it has
been drawn out many years with my own hand, and many have had the perusal of
it, have approved it, and desired it; yet till I could prevail with a Friend to
teach it to speak a little better English, I could not be persuaded to let it
walk abroad; The Stuff and Matter is my own, the Trimming and Form is another,
for whom I must vouch, that he has done the Truth, my self, and the Reader
Justice.

Having overcome all these difficulties, I do here Erect my Ebenezer, as a
small Monument of great Mercy, and as an Obligation upon my Soul to great Duty,
and do pray that it may stand as an Abiding Witness for God in my Conscience;
that whenever I am tempted to Sin, I may have an Answer ready to stop the
Mouth of the Tempter with Indignation; How can I do this great Evil, and Sin
against my good God? When I am tempted to distrust, I may encourage my Faith
from my own Narrative, saying, Remember that God who delivered thee at Sea;
when I am tempted to murmur, I may suppress those mutinous thoughts from my own
Narrative, saying, Remember what thou endurest in Algiers. When my Heart grows
cold, and unthankful, I may chide, and shame it, from my own Narrative, into
gratitude to God; That God, who remembered us in our low Estate, for his Mercy
endures for ever! who preserved us at the Sea, the Great Sea; for his Mercy
endures for ever! and secured us in a Boat, a Contemptible Boat, for his Mercy
endures for ever! who gave us favor in the Eyes of Strangers, for his Mercy
endures for ever! and opened to us the Hearts of Enemies; for his Mercy
endures for ever! and taught us to look up to his never failing Mercy, when
Friends failed, for his Mercy endures for ever! who turned us safe to England,
for his mercy endures for ever! we called upon him in the day of Trouble, he
delivered us, and we will glorify him.

Reader, this Narrative is true, peruse it seriously, and let not Vanity tempt
thee to say, Things might have been better contrived, wiselier managed; it was
God that did what was Good in All; call not his Wisdom in Question, because he
did not create more wonders to gratify thy itching Humor; perhaps thou
would have had us been brought over upon a Floating Island, or in a Whales
Belly, but I do not understand that the great God is bound to work Miracles to
save Men's longings: God has done his work well, and none can mend it; for, what
can the Man do that comes after the King? Eccl. 2. 12. For the matter of Fact
Recorded herein, I might safely call God to Record upon my Soul that I lie not:
The thing is known to many, and has been sifted, and scanned by such Eyes and
Ears as are not guilty of easy Credulity; I have Evidence that may storm the
most obstinate unbelief: Mr. Thomas Saunders, my Wife's Brother, being in
Mayork not long after we came from thence, saw our Boat hang up for a Monument
upon the side of the great Churh there. Mr. Robert Hales, who was there 1671.
assures me he saw the naked Ribs and Skeleton of it then hanging in the same
place. Now, I assure thee, Reader, I should be much ashamed of my self, if
Strangers unconcerned in my Personal Deliverances, should be so far concerned
as to preserve a Memorial of them, and yet unthankful I should Erect no
Standard or Pillar as an Evidence of Gods wonderful appearing for me.

It Is true, I am informed by one, that some affirm, there are more Boats
hanging up in Mayork, in Memory of some such like escape: Now, if others have
really escaped the same danger, by the same means, it greatly confirms our
Narrative; and I do heartily rejoice, Providence has appeared in the same
Method for others, as for our selves: we never intend to Monopolize Gods
Providence to our sole use and behoof; and we rejoice if our attempt and
success may have encouraged others to make the like attempt, and have found the
like success; but I do assert it with great confidence, that when we were in
Mayork, there was no such Boat hanging up, but the Inhabitants there
entertained our Deliverance as such whereof they had no parallel: But if on the
other side, these, or some of these succeeding Boats were but Imposture, then
the goodness of God appears more remarkable toward us, that we really were the
Subjects of such wonder which others durst only pretend to; and it sets a
luster upon this great Salvation, which others have thought so considerable,
that they judged it worth the while to tell a Lie to entitle themselves to the
Credit of it; for it is Gold and Silver, not Copper, or baser Metals, that they
who drive the Coining Trade, strive to Counterfeit.

Let then every one that reads, understand, and seriously sit down, and
consider with himself, whether he has not had many eminent Personal
Deliverances in one kind or other, which this Mavelous Providence of God
toward us may not refresh his Memory withal; and if he shall hence be taught
to blush at his forgetfulness of lapsed Mercies; if this Narrative shall
recover any lost Providencies, and fix them on, and rivet into his Soul; if he
shall find himself awakened to do thankfulness to God for all his benefits
toward him; let him join with me in ascribing all the Power, and therefore all
the Glory, to the Almighty, and let him kindly accept the assistance of him,
who shall reckon it amongst his other Mercies, to have been Serviceable to any
one in reviving a better frame of Heart. Iam,

Reader, Thy Friend, and Servant, W. Okeley.

A SMALL MONUMENT OF GREAT MERCY.
SECT. I.
A Brief Acconnt of those Providence Which led toward our Captivity in
Algiers.
THIS Narrative would be too happy, if it should not meet with some hasty and
impatient Spirits, that grudge the time that is spent in Preface and
Introduction; and such as these, are wild to come at the Story of the Boat; all
the rest is but one great tedious Impertinency, they will not give a Figg for all
the other. I shall make never the more haste for unreasonable Importunity; but
the Remedy is in their own hands, they may turn over a few leaves, and meet
with it in its proper place, if they sit upon Thorns. But to the more judicious
and considerate, it will be acceptable to know how our Foot was taken in the
Snare, as well as how the Snare was broken, and we delivered.

In the Month of June, in the Year of Our Lord, One Thousand, Six Hundred,
Thirty, and Nine, in pursuance of a Commission from the Right Honorable, the
Earl of Warwick, the Lord Say, and the Lord Brook, we took Ship at Gravesend,
in the Mary of London, carrying Six Guns, Mr. Boarder being Master, and James
Walker the Masters Mate; the Ship was chiefly Laden with Linen and Woollen
Cloth, having in her, Seamen and Passengers, above Sixty, bound for the Isle
of Providence in the West Indies. Five Weeks we lay in the Downs, wishing, and
waiting for a Wind, and then we set Sail, and came to Anchor near the Isle of
Wight; but by this time all our Beer in the Ship stunk, and we were forced to
throw it overboard, and to take in Vinegar to mix with Water for our Voyage.
The next Lord's Day we set Sail again, and coming between the Island, and the
Main Land, we stuck fast in the Sands, but the Tide coming in, hove us off.
These Circumstances seem very inconsiderable to those that were not concerned
in the Products of them; but God has given us the advantage and leisure to see
what great things were in the Womb of these little things. Had the Wind stood
longer against us, it had been more for us, and the danger had been past; had
it stood less while against us, it had been for us too, and we had been gone
past the danger: But God appoints it the Moment when it should come about to
blow us into the Mouths of our Enemies: We see the Truth of that, Ye know what
to pray for: We prayed for a Wind, and we had a Whirlwind: If we always knew
what mischief the Answer of our Prayers would do us, we should be glad to eat
our words, and Pray against our Prayers. Denial is often the best Answer, and
we had need leave all Petitions to the wisdom of God to be Interpreted,
according to his good pleasure, and returned as they may be good for us, and
make most for his own Glory: we were also taught, that the Sea may sometimes be
our best Friend, and the Earth our worst Enemy; and that nothing can do us good
or hurt, but by the Direction and Commission of the Almighty.

We were now three Ships in Company, and one of the other I remember, carried
Nine Guns, Mr. Church, Master. The Sixth Day after our setting Sail from the
Isle of Wight, by break of Day in the Morning, we discovered three Ships about
three or four Leagues to Leeward: The Masters of our Ships presently consulted,
what was most advisable; whether to stay and speak with them, or to make the
best of our way; at last (upon what Reasons I know not) it was determined that
we should stay; It was not long before we discovered those other three Ships to
be Turks Men of War, who espying their Prey, endeavored to come up with us,
which about Night they affected: Whilst they were coming up, the Masters of our
Ships seemed resolved to Fight them, and accordingly made preparation to
receive them, but in the Night, the Master and Company of the Ship wherein I
was, altered their Counsels, let their Resolutions Dye, and agreed to run for
it; uncertain Counsels never produce better success; when we might have gone,
then we would stay; and when there was no way to escape, then we musts needs
attempt it: Had we either at first Resolved not to Fight them, or resolved to
Fight, had prosecuted our Resolutions lie Men of Courage, we might, perhaps,
either have avoided the danger, or bravely Mastered it. The Turks perceiving us
begin to run, sent one of their number to Chase us, whilst their other two
attended the remaining two of our Company till the Morning. At break of Day
they began to Fight us, and after a short Dispute Boarded us, and took us all
three: In the Mary, six were slain, and many wounded; so small was the
difference between Flight and Fight; but that the Death and Wounds of those
that fly, are dishonorable; but of them that Fight, beautiful, and Glorious.

Many Weeks they kept us close Prisoners at Sea! we found many Englishmen in
their Ships, Slaves, like our selves, from whom we had no other Comfort, but
the Condoling of each others Miseries, and that from them we learnt a
smattering of the Common Language, which would be of some use to us when we
should come to Algiers, whither, after five or six Weeks we were brought.

SECT. II.
The Description of Algiers, with their Manner of Buying, and Selling Slaves.
ALgier is a City very pleasantly situated on the side of the Hills,
over-looking the Mediterranean, which lies North of it; and it lifts up its
proud Head so Imperiously, as if it Challenged a Sovereignty over those Seas,
and expected Tribute from all that shall look within the Streights. It lies in
the 30th. Degree of Longitude, and has somewhat less than 35 Degrees of
North-Latitude: The City is considerably large, the Walls being above three
Miles in Compass, beautified and strengthened with five Gates: Port-Marine
toward the North, and Port Piscadore not far from thence, and Porta-Nova
toward the South; built, as they report, by the Spaniard, whilst it was in
their Possession: The West-Gate, which they call Bubawite, and the
Eastern-Gate, which in their Tongue is called Bubazoon: They have also several
strong Castles besides that upon the Point of the Mole, so that the Town is
judged impregnable. The City is built very stately, and yet more strong than
stately; and more Famous than strong, but not more Famous for any thing than
for Infamy, being the Retreat, the Nest of those Turkish Corsairs, which have
long Tyrannized in, and been a Terror to the Neighboring Seas. It is supposed
by some to contain Four Thousand Families, by others, Fourscore Thousand
Persons; but they must needs be very short in their Reckoning, it having been
Judged, that of all Nations there could be no less than Twenty Five Thousand
Slaves. The Private Buildings are very beautiful, flat Roof'd. Adorned with
Galleries toward their Courts, supported by Pillars: And they may afford to
Build sumptuously, because they Build at other Men's cost, and with other Men's
hands: Their Temples are also very Magnificent, and much too good for their
Religion, whose Practice and Conversation speaks them to say, There is no God.
And yet we Read of a Religious Thief, who never went about the works of his
Calling (for so he called stealing) but he would solemnly implore the
assistance of his Idol; A strange God, sure; that would be accessory to his
Devoto's Robberies: And a strange Worshipper, that either hoped to flatter to
his God become his Accomplice in Villainy, with the Vow of a good round share of
the Booty, or would be such a Fool, to think that God worth the Worshipping
that should be thus flattered. They have also many stately Baths, to which the
Men resort in the Morning, and the Women in the Afternoon; But they want one,
worth them all, wherein they might by Faith and Repentance was away their
filthiness.

To this fair City we were brought, yet in our Eyes it was most ugly and
deformed; for the French Proverb is universally true, Il n'y a point de bell
Prizon. There is no such thing as a fair Prison. I confess, for a Goal, it is
one of the best Built that I have seen; there is nothing that the Soul of Man
bears with more regret than Restraint: The Body it self is judged by some to be
but the Soul's Little-ease, or Cage; where though it seems to Dwell, yet it is
but in Honorable Durance; and though it dares not break the Prison, yet it
listens; and longs for a Jail-delivery: There can be nothing large enough for a
Soul but God, from whom since it once at first came, it must needs be restless
till it return to him again; and surely it has much forgot it self, and
extract, if it can take up with satisfaction in any thing on this side its
Creator.

As soon as we were ashore, for the first Night we were locked down in a deep
nasty Cellar; some inconveniences we felt, but they were nothing to what we
feared: The next day we were carried, or led, or rather driven to the
Viceroys, or Bashaw's Palace, who according to the Custom, and his own Right,
is to have the Tenth Man for his Dividend of the Slaves.

When the next Market Day came; we were driven like Beasts thither, and exposed
to Sale; and there is a great deal of God's goodness in that one word, that it
was not to the Slaughterhouse to be Butchered, as well as to the Market to be
Sold. Their Cruelty is great, but their Covetousness exceeds their Cruelty;
could they make as much of us Dead, as they make alive, that so both the
Interests of Cruelty, and of Covetousness, might be secured, and reconciled, we
were well assured which way it should have gone with us. But it must be a great
deal of Tallow and Fat, that will answer two or three Dollers a Month.

Their manner of selling Slaves, is this. They lead them up and down the Fair,
or Market; and when a Chapman bids any Money, they presently cry, a-Rache!
a-Rache! that is, Here Is so much Money bidden, who bids more? They that cheapen
the exposed Slaves are very circumspect persons, they carry their Eyes in their
Heads, as well as their Money in their Purses, and use the one in laying out
the other; for they are loath to buy a Pig in a Poke; their first Policy is to
look in their Mouths; and a good, strong, entire set of Grinders will advance
the Price considerably, and they have good Reason for this Practice: for first,
they are Rational Creatures, and know, that they who have not Teeth, cannot
eat, cannot work; and they that cannot work, are not for their turn; and they
that are not for their turn, are not for their Money. And Secondly, they intend
to keep them at hard meat all the Year, and it must not be Gums, but solid
Teeth (nay, if it were possible, case-hardn'd Teeth) that must chew it; and
when all is done, they had need of the Ostriches Stomach to digest it. Their
next process is to feel their Limbs; as whether there be any Fracture, or
Dislocation in the Bones; any thing Analogical to Spavin, or Ring-bone, for
these will bring down the Makret wonderfully; And to be clean Limbed, close
coupled, well joynted, will advance it as much. The Age is very considerable;
but they that sell them, did not breed them, and therefore they know nothing,
more or less of that: Two ways they have to find out the Age; the one is, to
stand to the courtesy of the Slaves, but they are not bound to make any such
Discovery, and therefore they go by general conjectures from the Beard, Face,
or Hair; but a good set of Teeth will make any one Ten Years Younger, and a
broken one Ten Years Older than the Truth; for if they were Five Hundred Years
Old all is a Case, if they could but eat and work; or if they could not eat,
yet if they could but work, or if they neither eat nor work, if their Skins
would but fetch in the Money again. You shall have the Seller commend his Goods
to the Sky, and the Buyer on the other hand, as much undervalue them, and the
true Market-price commonly lies just between them; but so it is all the World
over. Or says the Seller, mark what a Back he has, what a breadth he bears
between the Shoulders! What a Chest! How strong set! How fitted on the nonce
for Burdens! He Will do but e'ne to much work. Pish, says the Buyer, He looks
like a Pillard, like a very Meacock at his Provinder, and one that seems to be
surfeited. But they are very curious in examining the Hands; for if they be
callous and brawny, they will shrewdly guess they have been inured to Labor;
if delicate and tender, they will suspect some Gentleman, or Merchant, and then
the hopes of a good Price of Redemption makes him Saleable.

When any are sold, they must be trotted once more to the Viceroys, that he
may have the review of them, and if he likes any of them at the prizes they
went off at, there is no more Dispute, they are his own.

As for my self, I was sold the first Marget-day to a Tagareen; and that the
Reader may not stumble at that hard word, he may understand; That when the
Moors were driven out of Spain by Ferdinand the Great, they, upon their return
into Africa, assumed Names that might argue Gentility, and be an Evidence of
their Ancient Extract, from such places where they had been great Dons, and
accordingly there are many Families thus denominated; as Tagareens, Jarbeens,
etc.

SECT. III.
An Account of some Difficulties that I met witb during my Captivity in Algiers.
THose Miseries which it is dreadful to endure, are yet delightful to be
remembered; and there is a secret pleasure to chew the Cud, and ruminate upon
escaped dangers: However, the Reader may afford to run over with his Eye in an
hour, that which I ran through in five Years; and supposing himself safe upon
the Amphitheatre, may behold poor Slaves Combating with Beasts below.

The first Adventure I met with after I was brought to my Patron's House (for
so I must now style him) had well nigh cost me my Life. My Patron's Father
being desirous to see his Sons Pennyworth, commanded me up into a Gallery,
which looked into the Court; he began to insult over me with insupportable
scorn, reflecting upon me because I was a Christian, and cast out some
Expressions which did really reflect upon the Person of my Rdeemer, though I
have heard worse since.) My Neck was not yet bowed, nor my Heart broken to the
Yoke of Bondage; I could not well brook, because I had not ben used then to
such Language; and because I could not express my self in the Moresco, or
Lingua Franc, I supplied it with Signs; and imitating the Cobblers Yarke, I
signified both ways as well as I could, That their Prophet was but a Cobbler. I
confess, my meaning was no more, but that Mahomet, by the help of Sergius, a
Nestorian Monk, and Abdalla the Jew, had patched up a Cento of Jewish, and
Monkish Fopperies, which was now their Religion. But he, without the preamble
of many Railing words, fell upon me with severe blows; whatever Rage and Fury
his Hands or Feet could Execute, that I felt; and my entreaties did but enrage
his Choler, so that I saw I might sooner blow out the Fire with a pair of
Bellows, than lenifie his passion with Prayers; I had no other way but this, to
make an offer of leaping down out of the Gallery into the Court, and therefore
clapping my hands upon the Rails, as if I would throw my self headlong down
over them, and rather choose to receive my Death from the Pavement, than his
Hands, he presently asswages, if not his Rage, yet the Execution of it. The Old
Gentleman knew very well, that if I lost my Life, his Son must lose his present
Money, and future profit; for there is little made out of a Dead Man's Skin: and
therefore he respites my further punishment till my Patron's Return, and then
indeed this reputed Blasphemy of mine with full cry was carried to his Ears,
and it lost nothing in the telling, but was aggravated to purpose: My Patron
being Naturally a very passionate Man, said nothing, but without Examination,
drew out his long Knife, (which they constantly wear by their sides) and made
at me; and had there doubtless put an end to my Life and Captivity at once, had
not his Wife, who was there seasonably present, taken him in her Arms, and
sweetened him into more moderate Counsels. Some will be ready enough to say,
that I was but a Martyr to my own Folly: This was not a place for Dispute, but
Obedience. Well, I learnt from hence two Lessons: One, That when the Body is a
Slave, the Reason must not expect to be free; and where the whole outward Man
is in Bondage, the Tongue must not plead Exemption. A Second, That it is fair
for Slaves to enjoy the freedom of their own Consciences, without Reviling
another Religion, though erroneous; and this Wit I bought, as it fell out, a
pretty good Pennyworth.

When the Storm was over, my employment was assigned me (for they had rather
see a Slave Dead than Idle) and for about half a Year it lay in trudging on
Errands, bearing Burdens, and discharging other Domestic Services at Command,
wherein the only consideration was, That it was Commanded, and not What was
Commanded.

At this time my Patron had a part in a Man of War, which carried Twelve Guns:
She being at Sea, (with some others of the same place) met with an English
Merchant, Laden with Plate, and other Rich Commodities from Spain, and Bound
for London, (one Isaac being Master) and after a very sharp, though short
Dispute, the Algerines carried her, and brought her safe home. The Adventurers
divide their Booty, and being high flown with this success, they Resolve to fit
her out again to carry more Guns; and from hence grew my new employment. Upon
the Capenters I attended, waited on the Smiths, to get the Iron-work fitted,
and finished; and truly he allowed me more for Portage than to the ordinary
Hammels, or common Porters.

When this Ship was now fitted for another Adventure, my Patron tells me, I
must go in her; it was a nipping word: I pleaded, that I was no Seaman,
understood nothing of the Mariners Art, and therefore as he could expect little
Service from me in that kind, so I must expect most rigorous treatment, because
I could not acquit my self in the Service as well as others; he removed my
Pleas, and promised I should not be wronged; but there was more at the bottom
than all this: For here a Case of Conscience offered it self, Whether I might
without Sin in any Case fight against Christians, on the Port of the common
Enemy of all Christianity? The best Resolution I could give my self, was this;
That first, my employmy employment would only lie in managing the Tackle, which
will kill no Body; but it was replied, That without the due management of the
Tackle, all the Guns in the Ship would kill no Body: Secondly, therefore I
answered, That it was not evident that they would engage against Christians
more than all the rest of Mankind, for all the World are their Enemies, who are
Rich enough to invite them, and too weak to resist them; but my Patron had a
Solution worth all these: He told me peremptorily, I must, and should go; I
found my self under force, I was a Pressed Man: who could not examine the Justice
of the Cause. In a word, his Commands were backed with Compulsion, and whatever
his Authority was, he had more Power, than I had Courage to deny, or Strength
to resist; and go I did. Yet this I will say for him, he spoke to the Captain
and Officers of the Ship, to treat me civilly, that is, less cruelly than other
Slaves were treated: He gave me some Money also in my Pocket, bought me
Clothes, and laid me in Provision above the Ships allowance.

Nine Weeks we were at Sea, within, and without the Streights, Cruising, and
Pickarooning up and down, at last we met with one poor Hungarian French Man of
War, whom we took, and so returned.

My Patron having been at great charges in fitting, and manning out this Ship,
and the Reprisals so slenderly answering his great cost, and greater hopes,
told me, I must allow him two Dollers per Month, and Live ashore where I would,
and get it were I could. This was a hard Chapter, That he that could not
maintain himself, should be compelled to contribute to the maintenance of
another; it was difficult to raise increase out of no stock, and to pay
Interest out of no Principal; but there was no contending; It cost me much
debate with my self, and I turned my thoughts into all forms and shapes, but
all Projects that presented themselves were encumbered with so many
difficulties, that they amounted very near to impossibilities. The more I
consulted, the further I found my self from a conclusion, and I could see no
way but one, (but that was worth a Thousand, could I have made the best of it,)
and that was to commit my self to God, who had brought me into this strait,
beseeching him that he would bring me out of it.

But that my trusting to God might not be a Cloak for Laziness, or a Pillow for
Sloth to rest upon, I addressed my self to an Englishman, whose condition was
that of a Slave, whose Calling was that of a Tailor. He at first word
counseled me to come and stay with him, and he would teach me to work of his
Trade. I accounted nothing base that was honest, and necessity would ennoble a
far meaner Emploiment, and very readily closed in my thoughts with his motion,
and was suddenly elevated into huge hopes that I should now be in a capacity to
answer my Patron's demands, and escape his lash. But my straits were not (it
seems) great enough to glorify God; nor my condition mean enough to magnify
his Power in raising me; I was not reduced to that Extremety which would make
an opportunity to exalt his appearing Mercy; for when I came to him the next
Day, I perceived by his silence that his mind was changed, and I was loath,
either out of Modesty or Pride, to give him further trouble; and therefore
interpreting his silence to be a more civil way of denial, I left him, and once
more Launched out into the wide World.

In this forlorn posture I wandered, but neither knew, nor much cared whither,
though the wise God both knew, and cared; and his Providence directed me to
another Englishman, who was sitting in a little Shop: He asked me what News?
And (as that which is uppermost always comes out first) I presently began the
Story of my desperate Condition; how the Rigid Law of my Patron had imposed two
Dollers per Month upon me, and I knew not where to levy the least Mite of it:
He heard, considered, pityed my Condition, and invited me to come and sit in
the Shop with him; but seeing nothing but the bare Walls, I asked him, to what
end? What Trade should we drive there? There Is not much difference between
starving in the Streets, and in the Shop. Countryman (said he) I drive here an
unknown Trade; here I sell Lead, Iron, Shot, Strong Water, Tobacco, and many
other things. This motion was a great deal to good to be refuesd, and I think
at that time no tolerable condition would have stck with me.

I acquainted my Patron with my Design, pleaded I wanted stock to set up with;
he lent me a small modicum, and with another pittance that I had privately
reserved of my own, I began to Trade. That very Night I went and bought a
parcel of Tobacco, the next Morning we dressed it, cut it, and fitted it for
Sale; and the World seemed to smile on us wonderfully. In this way of
Partner-ship we continued for some while, and what we got clear, we divided
every week according to the proportion of our respective stocks. In a while,
finding the World to come in upon us, we ventured upon no less then a whole
Butt of Wine, some Money we had, and some Credit: This Wine we drew out, and
got considerably by it. But it is very difficult to maintain moderation in an
exalted State, for even our State was capable of better and worse; for my
Partner being elevated with our good success, grew a good Fellow, and a bad
Husband; neglecting his business, went tippling, and fndling up and down, and
the Concerns of the Shop and Trade lay wholly upon my Shoulders.

It fell out, that one John Randal, who with his Wife and Child were taken in
the same Ship with my self, being put to the same shifts with my self, and, as
it is very common, having a Monthly Tax imposed upon him by his Patron, which he
must scrape out where he could, and besides maintain himself, his Wife, and
Child, went up and down seeking for Relief, at last the poor Man straggled to
our Shop: His Case made great impression upon me, I could not but consider the
goodness of God to me, that should now be in a condition to advise, and help
another, who so lately wanted both my self; and it had this operation upon me,
that I would not suffer a poor distressed Countryman, a Fellow-Captive, a
Fellow-Christian to stand begging at that door, where I had so lately stood my
self: Shall I shut the Door, or my Heart upon him, when God has opened a Door
of hope to me in the day of my Trouble? Shall I so ill requite the Lord's
kindness to me? Surely that God who comforts us in our Tribulations, expects
that we should comfort others in theirs, 2 Cor. 1. 4. I bad him therefore come
in, and knowing him to be a Glover by Trade, advised him to learn to make
Canvas Clothes for Seamen that are Slaves; and for my own part, he should sit
Rent-free; but if my Partner would insist upon his Moiety, he must be willing
to satisfy him, for I had no power to determine of another's Right.

It were tedious to trouble the Reader how I wore out three or four irksome
Years in this way of Trading. All this while there was no dawning of
deliverance from our Bondage: As one Year left us, another found us, and
delivered us over Captives to the next: Our condition was bad, and in danger
every day of being worse, as the mutable Humors of our Patrons determined upon
us, for our Shop and Trade was no freehold: The Truth is, in time we were so
habituated to Bondage, that we almost forgot Liberty, and grew stupid, and
senseless of our Slavery; like Issachar, we couched down between our burdens, we
bowed our Shoulders to bear, and became Servants to Tribute, Genesis 49. 14, 15.
And were in danger to be like those Israelites in Babylon, who being once
settled, forgot Canaan, and dwelt with the King for his work, 1 Chronicles. 4. 23.
We seemed as if our Ears had been bored, and we had vowed to serve our Patrons
for ever. Long Bondage breaks the Spirits, it scatters hope off, and
discourages all attempts for freedom: And there were more evils attended our
condition than the bodily torture, which we were always liable to, and
sometimes endured.

1. We were under a perpetual temptation to deny the Lord that bought us, to
make our Souls Slaves, that our Bodies might recover Liberty. As Satan once
tempted Job to Curse God, and Dye; so he knew how to change his Note to us, and
accommodate his Snare to our condition, to Curse God, that we might Live. How
many have made Shipwreck of Faith, that they might not be Chained to the
Galliees? I can never enough admire the grace of that Promise, Psalm. 1253. The
Rod of the wicked shall not always roast upon the lot of the Righteous, lest the
Righteous put forth their hands to Iniquity; nor ever enough adore the
faithfulness of him, who will not suffer us to be tempted above that we are
able, 1 Cor. 10. 13.

And 2. Evil is the unmaning, and dispiriting of the Soul to worthy Actions;
for we are apt to put on the Temper and Spirit of Slaves with the Habit, and
the Christians of the Greek Communion, are a very sad instance of this Truth.

And 3. We were very much at a loss for the Preaching of the World: And yet
herein the Gracious God stepped in for our Relief.

SECT. IV.
How God Provided for our Souls, by sending us an Able Minister to Preach the
Gospel to us in our Bondage.
THE gracious God looking upon the affliction of his poor Servants, and
Remembering us in our low Estate, was pleased many ways to mitigate the load of
our Captivity: We have Reason to say, with the Church, Ezra 9. 9. We were
Bondsmen, yet our God has not forsaken us in our Bondage, but has extended
Mercy to us, to give us a reviving, and a Nail in his Holy place: And thus he
brought about his Design of Grace and Mercy. There was an English Ship taken by
some of our Algerine Pirates, and in her one Mr. Devereux Sprat, a Minister of
the Gospel. It deserves our consideration, and greatest Admiration, that the
wise God should ^upply our Necessities at the cost and charges of others of his
dear Servants: But thus Providence sent Joseph into Egypt, where he endured
thirteen Years Slavery, that he might preserve the Lives of his Fathers Family,
within those narrow walls the most visible Church of God in those days was
enclosed, Genesis 45. 5. Now, some of us observing this Mr. Sprat to be a Person
of very Sober, Grave, and Religious Deportment, we addressed our selves to him,
and humbly entreated him that we might enjoy the benefit of his Ministry; in
Order whereto, we desired him that he would compound with his Patron at so much
a month as he could, and because we were abundantly convinced of our Duty to
administer to him of our Carnal things, who should administer to us of his
Spirituals, we engaged to allow him a Competency to maintain himself, and
satisfy the expectations of his Patron: The good man hearkened to us with much
readiness; and now indeed we found our burdens much lighter, and our conditions
not pressed so hard upon our Spirrits: Thrice a week this Godly, painul Servant
of Jesus Christ prayed with us, and Preached to us the Word of God; our
meeting place was a Cellar, which I had hired at some distance from our Shop,
where I stowed some Goods that were peculiarly my own when we fell into a
greater stroke of trade. To our Meetings resorted many, sometimes three or
fourscore, and though we met next the Street, yet we never had the least
disturbance from the Turks, or Moors; for whilst we intermeddled not with their
Superstitions, but paid our Patrons their demands, we might, without any
disturbance from them, Worship our God, according to our Consciences: It Is
true, that such were the circumstances of the Slavery of many poor Christians,
that they could not attend; and such the wretched carelessness of others, that
they would not attend, and such the Provisions that God had made for others, by
other means, that they needed not, perhaps, attend upon God's Worship with us;
but thus was our God pleased to give us the means of strengthening our Faith,
and Comforting our drooping Spirits.

At length came one Captain Wildy of Ratcliff to Trade there, who, with the
Assistance of the Legorn Mercahnts, freed our Minister from his Patron. After
his freedom from his Patron, yet there remained a Duty of sixty Dollers, which
was a particular charge payable to the Public Treasury, before he could be
fully enlarged from the City: We Petitioned therefore the Captain, that he
might, and Mr. Sprat himself, that he would still continue to be Serviceable to
our poor Souls, in the work of the Gospel, and we easily prevailed, and had the
benefit of his Ministry whilst I staid there.

SECT. V.
Some Remarkable Observations that I gleaned up, whilst I remained in Algires.
THey that are pressed with their own Personal Grievances, have little leisure
to look abroad, and observe the Motions of others; and indeed our own
Afflictions however sweetened, lay still gnawing, and grating upon our Spirits
that we must needs be very ill qualified to treasure up materials to make a
History. Such a Design required Leisure, Liberty, Privacy, Retiredness,
Intelligence, and strict Correspondence, to all which we were perfect
Strangers. Yet sometimes I could make a truce with my Troubles, and obtain so
long a cessation from my vexatious Pressures, as to make Observation.

And. 1. The Hypocrisy of their Profession was so notorious, that he must put
out his Eyes that did not see it. One Month in the year they Observe their
Ramedam, which is their Lent; and indeed rhey Observe it by day with more
Monkish Austerity, imposing upon themselves a total Abstinence: An Observation
which they may be presumed to owe to that Nestorian Monk, who clubb'd with
Mahomet in the cursed invention of the Alchoran: But for all their demure
Quadragesimal looks by day, they give or sell themselves to commit with
greediness all manner of the most execrable Villainies by night. And they cheat
themselves with this evasion; that forsooth Mahomet Commanded them to Fast so
many Days, but not so many Nights; For now they beat up their Drums, and call
their Friends first out of bed, then out of Doors, they provoke, challenge,
dare one another to eat, drink, and run into all excess of Riot. They will
neither spare Men in their Rage, nor Women in their Lust: The two hungry meals
of the Day, makes the third of the Night an errand Glutton. By Day they create
themselves a Purgatory, and by night the poor Slaves find a Hell. Now when they
have crammed their Guts all Night, and are Maw-sick in the morning, they put on
their Lenten face again; and call that a Fast, which is but Physic; and
pretend Religion for that which they are compelled to by Nature; that is, they
Fast when they can eat and drink no longer: But indeed their Fast by Day is
nothing but a dry Drunkenness; for when they have drunk, and whored themselves
into sin, they fancy they merit a pardon by Abstinence. A piece of Hypocrisy
so gross, that whether it be to be sampled any where in the World, unless,
perhaps, by the Popish Carnevals, I cannot tell.

2. I could not but observe, that though they allow, that every man may be
saved in that Religion he professes, provided he walks by i'ts Rules,; and
therefore that at last, the Jews, under the Banner of Moses; the Christians,
under the Banner of Christ; and the Turks, under the Banner of Mahomet, shall
all march over a fair bridge, into I know not what Paradise, a place far beyond
the Elisian Fields; yet they afford no mercy to one, who having once professed,
afterward Revolts from Mahumetanism; an Instance whereof I shall now present
the Reader with.

The Spaniards every year return a considerable sum of money to Algires, to be
employed in the Redemption of such of their own Country as are there in
Slavery: Some say, there is a ^articular Treasury set apart for that Service;
but this I know, that they use the Charitable benevolence of well disposed
Persons, to advance it. Now, there was a Spanish Friar, that was a Slave, who
being passed by in the Redemption that Year, took it very hainously to be
neglected, thought himself much wronged; hereupon he grows Discontented, and
the Devil (who never works with greater success than upon that Humor) takes the
Advantage to push him on; and he in a pett, Renounces the Christian Religion,
declares himself a Mussulman, and accordingly appears in his Turkish Habit. I
knew him very well by sight he was a fat, corpulent person; but after he had
turned Renegado, I observed him to become strangely lean, and dejected in his
Countenance. but I little suspected, that the Root of his Distemper lay in his
Conscience: but it seems he had severely reflected upon his Apostasy, for he
had not Renounced only his Popery, but his Christianity: His own Conscience,
which was a Thousand Witnesses against him, was a Thousand Tormentors to him:
Long he bore i'ts secret and stinging lashes, but when he could no longer stand
under them, he goes to the Viceroy's Palace, and there openly declares himself
a Christian, and protests against the Superstition and Idolatry of Mahomet, as
a most Execrable, and damnable Imposture: Immediately he is conveyed before the
Council, and there strictly Examined, he persists resolutely in his Profession,
whereupon he is clapped in Irons, and for some time there secured: Now, they
pretended this reason for their proceedure. That there had been some practicing
and tampering with him, either Morally by Argument, or Naturally by some Dose
of intoxicating Drugs, that had thus distempered him; for loath they were it
should be thought, that any Man of sound mind, or master of his Reason, would
ever revolt from their Religion: But when they saw him fixed in his Resolution,
and that neither what he felt, or might fear, what they had inflicted, or could
threaten, did unhinge him from his Profession, they proceeded to the last
remedy, and inexorably Condemned him to the Fire: A way of Punishment which
they learnt from the Spaniards themselves who first set up the Inquisition
against the Moors, and have now turned the edg of it against the Protestants.
And now they proceed to the Execution of the Sentence, which was performed with
some Pomp, and State. And first, they formed a Crown with a Cross upon the top
of it, within the Plates, and Bars whereof they put Flax; thus Crowned, they
guard him through the City, out of the West-Gate, about half a mile, which was
the appointed place of Execution: and first, one puts Fire to the Flax in his
mock-Crown, to take possession of his Head, in the Name of the rest of his
Body: at first he shook it off, but another put Fire again to it with a Cane,
and then the poor man stood patiently, and presently they put Fire to the whole
Pile, and there burnt him: I saw some of his Bones, and scorched Flesh after he
was dead; and the same Evening came a Zealous Spaniard, and carried away some
of his scorched Flesh, and Bones, as the Holy Relics of a Martyr, saying I
have now done enough to make satisfaction for all the sins that I have
committed.

3. It Is worth Admiration, to see in what great awe they stand of the meanest
Officer, who is known to be such by his Turbant, and Habit. If any Affray be
made, or a murder committed in the Streets, the Chiaux, or Officer presently
comes without any Weapon or Person to assist him; and if he seizes the
Offenders, none is so hardy as to resist even unarmed Authority.

4. The great Reverence which the Moors pay to the Turks, though both
Mahumetans, is remarkable: If a Moor shall dare to strike a Turk, he is punished
with great severity: I saw two Moors whilst I was there, whose right Hands were
chopped off for this one Crime, and hung about their necks in strings; the one
was set upon an Ass, the other walked by on foot, the Common Crier proclaiming
before them their Offense, through the chief Streets of the City. I saw another
also with his heels tied to a Horses Tail; he was wholly naked, only he had on
a pair of linen Drawers, and thus was he dragged through the Streets? It was a
most lamentable Spectacle, to see his Body all torn with the rugged way, and
stones; the skin torn off his Back and Elbows, his Head broken, and all covered
with blood, and dirt, and thus was he dragged through the City out at Bubazoon,
or the Eastgate, where he ended his miserable Life.

Two others of their own Countrymen I saw Executed in a most terrible, and
dreadful manner, (but either I did not know, or do not remember their Crimes:)
The one was thrown off from a high Wall, and in his fall he was caught by the
way, by one of the great sharp Hooks, which were fastened in the Wall; It caught
him just under the Ribs, and there he hung roaring in unspeakable pain till he
dyed. The other was fastened to a Ladder, his wrists, and ankles being nailed
through with Iron spikes, in such a posture as somewhat resembles the
Celebrated Cross of St. Andrew; and least his Flesh and Sinews should fail, and
the Nails not hold; his Wrists and Ankles were bound fast with small Cords to
the Ladder: Two days I saw him alive under this Torture, how much longer he
lived under it I cannot tell.

5. They are generally great Enemies to Debauchery in public: It Is a great
scandal to them when they see any Christians, who brought that Beastiality out
of their own Countries with them, to be guilty of it. I have heard them say, of
a Drunken Slave; A Christian? No, He Is a Swine. And though they will indulge
themselves by Night (especially in their Ramedam Month) yet woe be to him, that
shall Offend by Day in that Kind. There was an Englishman, who had brought over
with him his drunken Humor, and his Captivity had not made him Sober: and when
Religion has not firm hold of the Heart, a little matter will make such a one
let go his hold of Religion: This Englishman turned a Renegado, and of a
Drunken Christian became a Drunken Turk, and was not able to keep the Pot from
his Head, during their Holy time of Ramedam; being one day found thus like a
Sot, he was brought into the Cassabal, or Chief Court of Judicature, where he
was adjudged to receive many hundreds of violent blows; some upon his naked
Back and Reins, others upon his naked Belly; he could not creep from the place
of punishment, but was carried away by the Hammels; his Belly, and Back were so
excoriated, that Sampson Baker, an Englishman, who was his Surgeon, assured
me he was forced to cut off abundance of his Flesh before he could be Cured.

6. What Cruelties they Exercise upon poor Slaves, needs not be mentioned, and
there will be an Occasion to speak of the most Ordinary way of punishment e're
long. Let it suffice, that all is Arbitrary, and unlimitted. If a Patron shall
kill his Slave, for ought I could perceive, he suffers no more for it, than if
he should kill his Horse: There was a Dutch Youth, a Slave to a Turk, who, upon
some provocation, drew his Knife at his Patron; for this Offer, he was
Sentenced to be dragged out at one of the Gates, and there to have his Arms and
Legs broken in pieces with the great Sledg Hammer, which Sentence was
accordingly Executed, for though I could not see his face for the Crowd, yet I
heard the blows, and the miserable Cries of the poor dying Young Man.

SECT. VI.
The grievous Punishment Inflicted upon John Randal; the Authors Danger, and
Deliverance from the same, upon pretense that they had attempted to make an
Escape.
IT is time to reassume my own concerns, and look a little into my own
Condition, which, through the good providence of God, was much better than that
of many of my poor Brethren and Fellow-Captives; and yet I met with great
ebbings and flowings in my Tranquillity: whilst I was managing my Trade very
stoutly and successfully, (John Randal working with me in my Shop) my Partner
now having knocked off, and left all to me: One day I changed a twenty
shilling-piece of Gold for Silver with a Friend, and having the money chinking
in my hand, John Randal asked me, what I did with so much money? I desired him
to keep it for me, till our return, and he should know: For he being not very
well, we agreed to walk out of the Town to take the fresh Air; a liberty, which
for somewhat above a mile, is indulged to the Slaves: When we had walked almost
to the end of our Tedder, I was desirous to walk a little further to view the
Coasts, if, perhaps, any advantage might offer it self afterward for an
Escape, though we Actually designed no such thing. As we were prying about the
Seaside, one of the Spies appointed constantly to watch, lest any of the
Slaves should run away, came to us, and charged us with an attempt to make an
Escape? we flatly denied it, but he laid hold on us; there was no resisting;
Obey we must, and accordingly attended his Mastership toward the City: As we
drew near, I espied some Englishmen at Quoits (for with such Recreations and
Diversions, they are willing now and then to beguile the tedious minutes of
lingering thraldom) I beckoned to one of them whom I knew, and pretending only
to whisper to him, I secretly conveyed to him my purse, wherein were seven
pieces of eight? we were presently met by another Spy, and those two led us to
a little blind House, where they searched us, they took away the twenty
shillings, which I had put into my Friends hand, and finding nothing upon me,
took away my Doublet, and then brought us before the Viceroy, and his Council:
We were straightly Examined, and strongly charged with an attempt to Escape: We
peremptorily denied all, and stood upon our Innocence, affirming, that our
only design of walking abroad, was to take the fresh Air, occasioned by my
Fellows Sickness. This Purgation would not be Accepted, and the Battoon was
commanded to be brought forth, we answered, we durst not falsely accuse our
selves, nor make our selves Criminal, when we were not so, and therefore if
such was their will and pleasure, we must abide by it, and so we sat down by
the sticks.

The way of Punishment by the Battoon, or Cudgel, as this, They have a strong
staff, about six Foot long, in the middle whereof are bored two holes; Into
these Holes a Cord is put, and the ends of the ^^rd fastened on the one side the
staff, with knots, so that it makes a Loop on the other side. Into this Loop of
the Cord both the Feet of the Person Condemned to this Punishment are put; then
two lusty Fellows, one at each end of the staff, lifts it up in their Arms, and
twisting the Staff about, till his Feet are fast pinc'd with the Cord by the
Ankles, they raise up his Feet with the Soles upwards, well nigh as high as
their shoulders, and in this posture they hold them, the poor man the mean
while resting only with his Neck and Shoulders on the Ground: Then comes
another lusty, sturdy Knave behind him, and with a tough, short Truncheon gives
him as many violent blows on the Soles of his Feet as the Council shall order.

But the Viceroy, with his Council, gathering from circumstances, and induced
to believe us by our constant and resolute denial of the Fact, omitted at
present any further punishment* and only commanded us to be laid in chains in
the Viceroy's Prison till our Patrons should demand our Liberty, and fetch us
out. And the next day we were both delivered, though with differing Fates; as
Pharaoh's Chief Butler, and Chief Baker were both taken from Prison, the One to
be Advanced, the Other to be Hanged: For John Randal's Patron being a very
Termergant, used that absolute and unlimitted Sovereignty which they pretend
to, over their Slaves, and commanded him to receive three hundred blows upon
the Soles of his Feet with the Battoon, in manner before described: As for my
self, when I was brought home, the Spy that seized us, came and demanded Money
of my Patron for his good service (not reckoning that he had any thing of me)
which put him into a most desperate fit of Passion, and calling me Dog and Jew,
and all to naught, commanded me to go work in the Looms with two other
Englishmen that were Slaves, and Linnen-Cloth-Weavers: But alas, I was a very
Bungler, and understood nothing of the Craft and Mystery of Weaving more or
less; but there I wrought till I had spoiled all that I laid my Hands on: Now,
when he saw that my labor this way would not turn to Account, he rated me for
a Loggerhead, and bad me fill Quills for the other two; being now degraded from
a bungling Weaver to an excellent ^iller of Quills, I continued about a month;
my Shop all this while lay at sixes and seavens, what was become of it I knew
not, and durst not for my Life discover any desire to return to that
employment. At last, my Patron asked me for the money that he had lent me when
I first began to Trade: I answered submissively, that I had not a farthing, all
my small Estate lay in a few Goods, and till they were sold, I could not
possibly repay him: He calls one of his Slaves, a Dutch man, and commands him
to go with me, and turn all into ready money, and bring it him: When I came to
my Old Shop, there was the Nest indeed, but all the Birds were slown; for in my
absence, (poor John Randal being Lame, and not able to work, my Partner
sometime before having left me, and I confined to another Employment) some of
these Rascals had broken open my Shop, and thence carried the best of my Goods,
though my Cellar was still safe, and some of my Goods I heard of, and
recovered; what money I had was hid in the Ground, as it was my constant way:
That night the Dutch man and my self returned to our Patron, and told him we
could sell nothing; whereupon he remanded me to my Shop, there to Trade, paying
him the two Dollars a month, as I had done before.

SECT VII.
The Authors Patron growing poor, he is Sold, or Mortgaged to another; the
wonderful kindness that he found from his second Patron.
HEre was nothing yet working toward a Deliverance, nor could I yet see the
least glimmering of possibility which might so much as flatter my willing mind
with a hope of escaping: But it is Observed, that the Night is always darkest
toward Daybreak; and God is often drawing nearer to us in Mercy, when we
conceive he is departing further off in Displeasure.

My Patron had been sincking in his Estate a pretty while, the last Ship he had
put to Sea broke his back: At last he was grown (insensibly) so low, that it
could no longer be daubed up with his Repute, but he must be forced to sell all
his Slaves to pay his Debts: It was not much to me whither I was chopped and
changed; I might change my Jailer, and my Goal, but still I was like to be a
Prisoner: I might be bought and sold, and sold again, but still my Condition
was Slavery; yet one thing methought was comfortable, that the last Instrument
of my Bondage was come into Misery as well as my self.

In the partage of his Slaves, it fell to my Lot and another to be Mortgaged
for a certain sum of Money, jointly to two Persons, the one a Cap-maker, the
other a Grave Old Gentleman, who amongst his own People had the Repute or a
good Natured and moderate Person, (as good Nature, and Moderation go at
Algier.) The Day of Payment came, the Money was not paid; the Cap-maker and the
Old Gentleman seize on us, and hold us in Common, but in a While they resolved
to divide us, that each of them might know his proper Goods and Chattels, and
each of us might know whom to call Master, and whose whistle we were bound to
Obey: We are both summoned to appear in a certain place at mid day, and much
ado there was about our Dividing: At last they agreed to Cast Lots for us,
only because I was in a handsome way of Trade, it was accorded, that he to
whose share I should fall, should pay the other fifty Doubles, which, if I
compute aright, is something more then fifty shillings Sterling. I was
exceeding fearful I should fall to this Cap-maker, for he had the Character of
a brutish, ill-humour'd Creature and therefore I was concerned to lift my
Petition to God, that seeing, when the Lot should be cast into the lap, yet the
whole Disposition thereof is of God, he would give me forth a gracious Lot:
Whatever there is of Contingency as to us there is nothing accidental to God.
Well, God Delivered me from that Tyrant, and I was adjudged by the decision of
the Lot to the Old Gentleman: And if I should be silent here, I should be the
most ungrateful wretch Living: I found not only pity and compassion, but Love
and Friendship from my New Patron? had I been his Son, I could not have met
with more respect, nor been treated with more tenderness: I could not wish a
Friend a better Condition then I was then in, except my Bonds. If any thing
could be mingled with Bondage to make it sweet? if any thing could Reconcile
Slavery to Nature? if any thing could beget an Acquiescence in such a state, I
did not, I could not want it.

And indeed the Freedom that I found in Servitude, the Liberty I enjoyed in my
Bonds was so great that it took off much of the Edg of my desire to obtain, and
almost blunted it from any vigorous attempt after Liberty, that carried hazard
in it is Face; till at last I was awakened upon this Occasion.

My Patron had a fair Farm in the Country, about twelve miles from the City,
whither he took me along with him? he had me to their Markets, showed me the
manner of them, and at my return, he loaded me home with all manner of good
Provisions, that I might make merry with my Fellow Christians? I had some
Reason to conclude from his great kindness to me, that he intended to ^end me
thither to manage the Farm for him. I saw now evidently, that if I once quitted
my shop* I should lose with it all means, all helps, and therefore all hopes to
rid my self out of this Slavery: And though I might have been there a petty
Lord, and Bashaw'd it over the rest of my Fellow Servants, yet Slavery had in
it something of I know not what harshness that I could not brook. Fetters of
Gold do not lose their Nature, they are Fetters still: Had Bajazet's Cage been
of Gold, as 'twas of Iron, yet it was a Cage; and that was provocation enough
to a haughty Spirit to beat out his own Brains against it is Bars. This
therefore quickened my dull temper, and I began to Resolve to make an Attempt
once for all. Now therefore mustering those few Wits Captivity had left me, I
set them on work, and ran through all things possible, and impossible; he that
will find what he has lost, must look where it is not, as well as where it is;
and forming stratagems in my Head, some Idle, and Vain; some Desperate, others
impossible; at last pitched upon one, that seemed to me feizable and practicable.

SECT. VIII.
The Contrivance for our Escape, the Persons Acquainted with it, and also those
that were Engaged in it; some Debates about leaving my Patron.
HAving Formed the Design, or at least, the rude draught, and general Model of
it, my first care was to open it to some skilful and faithful Counselors, who
might more impartially discover to me it is inconveniences, where it was like to
prove leaky, or take wind; And first I acquainted Mr. Sprat, our Minister, with
it, and laid before him the whole of the Contrivance; and he so far approved
it, that he judged it possible: Next, I acquainted one Robert Lak^, a very wise
and Religious Person, who bestowed his Blessings on it, and wished it all good
Success: And lastly, I acquainted my Friend John Randal, who approved it: Yet
none of these could, or would run the risque of it is miscarriage. Mr. Sprat was
already delivered from his Patron, and in a fair way to be absolutely enlarged,
in a more safe and Regular way, for not long after our Escape came Captain
Pack, of London, and paid the sixty Dollars and took him along with him for
England: John Randal had a Wife, and Child and these were too dear pledges to
be left behind, and yet too tender things to undergo our Difficulties: Robert
Lake was an Ancient Person, and neither able passively to be carried in, nor
actively to carry on a Design that required much hardness of Body and Mind to
endure, and much strength to go through with it? we had nothing more from them
then Prayers and Counsels, which yet was the mane? and then my next care was,
to take in Partners, and Accomplices in the Design*

And herein I had a three fold Respect: First to such as were necessarily
required to Form the Instrument of our Escape and Deliverance* Secondly, to
such, whose tried, and approved Fidelity I might presume would be obstinately,
and Religiously secret in concealing it: Thirdly, to such, whose Courage of
Mind, and strength of Body would render them capable to pursue the ends of it,
to put it in Execution, and go through with it.

But before I would reveal the Project to any of them in particular, I Required
an Oath of Secrecy: That whereas I should now reveal to him, or them, a matter
of great concernment to their Happiness and Welfare, they should solemnly
promise, and swear, that in case they did not approve it, or would not join in
it, yet they should, neither directly, nor indirectly,; for fear, or flattery,
discover it, or the Persons engaged in it, to any Person whatsoever. When a
Project was once mentioned, which promised in general their Happiness and
Welfare, I needed not tell them in particular what it drove at, they could
smell out that with ease; for what could be Good, or Happy to Slaves without
Liberty? This Oath therefore they willingly took: I judged seven Persons would
be enough to manage, carry on, and Execute it; and therefore except the three
forementioned, I communicated it to no one Person but these following, who
engaged in it, though all of them did not go through with it. John Anthony, a
Carpenter, who had been a Slave fifteen years: his Trade sufficiently shows,
how useful he would prove in the Design. William Adams, who since his
Captivity, had learnt and used the Trade of a Bricklayer; his Serviceableness
in it will be evident in the sequel; he had been a Slave eleven Years. John
Jephs, who was a Seaman, and must therefore be presumed one of the Quorum is a
Project of this Nature; he had endured Slavery about five Years. John -- a
Carpenter, who was a skilful Man in his Trade, Lusty of Body, and therefore
must be a good Wheel in this Engine, and he had been a Slave five Years: And
two others, whose Employment it was to-wash small Clothes at the Seaside, and
those had also their parts in carrying on the work, though they went not along
with us; and William Okeley, who presents the Reader with this Narrative, who
was taken August 11* 1639* and Escaped June 30. 1644* these made up the Number
of 7. There arose a Scruple, nay, it amounted to a Question, whether to attempt
an Escape from my Patron, one that so dearly Loved me, so courteously treated
me, had so fairly bought me, were justifiable before God and Men?

And 1. It might be a Question in point of Prudence; for, where could I hope to
mend my self? Or better my Condition? I might possibly find worse Quarter in
England, where the Civil Wars were now broke out, and to that height of
exasperation, that those of the same Nation, and, perhaps Blood, would hardly
give Quarter of Life one to another: If the Name of Native Country bewitched
me, if That dazzled my Eyes; surely wherever we are well is our Country, and
all the World is Home to him that thrives all over the World: And why should
the Name of Bondage, why should a word grate so harshly upon my delicate
Spirit, when the sting of it was taken away? Liberty is a good word; but a Man
cannot buy a Meals meat with a word: And Slavery is a hard word, but it breaks
no man's back. Thousands are more Slaves then I, who are yet their own Masters,
and less at Liberty then my self, who have the free rake and range of the whole
World. But yet my Patron's Favor was no free hold; I held not my Happy time in
fee simple, all was advoluntatem Domini; besides, he might dye, and leave me to
another; or Live to Sell me to another, who might be of another Character, and
then my Condition would be therefore wose because I had known a better.

2. I might be Questioned in point of Ingenuity, how I could be so unworthy to
leave him, who had Loved me? Would not all that should hear of it, Condemn me
of ill Nature, to leave without taking leave, one that had been a Father to me,
who might have used the Right of a Lord; and used me as a Child, who might have
treated me as a Slave? But really I thought there was more of Manners and
Courtship in the Objection, than of weight, and Cogency; Still I dwelt with
Meshech, and had my Habitation amongst the Tents of Kedar; and one thought of
England, and of its Liberty and Gospel confuted a thousand such Objections, and
routed whole Legions of these little Scruples. It was no time to stand upon the
Punctilio's of Honor and Ingenuity; no time to Complement, and strain
courtesy; here was no Farewell Patron, in the Case, and therefore I soon
overcame that.

But, 3. It might be Questioned in the Court of Conscience, whether it were not
downright Theft to withdraw my self from his Service, who had bought me, paid
for me, entered upon me, possessed and enjoyed me, as his own proper Goods, and
now I was not my own, had no right to my self: Whether might not a Man be felo
de se, in stealing himself, as well as killing himself? And whether he is not
the greater self-robber, that steals away himself, then he that steals away
from himself? But I much questioned their propriety to me; my Patron's Title
was rotten at the Foundation: Man is too noble a Creature to be made subject to
a deed of bargain and Sale; and my consent was never asked to all their
bargains, which is Essential, to create a right of Dominion over a Rational
Creature, where he was not born a Subject. If I had forfeited my Life or
Liberty, the Law might take it; but I was not Conscious to my self of any such
forfeiture, but that I was at my own Disposal.

Thus all was clear and quiet, and we went on with our Design, which I now
first opened to them: That I had contrived the Model of a Boat, which being
formed in parcels, and afterward put together, might, by the super-intendency
of Divine Providence, prove an Ark to deliver us out of the hands of our
Enemies. This was soon said, and greedily entertained; to Escape was a pleasant
word, the Name of Liberty made Music in our Ears, and our wishing hearts
danced to the Tune of it; and a Boat was as promising a means as any thing
could be imagined: But when once their thoughts cooled, and came more sedately
to look into the difficulties of it; they appeared innumerable, and some of
them seemed insuperable; and some things that had past current in my own
thoughts, and I went clever away with them, without any rub; yet when they came
to be pierced into with more Eyes, and scanned upon more Fingers, they were
attended with considerable impediments: where this Boat should be built, was
one staggering Question: Where it should be Lanched, and where put to Sea, was
a Choking Objection: How we should escape those Argus-eyes, which are always
observing us by Day, was a gravelling Qhaery; or how to get out of the City by
Night, whose Walls are so high, whose Gates are so close shut, and strongly
Guarded was another vexatious Quaery: How we should be Rigged and Victualled
for such a Voyage, was a considerable enquiry: and whether we should design,
was not to be slighted. But how such a little Skiff, rather than Boat, should
be able to Weather all the Accidents of the Sea, was a Neck Question, enough to
strangle Faith, and stifle with us with Despair.

To these Objections, I Answered. That I had designed my own Cellar, as the
meetest place wherein to build the Boat; that when it was there Built, it might
be taken in pieces again, and carried out of the City in parcels, and bestowed
in private places till things were ripe for Execution. That for a place where
to put to Sea, it ^ould be time enough to determine upon that when we had
finished our Vessel: That Mayork was the most commodious place to design to
Land in: But in general I told them to this purpose; That if we never attempted
any thing till we had Answered all Objections, we must sit with our Fingers in
our Mouths all our days, and pine, and languish out our tedious Lives in
Bondage, Let us be up and doing, and God would be with us. To begin is one half
of our work; Let us make an Essay, and Answer particular Objections as they
Offered themselves, and as we met with them in our work. That the Project had
its difficulties, was confessed; but what has not, that is Commendable, and
Glorious? Yet whatever difficulties and dangers we could meet with, Liberty,
kept in our Eye, would sweeten the dangers we might encounter in Attempting*
They were all well sati^fied with what was said and all engaged to venture the
utmost they were, and had, to accomplish it.

SECT. IX.
The Model of the Boat, Carrying it out of the City, and bestowing it in
convenient Places.
IN the Cellar where we had Worshipped God, we began our Work; and it was not
the Holiness, but the Privacy of the place that invited us, and advised us to
it. And first, we provided a piece of Timber about twelve Foot long, to make
the Keel: But because it was impossible to convey a piece of Timber of that
length out of the City, but it must be seen; and of that shape, but it must be
suspected, and that Suspicion would bring us into Examination, and the Rack, or
Battoon might extort a Confession out of the most resolved, and obstinate
breast; we therefore cut it in two pieces, and fitted it for Joynting thus in
the middle. Our next care was the Timbers or Ribs of the Poat, which we
contrived thus; every one of the Timbers was made of three pieces, and joynted
in two places, because a whole Rib at its full length, would be liable to the
same inconveniences with the Keel. Now understand, that the joints of the Ribs
were not made with Mortice and Tenon, but the flat side of one of the three
Pieces was laid over the other, and two holes were bored at every joint, into
which two Nails were to be put, when we should join the parcels of our Boat
together: You must understand further, that these two holes at every joint were
not made in a strait line, parallel with the sides of the pieces, for then the
three pieces, which make one Rib, being joined together would have made one
strait piece; a Form which would by no means comport with the Use and Design of
the Timbers; But so, that when both the Nails were in the holes, each Joint
would make an obtuse angle, and so incline so near toward a Semi-Circular
Figure, as our Occasion required. All this while here is no visible Provision
made for boards, to cloth the naked Ribs of our Boat, without which, the Keel
and Timbers looked but like an useless Anatomy; but neither had we, nor was it
possible we should have any boards in our Vessel: Necessity is the best
Artificer when all is done, if we accept her Sister Contingency; to which two
the World has been beholden for the most useful inventions, which at this day
do ease the Labor and Toil of wearied Mankind. For the Joynting of these
Boards; and the Nailing of them, to make the Boat Water-tite, would require
such Hammering, and that Hammering would make such a clamarou^ Echo in the
Cellar, as must have drawn upon us the Jealous Eyes of the Algerines, who about
their Wives and Slaves are insupportably suspicious: And therefore from the
first Conception of the Design, I always resolved upon a Canvas: In pursuance
of which thought, being all satisfied that it was practicable; we bought as
much strong Canvas as would cover our Boat twice over, upon the Unequal of the
Carine; We provided also as much Pitch, Tar, and Tallow as would serve to make
it a kind of a Tawparlin Sear-cloth, to swaddle the naked body of our
Infant-Boat: With Earthen pots to melt done our Materials in; and prefixed a
night wherein we might Execute that part of our Labor. The two Carpenters, and
my self were appointed to this Service, and the Cellar was the place where we
met. Matters had hitherto run very evenly, and smoothly, but here we met with
some discouraging rubs. For when we had stopped all the Chinks and Crannies of
the Cellar, that the stream of the melted Materials might not creep out and
betray us, (there being no Chimney,) we had not been long at our work before I
felt my self exceeding sick, with the strong, and unusual scent of the melted
Liquor; I was forced to go out into the streets to gasp for breath, where
meeting with the cool Air, it over-came me, I swooned, fell down brake my face,
and there lay: My Companions missing me, made out to seek me, found me in this
sad plight, and carried me in again, though exceeding sick, and unserviceable.
They had not proceeded much further before I heard one of them complain he was
sick, and could proceed no further, and now our work stood still: I plainly saw
that our hopeful Project, that had hitherto so smoothly proceeded, must needs
miscarry, and Prove Abortive; for it would be impossible to finish it this
night: and if we once parted, and suffered our Spirits to cool over the Design,
they would never cease cooling till they were stone-cold, and hard frozen; and
therefore I advised to set open the Door, and commit our selves, and our work
to Gods Protection: For I told them they could not but know, that if any
Discovery were made, the burden would fall heaviest upon my shoulders; and my
Back or Feet must pay for all. At length, we resolved to set the Cellar-door
wide open, and as soon as that was done, and the stream pretty well gone out,
we came to our selves again, courageously went on with our business, and
pitched one half that Night. The next night we met again, set open the Door,
and whilst they plied the work, I stood Sentinel at the Door to give Notice of
approaching danger; but we happily finished the whole, and while it was yet
dark, carried it to my Shop, which was about a Furlong from the Cellar, and
there at present secured it.

I shall not question the Readers Ingenuity so much, but that he will suppose
there goes a great deal more to a Boat than I have described; but what should I
trouble him with those things that are common to all other Boats, I mention
only what was Peculiar to our own; and I do not intend to trouble him with the
Boat-wright's Lecture.

In our Cellar we fitted all things, we made the Timbers fit to the Keel, and
the Canvas fit for the Timbers, and the Seats fit to the whole, and then took
all in pieces again, and laying our Heads together, plotting how to convey all
out of the Town, and lodge them in secure and trusty places.

And first* for our Keel, we all with unanimous consent judged Will. Adams the
fittest Person to execute that part of the Design, for he had long Exercised
the Trade of a Brick-layer, and his Employment lay much without the Town; and
besides, he used such pieces in levelling his work. He therefore; accourted
with his Apron before him, his Trowel in his hand, and one of the pieces upon
his shoulder, undertook it, and without the least Observation went cleverly
away with it, and as he saw his Opportunity, hid it in the bottom of a Hedge;
and not long after conveyed out its Fellow, and Lodged it in the same place.
This succeeding so happily, we saw no great difficulty in the Timbers, for we
put one nail into a hole of every joint, and then you will easily conceive,
that the two extreme pieces of one Rib being folded inwards upon the
middlemost, will lie in the room of one of the pieces for length, excepting
that litile that the ends of each piece were beyond the holes: Now, by general
consent, the conveying these out of the City was committed to one, whose
Employment was to wash small Clothes by the Seaside: He puts them into his bag
amongst his Clothes, and so very orderly carried them out, and hid them where
he could find most commodious stowage, but yet with Respect to nearness to that
Place where the Keel was laid.

But how to convey our Tarpawlin safe out of Town seemed most difficult; by
night it was impossible, and by day the difficulties very considerable, and the
danger proportionable; for the Gates are strictly watched, the Streets crowded,
the Spies pickering in every corner, and the bulk of the Canvas thus dressed
was very great. To divide it had been to ruin our selves, for no stitching
together again, could so cheat the searching water, but it would find out the
needle-holes. At last we ventured upon this way; we put it into a large Sack,
and committed it to him that used to wash Clothes, and lest any should clap a
jealous hand upon it, we put a Pillow over our Canvas within the bag, that so
its softness might delude the Inquisitor, and make it pass for Clothes. Let
none despise, or condemn these as low, mean pieces of contrivance, for we had
not Politicians tools to work withal; but the less was our Policy, the more
glorious does the wisdom of God shine in succeeding it, and yet even that
little Policy we were guilty of, was of his bestowing also; what of sin was in
all of it, was entirely our own; what of Power, Wisdom, and Success, was all
his: But our Agent escaped happily with it, and Lodging it in a secret place,
returned.

We had yet many things to provide, and Oars are absolutely necessary, they
were of the Quorum to an Escape by sea: As Finns are the Fishes Oars, so Oars
are the Boats Finns, by help whereof she makes her way: Now, to supply this
defect, we took two Pipe-staves, and slitting them a cross from corner to
corner with a Hand-saw, we made of each Pipe-staff two Rude things, which
Necessity was pleased to entitle The blades for a pair of Oars, and these were
easily conveyed out, without suspicion.

Next, we considered, that Provision must be laid in for our Voyage; and
therefore we provided a small, and but a small quantity of Bread, presuming our
stay at Sea must be but short; for either we should speedily recover Land, or
speedily be drowned, or speedily be brought back again: Two Goats skins also,
stripped off whole, and so Tanned (a kind of Bottle much used by the Algerines to
carry Milk and Water in) we had, which we lived with fresh water, and we know
that must needs be a great Rarity in the Mediterranean.

We remembered also that a Sail might be of right good use to us for expedition,
and therefore we bought as much Canvas as would Answer that End; and when some
Dispute was made about carrying it out, I Offered to undertake that last part
of our work: I had not gone a quarter of a Mile, but as I cast my wary eye
back, I espied the same spy, who once before had seized me, and given me
trouble, following me very roundly. My Heart began to ache; I was loath a Design
of so near, and dear concernment to all of us, should be brought to the Birth,
and there should be no strength to bring forth. It Is sad, after a Voyage, to
shipwreck in the Haven, but me-thought it was more sad to sink a Vessel before
it could be Launched: And here I first found the difference between Innocence
and Guilt; for how boldly could I hold up my head to this Spy, and his
betters, (at least, his Masters) when I was not Conscious of any such Design in
hand? Where as now the Reflection of my Conscience. was enough to write guilt
in my Countenance, (for some things are sin there which are not so in other
places:) and this had betrayed me, had I not suddenly plucked up my spirits, and
spying an Englishman washing Clothes by the Sea, I went the ready way to him,
and desired him to help me wash that Canvas; as we were washing it, the learing
Spy came and stood upon the Rock just over our Heads to watch our motions: As
soon as we had a little formally washed it, to cast a Mist before his Observing
Eyes, I took the Canvas and spread it before his Face upon the top of the Rock
to dry; he staid his own Time, and then marched off. But I was as Jealous of
him, as he could be of me for his Heart; and therefore fearing he might lie in
Ambush for me, took it when 'twas dry, and very fairly carried it back into the
City, and faithfully acquainted my Accomplices how the Matter squared. This
Discoraged them not a little, for that they seemed timorous to proceed in the
Enterprise.

At last we comforted, and encouraged one another, and entered into close
Counsel, where we should meet that Night? At what time? Where we should put our
Boat together, and where put to Sea? The Time was an hour within Night; the
Rendevouz on a Hill, about half a Mile from the Sea; and so we dispersed, some
one way, some another; and privily lurking in Hedges and Ditches, lay close
till the time appointed.

There is one thing that the Reader will be ready to ask; and I shall be more
ready to Answer him for a special Reason: viz. What I did with my Shop and
Goods? When I had once Resolved upon this Adventure, and saw it go on
hopefully, I gave my Patron my wonted Visits; kept fair Correspondence, paid
him his demands duly, but secretly I made off my Goods as fast as I could, and
turned all into ready Money: I had a Trunk, for which John Anthony made me a
false bottom; into which I put what Silver or Gold I had? and into the Body of
the Trunk, what ever it would hold, and was worthy holding: This Trunk I
committed privately to the Fidelity of our dear Minister, Mr. Sprat; he took
the charge of it, and he was now ready to receive his full Discharge. This
Trunk he Faithfully Secured, and carefully brought over, and as honestly
delivered to me when he heard I was come safe to London; and I was willing to
move that Question, merely for the Answers sake, which witnesses his Fidelity,

SECT. X.
The putting off our Boat together, the Difficulties we met with therein; and
our putting out to Sea, June 30. 1644.
AS soon as we were met all together at the appointed place; we began to think
of Executing our long intended Design; but we were divided in our Counsels,
where to begin our work: It had been a Question propounded before, and we
thought we had fully resolved upon the place; but at our Meeting we were
strangely discomposed: There were two places which stood in Competition, each
pretending good Conveniences for that end. The one was a Hill, about half a
Mile from the Sea; the other was a Valley, encompassed with two Hedges, about a
Furlong from the Hill, but of the same distance with it from the Sea: It was
urged for the Valley, that it was a place of more Secrecy and Privacy, less
obvious to view; but then it was objected, that we might there be surprised,
and seized by the Churches of our Enemies, e're we could have notice to shift
for our selves: For the Hill, it had been argued, that we might there make
better Discovery of Danger, and make Provision to avoid it; and in short, we
all agreed over night, to put our Boat together upon the Hill; promising our
selves much Advantage from its Situation: But when we were met, we all altered
our Resolution without any visible Reason, and carried it for the Valley* God
is much in the dark to us, but all our ways are in the open Light to him. It Is
very difficult to give an Account what God is doing at present, but we shall
know, if we can but patiently wait till future Providence Comment upon the
former: And in a while we saw the Reason why God overruled our purposes.

We had hid several of our Materials near the top of the Hill, where also grew
a small Fig Tree, which we had marked with our Eye, as Judging it would be
useful to strengthen the Keel of our Boat: Two of our Company were immediately
dispatched to saw down this Fig Tree, and bring it, and the parcels of our Boat
there disposited away with them: They were hardly come to the place, but we
heard Dogs bark about the top of the Hill, and indeed two Men with Dogs came
very near them; but our Men being aware lay close and still, and so they passed
by without making any Discovery, and then our Men bestirred themselves, and
brought away the Fig Tree, and the other Materials, and returned to us.

And now we had once more brought the scattered Limbs of our Boat into one
place, which, like those of Absyrtus, had been dispersed up and down the
Fields: It was no time to trifle, and therefore we all buckled to our work in
good earnest: But we were so nigh some that were at work in the Neighboring
Gardens, that we could hear them speak, and therefore must needs suppose they
might hear us too; and therefore we Acted by Signs, and pointed, and pulled,
and nodded, but were all Mutes: It might have been an Expedient for the
Builders of Babel, when their Languages were Divided, to have carried on their
great Project by Signs: but certainly there was Confusion poured out upon their
Hearts and Counsels, as well as Division in their Tongues and Languages.

The two parts of our Keel we soon joined; then opening the Timbers, which had
already one Nail in every Joint, we groped out for the other hole; and put its
Nail into it: Then we opened them at their full length, and applied them to the
top of the Keel, fastening them with Rope-Yarn, and small Cords; and so we
served all the Joints to keep them firm and stable; then we bound small Canes
all along the Ribs length-ways, both to keep the Ribs from vering, and also to
bear out the Canvas very stiff against the pressing water: Then we made Notches
upon the ends of the Ribs, or Timbers, wherein the Oars might plye; and having
tied down the Seats, and strengthened our Keel with the Fig Tree, we lastly drew
on our double Canvas Case, already fitted; and really the Canvas seemed a
Winding Sheet sheet for our Boat; and our Boat a Coffin for us all.

This done, four of our Company took it upon their shoulders, and carried it
down toward the Sea, which was about half a Mile off: It was a little
Representation of a Funeral, to see the four Barers Marching in deep silence
with something very like a Hearse, and Coffin, upon their shoulders, and the
rest of us decently attending the Ceremony; but we wanted Torches, and besides,
it is not usual for any to wait upon their own Coffins: But we durst not grudg
our Boat that small, and last Office, to carry it half a Mile, for we expected,
it should repay us that Service and Civilty with Interest, in carrying us many
a League: We carried it at Land, where it could not swim; that it might carry
us at Sea, where we could not walk. As we went along, they that were in the
Gardens heard us passing by, and called to us, who comes there? But it was
dark, and we had no mind to prate, and therefore without any Answer, we
silently held on our way.

When we came to the Seaside, we immediately stripped ourselves naked, and
putting our Clothes into the Boat, carried it, and them, as far into the Sea as
we could wade; and this we did, lest our tender Boat should pe toren against
the Stones or Rocks; and then all seven of us got into her: But here we soon
found how our Skill in Calculating the Lading of our Vessel failed us: For we
were no sooner Embarked, but she was ready to sink under us, the water coming
in over the sides? so that once again we must entertain new Counsels* at last,
one whose Heart most failed him, was willing to be shut out; and rather hazard
the uncertain Torments of the Land, than certainly be drowned at Sea; then we
made a second Experiment, but still she was so deep Laden, that we all
concluded there was no venturing out to Sea: At length, another went a shore,
and then she held up her Head very stoutly, and seemed hearty enough for our
Voyage.

It was time now to commit, and Commend our selves, and Vessel to the
Protection, and Conduct of that God who Rules the Winds and the waves, and
whose Kingdom is in the deep Waters, imploring Mercy for the Pardon of our
Sins, and resigning up our souls to God, as if we had been presently to suffer
Death by the Hand of the Executioner. and taking our Solemn Farewell of our two
Companions, whom we left behind, and wishing them as much Happiness as could be
hoped for in Slavery, and they to us as long a Life as could be expected by Men
going to their Graves; we Launched out, upon the thirtieth day of June, in the
Year of our Lord, One Thousand, Six Hundred, Forty, and Four: A Night for ever
to be remembered by his poor Creatures, who are our selves Great Monuments of
Divine Providence, and do set up this Littile Monument of his Goodness and
Mercy, that may survive us and bear up the Name of God to aftertimes, that by
us Men may Learn to Put their Trust in God: And the Bill of Lading is as
follows; John Anthony, William Adams, John Jephs, John -- Carpenter, and
William Okley.

SECT. XI.
The great Extremities we Endured at Sea for Six Days, and Nights, with the
Coincident Providence of God that appeared for us in our Extremities, and our
Miraculous Landing at Mayork, July 6. 1644.
WE are now out at Sea without Helm, or Pilot; without Anchor, Tackle, or
Compass; but God was these. all these, and more then all these. Our Number was
Small, our Work was Great, we could not afford one Idle Hand, not one idle
Finger: Four of the Company continually wrought at the Oars; and indeed we
wrought for our Lives, and then I shall not need to say how we wrought: But
this I shall say, I can truly say it, I never saw strength so strained, nor the
utmost of what Nature could do for Life and Liberty, exerted so much in all my
Life. The Employment of the fifth Man was more easy, but no less necessary,
which was to free the Boat of that water, which by Degrees leak't through our
Canvas.

We Labored the harder that Night, because we would gladly be out of the Ken
of our Old Masters by Day; but when Day appeared, we were yet within sight of
the Ships that lay in the Haven, and Road, and off the Land: But our Boat being
small, and lying close, and snug upon the Sea, either was not at all
discovered, or else seemed something that was not worth the taking up: A little
hope in the midst of great Fears, made us double, and re-double our Diligence;
we tugged at the Oars like those who are Chained to the Galleys, because we had
no mind to be Slaves to our Old Patrones in their Galleys.

But upon all Occasions we found our want of forecast, for now our Bread,
which was to be the staff of our decayed strength, had lie soaking in the Salt
water, like a drunken Toast sopt in Brine, and was quite spoiled: And our fresh
water in the Bottles stank of the Tanned Skins, and Owze, having lie sobbing in
the Salt water which made it nauceous: But yet that hope that hovered over us,
and flattered us that we should one day mend our Commons, sweetened all again;
so long as Bread was Bread, we complained not: Three days with good Husbandry
it lasted, but then pale Famine (which is the worst sheap Death can be painted
in) stared us in the Face; And there was no substitute for Bread at Sea: At
Land, the Roots of Grass the tops of Trees, and the vilest Excrements have
served to stop the clamor of a Ravenous Stomach, but that which Slaves
despised, we should have admired, and prized: Water indeed we might have,
either cold, or hot; we had choice, but it was a hard choice: Either the cold
salt weter out of the Sea, or that warmer which had been strained through our
Bodies, and that we chose of the two, but we must not have that, after a while,
unless we would first accept the other: And the Misery was, these did not
assuage our thirst, but increase it; nor increase our strength, but diminish
it; yet these were the means of Life: Strange means, that would destroy the End.

Several things added to our Misery; for trouble seldom comes solitary: For
first, we had the Wind for some time full against us: And this was both an evil
in its self, an evil in its effect, and an evil in its cause. It was a great
evil in it self; it increased our Labor, and then defeated it: We Rowed harder
to less purpose: we moved, but did not advance! we s^ent our strength for
naught, and in vain. It was an evil in its effect; for it engaged the Waters
against us, and drew them into its prey, The Sea is a perfect Neuter of it
self, and willing to maintain its Neutrality; but the powerful Winds drew her
into the Faction: And that Sea which serves the North to day, shall comply with
the more prevailing South to Morrow; for the Waves are the greatest
time-servers in the World: But it was far the greatest evil in its Cause; for
the Winds being against us, argued that God was against us; for the Wind we
know was his: He brings the Winds out of his Magazines. We were now so
dispirited, that we debated, whether we should bare up with the Wind, or make
the best of our way, and Row against it? That is, whether it were not better to
go back to Algires with ease, then painfully make toward Freedom? At last like
Persons that though we knew not what to do, yet resolved not to return; we
resolved whilst we had Life, and strength, and Breath, we would struggle with
it: And now the great God interposed; he rebuked his Wind; it was not against
us; nay he reconciled his Wind, and it became our Friend. He that can turn the
Rivers in the South, could turn the Winds out of the North: Here we might have
had a notable demonstration of Gods Soverignty. He determined the Quarter of
the Wind, the Quantity of the Wind, and the Continuance of the Wind. The
Quarter, whence it should blow The; Quantity, how much it should blow, and the
Continuance, how long it should blow. The Quarter was our Enemy, the
Continuance had quite brought us to Despair; but had he opened his Hand, and
let out one blast more, the proud Waters had gone over our Souls, we had
perished in the deep: But we see that our times are in Gods Hand; the Ocean in
the hollow of the same Hand, and the Winds in the same hand; and Happy it was
for us, that we, and they, were all there.

A Second great Inconveniency was, that our Labor was without Intermission,
though we advanced not forwards at many strokes, yet cessation had driven us
backwards. The poor Sentinel that stands upon the Watch, yet comforts himself
that another will Relive him; but we had none to take the toil off our Hands,
and give us Respite: We might shift our places, but not our pains.

A Third great Evil that lay sore upon us, was the extremity of the heat by
day; the Season was Raging hot, being the beginning of July; the Climent was
hot, being under, or about the Fourth Climate; we wanted fresh Water to cool
the Heat, and were engagad in continual Labor to enrage the heat, and all
these made it insupportable to our Bodies, and our little, or no hope, (which
now like a Candle burnt down to the Socket, did rather blink, than burn) made
it grievous to our Souls. One small help we had (if it was a help) that the
fifth Man, who emptyed the Boat of the Salt Water, threw it upon the Bodies of
the rest to cool them; But this was a Miserable Remedy, for our Bodies were so
bleached between the scorching Sun, and the cooling Water, that they rose up in
Blisters all over. Great pain we felt, great danger we were in, great Miseries
were endured, great wants we were under, and had nothing little, but hope,
food, and strength. By Day we were all stark Naked, by Night we had our Shirts,
or loose Coats, and that was all our Clothing, the rest we left a shore to
ease our Boat.

If any shall be so Inquisitive, as to ask, by what Directions we steared our
Course, that we did not tack about insensibly in the dark Night or Day? He may
know, that for the Day, one of the Company had a Pocket-Dyal, which supplied
the place of the Compass, even well enough for such a Vessel, and such
Mariners. By Night when the Stars appeared, we had our advice from them, and
when they dis-appeared, we ghessed at our way by the Motions of the Clouds.

In this sad and woeful plight we continued four Days and Nights; on the fifth
Day, we were on the brink of the brink of despair, and all hope that we should
be saved, utterly perished. And now, as persons despairing of the End, we
ceased to pursue the means; laid by our Oars, left off our Labor; either we
had no strength left, or were loath to throw away that little we had to no
purpose, only we kept still emptying the Boat; loath to drown, loath to dye, yet
knew no ways to avoid Death: When the End is removed, all means perish with it.

They that act least, commonly wish the most: thus when we had left fruitless
Labor, we fell upon fruitless wishes, that we might meet with some Vessel,
some Ship to take us up* If it was but a Ship, we considered no further;
English, or African, Tross, Tyriusve; all was a Case: Or if not, yet the worst
was better than our bad case; and therefore resolved, could we have Discovered
any Ship, to have made toward her, though it had been one of Algiers: How many
wished themselves again in Egypt, when they Combated with the un-expected
Difficulties of the Wilderness! How often have the People of God been more afraid
of the means of their Deliverance, than of their Danger! When Christ came to
save his Disciples from the Storm, yet because he came in a way uncouth, and
unexpected, they cried out for fear, Mat. 14. 26. Whether the Reader will pity,
or condemn us, I know not; but to that pass were we now brought, that we would
have accepted Life upon any terms, not base and sinful; and whether we should
have stuck at such or no, I have no such security from my own Heart as to
resolve him.

Whilst we were at this dead Ebb of Hope, the Great God, whose most Glorious
Opportunity to help, is his Creatures greatest Extremity: He that appeared for
Abraham in the Mount, and to the three Young Men in the Fiery Furnace; he that
Delivered Israel at the Sea, at the Red Sea; he who times all his Mercies for
their Advantage: even He sent us some Relief, and a little Relief is great, in
great exigencies. As we lay hulling up and down, we Discovered a Tortoise not
far from us asleep in the Sea. Had the great Drake Discovered the Spanish
Plate-Fleet, he could not have more Rejoiced; once again we bethought our
selves of our Oars; and now our little Boat showed it self to be of the right
breed of Algiers, made of Piratick Timber, and to its poor Abbility would
become a Corsair; we silently Rowed to our Prey, took it into the Boat with
great Triumph, we cut off her Head, and let her bleed into a Pot; we drank the
Blood, eat the Liver, and sucked the Flesh; warm Flesh, and hot Liquor (except
our own) had been a great Rarity with us a long time, it was a Novelty of
Providence; and really it wonderfully refreshed our Spirits, repaired our
decayed strength and recruited Nature; at least, poor exhausted Nature was
willing to be cheated, and fancy her self recruited: But there was no cheat
in it we were really refreshed, and with fresh vigor and courage fell to our
Work; we left our fears behind us, we picked up some scattered crumbs of hope,
and about Noon, we Discovered, or thought we Discovered Land. It Is impossible
to express the Joy, and Triumph of our raised Souls at this apprehension. The
Poets tell us, that as often as Hercules threw the great Giant against the
Earth, his Mother Earth gave him new strength against the next Encounter: It
was new strength, new Life to us, though not to touch yet to see; or if not to
see, to think we saw it. It brought fresh Blood into our Veins, fresh coour
into our pale Cheeks; we looked not like Men awaked from sleep, not like
Captives broke from the Chains of Algiers, but like Persons raised from the
Dead. But Hope and Fear made a strange Medly Passion in our Souls; like the
Reparties of two contrary jostling Tides, or the struggling of the Eddy with
the main Stream; Hope would persuade us that we saw the Land; but chill Fear
bad us pause upon it, for as we easily believe, what we desire to be true, so
we are as ready to fear lest it should not prove true; for fear had got long
possession of our Souls, and would hardly admit Hope to stir, but was ready to
suppress it as a disturber of its Empire: We had seen nothing but Air, and Sea;
Sea, and Air in five Days and Nights; that though our Reason told us there
was such a thing as Land, yet the Impressions that fear had made upon us, made
it Questionable, whether ever we should see it. And we durst not give too much
Credence to our Eyes, that had been used to bring sadder stories to our Hearts.

Yet still we wrought hard: Hope did us that kindness it put us upon an earnest
desire to see, whether we were deceived or no. After some further Labor, we
grew more confident, and at last, fully satisfied that it was Land: I hope I
shall never foeget what a sense we had of Gods goodness upon that Assurance.
Extremes do equally annoy, and sometimes infatuate the mind: They tell us, that
in Greenland, the extremity of Cold will make the Iron stick to the Fingers, as
our Experience assures extremity of Heat will do; for now like Distracted
Persons, we all leapt into the Sea, quitting our Boat, and being all good
Swimmers, we there Bathed, and cooled our heated Bodies. An Adventure, which,
if well considered, had as much of the Desperado in it as our putting to Sea:
For now we were at the Mercy of the Sharks; which might have sheared off a Leg,
or Arm; and now our overheated Bodies were open to receive the Impressions of
that Cold Element: But as we never considered our Danger, the great and good
God delivered us from the Ordinary effects of such Folly; we presently returned
to our Boat, and being both wearied with Labor, and cooled a little with the
Sea, we lay us all down to Sleep in as much security, as if we had been in our
own Beds: Nature being almost spent, must have a Truce; she will not undertake
to keep our Bodies upon their Legs, if we will not submit to her great standing
Ordinance of Rest; and here we saw still more of Divine Goodness, that our
Leaky Vessel did not bury us in the Sea, and we awaking find our selves in the
other World: But he that gave us Sleep, measured it; and he measured it
exactly, not suffering us to out-sleep the Season of plying our Pump, or that
which supplied the place of it.

Being thus refreshed with sleep, we found new strength for our Work, and God
found us new Work for our strength: We tugged the harder at the Oar, because we
hoped ever Night to sleep upon a more stable, and faithful Element. But we made
our way very slowly, and when we cast up the Account of our Progress, found
that we had gone but little way in a long time; toward Evening we discovered
another Island: The first we saw was Mayork, the second, Fromentere; and some
of our Company that had Sailed in these Seas, would undertake to assure us of
it: We debated not long to which of these we should direct our Course, for the
latter being much infested with venomous Serpents, and little, if at all
Inhabited, we resolved all for Mayork: All that Night we Rowed very hard, and
the next, being the sixth of July, and from our putting to Sea; we kept within
sight of it all Day, and about Ten a Clock at Night we came under the Island,
but the Rocks were there so craggy, and steep, that we could not climb up.

Whilst we were under these Rocks there came a Vessel, very near us. Let the
Reader put himself in our stead, let him but Copy out our Thoughts, let him
imagine how loath we were to lose all our toil and Travel, to forego our
Deliverance, to have this Rich Mercy, which God had put into our Hands, wrested
out of them again by some Turkish Pickaroon, or Corsair, that are always
skimming those Seas: It concerned us therefore to lie close, and when they were
passed by, we gently crept along the Coast as near the shore as we durst, till
we found a convenient place, where we might thrust in our Weather-beaten Boat.

If these Papers should fall into the hands of some that are great Clerks in
the Art of Navigation, and have conn'd the Mariners Terms of Art, they will
smile at my improper wording of these Matters, and say, I am one of Paul's
Mariners. But I can be content to be Accounted one of his Mariners, whilst I
have shared in his Mercies: How many of those that spoke the Language of the
Sea, yet have found her Billows deaf to their Cries and Prayers, and their
stately Ships made the Scorn of Winds, and the Reproach of Waves, when we, who
had none of their Ships, and little of their skill, have had Experience of
those Providence, to which rhey have been Strangers.

SECT. XII.
The great kindness we received at Mayork from the Viceroy, and the
Inhabitants of that Island and City.
WHen we were come to Land, we were not unsensible of our Deliverance, though
like Men newly awakened out of a Dream, we had not the true Dimensions of it;
We confessed God had done great things for us, but how great things he had done
was beyond our Comprehension: We had escaped the Sea, but yet Death might be
found at Land; and we were ready to say, with Sampson, Judge. 15. 18. Lord, thou
have given this great Deliverance into the hands of thy Servants, and now shall
we dye for Thirst? We had had no Food since we eat the Liver, and drank the
Blood of the Tortoise, and therefore leaving three of our Company with the
Boat, the other too, viz. John Anthony, and my self were sent out to scout
abroad for fresh Water: And the rather were we sent, because this John Anthony
could speak both the Spanish, and Italian Tongues very perfectly; and I had as
much of the Spanish as might serve to express our wants, and desires, if
perhaps we might meet with any persons there abouts. We were not far gone,
before we fell into a Wood, and we were in a Wilderness in our thoughts, which
way to take: He will needs go his way, and I mine. Good Lord! what a frail
impotent thing is Man! That they whom common dangers by Sea, common
Deliverances from Sea had United, should now about our own wills fall out at
Land. And yet thus we did: He gave me reproachful words, and it is well we came
not to blows: But I went my own way, and he seeing me resolute, followed me,
and the Providence of God, not dealing with us according to our frowardness,
followed us both: This way led us to a Watchtower of the Spaniards many of
which they keep upon the Seacoasts, to give the Country timely notice of any
Pickaroons that come ashore to Rob, and Spoil.

When we came within call, fearing he might Discharge at us, we spoke to him
upon the Watch, told him our Condition, what we were, whence we came, how we
escaped; and earnestly begged of him to direct us to some fresh Water, and in
the mean time to bestow upon us some Bread. He very kindly threw us down an old
moldy Cake, but so long as it was a Cake, and not a stone, nor a Bullet,
Hunger did not consider it is Mouldiness: Then he directed us to fresh Water,
which was hard by? We stood not telling Stories; we remembered our selves, we
remembered our Brethren left with our Boat, and observing the Sentinels
Directions, came to a Well, where there was a Pot with strings to draw with: We
drank a little Water, and eat a bit of our Cake, but the passage was so
dis-used, that we had much ado to force our Throats to relieve our clamourous
stomachs: But here we staid not, but, with the four Lepers in the Tents of the
Syrians, 2 Kings 7. 9. Rebuked our selves, We do not well, we have glad Tidings
to carry, and do we hold our peace? We return to our Boat, are welcomed by our
Companions, acquaint them with the good success of our Embassy, and all prepare
to make to the Well.

And now we must leave our Boat; that faithful Instrument of God's Providence,
which had so trustily served his purpose to deliver us: It was not without some
recoylings upon our Spirits, that we should so much as in appearance imitate
the ingratitude of those, who having served their private ends on their
Friends, and have now no further use of them, most ungratefully shake them off:
That we should be like the water-dog, which uses the water to pursue his Game;
and when he comes to Land, shakes it off as troublesome, and burdensome. But it
was no time to stand upon Complements; Hunger, Thirst, Weariness, desire of
Refreshment and Rest* those importunate Duns, Commanded us away; and tying our
Boat as fast as we could to the Shore, we left her to Mercy, which had been so
good to us.

As we were going, or rather creeping, or crawling toward the Well, another
Quarrel started amongst us, the Memory whereof is so ungrateful, that I shall
give it a Burial in silence, the best Tomb for Controversies.

And now we are at the Well, and the Well is provided of Water, and we have
something to draw; all these helps God has given us, but he must give us one
more, even a throat to swallow it, without which, all the rest signify
nothing. This was the evil Disease Solomon had observed in his Days, Eccles.
6. 2. A Man to whom God had given Riches, Wealth, and Honor, so that he
wants nothing for his Soul, of all that he desires; yet God gives him not
Power to eat thereof: He that gives us water to drink, and meat to eat, must
give us Power to eat and drink also. How totally do we depend upon him for
Life, and Breath, and all things! One of our Company, William Adams, attempting
to drink, after many Essays was not able to swallow it, but still the water
returned, so that he sunk down to the Ground, faintly saying, I am a dead Man?
we forgot our selves, to remember him, and after much striving, and forcing, he
took a little; and when he and we were refreshed with our Cake and water, we
lay down by the Well-side till the Morning. None of us could watch for the
rest, but One God watched over us all: There we lay locked up, and buried in
Sleep: The Heavens covered us, when we wanted a Canopy: Each might say in the
Morning, with David, Psalm. 3. 5. I laid me down and slept; I awaked, for the
Lord sustained me.

When it was clear day, we addressed our selves once more to the man upon the
Watchtower, entreating him to direct us the ready way to the next House, or
Town, where we might find relief. He civily points us toward a House about two
Miles off, whither, with wearied steps, and joyful Hearts, we now began to
Travel: Our Feet had been so parboyled, and quodled with the Suns heat, in the
Salt Water pickle, that they were very raw, and more blister'd; and long it was
before we could overcome the tediousness of those two Miles. When we approached
the House, the Owner espying us, and concluding by our shabby garb, that we
were some Pilfering Rascals, presented a Fowling Piece at us, and chatged us to
stand. The foremost of our Company, who could speak that Language well, meekly
told him, he might spare that Language, we were not able if we had so wicked a
will; nor willing if we had been able, to offer him the least injury; That we
were a Company of poor Creatures, whom the wonderful Providence of God had
rescued from he Slavery of Algiers, and hoped he would show Mercy to the
Afflicted. The honest Farmer, moved with our Relation, sent us out Bread,
Water, and Olives, with which when we had refreshed our selves, we lay down,
and rested three or four hours in the Field; and returning thanks for his
Charity, prepared to crawl away at our lame rate. He seeing us thankful
Beggars, enlarged his Civility to us, called us into his House, and gave us
good warm Bean Pottage, which seemed to me the most Pleasant Food that ever I
eat in my Life: Our Leave once more taken, we advanced toward the City of
Mayork, which from this place is about ten Miles: No water could we meet with
upon our way, but toward Evening, we discoverd one drawing water at a Well, we
hasted to him, and he drew for us; that was our Supper, and there was our
Lodging that Night.

The next Morning we came iuto the Suburbs of the City, the strangeness of our
Attire, being barefoot, bare-legg'd, having nothing on but loose Coats over
our Shirts; drew a crowd of enquirers about us, who we were? whence we came?
whither we went? We gave them a particular account of our Deliverance, with its
Circumstances; and they as willing to pity, as to know our Estate, and as ready
to Relieve, as pity, accommodated us for the present with food; they gave us
Wine, and Strong Water, and whatever else might recover our exhausted Spirits;
but told us, we must be obliged to tarry in the Suburbs, till the Viceroy had
notice that such strangers were Arrived: He had soon Information of us, and we
as soon a Command to appear before him: He Examined us about many Affairs; what
Men of War the Algerines had at Sea? what strength they were of at Land? But
above all, he was most curious, and exact in satisfying himself about our
Escape, our Boat, our hazzards at Sea, wherein when we had fully obeyed him, he
ordered we should be maintained at his own Cost till we could have passage to
our own Country.

In this while the People gathered us Money to buy us Clothes and Shoes, and
we wanted nothing that Nature called for, but thankful Hearts to God. And they
endeavored to help to that Mercy too: As I was walking in the Streets viewing
the City, a young Man-steps to me, Friend (said he) are you one of those that
came lately over in the Canvas Boat? I Answered Yes, I was one of them: well
(replied the young Man) It was not the little Boat, but the great God that
brought you Over. I must needs say, I often think on this young man's words,
and as often as I think on them they chide me, that I have not hitherto more
publicly owned God in his Gracious and wonderful Deliverance. However others
may be concerned to read, I know not, yet I am concerned to Write of the great
things God has done for me.

SECT. XIII.
The Providence of God which attended us, and Conducted us all safe to England.
IT may not prove ungrateful to the Reader, to see how the great God, who begun
to work for us, perfected his work concerning us: How he that had, and did
deliver, would still deliver us; as single Stars have their Glories, yet
Constellations are more Glorious: So each Providence of God is admirable, but
taken together, as one serving another, and this helping forwards that, so
indeed they are most admirable; when the Creator viewed his each days work, it
so punctually answered its Idaea according to which, and Obeyed the Power by
which it was Created that he pronounced it Good; but when he reviewed the
Product of the six days, he pronounced all to be very good: Each Letter in a
Book speaks skill, but when those Letters form words, those words, sentences,
there is a greater Excellency, and more skill Discovered: Separate Providence
speak out eminently some of God's Attributes; but when we put them together,
all the Attributes of God shine forth in them, and one Illustrate another,
which refl(...) a light upon the former.

Mayork is a City where our English S(...) did seldom Trade, and we being full
of desir(...) see our Native Country, preferred our hum(...) Petition to the
Viceroy, That we might (...) Passage in the King of Spains Galleys, wh(...)
were then in the Road, bound for Alican(...) Spain, which he graciously granted
us: W(...) cold Entertainment we met with there (...) some of our own Country,
I shall draw a (...) over; yet even there we found the Mercy(...) God. One
Merchant took Compassion on (...) and Conducted us to an English-mans Hou(...)
where we Lodged, and gave us half a Do(...) to defray our Charges. The next
day, understa(...)ing that there was an Englishman in the To(...) bound for
England, we went aboard to see(...) Passage; we made our Condition our best
(...)gument to prevail: The Master told us, he (...) but little Provision, but
if we would be con(...) with Bread, and Beverage, we might go (...) accounted
that, Royal Fare, and accordin(...) waited till he set Sail: Whilst we were
aboa(...) two English Merchants came thither also, (...) were very earnest that
we would give them (...) short of our Adventure: We gratified them (...) one of
them said; Contrymen, we have he(...) your story. After a few days, we set
Sail, (...) when we were at Sea, were hotly Chased (...) two Turkish Men of
War, but being near (...)

A Further Narrative of James Deane and others.
THe Methods of Gods Providence are Various, yet all equally freight with, and
guided with adorable Wisdom, Justice, and goodness toward the Children of Men;
sometimes by His Blessing He is pleased to Crown weak and unlikely means with
strange and Amazing success: At other times to Blast Hopeful projects, and
divert or overthrow promising designs when they seem full ripe for Execution.
By the one He encourages our Faith in Himself; by the other, corrects our
presumption on our own Inventions, and by Both, Glorifies his own Omnipotency,
Teaching us, That in and by Him we can do all things, but without Him, Nothing.

The foregoing Narrative of a Stupendous Deliverance, is a signal Instance of
the First. And that which is here subjoined (referring in diverse Respects to
the like Subject, tho failing in an equal Success) may serve as an Example of
the second. And though our Relation abound not in such Varieties of Wonder, yet
may the same be of some Satisfaction and Use to the Reader, as well for
acquainting him with the Miseries poor Christians endure under the Tyranny of
cruel Mahumetans, thereby to awaken his Compassion, as also to raise his pious
thoughts to an Adoration of the Divine power and Wisdom, so Visibly, tho
Differently manifested, in these two Cases, wherein as far as man's Eye could
reach, the Contrivance the Conduct, and probability, seemed Equal, or rather to
have excelled in the latter, tho frustrated of Effect.

On the 25. of June 1679. we Sailed from Bristol in a Vessel called the Robert
and Hester, Captain William Stoakes Commander, bound for Barbado's. Those that
go down to the Sea in Ships behold the Wonders of the Lord in the deep, says
the Royal Psalmist; And I could wish that all such would lay those Wonders more
to heart, so as better to Improve their Lives: To Consider, that they are every
minute within a few Inches of certain Death, nothing but a poor plank (the
daily Embl^^ of their Coffin) between them and a watery Grave; That every hour
they are subject to Storms and Tempests, ready to become a prey between the
fury of contending Winds and Waves; besides the hazard of Enemies and Pirates,
and a Thousand other Casualties, all which were enough one would think to keep
them in the most sober frame, an Holy Conversation and strict Dependence on
that all-sufficient Power, who alone can protect them from so many immediate
and Round-threatning Dangers; But so incorrigibly hard and wicked is the Heart
of Man, that we find too many under the prospect of all these Wonders and
Perils utterly insensible; Mariners that fill their Sails with the Breath of
Cursing and Blasphemies, and increase the raging of the Sea with the Vomits of
their Surfeiting and Drunkenness; And what can such expect but swift
Destruction, even to be Swallowed up by an Ocean of Water, and delivered over
to a Deluge of everlasting Flames? I speak this not as reflecting on our Ships
Crew in particular (wherein most were at least Civilized Persons) but for a
General Caution; Nor yet dare I excuse my self and our Company from many
neglects of our Duty, for which it appears in the Sequel, God had a
Controversy with us, whose Justice always punishes us, that we should not Sin,
and never but for Sinning.

After a week pleasant Sailing, on the 2d. of July at Day light, we saw two
Ships standing toward us, and soon discovered them to be Turkish Men of War,
which put us into a great and General Consternation, as knowing how unprepared
we were for resistance, both for our small strength, and for that ours was a
Pesterd Ship by reason of a quantity of Hay we had on Deck and elsewhere, for a
dozen Horses we carried with us; However we resolved to Sell our Liberty at the
best rate we could, and prepared to Entertain them; within an hour and an half,
one of them was came up along by our side, and for the First Complement fired
in his Broadside and a lustly Volley of small Shot, which shot off our
Taller, and wounded us three Men, but none mortally; Killed also one of our
Horses in the Hold, and having received two Shots more between Wind and Water,
we quickly had about 4 or 5 foot Water in the Hold: we Answered them with our
Guns, but to little purpose; for having soon spent all the Powder we had up out
of our Powder-Room, and it being Impossible for us at that instant to come at
any more; and at the same time perceiving the other Ship almost with us, and
that it was impossible we should make good our Defense against 2 of the best
Ships of Algeirs (For they proved to be the Golden Horse, old Canaria Captain,
and the other the Golden Rose, young Canaria Captain,) we thought best to
Compound for our Lives at the price of our Liberties, and surrendered our Ship.

Hereupon their Boat came aboard and fetched us all away, except two whom they
left aboard with some of their Turks and Moors. When we came on Board the Turks
man of War, the Captain by an Interpreter inquired our Lading, and with many
menaces exacted a full Account to the best of our knowledge, soon after they
took 2 Ships more, and ere they went off our Coast, they surpised in all 9
Ships, wherein were about 170 Souls. And having taken the men out, and pillaged
their pleasure; some of the Ships they Burnt, and others Sunk, having not Men
enough to spare to Man so many, but three of the best they sent away home; And
having now been out of the Straights near six Weeks, they are afraid to venture
in without clearing their Ships, and therefore went on the South Coast of
Barbary to Magadore, touching also at Saphe and other Towns to take in fresh
Provisions;

All this time we poor Captive Christians were put every night in Irons. The
manner whereof was thus, between 2 spare Top-Masts between the Decks placed
about 6 asunder, we sat close to one another on each side, and in the middle
went a long Iron Bolt between our Shackles, so that we were constrained to
sleep sitting (when the necessity of Nature could Charm our perplexed Spirits
into any kind of Repose;) not being afforded Room to lie down; And the weather
being extreme hot, and the place close and Sultry, we were forced to sit naked;
The Provisions allotted to keep us alive, (who now began rather to Court and
wish for Death) was only a small pittance of Bread, and some Vinegar, with a
few drops of Oil, and this was all our Allowance for 24 Hours; and that which
yet added more to our misery was, that they afforded us not much above a pint
of Water a Day, so that through very extremit^ of Thirst, we were frequently
forced to beg and entreat of the Moors boys, to bring us salt Water, and could
but seldom obtain that favor of them neither; Nay when we were in Magadore,
tho we could (like Tantalus for our greater Torture) see the Fresh Water
plentifully on the shore, and were almost Dead with Drought, in working and
continual heaving in of Ballast, yet we could not be allowed but about 3 pints
for four and twenty Hours, and half of that too, Salt or brackish; whereby we
became so faint that we could hardly stand on our Legs; but it was vain to
Entreat or expect any other usage from those whose tenderest Mercies were the
Extremities of Cruelly, unless we would have abandoned all fear of God, and
respect to modesty and the Dignity of Humane Nature, by Condescending to the
detestable solicitations of their most unnatural Lusts, to which they were not
wanting in their cursed Importunities; so that our very Souls were not free
from their Tortures; They being so filthy as to mix with Brute Beast, having
seen such Evidences of their abominations in that kind, with some Creatures
that were on Board, as filled our Hearts with horror, and are not fit to be
named amongst Christians: At length the Wind standing fair, they resolved to
Sail Homewards; but first must perform their Orisons; (for these
Filthy-Infidels at to the outward Ceremonies and observances of their wicked
Religion are Extraordinary Punctual;) Therefore for a Peace Offering to the
Sea, (or whether it were to Mahomet, to send them an Happy passage, I know not,
they offered their Sacrifice of a Sheep, having first cut in the midst, one
half they heaved Overboard on the one side, the other on the other; with
certain Muttering Prayers which we understood not; This fit of Devotion being
past, they make all the Sail they could, and in they stand through the
Streights-Mouth, and in two or three days Arrived at their Desired Port;

Nor was it undesired by us: For as we longed to know the worst of our
Condition, so we flattered our selves that it must needs be better than that on
Board, at least that there we should have Water enough, the Want of which here
was intolerable.

Being brought ashore we were sent to the Armidore's House, and the next day
carried to the Palace of the Dey, Bashaw, or King, who by his Prerogative out
of every Eight Slaves brought in, Chooses one, and commonly elects the Captains,
as supposing they are able to procure the best Ransom, or if there happen to
be taken any young Lady of Extraordinary Beauty or Youth, well Featured, and of
a promising Aspect, these he snaps, and sends away as most Acceptable Presents
to the Grand Seignior; for whom there is never any Redemption. The next day
about eight of us were carried into the Market, and one or two of the Kings
Slaves with us, where about one a Clock we were led about the Market, one by
one by a Negro, who in the Turkish Language cried out as he went, to this
effect -- Here is a brave Captain, a Mate, a Merchant, etc. (as the Person is
quallified) one has bid so much, who bids more? And when they have been the
Market round, and none will give more, then they put him by; And so proceed
till all are sold. And then they have us to the Kings House again, and if He or
any else there, will give more but to the value of a shilling then was bid in
the Market, he shall have the Slave; otherwise the Market Chapman takes him,
and he is thenceforth absolutely His,

It was my hard fortune to be sold to a Tagareen (or Moor, whose Ancestors
formerly came out of Spain, and ever since assume the Title of that City from
whence they were driven) but his Name was Haly Hammet Ben Jejilee, and for his
Temper it was well known, for as I came out with him from the Kings House,
several told me I had got a Cursed Patroon.

But I was now in, for better for worse, and followed him very obsequiously to
his House, where after a day or two, I with others of his Slaves (whereof
several were English) were set to gather dung out of a Fondack, as they call
it, being the place where Horses, Asses, Mules, and Cows and other Cattle,
sometimes to the number of 100 or more were kept, and also the place of
Slaughter, where they killed Beasts as often as they had occasion, whose Blood
mixed with their Dung in that hot Climate, made it very noisome and offensive;
but we must not be Dainty-Nosed, but rake it up into Baskets, and carry it out
on our Heads or Shoulders, to a Dunghill at a great distance.

This Jobb being finished, we were put to work in the Mould, abord Prizes, for
sometime, and after that sent to the Garden or Vineyard (for it was both) about
four miles from the Town, where instead of digging with a Spade, we had only a
Chopp of 8. or 10l. weight which we were forced to work with at Arms-end, and
I think was as hard Labor as any could be, unless grinding at their
Silk-Mills; and if we Loitered, or they were pleased to think we did so,
presently we had many blovvs on the back, and sides, and sometimes on the
Soles of the feet, and our hair torn off our heads, with other inexpressible
Cruelties, whilst in the mean time, we had many times but one poor Cake of
Course Bread allowed us per day for our diet, and our Lodging at night most
hard and miserable, for frequently when we were in the City, we were driven
into a Nasty Cellar, where was an House of Office that stank intollerably; and
the room so small, that there being near twenty of us, it would not afford
breadth or length enough for us to Ly^ Down, but there were some Bords put up
and a Platoon made about three foot from the Ground, where some lay a top, and
the rest under neath.

Thus for many long months we continued as miserable, as to this World, as
'twas possible for the Envy and Cruelty of our Patroon to make us. You need not
doubt but we had often thoughts of making our Escape, but the manner how to do
it, seemed next to impossible; yet as N^cessity is the Mother of Invention,
variety of ways were proposed, some that were men of Courage heated by these
Cruelties to a degree of* Desperation, were for taking a Boat from the Mould at
Noonday, and going away maugre all their Force, and defying them to Catch us,
but this was looked upon as extravagant, others had other projects; and no
sooner was any thing offered, but it was disliked, for indeed all were attended
with insuperable Difficulties, and yet so greedy were we of Liberty, that we
would Catch at any thing that seemed to promise us that happiness, and somewhat
eased our present miseries by those pleasing thoughts and Idaeas; which yet our
recollected Reason told us were vain and impracticable.

At length one of my Fellow-Slaves told me of a design that He and some others
had of getting away, which he verily believed might be feazible, and after he
had sworn me to Secresy, acquainted me, That it was by building a Boat
privately, but that they wanted strength, and an Artificer for the Work; which
I undertook to procure; The Names of us Concerned in his Project were William
Johnson, Captain Peter Palmer, Doctor John Atwood, of London, Captain Thomas
Cheiney, William Knight of Bristol, Henry Bull, William Phelps, Arnold Showel
of Bristol, Captain, Another a Carpenter, whose name I know not, though I
brought him into the design; Three Spaniards, a Portuguez Negro, who were with
us in the Garden, and my self.

Matters being thus resolved on, we applied our selves to getting of Thyme,
some of which we furnished our selves with, out of our own and the rest from
other Folks Gardens, in the Night (wherein if we had been Caught, we should
have had Three or 400 Bastinadoes for Breakfast) and it was almost a miracle,
how those which lay in the Garden, viz. John Atwood and the Spaniards, escaped
it, the Moors lying very thick up and down the Hedges; but at last after much
time, hazard and industry, we had formed our Keel, which was twenty foot long,
six foot broad and three foot deep, and our Timbers fitted to their places,
with holes ready bored, that there should not want much knocking, when we
should set her up for good and all; we had likewise got Canes to make fast with
Rope-yarns from Timber to Timber, as also, Pitch, Tar, Tallow, and other
requisites, For providing of which; you must know, that some of us had saved
privately, some small parcels of money, and others being suffered to work at
their own hand, and follovv Trades, paying their Patroons so much a Month, got
Money, which they expended freely on this occasion* But the great difficulty
was to get the dressed Hides wherewith we intended to cover our Boat, and to
help us therein we were beholding to Mr. Showel, who since his Slavery, upon I
know not what former insight into that Mystery, had set up for a Cobbler, and
lived from his Patroon under Contribution; and by that means had the
Opportunity to buy them, which were privately conveyed into those things in
which we carried Dung on the Mules, and so got out of the Town, and so sowed
up, which was most artificially performed by Mr. Showel and Mr. Bull, and the
Boats covering most conveniently prepared, and all things hid in parcells near
the Seaside ready for the Voyage.

Hitherto things going on thus fairly, and every one of our Cabal expecting no
less than Liberty, the very day appointed for our going away at Evening being
come, and having provided Bread and Water and other Necessaries for that
purpose. It happened our Patroon himself, who had not been in the Garden for
sometime, did, by I know not what ill-Fortune, or rather as to me good
Providence, come into the Garden, of whose approach a Spaniard set for a Spy,
gave them notice, so that they had time enough to hide their things which they
were preparing that night to set together, but some of them being found
rambling, were strictly Examined, and when come home severely Beaten upon
Suspicion, but they stood it out stiffly, and never Impeached any.

In the mean time I was gone to call some more of our Company, and at my return
received tidings from the Spaniard how Cases stood* whereupon we consulted,
whether it were best to go on presently, or deferr it for some time, and it was
carried for waiting another Opportunity; which whilst we were expecting,
another Accident put us to stand, which was thus, Some of our Timbers being
bound together, and put into the next Garden by Consent of a Spaniard, who of
Necessity must be made privy to the Design, his Patroon happened to light upon
them so out to pieces, and violently bent his Slave, but by good luck this old
Fellovv and our Patroon were not Friends, and so the business never came to
his Ear.

Therefore this Disappointment of the loss of our Timber did not wholy
discourage, but got others and framed them, and had brought all things again to
perfection, when once more our project was Interrupted, and by other hands
and in an untimely manner put in Execution.

For about the latter end of November 1681 there came from other Gardens 2
Dutchmen* a Spaniard and some others; Who, by I cannot guess, what means, being
acquainted with our Designs, and the forwardness we were in, they Ingratiated
themselves with the Spaniards that lay in our Garden, and agree with them
forthwith to make use of this Expedient for their Escape, And thereupon they
threaten John Atwood, who also lay there, that if He would not Consent and go
with them, they would forthwith Kill him to prevent his making a Discovery.

Poor Mr. Atwood was loath to abandon his Friends, and Rob them of that means
which they so long and with such Danger and Charge had been Contriving to leave
them behind, and Embarque himself with (...) as were for the most part
Strangers; yet dread of Death and Hopes of Liberty prevailed with him to
Comply; (...) under pretense of some (...) another Garden where was an
Englishman privy to the Intrigue and (...) was and that the Carpenter was at
Work (...) resolved to be going by (...) Clock* (...) poor Man's Patroon being
in the Garden, he could not come till Fight, and finding then gone runs to the
Sea^side, and in his have set several Dogs a Barking (...) supposed they
fearing some might be in (...) of them, (...) a Jarr of Water, some Figs, some
Bread, and a Blank(...) behind them; and so the before mentioned Englishman
lamenting the loss of this Opportunity, returned to his Garden undiscovered.

Next morning 'twas my lot with one of my Fellovv Slaves to be sent into the
Garden, but finding no body there, and quickly perceiving other Symptoms, I
concluded they were gone* But Oh! how much anger did I swell with against
them for leaving me behind, (for as yet I understood not the Truth, tho
afterward I did, from the beforementioned Englishman that came too late,)
and what an Excess of Grief and sorrovv did possess me for not going with
them; when yet this very thing which I so much fretted my self about, was to
me the the most eminent Mercy of Providence; for those that went off, were
never any of them heard of, so that it is Justly supposed they were all lost and
cast away: And as for me that was left behind, within six vveeks after, my
Ransome-Money came from England, being 400 pieces of Eight, besides 218 for
Charges, and so I safely returned to my Native Country; For which Gracious
Providence of God, as I hope I shall never forget to return him continual
thanks from the Center of my Soul, so I thought it no less than my Duty to give
this Public Testimony of my Gratitude to that Divine and Adorable Power to
whom be all praise, Glory, and Honor both now and for Ever-more.

James Deane.

FINIS.

