A STANDING LOTTERY Of his own BOOKS Designed and to be Erected by the AUTHOR,
JOHN OGILBY Esquire who has in several years last past, Printed and Published at
his own charge, several Volumes of great Value and Beauty, such as our English
Imprimarie had been altogether unacquainted with heretofore, viz. AEsop's
Fables Paraphrased and adorned with Sculptures, Virgil, Prince of Latin Poets,
Translated, Illustrated with Notes, and adorned with Sculptures; Homer, Prince
of all Poets, his Iliads in like manner, set forth and Dedicated to the King's
most Excellent Majesty; and next, a Royal Bible Printed at Cambridge, Dedicated
to His Majesty, Illustrated with Maps and Chorographical Presentations, fifty
of them being Imperial, to be bound in two, or three great Volumes, with not
only Chorographical, but Historical adornations; and lastly His Majesty's
Entertainments on the 22. of April, 1661. passing through the City to His
Coronation, and His Coronation, wherein is Engraven the whole Caval-Cade, the
Triumphal Arches, their Inscriptions, Figures, Aenigmatical Emblems, indeed the
whole Poetical Conduct, Illustrated and defended by noted Observations, drawn
both from Modern, Ancient and most Authentic Writers.

The Author therefore having a virtuous Ambition, to perfect these his former
Labors, being the Work of twenty years, by the Addition of Hom^r's Odysses,
long looked for, and now in the Press, with all expedition to be Published,
with Notes also and Sculptures; and his Aesop's Fables, a scarce Book to
reprint, with additional Annotations, and the adaption of it for the better
joining and binding up with his other Works in a Royal Folio; and having yet
upon his hands, to his great prejudice, several of all the forementioned
Volumes, though many of them had a fair reception, by his munificent Friends
and Patrons: And that his Majesty's employments calls him suddenly elsewhere,
does as he supposes by very good advice propound an expeditious means to
dispose of this his whole Stock in a few months, which else would not drop off
Book by Book, in many years. And to those (...) are desirous of them at less
than half their well known Price and Value, by putting them thus into the hands
of (...) LOTTERY, who, though a blind dispencer of her favors, and oftener
mistaking on the wrong side, than on the (...) send all those Adventurers, who
are pleased to put in for their Chance, home contented more or less, since they
(...)

To be ordered and disposed after this manner, FIRST, Whosoever will adventure
for a Lot, may be pleased to put in forty Shillings, OF WHICH These are the
number and value.
The first and greatest, contains these BOOKS.
1 Lot Numb. 1. His Majesty's Entertainment passing through the City to His
Coronation; and Coronation, Valued 2 l. Aesops Fables Paraphrased, in Folio
with Sculps and Annotations, never published before, Val. 3 l. Homers Odysses
Translated with Sculps and Annotations, never Published, Val. 4 l. Homers
Iliads Translated, and already Published, Val. 5 l. Virgil Translated with
Sculps and Annotations, Val. 5 l. A Royal Bible with Chorographical Sculps,
Val. 5 l. An Imperial Bible with Chorographical, and an hundred Historical
Sculps, Valued 25 l. In all 49. Pounds. The second Prize contains.
1 Lot Numb. 2. One Imperial Bible with all the Sculps, with Homers Works in
two Volumes, Valued 34 l. The third Prize.
1 Lot Number. 3. One Imperial Bible with all the Sculps, and an English Virgil,
Val. 30 l. The fourth.
1 Lot Number. 4. One Imperial Bible with all the Sculps, and a new Aesop, and the
Kings Entertainment, Valued 30 l. The fifth.
1 Lot Number. 5. One Imperial Bible with all the Sculps, Val. 25 l. 25 l. 1 Lots
Number. 6. Twenty Prizes, each an Imperial Bible with Chorographical Sculps, at
twenty Pound a Lot, Val. 400 l. 400 l. The twenty sixth Prize.
5 Lots Number 7. One Entertainment, one Aesop, one Virgil, one Bible Royal,
Homers Iliads and Odysses, Valued 25 l. 25 l. Four Lots more of the same Books,
Val. 25 l. 100 l. Five Prizes each containing,
5 Lots Number.8. One Aesop, one Virgil, two Homers, Valued 17 l. 85 l. 5 Lots
Number. 9. Five Prizes, one Virgil and two Homers, Valued 14 l. 70 l. 25 Lots N.
10. Twenty five Prizes, two Homers, Valued 9 l. 225 l. 90 Lots N. 11. Ninty
Prizes, Bibles Verney Royal, Valued 5 l. 450 l. 90 Lots N. 12. Ninty Prizes
Virgil, Translated, Valued 5 l. 450 l. 350 Lots N. 13. Three hundred and fifty
Prizes, Homers Iliads Val. 5 l. 1750 l. 500 Lots N. 14. Five hundred Prizes,
Odysses, Valued, 4 l. 2000 l. 500 Lots N. 15. Five Hundred Aesops, Valued 3 l.
1500 l. 225 Lots N. 16. Two Hundred and five and twenty Entertainments, Valued
2 l. 450 l. The number of Blanks,
One; Which whosoever draws, shall be presented by the Author.

His Majesty's Entertainment, being the lowest Prize is a very fair and a
scarce Book, valued at forty Shillings, which is the money that is put in, and
it is eight to one, if you draw not higher: The whole value of all the Books as
they are apprized at above (being the prices they have been usually disposed at
Book by Book) comes to 7620 l.

The number of Lotts in all 1820. at 40 s. each, amounts to 3640 l. So that the
adventurers will have the Books abovesaid, for less then half of what they
would yield in process of time Book by Book.


