(...) THE GENERATION OF SEEKERS: OR The right manner of the Saints Addresses
to the Throne of Grace: IN TWO TREATISES.

The First being a sober Vindication of the Spirit of Prayer, with the
Resolution of diverse Practical Cases relating thereunto.

The Second, a plain Exposition of the Lord's Prayer, with Notes, and
Application, mainly intended as a Directory to those who desire to attain the
Gift of Prayer.

Ephesians. 6. 18. (...) Tertull: ( Citante Dieterico) A tali spiritu prosicisci
debet oration, qualis Spiritus est ille ad quen mittitur. August. Si vis c^m
fructu orare, oportet te prius esse templum Spiritus Sancti. London, Printed in
the Year 1671.

THE EPISTLE TO THE READER.
Christian and Courteous Reader.
WHat some have said of Laws, That if to all those wholesome Constitutions which
our pious and prudent Legislators have enacted, there were added but one more,
viz. To enforce the execution of the rest; The nation would be both happy in it
self, and a Mirror (and Terror also) to all about it: The like may be said of
holy and Practical Books (wherewith this Age abounds even to a furfet) that
could such a Book be written as might effectually stir up Christians to a right
use and improvement of the Labors of God's faithful servants already extant,
there would be (I will not say none, but I may say) less necessity of writing
more in that kind. For indeed, as to the substance of Christian duties, I may
allusively take Eccl. 1. 9.
up that of Solomon, The thing which has been is that which shall be, and that
which has been done is that which shall be done, and there is no new thing
under the Sun. Treatise upon Treatise, line upon line, precept Isa. 28. 13.
upon precept, are extant, whereby Christians might be both instructed in and
excited to the Duties of Religion and I think no duty of Religion more
frequently treated of, than that which is the subject of these poor labors.

But as once it was the answer of ^ Minister to one of his Hearers, blaming him
for too often declaiming against the sin of Drunkeuness, that he resolved never
to leave preaching against it, till the People had left off the practice of it;
So methinks it may be a sufficient Apology for any labors of this nature, that
till the duty be more generally and carefully practiced, there is a necessity
of reiterated calls to it, and a^ it is said by one, Nunquam nimis dicitur,
quod nunquam satis discitur, That duty (if it be indeed a duty of weight and
importance as this is) is never too much pressed by the Minister, which is
never enough practiced by the Hearer.

But alas! It Is matter of sad consideration, that, while both from the Pulpit
and Press, Christians have such loud and repeated calls to their respective
duties, so few believe the report, so that with reference to the generality of
our hearers we may take up that of the Prophet, To whom shall I Jer. 6. 10.
speak and give warning that they may hear? Sad it is, that God's painful
laborers have so just cause (as to most people) to renew the old complaint, I
have labored in vain, I have spent Isa. 49. 4.
my strength for naught and in vain -- And this, not only as to their Oral
labors in the Pulpit (whither for most part, they bring their Sermons, as
People do their dead to Church, to bury them there); But also their elaborate
writings, and elucubrations, whereby many of God's faithful servants though
they are dead yet speak

This I say again, is a sore evil, and should be for a Lamentation, that so
little right use is made of that store of spiritual provision, which God's
Joseph, have laid in for a time of scarcity; and the greater sin, because so
little laid to heart, so rarely lamented.

I have sometimes observed it to be (and I hope in sincerity) the
acknowledgment of some Christians, that they have heard unprofitably: but it is
rare to meet with him that will seriously bewail his neglect of, or
unprofitableness in reading, either the Word of God, or the works and labors
of his servants, written for their edification; as if these last were not among
those Talents, which ought to be improved, and must certainly be accounted for.

Give me leave therefore, Reader, first to propose something in general for thy
more profitable improvement of these precious mercies which God puts into thy
hands, I mean the pious and practical Books, which this age has brought forth
in such plenty: and then a word or two in particular touching these two Mites
which I now cast into the common treasury.

As to the former, I hope it may be a word in seasons: Some are naturally dead,
and shall never speak word more to thee for thy edification, yet their labors
are in thy hand; by these they have endeavored, (with Peter) that thou
might be able after their decease, 2 Pet. 1. 15.
to have those things always in remembrance, to which, while living, they did
stir thee up, by putting thee in remembrance: Others are legally dead, and may
not speak, as formerly, from the Pulpit; Yet their hands are not so tied up,
but that they may write and (by the indulgence of Authority) make public such
things, as rightly improved may promote thy spiritual welfare and eternal
happiness.

To lose the benefit of these advantages, cannot but be an unspeakable loss,
and therefore to direct thee any way for thy more profitable use thereof,
cannot but be acceptable to every soul that is under a sense of his own
necessity, of the present scarcity of quicking means in many places, and of the
strict account one day to be rendered of every Talent we have received, and
amongst others the pious labors of God's faithful servants.

To detain thee therefore no longer, let me lay before thee these few things.

1. Persuade thy self that all these good Books and pious Treatises which of
late, and ev^n since our departure from Rome, have come forth into the World,
are the effects of Gods gracious Pr^vidence: it is he that has gifted, and
raised up Instruments to that purpose, he has put it into their heart, he ha^h
guided (as it were) their band, though not in that extraordinary manner as he
did the Prophets and Apostles, who were moved, and 2 Pet. 1. 20. 21. Matthew. 28.
ult.
infallibly guided by the Holy Ghost; yet in the same way, wherein he has
promised to be with his Ministers to the end of the World. Solomon tells thee
Eccl. 12. 12
that O making many Books there is no end, and much study is a weariness to the
flesh, yet God has made his servants both able and willing to undergo that
labor for thy sake, and with indefatigable pains (even to the impairing of
their own health and strength) to write Commentaries, Expositions, Sermons,
Martyrologies, and other like pious labors, for thy advantage: Look upon this,
I say, as from the Providence of God for his Churches edification, and as one
way whereby such promises as those are fulfilled, -- Many shall run to and Dan.
12. 4.
from, and knowledge shall be increased -- The earth shall be full Isa. 11. 9.
of the knowledge of the Lord as the waters cover the sea -- They shall all know
me from the least of them, unto the greatest of them Jer. 31. 34.
-- This consideration will be a Spur to improvement, when they are looked upon
as a price put into thy hand by God, it will make thee more conscientious in
the use of them.

2. In this great variety of useful helps, labor to single out such as may be
most helpful to thee. To this purpose, if thou have not opportunity or ability
to do it thy self, consult such as can direct and inform thee. There Is as much
skill and care to be used in the choice of Books as Meats; some may best suit
one, some another. Three things especially should be considered to this
purpose. 1. Thy Capacity, whether thou stand'st in need of milk, or art able
Heb. 5. 12.
to digest stronger meat; whether the more polite, sublime and spiritual
discourses of some, or the plain, familiar writings of others, be fitter for
thee. 2. Thy Condition as to spirituals, here is great variety: some are dead
and need quickening, others weak and need confirming, others doubtful and need
resolving, etc. It Is good to look into thy state, and be conversant in such
things as may best conduce to thy edification. 3. Consider also thy leisure and
opportunity (I may add also thy ability) All have not the like time to spare
for this exercise; their employments in the world take them up so, that they
cannot give themselves to reading, as those may whose callings are more
ingenuous, or whose Condition in the world sets them above the necessity of
toyling and laboring for the meat that perishes: These later may employ their
leisure in larger Treatises, but the former must content themselves with those
more succinct Epitome's of Christian duty.

3. But to come nearer what I intend; Whenever thou set'st upon this duty or
exercise, propose to thy self a right end, and labor that thy reading may
conduce thereunto. Want of this, I fear, makes many a great Student so
unprofitable to himself and others. Alas! How many propose no better ends to
themselves then to satisfy their curiosity, to furnish themselves with notions
or matter of discourse, or to drive away time (as they speak) when they know
not how to employ themselves otherwise? I fear some do but only fill up the
vacancies of the Sabbath with reading, because they have then (as some
foolishly call it) an idle time, and know not how to spend it, being ashamed or
afraid to go to their sports or worldly employments: It has sometimes grieved
me to see a Bible or good Book in the hands of some upon a Lord's day to so
little purpose. Well, if you would profit by reading, propose right ends, and
these either.

1. General such as agree to all good Books, namely your own edification, and
the benefit of others. When you open your Bibles, or other practical Books,
think thus; I have now a price in my hand; this exercise may, through the
blessing of God, conduce to my eternal good: hereby my knowledge of God, of
Christ, of my self, of my duty, etc. may be augmented, my graces improved my
Corruptions mortified, and for these ends I will endeavor to improve it. Were
our eye fixed on such ends, our reading would be abundantly more advantageous.

2. Besides you may propose to your self a more special end, namely that which
the Book, or subject ye read are directed to: as in reading a Treatise of
Prayer, your end should be to inform your judgment in the nature of that duty,
to quicken your self to the Practice of it etc. Make that your end in reading,
which is the Author's in writing, and take notice how every Doctrine, Precept,
Motive, or Instruction conduces thereunto. This will both make the things you
read better understood, and easilyer remembered; and hereby also more advantage
will accrue to you, as to the practice of those particular duties.

4. Next see that you read in a right manner, and that in these particulars.

1. Read attentively and considerately: See that your mind and understanding go
along with you. Understandest Act. 8. 20.
thou what thou read, is a necessary Questions; and this cannot be without
attention. What the Apostle says in reference to the understanding of others,
I had rather speak 1 Cor. 14. 19.
five words with my understanding, that by my voice I might teach others also*
then ten thousand words in an unknown tongue, I may allude to in this case. A
little read with deliberation, and understandingly, is better then whole volums
posted over without taking heed to the scope and meaning. Therefore labor to
keep your mind, as well as your eye, at work in this exercise: 'Twas Plato (if
I mistake not) that required in his Scholars (Mathematicum ingenium) a
Mathematical disposition, that is, To have their minds attentive and
considerate; without this you do but pour water into a Sieve: There Is much
variety of men's dispositions in this respect; Some very quick to apprehend,
their understandings like water, easily yielding to any impression, but very
fluid and unapt to retain; Others hardlyer imrress, but more happily retentive
of what is once taken in; both sorts have need to be attentive, the latter that
they may get, something to lay up; the former, that they may lay up and keep
what they get. Cursory glances, are but looking one's face in a glass, and then
going away Jam. 1, 23,
and forgetting what manner of men we are.

2. Read judiciously and with discretion: Weigh things in the Balance. The
Apostle often calls upon those to whom he writes to use their own Judgments. I
speak as to wise men, 1 Cor. 10* 15.
Judge ye what I say. And again 1 Cor. 11. 13.
judge in your selves. Is it comely -- Though in reading or hearing the word of
God, and the works of men there is a difference: We may read men's, writings
Alios ut judex, Scripturan ut judi^e^n.
as judges thereof, but we must read the word of God, as being our Judg^; yet
even in reading the Scriptures, there is discretion and judgment to be used,
not whereby we judge what is true or false, but what is our duty, and under what
circumstances etc. But in reading men's writings, even the best, there is great
need of weighing things, especially as to the application of them to our
selves; lest that which is intended for Physic to some, become Poison to
others, by misapplication: But that which I mainly intend here, is the same
which is so highly commended in the Beroeans: that Act. 17* 1^.
they received the word with all readiness of mind and (yet with Caution, for
they) searched the Scriptures daily whether those things were so, the happy
effect whereof is noted in the next words, Therefore many of them believed --.
This is that which* I would especially commend to you, in the reading (as well
as hearing) men's discourses; Take them to the Touchstone, weigh them in the
sanctuaryballance, To the Law and to the Isa. 8. 20.
Testimony --. Pass not over the Material Scripture-quotations, but turn to
them in your Bibles, see how they enforce the duty, confirm the Truth, forbid
the sin, etc. that is insisted on; By this means you shall not only grow into
more acquaintance with the word of God, but see with your own eyes, and drink
(not out of the Cistern but) Dulc^us exipso font bibuntux aquae.
out of the pure fountain; and arrive at a fuller evidence of things: it will
be with you, as with the Samaritans, who believed on Christ for the woman's
saying, but when themselves had seen and heard him, they came up to a fuller
assurance: Now, say they, we believe, not because of thy saying; John 4. ^9, 42.
for we have heard him ourselves, and know that this is indeed the Christ, the
Savior of the world: This is that which I would especially commend to you.

3. Read orderly and Methodically: take things before you: The beauty of Truths
lies in their connection: here and there a snatch will edify little: you may get
some notions, but you lose the main end of the work: Method is deservedly
called the Mother of Memory. It may be, some Pieces of a work may seem less
useful, but they add light to the rest: The opening and explaining of a Text,
drawing out the sense from the Original fountains, giving the several glosses
and opinions of men, and comparing them together, that we find out the Truth,
may seem less edifying, yet is as necessary as laying a good foundation, in
order to a firm building: The understanding is to be informed, and convinced,
as well as the affections to be moved, and the heart persuaded. Therefore see
how the foundation is laid, how Truths are deduced, how opened and confirmed: I
may fitly compare a practical Book (especially Sermons) to a feast: the first
course may not so please the appetite, but commonly consists of more nourishing
and solid meats, the last dishes may relish more upon the Palate, they may more
quicken the affections, but if you feed upon them alone, you shall not receive
such solid nourishment by them.

4. As your occasions permit, read constantly: I know worldly entanglements are
a great impediment to this exercise, but let Christians redeem what time they
can for it: Make it not only a Sabbath's work; but, as much as can be, an every
Day's business: a Page or two may be a refreshment in your employments.

Long intermissions wear off what you have gotten (Nulla dies sine Linea) no
day without a Line or two: I will conclude this with the application of a Rule
to this purpose which I have somewhere met with about eating. Saepe, parum,
lent, nunquam satis; Comenii Schola Ludu.
aurea lex est.

Eat often, but Sparingly, and slowly feed,
Never cloy thy self: a golden Rule indeed.
This observed in reading would make it more profitable. Frequency would beget
an attentive mind, and cause a retentive memory, especially if you do not tire
the mind, nor overwhelm the memory with too much at once, and neither go on
faster, nor proceed further, than both mind and memory may keep pace with you.
This for the manner of Reading.

5. In the next place labor to rivett and fasten things upon your selves; do
as the Apostle exhorts in reference to hearing; Give the more earnest heed Heb.
2. 1.
to the things which you have heard lest at any time you should let them slip,
lest they should leak out (as out of a cracked Vessel, so the word imports) or
run abroad as ink upon naughty Paper. It Is grand folly to take some pain's to
get, what we quickly forget. Some have made Learning to be nothing else but
remembrance: I am sure, without remembrance we are but like those silly Women,
ever 2 Timothy 3. 6, 7.
learning, and never coming to the knowledge of the Truth. Memory is the
repository of what the understanding takes in. Now that things read may stick
faster, I commend two things especially.

1. Recollection and After* meditation: sum up what you have read, especially
the substance and matter of it, nor once but often: food needs a manifold
concoction, before it be turned into our substance; It must be chewed with the
Teeth in order to concoction, then carried down into the Stomach where it
receives a change (as it were) being turned into that which the Physician calls
Chyle; the purest of this (...)
by winding passages (which the God of Nature has appointed for that end) is
carried to the Liver, and there again being separated from the grosser parts,
the purest becomes blood; which (...)
being thence sent by veins into each member of the body is at last
assimilated, (...)
and turned into our very substance: you see how much comes betwixt eating, and
receiving nourishment. If Stomach, Add, here, that it would be very profitable
to write down the most material things, and often to peruse it, if thou can
write, and have leisure for it.
Liver, or any other part fails in its office, the food, we take in, nourishes
not, yea often turns into diseases; so it is with the food of our souls, it
must be digested, concocted, we must ruminate upon it, and (with the clean
beast) often chew the cud, if we would be nourisht thereby. Well then, lay not
aside the thoughts of what you read, with the Books but either immediately, or
upon the next opportumity, recall what you can, and (which is the advantage of
reading above hearing) review the substance of what is gone out of your mind.
This will be found a very thriving way.

2. But add practice and exercise to all this: things are never your own, till
they be put in practice. Philosophers have made nature the layer of the
foundation, Doctrine or Instruction, the Builder; but exercise the Perfecter,
that lays the Topstone, of any good habit, Art, or Science: This is the end of
knowledge, and without it you know not in Gods account what you do know: He
judged the cause Jer. 22. 16.
of the poor and needy, then it was well with him: Was not this to Jam. 1. 22.
know me, says the Lord? This is indeed to know: without this, you read but to
your own greater condemuation; (...)
you do but put a cheat and fallacy upon your own souls.

Therefore when you set upon the reading any practical Book, look upon it as a
Tutour to teach you something of your Duty as Christians; take out those
lessons that are proper for you, and set about the Practice of them.

6. I shall add but one thing more, but that without which the rest will be
fruitless and ineffectual, namely, before and after this exercise lift up your
hearts to God in prayer, He it is that must Isa. 48. 17.
teach you to profit, he gives understanding, strengthens memory, quickens
affections, and makes the labors of his servants profitable: beg the
concurrence of his holy Spirit before you enter upon the duty, and turn the
matter of what you read into Prayer. When you understand your duty, go to him
for strength to perform it. When you meet with something that is convincing,
quickening, comforting, entreat the Lord to set it home and keep it upon your
hearts.

Thus I have, in some weak measure, proposed what seems most conducing to the
prefitable reading of both of the Scriptures, and other labors of God's
servants, which I hope may be acceptable because a word in season.

Concerning this two fold Treatise, I shall not say much: The dignity of the
subject, I confess, required an able^ and more experienced workman; yet I shall
freely acknowledge that the matter and substance in some of the Cases, is
borrowed; and because, as he said ( Ingenuum est ag^oscere per quos profeceris
It Is ingenuous to acknowledge by whom we profit) much of the first Case will be
found in these two Treatises which (without my commendation) will praise their
Authors in the Gate. viz [Hol^ingworth's, Holy Ghost on the Bench, other
Spirits at the Bar] of which I may truly say, it has (multum in parvo) much
matter in few words, and having this opportunity, I shall not conceal the
Encomium which a Reverend Brother, known to me, gave of it with allusion to the
Author's name, in this Distich.

Of all the Books which lately have come forth,
There Is none that has more worth then ALL IN WORTH.
The other to whom I acknowledge my self a debtour is, Reverend Manton on Jude
verse 20. who has succinctly handled the case: upon the Foundation which these
two Worthies have laid, I have added something of my own superstructure. I
would not rob them of what is their due and as it is suid, Facile est inventis
addere. I should but needlessly trouble you with the rehearsal of others, whom I
have for the most part quoted in the Margin, which yet is not so stored as to
beget in the Reader the least suspicion of my arrogating the praise of one
extraordinarily conversant in Authors, the judicious, and Book-acquainted
Peruser will easily discern,

-- Quam sit mihi curta supellex. Yet upon such Themes it had been no hard
matter for one indifferently read, to have replenish't the Margent: But to
leave these things to every one's censure: ^he first ^reatise declares both the
necessity and advantage of having the Spirit's help in prayer, especially in a
Day of affliction; In stead of the particular Doctrines which the text would
have naturally afforded, I thought sit to hanlle the substance of it under one
Doctrine, and that, in the Resolution of several important Cases relating to
it, which you may see in the Table prefixed, which when you look upon, you will
easily perceive that the matter treated of cannot but be highly useful and
profitable, though the manner of handling, I confess falls far short of the
Dignity of the subject:

The later Treatise is an Exposition (if you please so to call it) upon the
Lord's Prayer, with some (and but some) Observations, and the brief application
of them, The Method accommodated to the end of the Lord's Prayer, which is, to
be our Pattern in Prayer. Yet lest any should complain, that abundance of
useful Observations are omitted, which an Expositor (in the way that is now
commonly used) might have gathered from the Scope, and matter of it, I have in
the End of that Treatise given you such other Observations besides those in the
Treatise, as occurred in my meditations, which had they been all spoke to,
though but briefly, would have swelled the work, and rendered it less conducing
to the end I proposed. I hope it may find acceptance with the ingenuous Reader,
as being a help to improve that which (to say no more) is turned at this Day
into a piece of formality, by so frequent repetition in public (possibly six
or eight times, or oftener, upon a Sabbath:) The proper use of it being as
Calvin well notes, a Directory for Prayer [Noluit quidem praescribere Filius
Dei, quibus verbis utendum sit -- Sed tamen vota nostra fic dirigere
fraenareque voluit, ne extra metas istas oberrent: unde colligimus, non in
verbis, sed in rebus ipfis datam ab^ ^o fuisse rite precandi legem] thus he:
And therefore it is very necessary both to understand, the particular
Confessions and Petitions comprehended in it, and in what manner, with what
frame we are to put them up to God, which is the Scope of my undertaking. There
are many have gone before me in a way not much different; Especially Mr.
Brinsley in his Watch and Rule of Life, has furnished you with a briefer and
larger Paraphrase upon it: I have endeavored to suggest some
Scripture-expressions suitable to the matter of each Petition; in which, and
the like, we may express our selves. And now, Reader, I shall commend it to thy
serious perusal, beseeching the Lord so to attend this weak endeavor, and all
the Labors of his faithful Ministers with his blessing, that they may
administer matter of edification to thy soul, and give thee occasion to bless
his name from whom comes every good and perfect Gift: That both we that sow,
and thou that reapest, may rejoice together in a blessed eternity. Farewell.

Thy Soul's real welwisher. O. J.

THE CONTENTS Of the First TREATISE.
CHAP. I. THe Scope of the Work, the Connection, Division and Explication of the
Text, two Doctrines proposed. page 1-9. 1. Doctr. From the substance of the
words. To pray in the Spirit is the Saints Privilege. page 9. 2. Doctr. From
their Relation to the Context. The Spirit's help in prayer, in a singular
Privilege and comfort to Gods Children in Affliction. ibid. The first of these
designed to be handled in the Resolution of 7. Cases.
CHAP. II. The I. Case. WHerein Consists the Spirits help in prayer? Answered.
1. Negatively in 5. Particulars.. 1. Not by inspiring Christians as he did the
Penmen of Scripture. 2. Not as if we were Passive, and he made use of our
Tongues. 3. Not otherwise in Prayer then in other duties respectively. 4. Not
so as to exclude subordinate helps. 5. Not so as to exclude Christ's
Intercession. 10,-13. 2. Positively. 1. In bestowing praying gifts. page 13. 2.
Working and exciting in us praying graces, page 15. Where 1. He works in us an
Habitual disposition to the duty. p. 15. 2. Actually assisteth us. page 16. And
this by 1. Exciting us to the Duty, where are 5. or 6. Particulars showing how
he does it. page 16.-19. 2. Enabling us in the Duty. p. 19. and this 1. With
reference to the matter. Where 1. It teaches to prefer Spirituals before
temporals. 2. Amongst spirituals to ask what is most needful. 3. Brings one
matter suitable to each part of prayer. 4. Suggest's arguments. 5. Somethings
brings Scripture expressions to remembrance. page 10, 24. 2. With respect to
the manner. 1. By enlarging affections. 2. Exciting graces as 3. As to the
souls continuance in the duty, it helps against discouragements Confidence
Humility. page 24, 25. 1. From God. 2. From our selves. 3. From others. page
26, 27.
CHAP. III. The II. Case. HOw we may distinguish the motions of the Spirit from
those things that carry resemblance to it. page 28. I. From Satanical Impulses
which are. 1. Violent and unreasonable. 2. Unseasonable in three things. 3.
Ineffectual, page 29, 30. To which is added. 1. A necessary Caution. page 34.
2. A profitable Question answered. page 35. II. From the Gift of prayer. 1. The
Gift is but the outside of the Duty, whence Two consequences, and two contrary
to those as to the Spirit of Prayer. 2. The Gift alone swells. 3. Looks more at
performance than success, and therefore neglects. 1. Interest in Christ. 2.
Purity of heart which the Spirit mainly looks at. page 36,-43. III. From the
Vrgings of natural conscience. Which are, 1. Only upon some extraordinary
occasion. 2. Without assistance brought in. 3. Easily discharged. 4. Little
looks at the Issue of Duty. page 43,-47. IV. From the good Moods and Fits which
sometimes come upon a mere natural man, which differ from it. page 47. 48, 49.
1. In their Root and cause. 49. 50, 51. 2. In their Fruits and consequences. 1.
They leave a man what he was before. 2. They encourage to more looseness after.
3. Make us proud, 4. Are eas^ly put off. p. 51-56.
CHAP. IV. The III. Case. WHether want of the Spirit's assistance will excuse
our neglect of the Duty. page 56. Where Prop. 1. A man may want the Spirit's
Assistance either 1. When he is utterly void of the Spirit. p. 57. 2. When he
wants the actual motions and help of it. p. 58. 2. The Assistance of the Spirit
is God's gracious vouchsafement. ibid. 3. Prayer is a duty indispensably
arising from our Relation to God, and therefore depends not upon the
vouchsafement or withholding of the Spirit. ibid. Proved by Arguments 1. The
contrary Assertion fights against all other duties as well as prayer. page 59.
2. That which is a punishment of sin, cannot be an excuse for the neglect of
duty. p. 60. 3. The precepts for prayer enjoin assiduity, and the Patterns of
the Saints agree thereto. p. 61. Obj. But we cannot pray without the Spirit's
help. p. 62, Answ. 1. Yet the Obligation is not destroyed when assistance is
denied, etc. Answ. 2. The Spirit's help is not always Antecedent to the duty,
but comes in upon our endeavor. 62. 63.
CHAP. V. The IV. Case. WHat is on our part to be done that we may enjoy the
help of the Spirit in prayer? p. 63. 1. We can do nothing by way of merit, to
engage the Spirit's help. ibid. 2. Yet something may be done, upon which God
may graciously vouchsafe his Spirit. p. 64. 1. Accept Jesus Christ upon
Gospel-Termes. ibid. 2. Purge out these corruptions which damp the Spirit. p.
64, 65. 3. Beg the Spirit's help. p. 66. 4. Meditate. p. 67. 5. Stir up what
gifts and graces we have. p. 68. Obj. None of these things can be done except
we have the Spirit. p. 69. Answ. 1. Man is not a mere stone. ib. p. 70. 2. The
Spirit comes in with such directions given by a Minister. p. 71, 72. Here are
added two Motives. 1. From the misery of not having the Spirit. p. 73.-76. 2.
The dignity of This Privilege. p. 76, 77.
CHAP. VI. The V. Case. WHat is to be done that we may have the Spirit's help
Continued to use p. 78. Premised. 1. As the bestowing, so the Continuance of
this mercy is the mere indulgence of Heaven. p. 79. 2. God, vouchsafes or
withholds his Spirit, as he sees best for his people. p. 80. 3. Yet ordinarily
some miscarriage in us provokes God to withdraw. p. 81. To the Case. 1. Beware
of those things which may grieve away Spirit. ibid. As 1. Pride in
enlargements. page 82. 2. Self-sufficiency. ibid. 3. Corruption Cherished. p.
83. 4. Lazyness and sluggishness. ib. and p. 84. 2. Let the Spirit's motions
find ready and hearty entertainment. p. 85. 3. Make the best improvement
thereof. p. 86. 1. In holy wrestling. p. 87. 2. As an Evidence to this great
Truth. p. 88. 3. As an Inducement to frequency and constancy in the duty. p.
89, 90. 4. Into Thankfulness. p. 91. 4. Beg earnestly the Continuance of it.
ib. and page 92. 5. Be willing to follow the Conduct of the Spirit. page 93,
94. 6. Abide in Christ. i. e. 1. In the Truth of Christ. 2. Faith in Christ. 3.
Love of Christ. p. 94.-97.
CHAP. VII. The VI. Case. WHat is to be done for the recovery of the Spirit's
help when withdrawn? p. 98. Premised. 1. We may be (...) to be deprived of the
Spirit 1. As to that degree in which we have had it. ibid. 2. Wholly, as to our
own apprehension. p. 99. 2. The Spirit's return must be free grace and rich
grace. ibid. To the Case. 1. Endeavor to find out what sin or sins may have
deprived thee of it: Commonly. 1. Sins against light. 2. Customarry sin, long
continued in. 3. Sins more directly against the Spirit. p. 100,-103. 2. Humble
thy self, and beg pardon. p. 103,-106. 3. Earnestly beg the return of the
Spirit. p. 106,-108. 4. Desist not from duty under these withdrawments. page
109. 5. Make much of and be very thankeful for any degree we have. ibid. 6.
During the Spirit's with-drawments be very pliable to his commands. p. 110, 111.
CHAP. VIII. The VII. Case. WHether stated and straited forms hinder the
Spirits operations? p. 112. Prop. 1. Stated forms are lawful, and may be
useful and helpful, yea necessary* In Case. 1. Of gross ignorance. 2. Inability
to express our selves before others. 3. Some kind of distempers which craze the
memory, etc. p. 115,-116. Prop. 2. Yet hence it follows not, that any should
satisfy themselves herewith, or that others should impose them. p. 116, 117.
Reas. 1. A prescribed form does that, which is of the nature of prayer, less
perfectly. p. 118. 2. In it, we cannot so particularly express our emergent
wants or desires to God. ibid. 3. The Spirit is wont in Prayer to excite
special affections, which a form much hinders. page 119. 4. In a form,
Oscitancy and Sluggishness is more apt to seize upon us. ibid. 5. A prayer
accommodated to present emergencies must needs stir up more kindly affections.
p. 120, 121. So that a conceived Prayer. 1. Leaves the soul more freedom to
exert present affections. 2. affords more opportunity of putting up suitable
Petitions. 3. More calls out and imployes the soul. 4. Is singularly helpful
for Edefication. 5. Better discovers to a man the present frame of his heart.
p. 122, 123. These things applied to the Case. 1. By a fourfold Distinction. 2.
Then the direct Answer given. p. 124,-128. A Question added. viz. What may be
done for the attainment of present abilities in prayer? p. 128. Answ. 1.
Acquaint thy self with the Word of God. page 129. 2. Retire into thy own heart.
page 129, 130. 3. Exercise. p. 131. 4. Join in society with able Christians. p.
132. 5. Earnestly beg a serious, gracious heart. p. 133, 134.
CHAP. IX. THe second Doctrine. In two Propositions. p. 135. I. Saints usually
have the Spirit's help in Trouble. How this to be understood. Confirmed by a
single argument. viz. That the Saints in Trouble have prayed more, and more
fervently etc. Strengthened by a two fold consideration. 1. How they prayed. 2.
How they sped. p. 135,-142. II. The Spirit's help in Prayer is a singular
Privilege and Comfort to God's afflicted Servants. p. 142. Reas. 1. It carries
in it much of Evidence* 2. It brings ease. 3. Confidence. 4. Support. 5.
Sanctification. 6. A happy Issue, and deliverance when God sees it good for us.
p. 142,-149.
CHAP. X. BOth Parts of the Doctrine applied together. p. 150. I. To those that
want the spirit of prayer, and such 1. Who scorn and deride it: the sin and
folly of these detected. ibid. 2. Who care not for it. p. 151, 152. Where
considerations representing their sad condition especially if Trouble come. 1.
Afflictions come upon such, armed with sad Temptations, to make them run,
Either 1. To helpless helps. 2. Distressing helps. 3. Sinful helps. Or 4. To
break out into blasphemy, etc. p. 153,-160. 2. Such ordinarily lose the benefit
of affliction. p. 160. 3. It Is a probable evidence of a soul in a state of
wrath. p. 161, 162. 4. The whole weight of an affliction lies upon himself. p.
163.
CHAP. XI. 3. SVch as want it (at least in their own sense) and complian of the
want of it. p. 164. 1. Supposing they want it, there is hope of it is return.
ibid. 2. It Is to be hoped they do not altogether want it. p. 165. For. 1.
Whence are those complaints? 166. 2. Can they not pray with groans, etc. p.
167. 3. Have they not some fits of enlargement? p. 168,-171.
CHAP. XII. II. TO those who have experience of this great Privilege. page
171. And these. 1. Such as are not yet in affliction. p. 171. Advised, to
cherish and make much of the Spirit. Considering 1. They may suffer
afflictions. page 172. 2. As they now carry toward the Spirit, so will He then
carry toward them. page 173. 3. Supposing they should escape Trouble, yet the
Spirit's help is upon other accounts needful. p. 175, 176.
CHAP. XIII. 2. Such as being in affliction, experience this mercy. p. 177.
Counseled 1. To improve it to the utmost. 1. In begging a blessing upon
affliction. 2. As an alleviating consideration. 3. As a preservative from
taking offense at the Cross. page 178,-180. 2. Not to straiten or slacken their
returns of thankfulness for this mercy, because of their Troubles. p. 181, 182.
CHAP. XIV. 3. SVch as having been in Trouble have enjoyed this mercy. p. 183.
Exhorted. 1. To beg and use the same help in praise which they had in prayer.
p. 184. 2. To turn this experience into Obedience, in point of 1. Ingenuity. p.
185. 2. Prudence. p. 186. 3. To declare and communicate this experience to
others in affliction. p. 186, 187. 4. In all their addresses to the Throne of
grace, to make use of the Spirit's help. page 188,-190.

THE CONTENTS Of the Second TREATISE.
CHAP. I. THe excellency and difficulty of Prayer. p. 191,-194. The occasion of
the Lord's prayer, According to Matthew p. 194-197. Luke p. 194-197. The end of
the Lords Prayer, chiefly for a pattern or directory. page 197. Evinced by 5,
Arguments. 1. Our Savior's words in Matthew [After this manner]. 2. The
difference in the two Evangelist's relation of it. 3. The Apostles neither used
nor praescribed it; 4. The nature and brevity of it. 5. The nature and end of
prayer. page 197,-202.
CHAP. II. THe Usual Division of the Lords Prayer into the Preface Taken up and
followed. p. 202. Substance Taken up and followed. p. 202. Conclusion Taken up
and followed. p. 202. The Preface describing the Object of prayer 1. From his
Relation to us [Our Father] 2. From his eminency above us. [Which art in
Heaven.] page 203. From the Preface. 1. Doctr. Our prayers are to be directed
to God and him unly. p. 203. Proved by Arguments. 1. God commands it. 2. The
standing practice of the Saints confirms it. p. 203, 204. Reas. Prayer ascribes
to God those attributes, and gives him that glory which he will not have given
to another. p. 204. Use. 1. Detest that Religion whieh teaches to share this
honor to Angels and Saints. The absurdity whereof evinced, since he to whom we
pray must be, 1. Lubens. 2. Sciens. 3. Potens. All which (in the degree
requisite) belong only to God. page 205. 206. Obj. We may make Saints and
Angels Mediators. Answered in 3. particulars. page 206, 207. Use. 2. See the
infinite goodness and condescension of God in this. page 207. Use. 3. Try
whether we pray to God only. That is, whether to God as our Object End, though
not so proper to this place. p. 207; 211. Use. 4. Take this at once a Spur to
curb in This duty. page 211. 2. Doctr. They that come to God aright in Prayer
must come to him as to a Father. Explained. God is a Father, considered
Personally or Hypostatically. So the first person, of the second. Essentially
the whole Trinity and to in respect of Creation Sustentation. Adoption
External. Adoption Internal. p. 212, 213. Quest. May none pray to God, but such
as can call him Father by Adoption? Answered? p. 214. Confirmed by the Practice
of the Saints in Scripture. p. 214. Reas. There is not a more suitable Title
for God to have, or us to give him. For it helps against miscarriages in
Prayer. As. 1. Irreverence. 2. Unbelief. 3. Backwardness and unwillinness. page
215, 216. Use. 1. Then Prayer is not so much a Task as a Privilege, which
shows how unsuitaeble that threefold Distemper above mentioned is to this Duty.
216,-219. Use. 2. Prove and Try our Adoption. Notes of a child 1. Resemblance
to His Father. p. 219,-221. 2. Obedience to His Father. p. 219,-221. 3.
Dependence on His Father. p. 219,-221. Use. 3. Exhortation. All that call God
Father, carry as children. 1. In your more imme^^^ addresses to God 2. In the
whole course of your lives. p. 221, 222 3. Doctr. They that come to God as a
Father must bring Christ along with them [Our Father i. e. In Christ] page 223.
Proved by 1. The Types of the old Testament. 2. Command of the new Testament.
p. 224. Reas. 1. Because our Interest must not be titular but real. 2.
Christ's merit is the foundation of our acceptance. page 225,-227. Use. 1. Be
humbled for neglect of Christ. Evinced to be the sin of many. 1. From their
notorious ignorance of Christ. 2. Their palpable Unbelief. 3. Their Pharasaism
and self-confidence. p. 227,-230. Use. 2. Bring Christ with us: To which
purpose. 1. See that our Faith be right. 2. In exercise. 3. That our persons
and performances he suitable to such a Mediator. page 230,-232. Doctr. God
must be prayed to as our common Father: p. 232. which imports (as se many
Reasons) ^eas. 1. A distinction of God from an excellency above all earthly
Parents. 2. Our membership in that body which is spiritually begotten. 3.
Chiefly (in which sense it is prosecuted) the Union of hearts and Communion of
prayers amongst all Gods children. p. 233, 234. Use. 1. It blames our
privatespiritedness. p. 234. Use. 2. Pray for others. Urged by Motives 1.
Nothing is a better evidence of our real membership. 2. It Is singularly
advantageous. page 235, 236.
CHAP. III. 5. Doctr. IN our addresses to God by prayer we must come to him, as
in Heaven. p. 237. (there more gloriously.) p. 237, 238. Explained. 1. Not as
if he were confined there. 2. Nor as if he must locally descend thence. 3. But
us manifesting himself. Reas. 1. To distinguish God from Idols. 2. To beget
reverence in our hearts. 3. To take us off gross and Idolatrous conceptions of
God. 4. To strengthen our Faith. 5. To mind us that the heart must chiefly
pray. 6. To mind us what thingr are chiefly to be asked. p. 239. Use. 1. See
what self-debaseing, God-exalting apprehensions become us in prayer. p. 240.
Use. 2. See how heavenly-minded we should be in that Duty. p. 241. Use. 3. Then
all places are alike near to God. p. 242. Use. 4. Then make heavenly things our
first and chief requests. p. 243, 244.
CHAP. IV. I. PETITION. p. 245. 6. GEneral Rules about the Petitions. 1. The
Petitions naturally divide themselves into two Tables. Whence three things. 2.
Every Petition implies an acknowledgment of something. 3. Every Petition
includes together with the good thing asked, the means thereto; deprecates the
impediments, and binds us to endeavor etc. 4. What we beg for our selves, we
are also to beg for others respectively. 5. Under one kind, all the like is
signified. 6. All necessaries are reducible to these Petitions. page 245,-248.
The Petitions explained. [Name] for 1. God himself. 2. What notifies or
distinguishes him. 3. His glory. 4. Whereby he is known. p. 249,-256. Hallowed
or Sanctified. Man is said to Sanctify. God is said to Sanctify. God is said to
Sanctify. Man is said to Sanctify.
Himself or others. Man These Two are here meant. p. 251, 252. Himself God

Doctr. The glorifying or sanctifying of Gods Name should be our Chief Petition
in our addresses to God. p. 253. Quest. 1. Is it necessary that it be always
first? Answ. 1. The glory of God should always sit highest in our hearts, and
all our Petitions should be directed to it. 2. Ordinary that which is highest
in our intentions should be first in our Petitions. p. 255,-256. Quest. 2. What
necessity of such a Petition. 1. To testify our desire of it. 2. It Is our
concernment. 3. Upon it depends our happiness. p. 255, 156, Reas. 1. This is
the highest end of our Creation. 2. This sanctifies all the rest. 3. It Is fit
we should prefer God before our selves* p. 257, 258 Use. Labor to direct our
prayers according t^ this Pattern. p. 258 Mot. 1. We cannot lightly ask amiss
then 2. Nor miss of what we ask. 3. Not t^ do it, is real Idolatry. p. 159,
260 Direct I. Labor to understand what is imply^^ in this Petition, p. 260. And
that, 1. By way of all acknowledgment. 1. Tha^ God is in himself infinitely
glorious. 2. That it is our duty to glorify him. 3. That we are unable to do it
of our selves* p. 260,-263. 2. By way of Petition. 1. That God would glorify
himself by Removing Impediments, where Three particulars; Administering
occasions etc. 2. That we and others may glorify him, where Impediments to be
deprecated. Helps and enablements to be begged page 271,-274.
Direct. II. Endeavor that the frame of our hearts be suited to the matter of
this Petition. In Three particulars. page p. 271,-274.
CHAP. V. II. PETITION. p. 274. THe Order and Relation of it to the foregoing
and following* Explic. 1. [Kingdom] of God. General over the world Special over
his Church 1. Inchoate in this life 2. Consummate in heaven Called the Kingdom
of Grace and Glory. p. 272,-279. 2. [Come.] i. e. In it is effects, and
manifestations. p. 279, 280. Doctr. The coming of Gods Kingdom should be the
Petition of the Church and every member thereof. page 280. Quest. 1. To what
purpose such a Petition? 1. To Jestify our love to God. 2. In Obedience to his
command. p. 281. Reas. 1. In order to the fulfilling of the first Petition. 2.
The advantage that will accrue to us, and our inahility etc. p. 282. Use. Pray
accordingly. page 283. Mot. 1. It Is highly advantageous. 2. Then 'twill come to
our comfort. 3. It Is the sum of what we can desire. p. 283,-286 Direct. I.
(as in all) Understand what is employed or included in this Petition. page 286.
1. By way of acknowledgment. 1. That God is absolute Sovereign of the world. 2.
That we are not naturally in the Kingdom of God. 3. That all means are
ineffectual to promote God's Kingdom, except he concur etc. p. 286,-289. 2.
By way of Petition. 1. Privative: Impediments to be removed viz. Sathan's
Kingdom in 3. Particulars. p. 289,-293. 2. Positive. 1. As to the Kingdom of
Gods power or Providence in two Particulars. page 293. 2. As to the Kingdom of
grace. 1. The means of it: where three Particulars. 2. The efficacy of the
means. 3. The amplification and spreading of those means. p. 294,-299. 3. As to
the Kingdom of glory, in three Particulars. p. 299. Direct. II. Get a frame of
heart suitable to the Petition in two Particulars. page 300, 301.
CHAP. VI. III. PETITION. p. 302. THe Order and Connection of it. Expli. 1. Will
of God. Decretive, his will of Purpose, what he will do Preceptive. What he
commands us to do. Both here meant, chiefly the latter. p. 303, 304, 305. 2. Be
done. 3. On Earth, etc. page 305, 306. Object. To what purpose to pray for such
a degree of Obediential grace, Answered two ways. p. 306, 307. Doctr. That
Gods will may be done on Earth as in Heaven, ought to be the desire and prayer
of every Christian. p. 308. Reasons four. p. 308, 310. Use. Pray thus. A two
fold Motive. p. 311. Direct. I. Understand. 1. What Is Acknowledged here. In two
Particulars. page 312,-314. 2. What Is Petitioned. 1. Privatively against
impediments Inward Outward. p. 314, 315. 2. Positively as to Gods will of
Purpose in two things Precept Helps to do it in two Particulars. Manner of
doing, in seven Particulars* page 216,-321. Direct. II. Get a frame of heart
suitable. In two things. p. 321, 322.
CHAP. VII. IV. PETITION. p. 223. THe Order of it: where Four Reasons. p. 323,
324. The parts of it viz. The Petition self The Limitations respecting the Time
Quality Quantity. p. 325. Explication. 1. Bread. 2. Daily. 3. This day. 4. Our.
5. Give us. page 325, 326. Doctr. Necessaries for this like may and ought to be
asked of God, but with due Limitations. p. 327. Quest. 1. Why we are to ask
necessaries. Two Reason. p. 327. 2. With what Limitations: six Limitations,
drawn from the words. page 328.-331. Use. Pray thus: where, 1. One Motive to
ask page 331. 2. Motives to limit our asking p. 332. Direct. I. Understand. 1.
what is Acknowledged here, in three Particulars. page 233, 334. 2. What Is
Petitioned, and how? In six Particulars. p. 335,-339. Direct. II. Get a
suitable frame; in three Particulars. p. 339, 340.
CHAP. VIII. V. PETITION. p. 341. THe Order and Division of it. Explic. 1.
Trespasses or debts, how sin called a debt, in two Particulars. p. 342. 2.
Forgive. 3. As we forgive -- how a Reason of the Petition? p. 344, 345. and
Whether it bind us to forgive all? In three Particulars. p. 346. Doctr.
Remission of sins is to be sought of God, and may be hopefully expected, When
we are inclined to forgive others. p. 347. Reas. 1. Why forgiveness to be asked.
Two. p, 347. 2. Why this Condition mentioned. Two Answers. p. 348-351. Use.
Pray thus. Where, three Motives. page 351, 352. Direct. I. Understand. 1.
What Is Acknowledged? In three Particulars. page 353,-355. 2. What Is Petitioned?
1. As to the Things begged in four Particulars. 2. As to the Means of it^, in
three Particulars. p. 355,-361. Direct. II. Get a suitable frame. In four
Particulars. p. 361,-364.
CHAP. IX. VI. PETITION. p. 365. THe Order and Parts of it. Explic. 1.
Temptations distinguished 1. With respect to their Author Divine Humane
Diabolical. 2. As to their end Probation. Correction. Seduction. p. 365, 366.
2. Lead us not, imports three things. page 365 366 367. 3. But deliver us. etc.
p. 368. Doctr. To be kept from, or delivered out of Temptation, and preserved
from the evil of it, is a mercy to be begged of God. Reasons. Two. p. 369,-371.
Use* Pray thus. Where, three Motives. page 371,-373. Direct. I. Understand 1.
What Is acknowledged in four things. p. 373,-375. 2. What Is Petitioned in eight
Particulars. p. 375,-381. Direct. II. Get a suitable frame: in four
Particulars. p. 381,-385.
CHAP. X. THe Conclusion Vindicated. page 386,-388. Six Doctrins only named. p.
388-392.
CHAP. XI. OBservations flowing from the Connection, Scope and matter of the
Lords Prayer. page 392. etc.

ERRATA.
Page 21 in Marg. for John, read Luke; p 25 l 9 f Romans 8. 16 r 15 p 28 l 22 r
seem; p 52 l 17 r ab; p 94 l 1 r Testimony; p 97 M. ^ for Verse 23 r John 14 23
p 127 l 14 f. a in, r in a; p 128 M. r Matthew. 25 p 133 l 1 r Christians use
only; p 145 l 20 and M. r Psalm 22 r 20 p 146 M. r Psalm 138. 3; l 25 r that; p
166 l 6 r have the spirit; p 167 M. r 1 Samuel 1 p 173 l 31 dele of, p 176 l 26 r
put thee besides; p 178 l 25 r effectual; p 187 l 6 r extolled; l 28 r souls; p
190 l 29 r Weak p 192 l 20 r beggarly; p 193 l 7 r ly; p 197 l 6 r their; p 199
l ult. r (...); p 220 l ult r is so; p 231 l 25 r through; l 29 r he; l. ul^* r
must; p 260 l 18 r Jesreel; p 265 l 8 r Zoph. p 268 l 4 r Abilities; p 269 l 16
r fall put him; p 275 l 14 r he; p 287 l 29 r it; p 291 l 12 r working; p 312 l
26 r whose; p 316 l 7 r. Choose; p 317 l 13 r Lev. 10. 3. p 324 l 17 r
necessity; p 339 l 6 r this; p 336 l 27 r upon him for; p 344 l 18 r
punishment; p 351 l 28 r sense of Gods; p 366 l 22 r (...); p 373 l 21 r
rescue* p 374 l 2 r assaulting; p 388 M. r largely disputing; p 390 l 21 r
(...); p 391 l 29 r heed.

Rom 8. 26, 27. Likewise the Spirit also helps our infirmities: for we know
not what we should pray for as we ought, but the Spirit it self makes
intercession for us, with groanings which cannot be uttered.

And he that searches the hearts, knows what is the mind of the Spirit,
because he makes intercession for the Saints, according to the Will of God.


CHAP. I.
IT is noted by Jude, v. 10. as the property of wicked men, to speak evil of
things they know not. What Is said of Malice, that it never speaks well; is
often true of ignorance; it seldom speaks well, especially of spiritual things;
which are not more above the knowledge of ignorant and carnal men, than
contrary to their inclinations.

Amongst the duties of Christian Religion, as there is none more excellent and
spiritual, than that of prayer, rightly and spiritually performed, (being a
familiar converse, and near approach to the Most High;) so, none has met with
more scoffs and derision, from the profane and blind world. For though few
that bear the name of Christian, will be so palpably Atheistical, as to deny it
to be a duty; having, besides the clear and express injunctions of Scripture,
the light of natural Reason attesting it; yet how many would strip the power
from the form, and turn it into a mere lip-service, and fruitless babbling? For
what better is it, to utter words without affections and Graces? And what
affections can be spiritually excited, or Graces exercised, without the helps
of Gods Spirit? Yet what more ordinary amongst the prophaner sort, than to jeer
at praying by the Spirit, as if it were a ridiculous fantasy; or that ordinary
Christians could have no assistance of the Spirit, but they must presently run
into pretended Impulses and Enthusiasmes.

To silence (if possible) these blasphemers; and however, to evince the Truth
and reality of the thing; to encourage the Godly to hold on their course; to
show them where the strength and prevalency of this duty lies, how great their
Privilege is in this respect; is the design of this undertaking. The Scripture
I have chosen, is full and pregnant, and will, I hope, with its light and
power, bear down all those carnal reasonings, which are exalted against this
comfortable Truth.

That my way into it may be the clearer; you may take notice, that the scope of
the Chapter, is to comfort Believers; by declaring the precious Privileges
they are invested with by Christ; and what an everlasting spring of
Consolation, he is to those, that are savingly ingraffed into him, even against
all that might trouble or terrify them.

And because there are two principal springs, whence all the sorrows of Gods
people flow; viz. 1. The Relics of Sin within. 2. The Pressures of Affliction
without. The Apostle lays in comfort against each of these severally: Against
sin remaining, from v. 1. to 17. Against afflictions pressing, from v. 18. to
the end of the Chapter.

The Text is one of those Cordials, to prevent faintings under any kind of
suffering, (though not less Sovereign against the stirrings of corruption) and
indeed very precious and heart-cheering to those that enjoy it: namely that
they have the Spirit of God to help them in pouring out their complaints, and
begging what is needful for them at the hands of God.

Though I intend not, the distinct handling of every particular Truth coucht in
these words; yet, it will not be amiss to open them, that you may be the better
able, to glean up, not those single cars only, but whole sheaves of
Gospel Truth, which I shall leave behind me.

In the words then, is set forth a precious Privilege of Gods people, which
(though enjoyed in other Cases, yet) is especially besteading in a day of
affliction: namely, the Spirit enabling to, and assisting in the duty of
prayer. Particularly observe in them,

1. Our Insufficiency, to pray without the The Analysis in De^dates 4th Edit.
Spirits help, [ for we know not, etc.]

2. The Spirits Sufficiency, to quicken and direct us; and that both,

1. As to the matter of the duty, [ with groanings unutterable.]

2. As to the manner, [ according to the will of God.]

3. As to the acceptance [ And he that searches the hearts, etc.]

This seems to be the most natural division of the words. Yet for more orderly
explication, we may observe these five particulars: in which, though there be
not so much Art or Method, yet, it may better serve our present purpose, and
give occasion to a more particular opening of the Text; which I shall do, as I
mention the Particulars.

1. The Author of the Privilege, that is, ((...)) the Spirit; which what else
can it mean, but the Spirit of God, especially, since its emphatically pointed
out in the following clause, ((...), The Spirit it self, etc. Should any
Caviller urge that in Prove. 18. 14. The spirit of a man will sustain his
Infirmities, and therefore, why may it not be understood here of ones own
Spirit? The Answer were easy; That there is a vast difference betwixt [
sustaining] in that Text, and [ helping] in this. There, the Spirit, De^d.
that is, the vigor, firmness and alacrity of the soul, do uphold and bear up
a man, in his corporal weaknesses. What Is that to spiritual infirmities,
ignorance, unaptness and inability for duty? What can the natural vigor of a
man's own spirit contribute to the help of these? Besides that, other Texts
conspire with this, in the sense I give: Ephesians. 6. 18. Praying always -- In the
Spirit, per Spiritum, Beza in locum.
as Beza renders it, thus glossing; Paul would have prayers to proceed from the
Holy Ghost: Or, if that Text may admit of another sense: In the Spirit; that
is, ex intimis Add the consent of Expositors.
animi penetralibus, as the same Beza, making it parallel with that in Ephesians. 5.
19. [ making melody in your hearts -- ] Yet methinks, that in Jude 20. ((...),
praying in or by the Holy Ghost) is above any just ground of exception; and
cannot without manifest violence be otherwise understood, but of the Holy
Spirit of God, the third person of the Trinity, whose Graces they must exercise
in prayer. So that I take it for undoubtedly true, that by Spirit here, is
meant the Spirit of God, who is the Author of this precious Privilege.

2. Here is the Privilege it self: and that is expressed in two or three
words, very emphatical.

1. Helps our Infirmities: But that expression reaches not the Original,
[(...)] helpeth-together. Vicissim onus attollit Beza.
ex altera part, ne sub eo fatiscamus. He takes by the one end, lifts against
us, lest we sink under the burden.

[ Infirmities] that is, the defects, imperfections, corruptions, that cleave
to us in our prayers.

2. There are other two words, both of one root, v. 26. (...), he makes
intercession for -- v. 27. (...), which signifies the same. Their import is
thus much, to deal with a Judge, Magistrate, or any in authority, about any
business, to be Advocate, to plead a cause. Sometimes against another; as the
same word is used, Romans 11. 2. Acts 25. 24. But here, for, on the behalf of
another, to procure that the person in authority, may be propitious and
favorable, to obtain, that one may bring in his plea, and may be heard by the
Judge. Which yet is so to be understood, not as if the Holy Spirit did
intercede with the Father or Son for us (as the Arians affirmed;) but, that he
Beza.
excites us to pray; and as it were dictates sighs and expressions to us:
Whence he is said, to cry, Gal. 4. 6. and by it we are said to cry, Romans 8. 15.
Of this more anon.

3. Here is the manner of this Privilege, (for so I choose to call it) how the
Spirit makes intercession, viz. with groanings which (...).
cannot be uttered: Some will thus interpret, without speaking (as they render
that word) that is, say they, The virtue of their prayers, consists not in
number, or artifice of words, as the Hypocrites, Matthew. 6. 5, 7. but in lively
feelings and ejaculations of the Spirit. This is pious, but it seems to put
some force upon the word. Rather, it signifies ineffable, inexpressible; or, as
we render, that cannot be uttered. Now some things are said to be unutterable,
for their greatness: 2 Cor. 12. 4. Paul wrapped up into the third Heaven, heard
unspeakable words, which it is not lawful (...).
(or possible) for a man to utter. In this sense 1 Pet. 1. 8. the joy of
Believers is (...).
said to be unspeakable; not to be expressed, for the greatness of it. Some
things, in regard of our weakness, when through Infirmities, we cannot express
our sense and meaning: both may here be understood.

[ Which cannot be uttered.] i. e. whose fervor, Deod.
endeavor and efficacy, proceeding from a supernatural motion of the Spirit,
cannot be apprehended or expressed. Thus, we by Quia ingenii captum long
excedunt. Calv.
reason of infirmity, are like children which cry, but cannot tell where our
ailment is: we can complain, and mourn like Doves of the Valleys, but are not
able to express fully and particularly, what is our grievance. Thus it is
sometimes with a child of God, especially under sad afflictions, bound up (as
to expression) and cannot go forth, Psalm. 88. 8. He remembers God and is
troubled, he complains, and his spirit is overwhelmed, Psalm. 77. 3. Yet even
this is prayer, and from the Spirit of God: Not that this is the only way of
the Spirits assistance: sometimes he fills the mouth as well as the heart,
enables the soul to vent it self, in full and suitable Confessions and
Petitions, to approach God with an holy confidence. But here the Apostle (if we
so take the words) seems to speak of the lowest assistances of the Spirit, when
it is worst with a child of God in his own apprehension, when under heavy
pressures, and cannot pour out his soul; yet he can sigh and groan out his
sorrows, can chatter as the Crane or Swallow, mourn as a Dove; and yet even
this (when from the Spirit) is comfortable. This sense seems to agree best with
what follows, in v. 27.

4. Here is also the suitableness and necessity of this Privilege, intimated
in those words [ our infirmities, and we know not, etc. Could we pray as we
ought, if we had Gifts and Graces at command, it were no great matter; but we
have need of such a Helper: having 1. In general, such a multitude of
infirmities within; and therefore needing enablements from without. And 2. In
particular, being ignorant both as to the matter and manner of the duty;
neither knowing what, nor how to ask as we ought.

5. Here is the advantage and benefit of this Privilege, in v. 27. where there
seems to be a Prolepsis, or prevention of an Objection. If these groans be
unutterable (might some say) What advantage then is there in them? Yes, very
much; for, though men do not, yet he that searches the hearts, knows what is
the mind of the Spirit -- So that here is the advantage, the heart-searching
God understands the sense and meaning, the (...), Affectus illos benign
accipere ut agnitos and probatos. Calvin.
desires and breathings of his own Spirit; can put broken and inarticulate
sighs together, and spell out what they need: yea, before they ask, he knows,
so as to pity and supply, according to that Matthew. 6. 32. Your heavenly Father
knows that you have need of these things. The Reason whereof follows, because
he makes Intercession for us according to (the will of) God; that is (as in
the former Verse) to pray as we ought. He regulates our prayers, both as to the
matter and manner of them.

6. I might add a sixth; viz. the connexive Particle [ likewise also] i. e. add
hither --

This may suffice for opening the words: each particular would yield profitable
Doctrines: but I resolve to confine my self to these two.

1. To pray in the Spirit, is the Privilege of Gods children: Gods children
have the help of Gods Spirit, in their addresses to God by prayer.

2. (From the Relation of the words to the Context) The Spirits help in prayer,
is a singular. Privilege and Comfort to Gods children in affliction.

The first of these, I shall not handle in an ordinary Sermon-Method; but speak
to it, by propounding and resolving six or seven Cases, as the Lord enables:
Some of which may explain and confirm the Doctrine; and others be instead of
Application. I hope this Method, will not be less profitable or practical, than
that which I usually follow.

CHAP. II.
Case 1. WHerein consists this Privilege? or how may the Spirit be said, to
help in prayer? This being clearly and distinctly resolved, will make way to
other Questions.

To which I shall answer,

1. Negatively. 2. Positively.
1. Neg. The Spirit does not assist in that Enthusiastical way, as some have
dreamed: I am far from asserting such impulses of the Spirit, as some pretend
to. Particularly,

1. The Spirit inspires not ordinary Christians, as it did the Prophets and
Apostles in the delivery of the Scriptures. Holy men of old were moved ((...).)
carried, acted by the Holy Ghost, 2 Pet. 1. 21. So that their Prophecies,
Sermons, Prayers recorded in Scripture, are purely divine; Words, Matter,
Method, from the Spirit of God; and therefore infallibly true, free from any
fault, indiscretion; or mistakes in matter, form, phrase, etc. It Is not so with
Christians. Notwithstanding the Spirits assistance, their prayers may have many
failings, much corruption, indiscretion, disorder, rashness, etc. mixed with
them.

2. Muchless does the Spirit so help, as if we were merely Passive, and the
Spirit were active; as if the Spirit only made use of our tongues (as the Devil
uses the Organs of Non quod ipse revera suppliciter se ad precandum vel
gemendum demittat, etc. Calv. in loc. per vos, intra vos.
those he possesses, to vent his lies and blasphemies withal.) This is a
grosser conceit and absurdity, than to be charged on the Spirit of God. It may
seem indeed, Mat. 10. 20. as if the Spirit used the Organs of the Apostles: our
Savior tells them, It is not ye that speak, but the Spirit of your Father,
which speaks in you. Yet that ((...), in you) is no more (as Beza notes) than
by, or within you: that is, he gives expression, courage; elocution: Or as v.
19. he gives in that hour what they shall speak: So that not the Spirit, but
they speak; though extraordinarily enabled at such a time, both as to courage,
wisdom and elocution. Thus it was with the Sea Acts 24.
Apostles; but the help vouchsaft to ordinary Christians, lies not much (if at
all) in the guidance of the Tongue, or outward Organs.

3. Nor does the Spirit help more or otherwise in prayer respectively, than in
other duties of Religion. Some, I am persuaded, fancy, as if those that talk of
praying in or by the Spirit, had a conceit of some singular help in that duty
above others. Not so: the same help is respectively vouchsaft in other duties.
You read of singing, walking, serving God in the Spirit. The Spirit no less
helps a Minister in preaching, his people in hearing, singing, meditation, holy
conference, etc. (according to the nature and requisites of those duties) than
in prayer: that is, consider what Graces and Qualificacations are necessary in
those duties, and the Spirit does equally furnish Christians therewith, as with
praying qualifications. So that I am far from tying up the Spirit to any
extraordinary Energy in this, above other duties.

4. Nor does the Spirit so help in this or other duties, as if other
subordinate helps were unnecessary. I do not believe, that our Saviors
command, Matthew. 10. 19. Take no Vid. Calv. in loc.
thought what ye shall speak -- excludes all premeditation, but only that they
should not be anxiously solicitous, what to answer; they should not wrack
themselves with fore-thoughts about it: muchless, does the Spirits ordinary
assistance, exclude other helps, as study, preparation, premeditation: Though
the Apostles were extraordinarily inspired, yet they stood in need of Christ's
teaching, Luke 11. 1. Nor does our Savior, when they desire to be taught to
pray, tell them, that they had the Spirit, and therefore needed no
instructions, but prescribes them a pattern, whereby they might know to whom,
for what, in what manner they should pray: How much more then, is it needful,
for ordinary Christians, to use all helps for their better enablement to this
duty? To study the Word, which may furnish them with expressions, and direct
them in the right management of this, as well as other duties?

5. Nor does the Spirits intercession exclude Christ's; they being of a
different nature, and jointly necessary in prayer. Christ's Intercession is
performed in Heaven; the Spirits, in our hearts: That procures acceptance; This
provides assistance. It is fitly illustrated, by putting up a Petition to an
Earthly King. There is difference betwixt drawing up a Petition, forming and
framing it for matter and expression; and betwixt preferring or presenting it,
speaking to it, and pleading for it: The one may be done in the Country; the
other, must be done at Court: both, are necessary. The like difference is here:
The Spirit helps (as it were) to draw the Petition, Christ presents it,
procures audience and acceptance, pleading his own righteousness to that
purpose. This I thought good to hint Negatively, that I might take off the
odious imputation of some, who charge this Doctrine as Enthusiastical, and
tending to Fanaticisme.

2. Posit. Now to speak Positively, wherein this assistance chiefly consists:
and that,

1. In bestowing Praying Gifts upon Christians. In the Primitive times God gave
extraordinary gifts, whereby they were able on a sudden, in a strange unknown
language, to dictate a Prayer, or Psalm. Of this gift the Apostle treats, 1
Cor. 14. 15. teaching them the right and sober use of it. I^ Though some doubt
whether it be meant of dictating of a Psalm of ones own composition: Vid.
Sydenham's Exercitation, page 195. Beza.
seems, some abused it to oftentation; rather to be admired, than understood.
This the Apostle taxes, and teaches them, that al^ such gifts, are to be used
for edification. They might pray with the Spirit, (viz. in a strange Tongue
which the Spirit dictated) but, they must pray with the understanding also i.
e. so as they might be understood by, and instruct others. This extraordinary
Gift is ceased; yet so, as that there is something of this kind, still bestowed
on the Church. Its well observed by a Learned Commentator, That all miraculous
gifts, are now turned Manton in Jud. v. 20.
into ordinary gifts somewhat like them: as discerning of Spirits, into a
sagacity and cautelous prudence; gifts of Tongues, into a special dexterity,
that is attained by study and industry, etc. So, that extraordinary gift of
praying with the Spirit, into a readiness of utterance and freedom of speech:
This then (as it is a gift) consists in a special dexterity, whereby men are
able to put their meaning into apt words; and so to utter themselves, as to
affect and excite others; which (with the like gifts) is not of such a
miraculous and immediate infusion, as the former; but depends much on the
temper and suitable constitution of the body; and is much bettered by industry,
hearing, reading, meditation, conference, etc. as all other ordinary habits
are. I hope none will deny a concurrence of the Spirit with ordinary means,
whereby they are made effectual for the attainment of edifying gifts: and this
I may (without suspicion of Fanaticisme) call the gift of prayer, which (as the
abovementioned Author observes) may be, and often is, given to carnal men for
the Churches service; and is usually given according to men's constitution and
natural receptivity: There is a natural fervency. Vi. Bolton's Self-inriching
exam. 174.
So that there is a great difference betwixt one and another, in regard of
quickness and enlargement of speech. This is something, but the least part of
that which I aim at; to which you may refer the Spirits directions, laid down
in the Scripture, for the performance of this duty; for thereby is a Christian
thoroughly furnished for this and every other good work.

2. But besides this assistance by way of gifts, there is a higher work of the
Spirit; which I call its gracious assistance, in bestowing, exciting,
exercising praying graces. And this is either,

1. Habitual: a praying disposition wrought in the heart of every Believer at
their Conversion, and growing up together with their Sanctification. This
disposition was wrought, and exerted it self in Paul, as soon as converted,
Acts 9. 11. This new nature is ascending, like things of an aerie or fiery
temper; a little thing carries it upward. The Spirit of Grace, is a Spirit of
supplication, Zech. 12. 10. Christians are made Priests unto God, and furnished
with spiritual Sacrifices, which they are to offer up unto God.

2. Besides this, there is also an actual assistance of the Spirit in prayer.
It is not only a Quickening Principle to all duties, but an Active assisting
Principle in this as in others.

Now wherein this actual Assistance lies; is our main inquiry: and that chiefly
in two things:

1. In Exciting to the Duty. 2. Enabling us in it.
1. The Spirit helps, by exciting us to prayer: puts us in mind, gives many a
secret jogg, beckens a child of God to his Closet, Psalm. 27. 8. When thou
said, seek my face -- Possibly, by some inward impulses and motions upon his
Spirit, Cant. 2. 14. O my Dove, that art in the clefts of the Rock, in the
secret places of the stairs, let me see thy countenance, let me hear thy voice
-- Such hints may a child of God sometimes experience within. The Spirit says
Come, Rev. 22. 19. These are some of those motions, which we must not quench, 1 Thessalonians. 5. 19. And why should this seem a melancholy fancy, to any rational
person? I would but appeal to wicked, loose, debaucht persons (the great
deriders of this Doctrine;) Do you never feel extraordinary, violent, sudden
urgings and pressings to wickedness? When it may be, you are lawfully employed,
and your thoughts upon your business, Do not unclean, wicked blasphemous
motions, rush in uninvited, unthought of? And are they not pursued, and kept on
your hearts, with a kind of violence, even when there is in you a kind of
abhorrence and reluctance? Whence can these come, think you? I deny not, but
your Corruption may be the Mother or Nurse; yet, I doubt not, the Devil is the
Father of these Brats: they are by him begotten (as I may say) upon your
unmortified concupiscence. If the Devil can do so much (a Truth, which Gods
dearest children know by sad experience, when, in their best performances, such
dreadful things are suggested;) Why should it seem strange to any, that the
Spirit of God, does cast in good motions, arguments, encouragements to duty?
Yet, would I not be understood, as if we must never pray, but when we find and
feel such motions: that's an Artifice of the Devil, to draw us from our
constancy in this duty; which I shall meet with in its due place. Mean while,
let me tell you, that these Excitations, are not violent and unreasonable
Impulses; but sweet Motions, agreeable to reason, and pursued (as it were) by
reasoning and argumentation. As,

1. The Spirit excites a child of God to prayer, by showing him some special
want he lies under. This seems to be intimated in the Text, [ We know not what
we should pray for] q. d. We are ignorant of our own necessities. Now the
Spirit opens our eyes, discovers some strong corruptions to be subdued; some
weak grace to be confirmed; some Temptation whereby we are in danger to be
s^oyled, and prompts us to prayer, a^ the special Remedy. Thus Paul being
sensible of that Thorn in his flesh, prays Thrice (i. e. often, earnestly)
that it may be 2 Cor. 12. 7, 8.
taken from him.

2. Sometimes, by discovering the desirableness of some spiritual good thing,
grace, comfort, assurance, etc. It enlightens the souls eyes, to see the beauty
of Christ, excellency of holiness, advantage of an heart enlarged in duty, and
then opens its mouth to cry for it.

3. Sometimes, by representing encouragements to prayer: lets the soul see the
fullness and freeness of the Promises; the boldness and confidence it may have,
by virtue of Christ's Intercession, Gods readiness to hear, etc. And thus (as it
were) bespeaks a Christian: [Why so backward to ask, when God is so ready to
bestow? Were thou to ask at uncertainties, or had only a Peradventure to
speed, well might thou stand off: but when thou have infallible Promises, a
prevailing Mediator, a propitious Father to go to, Why do thou not ask more
and oftener?]

4. Sometimes, it makes use of the afflictions, reproaches, hard
entertainments, which a Saint meets with in the world, as a spur to prayer.
Thus David, Psalm. 109. 3, 4. They have spoken against me with a lying tongue --
But I give my self unto prayer. Peninnah's Taunts, sent Hannah to her prayers,
1 Samuel 1. 10* Sennacherib's railings, are a whet to Hezekiah, 2 Kings 19. 15.
This is not a lesson of Natures teaching; corruption would render railing for
railing. It Is the Spirit of Grace, that turns these into occasions of prayer.
So for Afflictions; the more the Jews are oppressed, the louder is their cry:
the higher these waters rise, the more does David lift up his heart and voice
to God. It Is true, Nature teaches to cry and complain; but the Spirit of Grace
turns carnal complaints, into spiritual breathings; gives vent this way to
sorrow.

5. Sometimes, it makes use of Providence this way; Mercies, unexpected
deliverances put the soul into a praying, praising frame, Psalm. 103. 1, 2. and
116. 12, 13. So Judgments, sudden strokes on our selves or others. Afflictions
become a Whetstone to prayer.

6. (To hint one thing more) It makes others zeal, fervor, constancy, a
provocation: by reading of, or hearing the struggling wrestling prayers of
others, the Spirit stirs up a child of God; hereby it shames him out of his
carelessness, laziness, negligence.

These things I have hinted, to show that the way of the Spirits working, in
stirring up Christians to prayer, is not fantastical, but agreeable to Reason;
by argument and conviction.

2. The Spirits gracious assistance, lies also in bestowing enablements for,
and in, the duty. It deals not as Pharaoh's Taskmasters, to require Brick, and
afford no Straw: It does not put us on, and then leave us; but it takes us by
the hand, and leads us on in the duty. So much the Text intimates: It does lift
with us: and this,

1. As to the Matter of the duty. 2. Manner. 3. Perseverance in it.
1. As to the Matter: it teaches what to ask, by discovering (as was said
before) our necessities, and what is according to the will of God; this is the
sense of v. 27. A very Heathen could observe, how apt we are to mistake in our
desires and prayers.

-- Pauci dignoscere possunt Juvenal. Sat. 10. per tot.

Vera bona --
And therefore instructs us, torefer it to Gods will.

Permittes ipsis expendere Numinibus, quid
Conveniat nobis, rebusque sit utile nostris.
The truth is, a great part of that Satyr, may put a Christian to the blush;
considering the solly and impetuousness of his own desires. But to the purpose;
I say, We are very apt to ask amiss, and to run our selves upon Temptations; to
pray for that, which it would be cruelty for God to give us; a Luke 11. 11, 12.
Serpent instead of a Fish, a Stone for Bread, for an Egg, a Scorpion. Our
Lusts and carnal Interest prompt us to ask, what is neither honorable for God
to give, nor profitable for us to receive. How often would our heady passions,
engage God in our private quarrels and revenges? Our insatiable desires, put us
upon asking food for our lusts? Even the Apostles would be calling for fire
from Heaven, to consume the inhospitable Samaritans, J^^^ 9. 54. --
and urge a Scripture-example, though mis-timed and mis-applyed; for which they
receive a check from our Savior. Now the Spirit supplies our Saviors place;
it gives a check to our heady passions, unlawful desires, unwarrantable
Petitions. How are Agur's desires regulated, and brought to a right Decorum,
Prove. 30. 8, 9. Gods Spirit teaches to ask, not only what is lawful in it self,
but what is convenient for us. Particularly*

1. It teaches to prefer spirituals before temporals; it widens our desires
that way, and shows us the far greater excellency and necessity of heavenly
things; so that a Christian sometimes forgets his bodily concernments, to
remember his soul.

2. Amongst spirituals, it helps to single out those, which are most needful
and convenient for us; and to be most importunate for things of most absolute
necessity: for grace, more than gifts or comforts: That, being necessary, to
the Being of a Christian; those, but to his well-being: That, being the very
foundation; those, the Roof and Battlements. Again, for Truth of grace, more
than measures of grace; as knowing that all measures are not fit for every one.
And again, amongst graces, for those that are most useful, needful for himself
in his capacity: For those which make him a substantial Christian, rather than
those that set him off in the eye of the world. Thus the Spirit helps a child
of God, to single out Petitions, to find out acceptable words; to fetch his
Petitions, nor only out of the Bible, or out of his memory, but ( e sul^o
pectoris) from his own sense and feeling; not only, to ask what he may, but
what he most needs to ask.

3. It brings to remembrance, matter suitable to each part of prayer. For
Instance, in confessions, it sets our own sins before us. How has a gracious
soul, been sometimes led to confess, such sins, or with such aggravations and
circumstances, as he has scarce took notice of before, and yet such as he
discovers to lodge in him? So in Petition, how often is he carried out further
than he thought of, and things cast in, which he sees himself to stand in great
need of? The like I might say of Prayer for others, and of Thanksgiving.

4. In Petitions, the Spirit not only teaches what to ask, but how to plead.
And herein lies much of the Spirits assistance, in furnishing a soul with
powerful and prevailing arguments. You may observe, what sinews, what strength
of Argument, is coucht in the prayers of the Saints in Scripture: as in the
prayers of Moses, David, Daniel, Jehoshaphat. Sometimes, from the Nature and
Attributes of God, his Goodness, Truth, Faithfulness. Sometimes, from the
Promises. Sometimes, from their own misery and helplessness: yea, the Spirit
teaches to make an argument of that, which seems to make against them: Psalm.
25. 11. Pardon my sin, O Lord; for it is great. Here is an argument from the
greatness of sin, which might rather plead against him: yet there is much
s^rength in it. Either thus* Thou art a God of great mercies, and therefore it
is suitable to thy nature, to (...) great sin: Or thus, Lord, I see my sin* I
am sensible of the hainousness of it; and therefore am a fit subject for a
pardon. The woman of Canaan, is a fit and famous Instance* How does she invert
Christ's arguments, and makes that a plea for her, which is urged against her?
Matthew. 15. 22. -- Surely, this holy Art, is taught by the Spirit of God,
Amongst which arguments, suitable Promises are most frequent and prevalent*
Promises and Prayers, differing only as the figures of Hollingworth's Gods
Spirit on the Throne.
6 and 9 (as a good man has wittily* observed) the one pointing downwards,
toward us, the other upward, toward God.

5. I may add here (though it is the least part of this great Privilege) that
the Spirit of God, though it does not guide the Tongue infallibly; yet it does
sometimes carry a child of God, even above himself, in fullness and suitableness
of expression; helps him to clothe his petitions in Scripture Phrase, and fills
his mouth with words, as well as his heart with affections. But this may
suffice, as to the Spirits help, in the matter of prayer.

2. It helps, not only for matter, but for manner also. Something to this, lies
in those words of the Text [ Groanings which (...) be uttered] which, as was
said in the Explication, is the lowest way, though not the least effectual. To
hint a few particulars.

1. It helps, by enlarging the affections. Words are but the outside of prayer:
Sighs and groans* are the language God understands and delights in. The Spirit
teaches importunity* draws sighs from the hearts, ^ears from the eyes. Parts
may teach eloquence, and the neat ordering of our prayers; (and nature it self;
may furnish with some flashly and spurious affections: But the Spirit wings the
affections, enlarges the heart. This causes reachings-forth of the soul after
God, and enables it to wrestle with a holy violence; sheds abroad the love of
God in the heart; widens the desires; spiritualizeth our joy, grief, anger,
zeal, and the rest of the passions. All which are necessary instruments in
prayer.

2. It helps, by exciting and exercising its own grades; (here is its most
proper work) these, lie as sparks under the ashes, till the Spirit of God blow
them up: as it works grace, so it must set it at work. It is said, Act. 5. 5.
Satan filled their hearts to lie, etc. -- So, the Spirit fills the hearts of
Gods people to pray: Here we have need of the Spirits help, to lift; else our
hearts and graces would lie unstirred and unexercised. To instance in one or
two of many; leaving the rest to your own meditation.

1. It fills the soul with a holy confidence; teaches to cry Abba Father, Romans
8. Sometimes, in the duty, Psalm. 20. 6. Now I know, that the Lord saves his
Anointed -- Sometimes, after: Hannah's countenance cleared from former sadness,
discovered the confidence of her soul, that her Petition should be granted. How
often have the Saints risen off their knees, with raised expectations; as if
the things asked, were already given in?

2. Yet it keeps the soul in a humble awful frame; makes it serious and full
of reverence. Lust would deal basely and affrontingly with God; but the Spirit
makes us, take beed to our feet -- and teaches us, not to be rash with our
mouths, or hasty to utter any thing before God, Eccles. 5. 1, 2. Makes us, Take
beed to our ways, that we offend not with our tongue, Psalm. 39. 1. restrains
petulancy and extravagancy of wit and words; teaches to avoid swelling words of
vanity; and so far as we enjoy its assistance, it helps us to utter our
desires, in words of truth and soberness. This (of much more, that might have
been spoken) concerning the Spirits assistance, with reference to the manner of
the duty.

3. As it helps in the matter and manner, so it enables to persevere; not only
sets us in, but carries through, and enables us to pray and not ^aint; not to
let the Lord Luke 18. 1.
go, till he bless us. Now here, there are many things to discourage, and take
us off; against all which, the So^rit does mightny strengthen and fortify a
Christian, according to that prayer of Paul for the Ephesians, That they might
be strengthened with might, by the Ephesians. 3. 16.
Spirit, in the inward man.

I shall briefly touch upon two or three which are most obvious, and
troublesome to Gods children.

1. It helps us to persevere in prayer, notwithstanding Exodus 31. 10, 11. Genesis
32. 26. Jer. 14. 11, 13. Matthew. 15. 22.
discouragements from God. Though God bid Moses, let him alone; and Jacob, let
him go; though he forbids the Prophet Jeremy, to pray for the people, though
our Savior gives harsh and discouraging answers, to the woman of Canaan, yet
they follow on: It teaches to answer Objections, to read love and pity in Gods
heart, when we can see nothing but frowns in his face: to catch faster hold,
when he seems to throw us off: to interpret Gods answers by terrible things,
contrary to the natural import, and to believe and expect contrary to our sense
and experience, to hope against hope, etc.

2. Against discouragements from our selves. Unbelief, short-spiritedness, and
the like corruptions, which would make us break out, as he, 2 Kings 6. 33. This
evil is of the Lord, why should I wait upon him any longer? Oh, but the Spirit
strengthens our faith, lengthens out our patience, bespeaks us, in the language
of David to his own soul, Psalm. 42. ult. Why art thou cast down, O my soul, and
why art thou disquieted within me? --

3. Against discouragements from others, from the world, or from the Devil: How
would men scoff or jeer us, out of our attendance on God. What profit is it,
that you Mal. 3. 14.
keep his Ordinances, in that you walk mournfully before the Lord of Hosts?
What get you by all your whining prayers, your creeping into corners? etc. Here
the Spirit comes in with some encouraging promise or experience: Yet a little
while, and be that shall come will Heb. 10. 37. Isa. 45. 19. Luke 18. 7, 8.
come -- I never said to the seed of Jacob, seek my face in vain -- And shall
not God avenge his own Elect, which cry day and night unto him, though he bear
long with them? I tell you, that he will avenge them speedily. The Devil also
acts his part; sometimes to distract us in, sometimes to divert, or fright us
from, or weary us out of this duty. Your own experience can furnish you with
sad Instances of this kind, if you know what 2 Cor. 2. 11. 1 John 4. 4.
prayer indeed is; for you are not ignorant of his Devices. But here also,
Greater is he that is in us, than he that is in the world. By the help of Gods
Spirit, we persist in the duty, against all these discouragements. And this for
answer to the first Case.

CHAP. III.
HAving thus according to the light I have; and, I hope, by the guidance of the
Spirit, and determination of the Word of Truth, resolved this great Case; the
next will be this:

Case 2. How may we discern and distinguish the motions and assistances of the
Spirit, from some things that carry resemblance to them? It is very necessary,
but not very easy to know, from what principle we act; lest being mistaken,
all our prayers miscarry, and we our selves suffer loss.

Now there are four things, which are something like the motions and actings of
the Spirit; from which I shall endeavor to distinguish it.

1. Satanical Impulses. 2. The Gift of Prayer. 3. The urgings of natural
Couscience. 4. Good fits and moods of a natural wan.
1. Satanical Impulses: It may perhaps seem incredible to some at first
hearing, that the Devil should put men upon duty, who is the grand Enemy both
to God and man; and makes it his whole business, to hinder man from communion
with, and enjoyment of God: Yet so it may be: this Prince of darkness, can in
this respect transform himself into an Angel of Light: He has his (...) his
devices, to get advantage against us; and can turn Duty it self into a
Temptation. Hear Another words to this purpose; I would not have this
interpreted, as if every 2 Cor. 11. 14. and 2. 11.
motion to prayer, were from the Spirit: It is possible Satan may oppress an
anxious soul, with the Tyranny of unreasonable impulsions to duty -- So, that
if Manton in Jude 20. See Baxters Directions for troubled Consciences, on Eccl.
7. 16.
he can do us a mischief, if he can by his importunate urgings, impair our
comfort, expose duty to the scorn of men; if he can weaken our bodies, or
destroy us by this means, you need not wonder at the thing. But how shall we
discern these, from the motions of Gods Spirit? I shall give a threefold
difference.

1. Satan's Impulses, are violent, tyrannical, unreasonable; they are cruel
insultings, not gracious excitings, nothing but terror and horror. Pray, and so
often, and so long, and with such a degree of says, servour, freeness from
distraction, or thou art a damned wretch! A rigid Exactor he is, and a cruel
Task-master; his design is (since he cannot keep the soul out of duty) to run
it out of breath; to over-drive the weak Believers (as Jacob said of the young
Cattle, Genesis 33. 13.) that they may die and perish. He turns himself into an
Ape and imitator of Gods Spirit, that (under that appearance) he may disparage
Gods Spirit, as if he were an unreasonable Tyrant; and renders Gods service, as
worse than Egyptian Bondage. He knows that Christ's yoke is easy, and his
burden light to a gracious soul, Match. 11. 30.
therefore he lays on load, to break the weak Christians back if possible; at
least to bring him to a grievous distaste and disl^^^ of Gods ways; and so to
give the lie to the Gospel and Ministers thereof, who report the ways of God,
to be sweet and pleasant. This is a Temptation, wherewith the Devil pursues
young and forward Professors; with whom he deals as a Rider with a young high
mettled Horse; nor does he only give them head, but spur and force them
forward, till he quite tire them out: He persuades them so much time must be
spent in duty, as cannot consist with their outward Calling; and so makes one
duty, thrust out, or clash with another. But now, the Spirits motions are sweet
and rational, Hos. 2. 14. I will allure her -- They are not forced, as fire
from the Flint; but sweetly drawn, as water from the Cock or Fountain. I deny
not, but the Spirit of God may enforce duty, from arguments of Terror (such
arguments he sometimes uses in the Word; as Mat. 10. 28. Heb. 12. ult. and
therefore may in the hearts of Believers;) But he does allay their bitterness,
and mixeth encouragements, a^ in those and other Scripture is evident: he shows
them the Rod, but his chief inducements are from the Love of God in Christ, the
sweetness, comfort, and advantage flowing from duty, the equitableness of
obeying God as our Sovereign. The Spirits motions are like it self, drawn
mostly from love and ingenuity. How tender is our blessed Savior, of his newly
initiated Disciples, Matthew. 9. 14. He will not have a new piece put upon an old
garment, or new wine into old Bottles: i. e. He will not have his young
Disciples, at first put upon the harder duties of fasting and mourning. He
shall gather the Lambs with his arm, and carry them in his Isa. 40. 11. and 42.
2, 3.
bosom, and gently lead those that are with young. He shall not cry, nor life
up, nor cause his voice to be heard in the streets. A bruised reed shall be not
break -- And such is the Spirit to weak Believers.

2. Satan's Impulses, as they are unreasonable, so they are unseasonable also.
The Devil is most urgent, when he sees us the least apt to duty. For instance:

1. When he sees us under some notable indisposition, outward or inward: when
our graces fl^g, or our bodies faint. It is reported of a good man, who had
kept up a strict course of duty, that being visited with sickness, he had
mighty pressings and urgings upon his Spirit, to hold on the same degree of
servour, length and frequency in duty, which by reason of his bodily
indisposition, much weakened him; and yet feeling himself unable, he fell under
sad Terrors: till by a godly Minister he was told, that there was something of
Satan in it, and that God required Mercy not Sacrifice; that God expected not
more, than according to his present strength and ability, etc.

2. Or when God calls us to other duties. If he cannot keep us from duty, he
makes use of one as a wedge to drive out another; unseasonably and violently
urging to one, when God calls to another; that neither may be acceptably
performed. Some pious souls have seen cause to complain of unseasonable good
motions: when hearing, then urged to prayer, etc. So, when in their worldly
Callings and lawful employments they have sometimes had such violent pressings
to break off and fall a praying, which at other times they would be glad of,
but cannot have them: (I shall by and by give some caution here:) now his
design is only to entangle conscience, and make them believe they have
slighted the motions of Gods Spirit.

3. Or when he has got some notable advantage against them, has fettered and
entangled them in some snare: He deals in this case, as Dalilah with Sampson;
when she had bound him, and cut his Locks, then Up, the Philistines are upon
thee, Sampson. When he Judge. 16.
has so enseebled a child of God, that he can scarce go, then he will press
him to run. All which, is but to make Religion irksome, to beget in the soul a
disrelish of duty, and so to break off its course: or else, to make us
laughing-stocks to others, as Sampson became an object of the Philistines
laughter and desision.

But now the Spirits motions are seasonable and orderly. Like the works of God,
each beautiful in it is time: It moves to the proper Eccl. 3. 11.
duty of the time; it sets in with other occasions and concurrent advantages.
We may say of the Spirits motions, as of that Army, Joel 2. 7, 8 They march
every one on his way, they do not break rank, neither one thrust another, they
walk every one in his own path. The Devil urges to one duty, as a diversion
from another; but the Spirit of God moves to one, as preparatory and helpful to
another. When the heart is warmed by hearing, or put in Tune by a Providence,
then it puts in a motion to the soul. When the sails are filled with a sweet
gale of heavenly breathings and inspirations, then it bids the soul set out;
and so makes its voyage prosperous; all its motions, are words in season: not
but that there may be, Prove. 15. 23.
and will be opposition; corruption within, and the world and the Devil
without, will withstand such motions. The flesh will lust Gal. 5. 17.
against the Spirit: (yea, sometimes with much violence) Yet the soul may find
strength and vigor, and a greater power carrying it out against such contrary
motions.

3. Satan's impulses (how violent soever) are ineffectual; he urges to, but
affords no help in the duty. A right Pharaob, exacts Brick, but gives no Straw:
yea, therefore does he exact it, because he knows we have none; that he may
find an occasion, to beat, to trouble, accuse, and torment Gods children. So
that the result of his impulses are, either that the soul sinks under
discouragement, gives out, and falls under despair, of ever performing its
Task* or else goes* on in a self-tormenting disconsolate manner; performs duty
as a Task or drudgery, is spurred on with horror, and comes off with Ter. 20. 3.
greater horror; is a very Magor-missa^ib, Terror round about: or exposes
Religion to censure, contempt, and derision, by unseasonable, rash, indiscreet
putting it self upon that, which it is not able to perform.

Whereas the Spirits motions, are attended with enablements in some measure, it
sends the soul into Gods presence, with some degree of enlargement, confidence,
humility* and it commonly comes off, either with a gracious return; or else
with some higher degrees of confidence and enlargement; at least, more humble
and sensible of its own deficiencies.

This is what I thought fit, to give in answer to this Case: Yet, lest any
should pervert, or make a sinister use, of what has been delivered; give me
leave, before I pass from it, to subjoin something,

1. By way of Caution. 2. In answer to a Question, which some may take occasion
to propound.
1. By way of Caution, I shall give in two things.

1. Let no profane Spirit hence take occasion, to speak blasphemously against
the workings of the Spirit in Gods people. Let none* hence conclude, that all
pretended motions* gifts, assistance of the Spirit, are mere Diabolical
impulses and delusions. Remember what is said, and I hope evineed, in answer to
the first Case. Nay, even hence, that they are Diabolical impulses, and
Satanical delusions, we may conclude, that the Spirit of God is as powerful and
industrious, in stirring up pious souls to good duties; as Satan is busy, to
stir up evil, or unseasonablygood motions.

2. Nor let us think all motions unseasonable, and consequently Diabolical,
which find us under indisposition, or are cast in, when we are in our worldly
employments* The Spirit blows when and where it lists. Heavenly motions (and
ejaculations thereupon) may be a whet in our secular business: it may be highly
seasonable, to have our hearts filled with Heaven, when our hands are full of
the world. Spiritual improvements of earthly objects, is one of the great
advantages of a Christian, when the world is a step, to help us up Heavenward.
So, that you must take all together; judge not only, by the seeming
unseasonableness, but by the violence and unreasonableness also of those
motions; else you may run your selves into a sad mistake.

Quest. 2. Some may hence, take occasion to ask, What course is to be taken,
when the Devil thus unseasonably, and unreasonably urges to duty? To answer in
a few words.

Answ. Not so to hearken to his unseasonable motions, as to be taken off other
duties; or, to throw our lawful employments out of our hands; but yet make this
advantage of them. Take the first convenient opportunity, and do that in its
season, which the Devil urges to be done out of its season. Nay further, you
may despite the Devil this way, by a resolute performance of, and perseverance
in duty, when he is most busy, to take you off: You shall find, that he is not
more industrious, to put you upon a duty unseasonably, than he will be to
hinder and divert you, when God calls you to the performance of it. In a word
therefore, remember such unseasonable motions, and time them aright. This will
be, to turn the Temptation, into an advantage: and did we thus defeat that
Adversary, he would not so often trouble us in this kind.

2. The Second thing, which carries some resemblance to the gracious Assistance
of the Spirit, is the gift of prayer, which I have hinted at, in speaking to
the first Case. Briefly, it consists in ability and aptness of expression, with
some show of affection. It is a common gift: that is, Reprobates and carnal
persons may have it; and that in a greater measure sometimes, than many a
gracious soul; whereupon a weak Believer may mis-judge himself, and be
discouraged, when he hears, with how much fluency and aptness of expression,
and with what seeming vehemence of affection, others can perform the duty of
prayer; and how low, flat, dull, and detective himself is. It will not
therefore be lost labor, to enquire how they they differ; that we may see, how
far the grace is to be preferred before the gift; though the gift more sets off
a man in the eyes of others.

First then, the gift is but the outside, the carcass of prayer; and when
alone, without the grace of prayer, it satisfies it self in words, and seeming
affections, in that which may set it off before men. If there be but aptness
and fullness of expression, a voluble Tongue, with a semblance of zeal,
humility, fervency, etc. this is all that the mere g^ft looks a^. Hence, as it
is but the outside of duty, so it looks much at an outward reward, the applause
of men: whence it follows, that it is intended or remitted, according to the
encouragements it has this way: where Two Consequences.
there is nothing of praise or commendation to be expected, duty is omitted, or
slubbered over, (which, I deny not, is too incident even to the best of
Christians:) But when there is probability of gaining applause, or some
external advantage; here the gift puts out it self to the utmost. Besides,

Secondly, The gift being but the outside or carcass of duty, it is not much
impaired by a course of sin; especially, if the sin be close and secret; the
gift of prayer, and practice of sin, can well enough consist together: yea,
such have been known, who could pray like Angels, and yet practiced like
Devils: who could make free, and full confession of sin, and yet as freely
commit it.

But now, the Spirit of prayer, is the inside of the duty: It lies within, and
mainly consists, in the vigorous motions of the soul, in sanctified affections,
holy reachings of soul after God, in vehement struglings, and contendings of
the inward man, Psalm. 63. 8. My soul follows hard after thee: and mainly in
the exercise of praying graces, such as Faith, Love, godly Sorrow, etc. Whence
it appears, that it may be exercised, when there is not a word uttered. The
gift of prayer, lies much on the Tongues end, and may be hindered by man: but
let the mouth be stopped, the tongue cut out, the Spirit of prayer cannot be
restrained, Neh. 2. 4. Good Nehemiah could send up his soul to Heaven, in a
secret ejaculation, when it is not probable he uttered any thing: and 1 Samuel 1.
10. Hanna^'s lips only moved: her voice was not heard, yet the voice of her
soul, reached Gods ear. Exodus 14. 15. Wherefore cryest thou unto me, says the
Lord to Moses, when we read not, that he spoke at all. The tongue of the
Spirit, cannot be cut out. And hence follows two Consequences, contrary to the
former.

1. The Spirit of prayer, is as much, or more exercised in secret, as in
company. The soul has most Elbow-room, when in the secret places of the
Stairs; when there is (...). 2. 14.
none but God present, then can the soul, with a holy ((...)) boldness and
freedom, pour out it self into Gods bosom: nor is it less careful, or
circumspect, when alone (unless under some Temptation) than if all the world
were present.

2. Conscience of sin, does exceedingly weaken it, and causes a damp and
deadness to seize upon it. Sin will restrain prayer before God. The Spirit of
prayer will eat out sin; or else sin will weaken and shrink Job. 15. 4.
it. Sin begets an Asthma, or short-breathedness in the soul.

2. The mere gift of prayer, does swell and puff up: The more able, the more
self-conceited: in which respect, a man is apt to despise those, that want the
like gift, or fall short of his measure; has high and self-applauding thoughts
of himself, as the Pharisee, Luke 18. 11. or those, Isa. 65. 5. This is
evident, when those extraordinary gifts were bestowed in the Primitive times,
the Apostle saw it necessary, to caution those that were endued with them,
against ostentation, 1 Cor. 14. Yet even in the exercise of these gifts, there
may be much of seeming humility and self-abasement, in outward expression,
while the heart secretly admires it self. Now, hence it follows, that when a
man thus gifted, has been outwardly enlarged, has had liberty of words and
expression, he comes off with much satisfaction; if he have but so acted his
part on the Stage, as to come off with public applause, he is well pleased:
for he has his reward (as Matthew. 6. 5.) though his heart (it may be) was full
of distractions, pride, vanity: whereas on the other hand, if he has been
bound up as to expression, and so miss of his expected commendation, then he is
crestfallen, then he is offended at himself, not so much, that he has offended
God, as that he has not pleased men.

But the Spirit of prayer is of a contrary nature: The more of that, the more
humble; it lays a soul low, and fills it with the sense of its own wants,
weaknesses and miscarriages: Its work is to help the soul to abase it self in
the sight of God. And hence it follows, that outward enlargements do not
satisfy. Though a man has spoken with the Tongue of Men and Angels, so as to
have men's applause; yet he sees so much vanity* deficiency, and corruption, as
keeps him humble; yea, when others have thought him most enlarged, he sees most
cause to bewail his inward straitness. Alas (thinks he) did you but know, how
little teeling I had of what I uttered; what a distracted heart, what vain
thoughts, what impertinencies and extravagancies, were mixed with my prayers,
you would see little cause to commend me: Nor (on the other side) is outward
straitness so grievous, if he has sound inward enlargements: for thus it is
sometimes, a soul may in some cases take up that of the Poet,

-- inopem me copia seeit: It may be lost in the fullness of its own sense; its
affections may be too big for its expressions; (which may be in part, the
import of that in the Text, Groanings which cannot be uttered) like a
narrow-mouthed Bottle, which, though filled to the top, yet nothing will come
our. Now, when a soul finds it self thus, he can rejoice, though others may
mis-judge, he rejoices that he had a full Tide of Faith, Love, holy Desires,
and heavenly Affections, though in respect of expression, it was a very low
Ebb. These things are especially experienced, when we perform the duty with
others.

3. The mere gift, looks more at the performance, than the success of the duty*
seldom does it follow prayer, with faith or waiting; for it has its end, viz.
credit and applause from men. If a merely gifted person, has but prayed
himself higher into the esteem of men, his end is attained; he looks no
further. Hence it is, that such have little regard to those things, which may
render their prayers, successful and acceptable with God: he does not consider,
where the stress lies; nor enquire whether he has so prayed, that God may hear
and answer; but rather, whether he has so prayed, as to deserve men's
commendation. Two things there are, mainly conducing to the Efficacy of prayer.

1. Interest in Christ, and Faith exercised on his intercession: Without this,
prayer is abomination to the Lord. Now, mere gifts do not eye Christ; sueh
think to be heard, for their gifts sake (as the Heathens, for their
much-speaking) they think the Rhetoric, Matthew. 6. 7.
Arithmetic, Logic, or Music of their prayers, shall find acceptance; or
indeed they do not much look at God, whether he hear or not. I deny not, but
such may make as frequent mention of Christ, and may have his name as much in
their mouths, as any; but there wants Faith in Christ.

2. Purity of heart, is the other great qualification: Jam. 4. 8, 9. Cleanse
your hands ye sinners, purify your hearts -- then, Draw nigh to God -- And 1 Timothy 2. 8. we must lift up pure hands, without wrath or doubting: For, as David
says, If we regard iniquity in our heart, the Lord will not hear our prayers.
Psa. 66. 18. See John 9. 31.
But now the merely gifted person, has little regard, to get, or keep his
heart pure, any further, than as the vanity or impurity of his heart, may
hinder the outward exercise of his gifts; he little confiders, what a holy God
he draws nigh to, who cannot endure iniquity.

Whereas, the Spirit of prayer, makes a man mainly solicitous about audience.
Such as have it in exercise, would not willingly go away without their answer;
and therefore labor, so to posture themselves, and to be under such
qualifications, as that they may speed in their addresses to God: Especially,
they are solicitous about the two great Qualifications before mentioned.

1. That they both have, and improve Interest in Christ: The Spirit of prayer
does as naturally lead the soul to Christ, as the Needle touched with the
Lodestone, turns North or South: It teaches us the wisdom of the men of Tire
and Sydon, to make Christ Act. 12. 20.
our Blastus, our Intercessor. And,

2. It makes them careful, to approach the Majesty of Heaven, with some degree
of heart-purity: and this not only, while the duty is performed; but, before
and after also: knowing, that an unholy heart, is unfit to serve a holy God
withal. In a word, the Spirit of Supplication, is also a Spirit of
Sanctificatiou; and therefore helps the soul in some measure, to live as it
prays; whereas the gift of prayer, may lodge in an impure heart.

It were easy, to add other differences: as this. The gift of prayer faints,
and gives out, when it meets with opposition: but, the Spirit of prayer,
gathers strength, and increases its importunity. Again, the gift of prayer, is
useful to others; but the Spirit of prayer, brings comfort and advantage to
ones own soul, etc. But I proceed to the third thing.

3. The Third thing, which carries some resemblance to the spirit of prayer;
and therefore is to be distinguished from it, is the urgings and pressings of
natural Conscience. It is undeniable, that Prayer and Invocation of a Deity, is
a piece of Natural Worship: I mean, attested by the light of Nature. It is one
of the more immediate conclusions, flowing from the consideration of Gods
Nature, of our Relation to him, and the necessity of supplies from him, that
God is to be called upon. For, if God be the Supreme Good, the Fountain of all
Good: and if we can have nothing, but by his leave; nor any thing that is good
for us, without his love; In a word if our whole dependence be upon him, as to
our Being, Sustentation, Comfort and Happiness (all which, right Reason will
teach us;) Will it not undenyably follow, that he is to be prayed to? Will not
Nature teach us so much in point of Duty, since he is our Maker and Sovereign;
and in point of Ingenuity, since he is our Benefactor? Now, even Natural
Conscience, having to the light of Reason, the light of Scripture, and express
injunction of God, added; it cannot but sometimes urge and press to the duty;
and upon our palpable neglect, accuse and trouble: How these urgings, may be
distinguished from the Spirits motions; is the Question to be resolved. Only,
let it be premised (which I would also should be understood concerning the gift
of prayer) that where the spirit of prayer is, there may be also urgings of
Conscience; yea, the Spirit makes use of Conscience, to put us upon duty. So
that the sense of the Question, is, Whether it be mierly the urging of a
natural conscience; or, whether the Spirit of God, by its gracious incitements,
sets conscience on work, to move us to this duty. And here,

1. Natural Conscience does not ordinarily and constantly press us; but upon
some extraordinary occasion; whether, upon some powerful conviction wrought
upon it by the Word; or the impression of some awakening Providence: as the
Mariners in Jonah, Jon. 1. 5.
being startled by the Storm, fall to their prayers; Thus Pharaoh entreats
Moses to pray Exodus 9. 28.
for him, when terrified by Gods Judgments: and Simon the Sorcerer, affrighted
by Acts 8. 24. Joh. 3. 6.
Peter's words, desires his prayers. Natural conscience, rather drags us to
God, as a severe Judge; than draws, or allures us to come to him, as a loving
Father. Whereas the Spirit of God, though not always alike, yet ordinarily,
invites the soul into Gods presence, and bespeaks it, with words of love and
sweetness. And though I deny not, but it may set in with such Convictions and
Providence; yet, not then only: it makes use of Precepts, Promises, Mercies,
and other occasions (as was showed before) to move us to this duty.

2. Nor does Natural Conscience bring in assistance. It puts the soul on, but
puts no strength into it, whence, the duty is not spiritually performed; but
slubbered and shuffled over: The water cannot rise higher, than the fountain.
The best that is born of John 3. 6.
the flesh, is flesh. A man may be vehemently urged, but when he sets out, his
legs fail him: like some sick person, that finds his Appetite craving; yet,
when he comes to it, can eat nothing; his Stomach turns against every thing,
that is set before him. There is a great dislike and disrelish of the duty
within. Terror puts him on, corruption pulls him back: little he can do; and
indeed he cares to do but little: he has no heart to the work, and therefore
gets it out of hand as soon as he can: only, something he must do; else he
shall not feel quietness in his Job 20. 20.
belly. But, the Spirit of God (as we showed before) puts on to the duty, and
sets in with us. It not only, bids us, stand on our Ezekiel. 2. 2.
feet; but, enters into us, and sets us on our feet, and then takes us by the
hand, and teaches us to go. So that the soul is carried out, and carried on,
with some degree of cheerfulness; though not without many pull-backs, and much
opposition: or, if it does not make us cheerful; yet, it makes us, in some
measure careful. If the soul cannot express its wants, it can vent it self in
groanings that cannot be uttered; if it be outwardly straightened, yet, there is a
kind of infiniteness in its desires; the heart is for duty, and communion with
God, though the hand can do little.

3. Natural Conscience, though it presses earnestly; yet, it is easily
satisfied; a little thing stops its mouth: like the unfaithful Steward, Luke
16. 6.
it will take up with fifty, for an hundred; it takes up with half-payments,
slighty performances. So that something be done (though never so poorly, and
distractedly) it is well satisfied. But where the Spirit of God is the
Principle, it causes the soul, to hold on its motion, till something be done,
in, and by duty. It makes us, have respect to the manner, as well as the matter
of our performances. Or, if duty be at any time shuffled over, it lets not the
soul be at rest; there is disquietment within; and the miscarriages of one
duty, become matter of confession and humiliation in its after-performances.

4. (What was said of the gift of prayer, may be also said here) Natural
Conscience little regards the Issue of duty. Its end is not so much to be
heard, as to be eased: the Convictions of duty, are its burden, which, when
they are a little satisfied, it is at quiet, as having obtained its end.
Whereas, the Spirit (as before) makes us solicitous to be heard, as it teaches
the soul, to ask things necessary; so, it enables the soul to wait for an
answer. And hence follows, on the one hand, mourning, humiliation,
perseverance, and greater importunity in prayer, if the mercy be not given in:
And on the other side, if the Petition be granted; then, is the soul carried
out in thanksgivings, and holy rejoicing; and (with the cleansed Samaritan)
Luke 17. 15.
it returns, to give glory to God. Neither of which, are found in those, who
are acted merely by the urgings of Natural Conscience.

4. There is yet a fourth thing, to be distinguished from the Spirits motions
and assistances: viz. Good moods and fits in a meet natural man. Violent pangs
of goodness, sometimes seize upon a wicked man; and in these fits, he will
pray, and it may be with much seeming servour and devotion, as I may allude to
what is said of Jeremiah, Jer. 22. 23. How gracious shall thou be, when pangs
come upon thee? Oh, how devout, how prayerful, how zealous, may he seem to be
during the fit, and yet all vanish? That thus it may be, is fairly intimated,
Job 27. 10. Will (the hypocrite) delight himself in the Almighty? Will he
always call upon God? q. d. He may indeed sometimes pretend love to God; he
may for a fit call upon him, but this will not continue: it is a fading color.
And though nothing be directly said of the Stony ground as to prayer; yet, you
may, Mat^h. 13. 20, 21.
by a parity of Reason gather, that those thereby represented, may pray in
their good fits: for, you read, that they hear the Word; they receive it, yea,
speedily ( anon, as we express it) yea more, with joy. Oh it is sweet, they are
ravished with it. Now in this mood, Vid. Bolton's Selfenriching Examine. p. 173.
they may doubtless, have an appetite to prayer; yea, be very much delighted in
it, while the pang lasts. Temporary faith may produce temporary prayer. Now, to
give a clear distinction betwixt these, and the Spirits motions, is a work of
much difficulty? considering,

1. That even those, that have the Spirit of prayer, do often experience sad
abatements, and frequent withdrawments (as will appear in the following Cases)
so that they are often at a loss, and fear lest theirs be no better, than some
temporary pangs of natural affection.

2 And then, how much of enlargement, and fervency, what seeming meltings, and
breathings, a natural man may have at such times, how much he may be
transported above himself, etc. This considered, it must needs be, a case of
much difficulty: here is a very small thread to cut by; a very narrow Bridge to
go over: and very dangerous it is, Matthew. 13. 29.
lest in pulling up the Tares, the Wheat also be pulled up (that I may only
allude to that Parable) lest I should either slay the souls, Ezekiel. 13. 19.
that should not die, or save the souls alive, that should not live: may that
blessed Spirit (whose operations, I would clear from all mistakes and
misconception) lead me into this, and every other Truth! Depending on his
Assistance, I proceed to the Resolution of this intricate Case.

First then, These fits differ from the motions of Gods Spirit, in their root
and cause: they, only proceed, from some external impressions, or some light
touches upon a man's Spirit, which the Holy Ghost calls, a tasting Heb. 6. 4, 5.
of the heavenly gift; a being made partakers of the Holy Ghost: a tasting of
the good word of God, and the powers of the world to Deodate, Calvin, and
others. ^
come; i. e. a slight superficial participation of these things, with some
delight (fitly resembled by Tasting) So that they are nothing but Nature
elevated, not Grace exercised; and differ as much from the Spirits motions, as
a fiery Meteor (which is nothing, but an oily Fume or Vapor, drawn out of the
Earth or Water, by the Sun's heat into the Air, and there set on fire) from a
fixed Star. So that it is good to see, whether there be in us the root of the
matter; whether the Spirit of Grace has begun a work of grace upon our hearts.
You may remember, I distinguished the Spirits gracious assistance, into
Habitual, (which is a praying disposition wrought in the heart of every
Believer at his conversion, and growing up together with his Sanctification)
and Actual (which is, the Excitation of those Habits wrought in the soul.) Now,
did you ever find, that Habitual praying-frame? That is, those graces, which
are to be exercised in prayer; such as Faith, godly Sorrow, Repentance, a holy
Reverence of God, sincere Love to Jesus Christ? In a word, Is there a
foundation laid in thy soul, of Repentance toward God, and Faith toward the
Lord Jesus Christ? Then, it may be hoped, that those lively stirrings are the
effects of the new Nature, the motions of Gods Spirit, which has taken up his
dwelling in thy soul: But if thou art a stranger to the sanctifying converting
work of Gods Spirit: If those seeds of grace, were never cast into thy soul; it
is evident, that those good moods, are nothing but Nature elevated by common
grace, or transported, by some more than ordinary impression from without, it
may be some unexpected mercy thrown in; as it was with the Jews, upon the
drowning of Pharaoh and his Host, Then believed they his words, they sang his
praise. Psalm. 106* 12, 13.
But it was but a pang of goodness; They soon forgot his works, they waited not
for his counsel: Or perhaps, some moving affectionate discourse, may have
charmed thy affections into an Ecstafie, or captivated thy Reason, to the
over-powring light of the Word; and given thee a convincing discovery, of the
transcendent sweetness of Communion with God and Jesus Christ in duty; which
impression, while it continues fresh upon thy soul, may wind it up to a high
pitch of Natural or Artificial fervency (as a Reverend Divine of ours, has
well distinguished.) Bolton ubi supra. 1 Samuel 21. 7.
Or else, some extraordinary tie upon thy soul, may for the time put life into
thy Devotion: a very Doeg, may be Qui se clauserat in domo Domini ut solveret
votum suum. Arab.
sometimes detained before the Lord; it is supposed, in conscience of some Vow,
or some express Devotion. The worst of men may have their devout moods: but
alas! it is but from some outward impulse. So that, Try what thy state is; if
thou art a stranger to the Spirits converting, regenerating, sanctifying work,
it is not to be thought, he does actually stir thee up to duty. The Spirit only
moves to duty, those whom he fits for duty. He is first a principle of life
within, then of action without.

2. But that which may more sensibly distinguish those fits of goodness, from
the Spirits motions, are, the different fruits and consequences. There may be
as much seeming fervor and zeal in those good fits, while they continue, but
they are not attended with such fruits as the other. To instance in some.

1. When these are over, the man is but what he was before: while the pang is
upon him, Who more heavenly and devout? Who speaks greater things of God and
Christ, the sweetness of duty, the advantage of holy walking, the pleasures of
communion with God? But alas! it is but as the Morning Hos. 6. 4.
Cloud, and as the early Dew it goes away.

Quantum mutatus a illo? Here he is quite another man. Was he loose, debauched,
profane before? You Will find him Stuppeae flamma. Cato.
so still. Was he drunken, riotous, voluptuous before? So is he again, as soon
as the fit is over. Alas, it was but a mere blaze: It is quenched as Towe, as
the fire of Thorns: and then he neither prays, nor cares for prayer: or, if he
keep up a form, it is without conscience, or affection. Now, where the Spirit
has furnished a soul with praying abilities, it sanctifies that soul: there is
some care of a conversation answerable; and though there may be abatements, yet
the soul seels, and complains thereof: whereas, Cant. 5. 5.
the other fits down contented in the neglect of duty. Where the Spirit puts in
his hand, by the hole of the door, he leaves sweetsmelling Myrrh upon the
handles of the Lock, which inflames the soul (though for some time it may lie
under indisposition) with enlarged desires after his return. But there are no
such complaints under deadness, or breathings after quicknings, in the other.

2. These fits, are often encouragements to more looseness afterward. The soul
being puffed up with a high conceit of his own performances; as having thereby
mightily engaged God (an ordinary attendant on his flashy devotion) thinks he
may take some liberty; he has super-crogated by his prayers, and now may sin
the more freely: much like the Harlots speech; I have peaceofferings Prove. 7.
14, 18.
with me: This day have I paid my vows -- Come let us take our fill of love --
q. d. I have performed an extraordinary piece of devotion, and now I am at
liberty to begin a new score. This is far from those, who are endued with the
Spirit of Prayer. Have they found extraordinary assistance? Has the Spirit
lift up their hearts, and wound them to a higher pitch than ordinary? This
draws out thanksgivings to God. Thus they think; Oh, what need have I to watch
against sin? How careful should I be, left I damp out these flames, by earthly
mindedness? lest I take cold after such heats? Yea, the remembrance of what
they have been enabled to confess, and beg, becomes a tie upon them, to
restrain them from committing the sins confessed, and a spur to put them upon
pursuit of the graces they have begged: these are the genuine fruits of the
Spirits enlargements. I deny not, but the Devil, and our own corruption, may
make use of these, as a Temptation to slacken our diligence afterward: but it
is not ordinarily so. Those fits and flashes, ordinarily bring forth such
fruits.

3. (Which I touched upon in the last) these good fits puff up. Man is naturally
a self-admirer, and if he has any thing above ordinary, he prides himself in
it. The most civilized, and moralized, amongst the Heathens (though they
sometimes spoke meanly of themselves) could never get victory over that
self-applauding humor. It sticks very close to nature; nothing but grace can
subdue it: nor that perfectly, till we be made perfect. For each to esteem
others, better than themselves, is the hardest thing in the world ( Si quid in
tota vita difficile, hoc in primis; Nam, Regis intra se quisque animum habet,
etc. as Galvin upon Phil. 2. 3.) But to the purpose; Such as have only Nature
elevated come off more proud, whatever show of humility they may make in the
duty: Whereas the genuine effects of the Spirits assistance (as we showed
before) are, to lay the soul low in its own eyes; and indeed there is not a
better evidence, that our enlargements are spiritual, then when we are enlarged
in the sense of sin and misery, and thence become enlarged in our apprehensions
of Gods goodness and mercy.

4. These good fits are easily put off. How small a Temptation, will hire such
from duty? How easily are they discouraged? How soon is their patience spent?
God must either come speedily, or they will be ready to say with that
blasphemer, This evil is of 2 Kings 6. 33.
the Lord, what should I wait for the Lord any longer? they are ready to
expostulate with God, as if he did them an injury: Wherefore have we fasted,
and thou see not? Isa. 58. 3.
Wherefore have we afflicted our soul, and thou take no knowledge? A cross
Providence, puts a dash upon their devotion; they will sometimes verify that,
which the Devil falsely suggested against Job, Does Job fear God for naught?
Have thou not made a hedge about Job 1. 9, 10, 11.
him, and about his house? -- But, put forth thy hand now, and touch all that
he has, and be will curse thee to thy face. Their devotion was not so hot, as
their passion will be high, when God crosses their wills. I say, thus it is
sometimes with such. But now, where the Spirit enables, the soul gathers
strength by opposition; follows a flying God; disappointments set an edge upon
his prayers, and call his patience into exercise: He will close in with God,
though he go halting away. His resoultion is, Though he kill me, Job 13. 15.
I will trust in him, I will pray to him: and though there may be a damp upon
him, his heart down, his Spirits saint; yet, he rises again, and renews,
increases his importunity.

Thus I have laid down something, whereby the good fits of Nature, may be
discerned, from the grace of the Spirit of Prayer.

And this may suffice to be spoken, in answer to the second Case; wherein we
have endeavored to distinguish, betwixt the Spirit of prayer; and those things
that seem to have some affinity with it.

CHAP. IV.
I Shall now proceed to the Resolution of a third. Case relating to the Spirits
Assistance in prayer, in answer to which (as to all the following) I shall
speak with more brevity than to the former; and with as much plainness, as the
Lord shall enable me.

Case 3. Whether will the want of the Spirits Assistance, excuse our Neglect or
Nonperformance of the Duty? A Question worthy our serious consideration. For,
though it be looked upon, as the opinion of a few brainsick persons, that we
must never pray, but when moved by the Spirit: yet methinks, they may seem (
insanire cum ratione) to have, at least, some show of Reason for this
Assertion. For this is undeniable (and the Text in hand clears it) that,
without the Spirits moving assisting influence, we cannot pray as we ought: our
prayers are not acceptable, but when they are the breathings of Gods own
Spirit. For, as it is here, v. 27. God knows the ((...)) the mind, meaning,
savourings, breathings of his Spirit: i. e. so knows, as to accept: and on the
other hand, he knows the ((...)) the mind, the motions and Ephesians. 2. 3.
desires of the flesh, so as that they are abominable to him: Now, shall we
say, that a man is bound to do that, which is displeasing and odious to God?
What delight can God take, in a prayer proceeding from a carnal heart? The
Sacrifice of the wicked, is Prove. 15. 8.
abomination to the Lord; but the prayer of the upright is his delight. So,
that it may seem to have some color of Reason, that where the Spirit is
wanting, the obligation to the duty cease: though upon due consideration it
will appear but a color.

Therefore, to make my way clear; I shall go by steps in resolving this Case.

Prop. 1. A man may be said, to want the Spirits assistance: either,

1. When he is utterly void of the Spirit of grace, while he is in a state of
Nature and unregeneracy: Such, are said to be in, and Romans 8. 5, 8, 9. Jude 19.
after the flesh; to be carnally minded, not to have the Spirit of Christ, in
whom the Spirit of God has laid no foundation of a saving work.

2. Or, when he wants the actual quickening motions and assistances of the
Spirit: though he has a saving work begun, and his life be whole in him; yet
he is in a spiritual Swoon, has no warmth, no motions or stirrings
heavenward, little differs from a mere carnal person. That it may be thus for
a time, the sad experience of some of Gods precious servants will testify.

Prop. 2. The Assistance of the Spirit, is Gods gracious vouchsaftment, and
mere indulgence. God is not a debtor to any: If he withhold it, none can charge
him of injury or injustice: and, if he vouchsafe it, none can say, they have
obliged God thereunto. The Spirit is a free Agent, and blows where it lists.
It is Gods Spirit, and John 3. 8.
not ours; and he may say to us, as in Matthew. 20. 15: May I not do what I will,
with mine own? The Influences of the Spirit, are like the Influences of Heaven:
Who can blame God justly, if it do not rain or shine, when he would have it?

Prop. 3. Prayer is a duty indispensably arising, from our Relation to God, as
we are his creatures, endued with reasonable souls, having our whole dependence
upon him: So that our Obligation to the duty is lasting, and ceases not, while
we are in the body, compassed about with infirmities, necessities, temptations;
in respect whereof, we continually stand in need of Gods help: We are taught
every day to say, Give us this day our Mat. 6. 11.
daily bread -- Whether therefore we have, or have not the Spirits assistance,
the duty is duty still; the necessity of it, and obligation to it, is
permanent, not variable according to the vouchsafements or witholdings of the
Spirit; and therefore it is sinful, to neglect the duty, upon pretense, that we
have not the Spirits enablements.

This I hope, might satisfy any unprejudiced Judgment; but, because I would
make things as Practical as I can, I shall add something further, to evince the
Absurdity of their Opinion, that make our Obligation to the duty void, where
the Spirit helps not. But of this briefly.

Arg. 1. This assertion as strongly fights against all other duties, as this of
Prayer: for, without the Spirits Assistance, we cannot perform any duty
pleasing to God. And indeed thus far, have some already improved it: Hence,
they will neither read, nor hear, etc. but when the Spirit moves them. So, that
this conceit (however it may carry some show of Reason in it) seems to be a
piece of the Devils Sophistry, devised to subvert the practice of Religion: an
Invention much like the Pharisees Corban; whereby Mat. 15. 5.
they disobliged Children from their duty to Parents. Nay, what a door would it
open to all wickedness, licentiousness, atheistical and vile practices; and
then all must be charged on God, because he gave them not his Spirit to
restrain, and sanctify them? Can any thing be more blasphemous, or more tend
to the subversion of Religion?

Arg. 2. That which is a punishment of sin, cannot be an excuse for the neglect
of duty: now the withdrawing or withholding the spirit's assistance is often a
just punishment for sin, for our grieving, slighting, quenching the Spirit,
etc. When we improve not it is offered help, reject it is motions, or arrogate to
our selves what we should ascribe to it is gracious enablements, or the like;
how justly may God withhold it? This seems to be David's case, when he had
fallen so grievously; it is probable, he found a want of the quickening
comforting influences of Gods Spirit: and therefore prays -- Take not thy Holy
Spirit from me: q. d. I feel decays, Psalm. 51. 11, 12.
and withdrawings, Oh, do not wholly deprive me of its Indwelling. Again,
Restore unto me the joy of thy salvation, and uphold me with thy free Spirit:
He felt weaknesses and faintings, and therefore prays to be upheld -- But now,
did David forbear to pray? Nay, does he not pray more importunately? Were that
opinion right, then a man might by some horrid provocation grieve away the
Spirit of God, and then he should be disobliged from duty, than which, what can
be more absurd and impious?

Arg. 3. But to put all out of question, The Precepts concerning this duty
enjoin constancy in it: and the patterns of the Saints agree to those Precepts,
1 Thessalonians. 5. 17. Pray without ceasing, Ephesians. 6. 18. Praying always with all
prayer and supplication in the Spirit, and watching thereunto with all
perseverance. Let none cavillingly object, That we are bid here to pray
always, but yet in the Spirit: for (besides that it is doubtful whether the
Spirit of God be meant here) it follows not hence, that we must never pray but
when moved by the Spirit. We ought indeed always to beg the assistance of Gods
Spirit, but if God in justice withhold his Spirit, must we therefore neglect
our duty? But more of this, by and by. Daily prayer is enjoined us in that
pattern, which our blessed Savior has prescribed us, and so much was typified
by the Morning and Evening Sacrifice. As for the Practice of the Saints, Psalm.
55. 17. Evening and Morning, and at Noon will I pray, and cry aloud -- Dan. 6.
10. Daniel kneeled upon his knees three times a day, and prayed and gave thanks
before his God, as he did aforetime. Note, that it was his constant practice.
It were casie to add more here, but this may suffice to convince those that are
not wilfully blinded. I would only add that this Opinion would destroy all
stated public prayer, since we cannot tie up the Spirit to our times, yet
there are frequent injunctions for it in the Word, Let that one Text suffice, 1 Timothy 2. 1, 2.

Object. Will any yet urge the Text in hand and tell me, that without the
Spirits help we know not what to ask, and therefore our prayers will be but
vain bablings, or taking Gods name in vain?

I answer. 1. True indeed, we cannot pray as we ought without the help of Gods
Spirit, but I urge, Is the Obligation destroyed, when assistance is denied? No,
this shows us the sad condition of every carnal and unregenerate person, and
all such as have not the Spirit, what a sad Dilemma they are in; If they pray
not, they sin, by neglecting a manifest duty; if they pray, they sin, by an ill
management of it: This should make us hasten out of that doleful state, and I
would add here, that there is ( aliquid tertium) a third way: I say not, that
we are absolutely bound to pray without the Spirit, nor yet to neglect the duty
because we have not the Spirit, but we are speedily to go to Christ, and accept
him on Gospel Terms that the Spirit may be poured out upon us from on high,
that we may have the spirit of grace and supplication given us.

2. I may further answer, that though God sometimes vouchsafe his Spirit to
stir up his people to prayer, yet this is not to be presumed* or constantly
expected or depended on. Its help is not always Antecedent to the duty, but
comes in upon our endeavors. Our work is to do what we can, in hope that God
will by his Spirit enable us to do what of our selves we cannot. He that sits
down resolving to do nothing till the Spirit put him on, does Tempt the Lord,
and unwarrantably expect what God has no where absolutely promised. I would
therefore say to the Christian that complains of deadness and indisposition as
David to Solomon, Arise 1 Chronicles. 22. 16.
and be doing, and the Lord will be with thee. It may be observed, how low and
disconsolate David is in the beginning of some Psalms, and yet how full of
Faith and Confidence in the close: May we not rationally think, that the Spirit
of God raised him up, and came in upon him, while we was meditating or praying?
I shall but lay this one thing before those, that oppose this Truth. Do you
forbear to plow, or sow, till God bid you: till he come and tell you, He will
bless your labors, and send rain and seasonable weather? etc. Or, do you
forbear Food or Physic, till God give you assurance, that he will bless the
creatures, and make them nourishing and healthful? No, but you plow and sow,
eat and drink, etc. expecting Gods blessing, He that ploweth, ploweth in hope
-- 1 Cor. 9. 10.
And should we not do the like in spirituals? not stay till we have a
particular command, or impulse of the Spirit, but take all opportunities to
read, hear, pray, etc. in expectation both of Gods assistance in, and his
blessing upon our endeavors.

CHAP. V.
A Fourth Case concerning the help of the Spirit in prayer may be this.

Case 4. What is on our part to be done, that we may enjoy this great
Privilege, that our prayers may not be the mere expressions of our lips, or
workings of our own hearts, but the breathings of Gods Spirit? A Question,
which deserves our serious thoughts, though I shall dispatch it in a few words;
leaving many things to your own meditation and enlargement.

Answ. 1. We can do nothing to merit or engage the Spirit of God, to attend us
in our prayers. You have already heard, that the Spirit is a free Agent; not
working by constraint or necessity; nor can all our endeavors oblige him to
us. Far be it from us, to imagine, that we have any of that preparatory, or
congruous Merit the Papists dream of, whereby we may deserve the graces of the
Spirit. All grace is the free and undeserved gift of God: we may put that
Question to those that have the greatest measures of grace; Who makes thee to
differ 1 Cor. 4. 7.
from another? and what have thou, that thou did not receive? (i. e. freely,
undeservedly) Now if thou did receive it, why do thou glory, as if thou
had not received it? i. e. Why do thou boast, as if it were purchased by
thy own endeavors or deservings?

2. Yet something may be done in order to our receiving, or being capable of
the gifts and assistances of the Spirit: that is, in the doing whereof, God may
graciously bestow his Spirit; not, because we deserve it; but, because he has
graciously promised to bestow it, and has made that the condition upon which
he will give his Spirit.

1. The first and great condition is, That we accept Jesus Christ, according to
the tender of the Gospel: The Spirit of Adoption, whereby we cry Abba Father,
is the Privilege Gal. 4. 6.
of Children: Because ye are sons, God has sent forth the Spirit of his Son
into your hearts, crying Abba Father. Observe here, He is called the Spirit of
his Son; not only, because the father has not given his Spirit John 3. 34. and
14. 16.
by measure (that is, above measure) unto him; but, because he procures the
sending of the Spirit, with all the gifts and graces of it. It will not here be
necessary to descend into that intricate Labyrinth, Whether the Spirit, as to
some of its graces and operations, be not received into the soul, before its
actual close with Christ (the Affirmative whereof, as to the order of Nature
seems to me unquestionable) But as to the Case in hand, it is sufficient to
know, that the Spirit of Supplication, is only their Privilege, who are Sons;
and Sons none can be, but by regeneration, and implantation into Christ: To as
many as received him, to them John 1. 12.
gave he power (right or privilege) to become ((...), to be, or to be made)
the sons of God, even to them that believe on his name. Would you then be
endued with a Spirit of prayer, that you may come to God with reverence and
confidence, that you may be enabled to pray, with groanings not to be uttered,
that the Spirit may make Intercession in and for you, according to the will of
God? Here then is the way, come to Christ, cast off all self-righteousness,
accept of his merits and satisfaction: Take his yoke upon you: put it out of
question, that Christ is yours, by making your selves his, giving up your
selves to him wholly, absolutely, unreservedly. None can have the Spirit making
Intercession in their hearts, but those that accept of Christ, and have him
their Intercessor in Heaven.

2. The next thing to be done, is to purge out those corruptions which hinder
and damp the (...) Operations: all sin nourished and (...) in the soul, has a
tendency that way* ^t fla^^rs the affections, and grieves the Spirit* The fles^
lusts against the Spirit, ^al. 5. ^^.
and ^inders that we cannot do those things we wo^ld* Consci^^^^ of ^^^*
mightily weakens considence in prayer (as we have already showed); vain and
worldly thoughts fill the (...), and keep out the better motions of the Spirit.
So do turbulent and unruly passions: 2 Kings 3. 15. The Prophet Elisha being in
a passion at the sight of wicked Jehoram must have a Minstril to calm h^s
Spirit, and purify his affections, before the Spirit of Prophecy can seize
upon him: As the wrath of man works not the righteousness of God, Jam. 1. 20.
so it hinders the workings of his Spirit: you may observe, that when the
Apostle bids us, not grieve the Holy Spirit of God, he immediately adds, Let
all bitterness, and wrath, and Ephesians. 4. 30, 31.
anger, and clamor, and evil speaking be put away from you, with all malice.
It seems these do in a special manner grieve the Spirit. It is a calm and quiet
Spirit, and delights to be, and work in a calm and quiet soul: a forgiving
reconcilable frame is requisite in all our addresses to God, since we are
taught to pray, Forgive us our debts, as Mat. 6. 12.
we forgive our debtors. So do covetous desites, carkings about worldly things;
so filthy unclean lustings, etc. If therefore we would be filled with the holy
Spirit, we must labor to empty the heart of these and other corruptions. If
the Devil must have the Room of our hearts, empty, swept, and Mat. 1. 4^
garnished (after his fashion) that is void of grace, filled with impurity,
that is his garnish (as Calvin upon the Text, Satanae sola deformitas pulchra
est, and nihil been olet praeter foetorem and sordes: Deformity is Satan's
beauty; and noisome smell, his delightful savor) I say, if the Devil must have
it so; surely the Spirit of God would have our hearts pure from filthiness,
cleansed from the defilements which are in the world through lust.

3. In the deep sense of our own ignorance, and insufficiency, beg the Spirit
to help and enable, to teach you how, and what to pray. It is amongst the good
things which God has promised to bestow upon those that ask it: Compare Matthew.
7. 11. There it is good things in general, with Luke 11. 13. There it is the
Spirit, as being eminently a good thing, or comprehensively and virtually, the
sum of those good things which God bestows upon his children. This is promised
for asking only. Labor to be sensible of your own necessity. To which end, do
but consider, what a pure, holy, heart-searching God you are to draw nigh to,
what qualifications are required in those that worship him; and particularly,
what graces are requisite to the spiritual and acceptable performance of this
duty. For instance, Heart-purity, If I regard iniquity in my heart, Psalm. 66.
18.
the Lord will not bear my prayer. Sincerity, your prayer must not go out of
lips of deceit. Faith and Confidence, you must ask in faith, Psalm. 17. 1. Jam.
1. 5.
nothing wavering. Zeal and Fervency, Importunity and Perseverance: so much you
are taught by the Parable of the importunate Widow, and the example of the
Woman of Canaan. Humility and Reverence, You Luke 18. 11
must not be rash with your mouth* nor your heart hasty to utter any thing
before God -- Eccl. 5. 2.
Besides, your prayers must be according to the will of God: add, that your
Confessions must be attended with a humbling sight of sin, and hearty sorrow
for it; your Petitions with a deep sense of your wants, and enlarged desire and
expectation of supply; to all which, must be added, Charity and Compassion
toward others. These and many other graces and qualifications are requisite to
the acceptable performance of this great duty. Now sit down, and consider your
own strength: Are you able to go upon your own legs? Can you either bestow
these graces upon your selves, or put them in exercise? Were prayer nothing but
wording it with God, the Spirits help were lose needful; but if this be indeed
to pray, Oh what need have you and I, to beg down the Spirit of God into our
hearts, to enable us hereunto?

4. Meditation also, is another means, whereby we may be fitted for the Spirits
operation; it is a door by which it enters into the soul; it prepares the
Sacrifice, upon which, fire from Heaven often comes down. My heart was hot
within me; while I Psalm. 39. 3, 4, 5.
was musing, the fire burned: and this fire breaks out into prayers and
ejaculations. These duties are of such affinity, that the Genesis 24. 63.
one is (probably) put for both. Isaac went out to meditate, (or pray) in the
field at Even-tide -- and they are joined together, Psalm. 5. 1. Give ear to my
words, O Lord, consider my Meditation. So Psalm. 19. 14. There is a natural
connection betwixt them: Now the Spirit of God works in a natural methodical
way; the soul is oiled by Meditation, then the Spirit sets it in motion. If you
ask, What Meditations will prepare us for the Spirits in-comes; There is a
large field to expatiate in, the works and Word of God, the Precepts, Promises,
examples of the Saints, the encouraging experiences of Gods people, the
prevalency and perpetuity of Christ's Intercession: and especially, your own
wants, infirmities, temptations, these will be spurs to put you on; and in so
doing, the Spirit will not be wanting to fill your sails.

5. (Which respects those who have a foundation laid, and a work of grace begun
on their hearts) Stir-up the gifts and graces, which are bestowed upon you.
Laziness deprives us of many a sweet experience in this kind. We must
therefore, not let the graces of Gods Spirit lie as sparks hid in the ashes of
corruption, but (as Paul exhorts 2 Timothy 1. 6.
Timothy) we must ((...)) blow them up into a flame. The Prophet complains,
I^a. 64. 7. There is none that calls upon thy Name; there is none that
[stirreth up himself] to take hold on thee. Hebr. that fortifieth, (...)
hardneth, puts himself in a military posture, ranks himself; so the word
properly signifies, 1 Chronicles. 12. 33, 38. Remember what I have already told you,
that the Spirit comes in upon our endeavors: Seldom do they that in good
earnest set upon duty, want divine assistance. Be but in good earnest, and I
dare assure you, to find some measure of enablement.

This is what I shall give in by way of Counsel in this case: but possibly,
some may have this secret Objection in their hearts against all that I have
said:

Object. You prescribe such things, in order to the attainment of the Spirit,
which presuppose the Spirits being already in the soul: Who can accept Christ,
or purge his heart, or pray aright for the Spirit, etc. but those that already
have it?

Answ. I answer briefly: It is granted indeed, that without the Spirit
enabling, these things cannot be done: Yet, neither are such directions, nor
our endeavors vain; If so, then all the Counsels and Exhortations of the Word,
all Precepts, Means, Motives, would be vain upon the same account. I am far
from asserting the Power of Nature in supernatural actions, or that Popish
merit of congruity (consisting, as they tell us, in those preparatory
dispositions acquired by our own endeavors, by which grace is merited) But I
may, I think safely, assert these two things;

1. That man is not a mere stone, he is endued with a reasonable soul; that is,
Understanding to conceive of things propounded, and Will, to choose the good,
and refuse the evil, though both sadly corrupted by the fall, the one with
blindness, error and prejudice; the other, with obstinacy, contrariety and
enmity to the Will of God; Both strongly carried out to sensitive and
flesh-pleasing objects, calling Isa. 5. 20.
evil good, and good evil; putting bitter for sweet, and sweet for bitter. Now
these two Faculties, namely, the Intellective and Elective Faculty remaining as
to their substance, though corrupted, as to their qualities; it follows, that
man is still capable of Reproofs, Counsels, Exhortations, Directions, and other
rational means, tending to his everlasting good. I have not been speaking these
things to Stones and Stocks, that cannot hear what I say; nor yet to Brutes
that cannot understand; but to reasonable creatures, endued with Understanding,
to conceive of things spoken: and Wills, to choose and refuse, though so
fettered with corruption, that of themselves they cannot come up to the
performance, of what I have proposed: I would add this further; Though nature
cannot come up to these things, by its own strength; yet, there are many
things, within the power of a natural men, which are in a tendency toward
them. May not such read the Word, and consider the reasonableness and advantage
of having a saving Interest in Christ? May they not repress many vile and
sinful thoughts, and do something to the mortifying of sin; at least, as to the
outward acts of it? May they not attend the Word in public, remember and
meditate upon it? etc. So that to lay down such Directions, Exhortations,
Counsels, is not to beat the air; or, as it is in the Proverb, (surdo canere)
to sing to a deaf man. But,

2. (Which I hope may satisfy) These Counsels and Exhortations are, as I may
call them, the [ vehicula Spiritus] in and by them the Spirit works, and
enables us (otherwise unable) to do that, to which we are exhorted: The Word of
the Lord comes to Ezekiel. 2. 1, 2.
Ezechiel, and bids him stand upon his feet; and therewithal the Spirit enters
into him, and sets him upon his feet. Paul and Silas Act. 16. 14.
preached to the Women that resorted to them, and the Lord opened Lydia's heart
to attend unto the things that were spoken. Thus it is said, The Apostles went
forth and Mark 16. 20.
preached every where, the Lord working with them -- which was the fulfilling
of that great promise made to them, and all faithful Ministers of the Gospel,
Lo, I am with you Mat. 28. 20.
always, even to the end of the world.

The sum therefore of what I have said, amounts to this; that, though you
cannot without the Spirit, come up to what I have directed; yet you are to put
out your utmost endeavors, and in so doing, God may please to accompany these
Directions with his holy Spirit, enabling you to the performance of what you
cannot do in your own strength.

If any shall look on this, as a Digression; yet I hope, it will not be thought
either altogether impertinent or unnecessary. And, let such know, that my main
design in it, was to wash off the filth, that some have cast upon our Doctrine,
and to clear it from an absurdity, that is unjustly charged upon it; as if, by
denying man's freedom of will, and power in supernatural things, we made all the
Exhortations and Counsels of the Word void and useless: For, To what purpose
(say they) or with what consistency with your own Doctrine, can you persuade
and exhort men to accept of Christ, to believe, repent, etc. when almost with
the same breath you tell them, they have no power to believe, repent? etc. This
is to tie a man's hands and feet, and then bid him, run or work. Now, my
Brethren, that which I have laid down, fully answers this Cavil. For, say I,
man can by the power of nature, go some steps toward these things, (the
external acts of Religion, hearing, reading, etc. are in order to the
internal). And then further, I have a Promise, that the Spirit shall go along
with my Exhortations, and shall work that in their hearts, which I can but
speak to their ears. And now judge, I beseech you, which of us come nearer the
Truth. They persuade men to Faith and Obedience, upon this ground, that they
have Freedom of Will to do these things: We persuade, and exhort men, in hope
and expectation, that the Lord will cooperate with our Exhortations, and work
that in their hearts, which we can but speak to their ears, or press upon them
by Moral Swasive Arguments. Whether is the corrupted and depraved will of man,
or the All-powerful, heart-changing grace of God, the surer foundation to build
upon? Much more, I could add: but I return whence I have digressed.

By this that has been said, it appears, that what I have laid down in answer
to this Case, is not in vain, even to those, that yet are void of the Spirit.
Something they may and ought to do, in order to these things: And (if I may
without offense, use the words of our Savior) The things I have delivered, are
not mine, but his that sent me: Joh. 7. 1^:
I have delivered them as from him, being, as I hope, agreeable to his Word.
And Isa. 48. 17.
now, may the Lord, who teaches to profit, and who has his Spirit, to send,
when, and to whom he pleases, follow these Counsels with his Spirit, that they
may be effectual to their intended end. Mean while (because this Case is in the
nature of an Exhortation to get the Spirit of Prayer) it will not be amiss, to
press my self, and you that hear me, to the use of these helps, for the
attainment of this great Privilege, by two or three moving Considerations:
wherein I shall not say what I could, but what is necessary.

Mot. 1. Let the first Motive be drawn from the misery of those, that want the
Spirit of prayer: which (had I the Tongue of Men and Angels) I could not fully
express. It was the Speech of a good man, that One is Mr. Dod.
never to purpose miserable, till he be in affliction and cannot pray. But it
is not only in affliction, that such are miserable: Let a man be in a condition
never so prosperous, the want of this is unspeakably sad. It were easy to
descend into particulars, but I forbear. In short, Would you not think it a sad
case, to be dumb, or tongue-ty'd, or to have your tongue cut out, that you
could not make known your wants or ailments? Will you not much pity and
compassionate such? But what is that, to the want of a Spirit of prayer? That Is
but outward, this Spiritual: that may be many ways supplied, as by signs, or
writing (as Zechariah, Luke 1. 62, 63.) But this can be no ways supplied, or
compensated. The very want of that, draws out men's bowels; you will sooner and
more bountifully relieve such, than a clamorous Beggar. Their want of Speech,
is the most moving Rhetoric. But, God is deaf to those that are spiritually
dumb; his ear is stopped to them, whose mouths are not opened. He bids, Open thy
mouth wide, and I will fill it. Psalm. 81. 10.
Again, is it not unspeakably sad, to be under an unsupportable burden, ready
to be crush't in pieces, and not able to cry out for help, though it is at
hand, if we could but call for it? This is thy Case; Guilt lies upon thy soul,
a Load that will sink thee into the lowest Hell: Mercy is at hand to help, to
ease thee, if thou could but cry for it. But without a Spirit of prayer,
either thou can not cry, or not so, as that God will hear thee. Besides, we
will suppose thee in a Wilderness of Troubles, ready to sink in the Psalm. 69. 2.
deep mire, where there is no standing. None to help, or pity thee; how sad is
thy case, if thou can not pour out thy soul to the Lord? Psalm. 55. 22. and
142. 2.
What hearts case would thou have, if thou could cast thy burden upon the
Lord* if thou could pour out thy complaint to him, and show before him all
thy trouble? Oh, but how intolerably heavy is thy burden like to be, when the
whole weight lies upon thy own back? This is the special advantage, of having
the Spirit of prayer; which the Apostle hints at in the Text: It lifts with us,
it gives vent (and consequently ease) to a soul ready to be overwhelmed. Once
more, were thou ready to be devoured, and torn in pieces by Wild Beasts,
Wolves, or Lions, and might be rescued, upon thy calling for help; How sad
were it, to want a tongue, in such an Exigency? Poor soul, thou art ready to be
seized upon by the roaring Lion, 1 Pet. 5. 8. Rev. 9. 11. John 8. 44.
the Abaddon and Apollyon, the murderer of souls, the destroyer of mankind; he
is at hand to make a prey of thee: nay, if thou be in an unregenerate state,
thou art already in his Paws; he has fast hold of thee; he leads thee Captive
at his will: yet (without 2 Timothy 2. 26.
the Spirit of prayer) thou art like to be a prey to his Teeth. If thou can
not pray, with Daniel, this Lion will have the mastery Dan. 6. 24.
of thee, and break all thy bones in pieces, and make thee the miserable
subject of his eternal Torments. But this is little to what might be spoken:
Thy wants are infinite and very pressing, yet thou have no way to fetch in
supply. Thy burdens great (and the greater, because not felt) and no way to
fetch in support: Thy dangers and temptations many (and the more, because not
feared or apprehended) yet no where to hide thy self: Divine Justice and
Vengeance ready to seize upon thee, to take thee by the Throat, and not a
Tongue to cry for mercy. Death ready to arrest thee, and the Devil to hurry
thee into an eternal Prison, where is nothing but weeping, and wailing, and
gnashing of Teeth, yet can not speak a prevailing word in Gods ear, though
thy life, thy soul, thy eternal happiness lie upon it. Oh, who would not
tremble, and hasten out of such a condition? And while I have said all this, I
would be understood thus, that the Spirit of prayer, is a remedy against all
these miseries. So that there is a second Motive included in this: viz. The
unspeakable advantage of having that Spirit of Adoption; that may teach us, to
cry Abba Father.

Mot. 2. Can you have a higher, or more honorable Privilege? Besides the
benefit, which, by contraries, you may gather from the former particular, What
a dignity is it, to be a Friend and Favorite of Heaven? to have Gods ear open
to your prayers, to have 1 Pet. 3. 12. Deuteronomy. 4. 7.
God nigh unto you, in all things, that you call upon him for? Let flattering
Parasites, and ambitious Haman's glory in distinguishing Ester 5. 11.
favors of Princes and Potentates, and boast themselves, of their honors and
advancements: What Is all this, to your dignity? You shall have his ear, who
has the hearts Prove. 21. 1.
of Kings in his hand* and can turn them as the rivers of water; who can give a
check to the proudest Monarchs, and reprove Kings for his peoples sake;
(effectually) saying to them, Touch not mine Anointed, and do my Prophets
Psalm. 105. 14, 15.
no harm. Yea, he can make the proudest Pharaoh beg your prayers. It will make
you Exodus 9. 28. Genesis 32. 28.
Isreal's: as Princes, shall you have power with God and with men, and shall
prevail: It will make you formidable to your enemies: She gave but a just
Testimony to this Privilege, that said, Queen of Scots.
She more feared the prayers of one Knox, than an Army of twenty thousand. This
made that Regiment of Christian Soldiers, famous to succeeding Ages, by the
name of the In Marcus Aurelius his Army. Mat. 21. 22.
Thundering Legion. Indeed it invests a Christian, with a kind of Omnipotency.
All things whatsoever ye ask in prayer, believing, ye shall receive. But the
highest Dignity it confers upon us, is, that we become Gods familiars; and in a
sense enables us to speak to God face to face, (freely, familiarly,
confidently) as a man with his friend. I shall urge no more; but leave these
with you, bese^ching the Lord, to set them home upon your hearts.

CHAP. VI.
Case 5. THE next Case shall be this: What are we to do, that we may have the
Spirits Assistance in prayer, continued to us? the Affinity of this and the
next, with the former, will make my labor the less in giving Answer. As to the
usefulness of this now under our hand; It is, I believe, the general experience
of praying Christians, that they have their Ups and Downs; now enlarged, anon
bound up: Sometimes, they can wrestle and continue in prayer, with ^ holy
fervency, without flagging or ^ainting. By and by a damp is upon their souls;
they are in their own sense, faithless and heartless. Bernard's Complaint is
theirs, That the Rara hora, brevis mora.
Spirits lively assistances, are short and seldom. Their cold fits, are much
longer, than their hot ones. This dashes their comforts, and often makes them
question their sincerity: they are ready to say, with Rebeckah, If it be so,
why am I thus? If indeed I have the Spirit Genesis 25. 22.
of Supplication (as I sometimes hope) Why am I thus dead, heartless,
indisposed? When they have assistance and enlargements then are they ready to
say, as Peter, It is good to be here: with Jacob, Genesis 28. 16, 17. Surely Mat.
17. 4.
the Lord is in this place -- This is no other, but the House of God, and this
is the Gate of Heaven. Then, how full of faith and comfort! It Is full Tide with
them; neither expressions, nor affections, nor graces wanting: and then, they
are apt to think, surely I shall never be so dull and senseless again: Such
impressions surely can never wear off; such a flame never go out. But alas! a
few days (may be, a few hours) experience tells them, these are but
short-lived. A low Ebb follows this high Tide; then are they tongue-ty'd, heart
bound; go into secret, there they can neither feel outgoings to God, nor
in-comes from him. Join with others, alas! they he like Stones; no rubbing or
chasing, will beget any warmth in 1 Samuel 28. 15.
them: In their own sense, much like Saul; God answers them, neither in one
way, nor another. Then how dejected and disconsolate! Oh, what would they give,
for the least degree of those enlargements, and meltings they have formerly
experienced; That they could but give vent to their sorrows, in hearty sighs
and groans! That they could but pour out their souls, with that childlike
confidence, as sometimes they have done! Now therefore, its worth our serious
enquiry, what may be done on our part, to have the Spirits company and
assistance for, under such Ebbings and withdrawmen's, a child of God cannot but
conclude, it is his own fault, some grievous miscarriage, has deprived him of
that sweet Guest.

1. Therefore, I shall premise this, that as the bestowing, so the continuance
of the Spirits motions, and lively operations, is the mere indulgence of
Heaven. God can be no more bound to continue it, than he was to bestow it.
Think not then, to oblige God, by any thing you can do.

2. And further, I premise, That, the Lord vouchsafes, or withholds his
Spirit, as he sees best for his people. It were not best for a child of God, to
have always a full Tide, to live under the constant smiles of Heaven, and to
have continual raptures and enlargements. Where would be room for the exercise
of Faith, as it is the substance of things hoped Heb. 11. 1.
for and evidence of things not seen? What must become of Hope and Patience? O,
how should we manifest our waiting and longing for Christ's return, if he should
always abide with us? How must we know, where, and what we are, how weak, how
insufficient, to think a good thought? How must we be kept from pride, and
swellings, and puffings above measure, if we be not sometimes left to our own
weaknesses? So that, it is not for us to be peremptory, or absolutely to desire
always such degrees of grace, such measures of assistance and enlargment: we
may humbly desire, and endeavor in the use of means; but we must not be
peremptory for them, nor impatient under the withholding of them. In this case,
we must learn of our blessed Savior: O my Father, Matthew. 26. 39.
if it he possible, let this Cup pass from me: nevertheless, not as I will, but
as thou will.

3* I premise this also, that ordinarily some miscarriage in us, provokes God
to withdraw his Spirit. Readiness mis-government and 1 Samuel 16. 14.
disobedience, caused the Spirit of the Lord ( i. e. that Spirit of Government
which God had endued him withal) to depart from him: David (as we noted before)
upon his fall, found some withdrawings, which makes Psalm 51. 11, 12.
him pray, Take not thy holy Spirit from me, establish me with thy free Spirit:
Possibly, we have not carried as we ought toward this blessed Guest; and
therefore he withdraws himself.

These things premised, I now address my self to give a direct Answer to the
Case propounded.

1. Then, if thou would have the Spirits Assistance continued, beware of
those things, which may grieve away the Spirit, or wither and shrink up its
gifts and gr^des, damp not out this holy fire, Quench not the Spirit. 1 Thessalonians.
5. 19.
It is observable, when the Apostle bids us not grieve the Spirit, he adds (as
an argument) whereby you are sealed unto the day of Ephesians. 4. 30.
Redemption; which seems to have a double force. Either thus: Be not so
disingenuous, as to grieve him that comforts you, by assuring you of eternal
happiness. Or thus, Take heed you grieve him not: if so, you will have the
worst of it; he will grieve you by withdrawing his assuring Testimony from you,
and leaving you in the dark, as to your eternal state. This, I humbly conceive,
to be genuine, and according to the mind of the mind of the Holy Ghost in that
Scripture. So, that you see our grievings of the Spirit causes his
withdrawments as to assurance: and so it does likewise as to assistance. If you
fall asleep in the lap of sow Dalilah-lust, you will find your Lock will be
out, God will depart from you; and then you will be weak as others. It would be
infinite to speak, what might be said under this Head, I shall only instance in
two or three Particulars.

1. Beware of Pride in enlargements: If God lift you up, in vouchsafing
extraordinary enlargements, take heed* you do not lift up your selves; that is
the next way to be laid low: He that begins to think himself something, shall
quickly find, that he is* nothing in himself: This is to abuse your mercy: Gods
and is, that you might give him glory* not take it to your selves: and it would
be to your own prejudice, if it should be continued: for, thus abused, it
becomes fuel for Pride and Lust: The Spirit will not so befriend our
corruptions. Some have smarted for this* God has taken down these swellings,
by long withdrawments. Let it be your care to bear a low Sail, when you have
the most prosperous and successful gales of spiritual enablements. A prick in
the flesh, shall cure Spiritual Tumors.

2. Take need also of self-sufficiency; I mean, a conceit, that you need no
more. Whatever gifts or enablements God vouchsafes, think not, you can live
upon this stock, without continual supplies: What you have received, can
neither be improved, nor long continue, without more additions: God never did,
nor will, put any Christian into a state of Independency: Never did any Saint
in this world arrive at that perfection, as to be able to live within, and of
themselves: your strength is in Christ, and continuance of supplies and
communications from him; Ephesians. 6. 10. 2 Timothy 2. ^.
Be strong in the Lord -- -- Be strong in the grace, that is in Christ Jesus:
The stream will soon dry up, if it be not fed by the fountain. Wherefore say my
people, We are Jer. 2. 31.
Lords, we will come no more unto thee? God takes it ill, when we begin to
think, we need not be beholden to him; and indeed its the highest degree of
pride, we can possibly be guilty of: it is intolerable insolency, and God will
lay us as low, as we lift up our selves high: the Spirit will make us know our
insufficiency, when we begin to conceit in our selves an al-sufficiency.

3. Cherish no corruption in our hearts. Sin entertained (as we have once and
again told you) will drive out the Spirit. When this Serpent grows warm in the
bosom, it will hiss, and disquiet the Holy Spirit; the steamings of
concupiscence, are exceedingly ofsensive to it. It is impossible to keep up a
Spirit of prayer, and a course of sin. He that will not be led by the Spirit,
shall not long be helped by the Spirit.

4. And especially take heed of cherishing laziness and sluggishness. Be not
found upon a Bed of case, when the Spirit calls you out to work: at least, be
not loath to rise, when he knocks. You see the sad consequences of this lazy
temper, in the Churches example; Christ knocks, and calls, Open to me my
Sister, my Love, my Dove -- She Cant. 5. 2. -- 9.
hears, but a lazy fit is upon her; She has put off her Coat -- She has wash^
her feet -- She is loath to put her self to the trouble, of rising to open.
Well, what is the Issue? When it is too late, she rises to open; but her Beloved
had withdrawn himself, and was gone. Now she would fain enjoy him, if she
might; but now she seeks, and cannot find him; she calls; but he gives no
answer. Now, she that might have had him for rising and opening, must be at
much pains, and run through many hazards, get many a blow and wound, be stripped
of her vail, and yet not find him; here is the fruit of laziness. If the Proverb
hold true any where (as indeed it is most true) then here especially, ( ex otio
negotium) of Idleness comes business. (...)
We create our selves infinite labor, and sorrow too, by laziness and
indisposition, when the Spirit calls us to duty. He that lies slugging in the
Harbor, when the Wind serves him, deserves to lie wind-bound, or to tugg at
the Oar for it. They that will not stir up themselves when the Spirit stirs,
shall want its motions, when they most need them: We sometimes lose a friend,
by not accepting an offered courtesy. Observe the word in the Text ((...))
helps together; or ^akes hold, and lifts with us: there is much art and ease,
when many lift at any thing, to lift all together: and it is as much a
Christians wisdom to lift, when he feels the Spirit lift; if he do not, he
shall find the burden too heavy for himself alone. Laziness (in this sense)
clothes us with rags -- Yet a little sleep, a little slumber, Prove. 3. 21.
Prove. 6. 10, 11.
a little folding of the hands to sleep, so shall thy (spiritual) Poverty come
-- The Talentimproving Christian, is the only thriving Mat. 13. 12.
Christian. But from him that has not (i. e. improves not, which is all one,
as if he had it not) shall be taken, even that which he has. To him that will
slug, when he is called to watch and pray, the Spirit will say, as our Savior
to his Apostles (though Ironically) Sleep on now and take thy rest. Let these
things 26. 45.
therefore be avoided, if you would have the Spirits assistance continued.

2. Let the Spirits motions find ready entrance, and hearty entertainment. It
is an encouragement to give a friend more frequent visits, that gives us hearty
welcome: Say to the Spirit, as Laban to Abraham's Servant, Come in thou blessed
of the Lord, wherefore Genesis 24. 31 Act. 24. 25.
stand thou without? Dismiss it not, as Felix did Paul, Go thy way for this
time, when I have a convenient season, I will call for thee. Such put-offs
speak a slighting Spirit, and so will they be interpreted. You will lay
business aside, to entertain a dear friend: and who deserves more respect, than
this heavenly Guest, Who comes not, that he needs thee, but because thou
need him: he comes not (as friends sometimes do) to hinder, but help forward
thy main concernment: It is not upon a mere complement, but because he knows,
thou can not do without his help. He comes, to help thee in the drawing up
thy Petitions at the Throne of Grace, to make thee as a Prince, to prevail with
God. And is it not infinite condescension? Should thou not say, as Elizabeth
to the Blessed Virgin, Whence is this that the Mother of my Lord should come
unto me? Wh^t Luke 1. 43.
a high favor and vouchsafement is it, that the Spirit of God, should come
into such an impure Stic, as my heart is? This should make thee free and
cheerful in giving entertainment to all his motions.

3. Make the best improvement of its motions and assistances. How wise are the
men of this Generation, to take and improve advantages for the world? Will the
Mariner neglect to take his Wind? Or the Husbandman, to make Hay when the Sun
shines? Will the Soldier neglect his advantages against his Enemy? Shall that
great Commander The Emperor Ferdinand A. I. P. Q. N. S. I. A.
quicken himself by a Motto, to catch at advantages,

( Accidit in puncto, quod non speratur in Anno) and shall the children of
light, let slip their advantages in things of infinitely greater concernment?
Shall the Spirits motions, be as a price in the hand of a fool? Oh be careful
to go as far as you can, in the strength of such Baits. Shall I hint a few
things in particular? Prove. 17. 16.
Improve these Assistances:

1. Into holy importunity and wrestlings with God, for what you stand in most
need of; to have corruptions subdued, grace strengthened, wants supplied. Does
God bind and strengthen your arms? Lay hold on his strength, let him not go,
till he bless you: spend not this strength in throwing feathers, or beating the
Air; if God by his Spirit enlarge your heart, do you then open your Psalm. 81*
10. John 16. 24.
mouth wide enough, and God will fill it: Ask that your joy may be full. Let not
such an advantage slip, without some notable execution done upon some leading
corruption; pray down some domineering lust; pray in some grace that is
wanting; pray up into exercise some grace, that lies languishing and ready to
die in thy soul.

2. Improve these seasons as an evidence of this great Truth; viz. That the
Spirits help in prayer, is no melancholy dream, as the profane world imagine;
but a great reality: What stronger or more pregnant demonstration can you have
of it, than your own sense and experience? Hereby you may fortify your selves
against the scoffs of ungodly men, and pity those that speak evil of things
they know not. You may say, as Christ to the Woman of Samaria* If thou knew
the gift of God -- If you had known those sweet divine enablements which I have
felt and experienced, you would not thus blaspheme against the Spirits
operation: Or as the Apostle of those that crucified our Savior, Had they
known, they would not have crucified the Lord of glory: So, did these poor
miserable creatures know, they would not deride and scoff at these things.
Besides, you may improve these feelings against the Devils suggestions, when at
any time he shall endeavor to persuade you into Atheistical and blasphemous
thoughts, as that the things spoken in the Word, and by Ministers concerning
the Spirit of God, and its operations are mere delusions, that there is no God,
no Christ, no Spirit, etc. How may you from your own experience, confute him?
and return him such an Answer: Now Satan, thou do plainly show thy self (what
the Word of Truth reports thee) a Liar from the beginning: Would thou have me
disbelieve my own sense and feelings? Have I not the witness in my self? Do I
not seel the lively and vigorous operations of that Holy Spirit, against which
thou blasphemest? Does it not sweetly inspire and enable me to wrestle with my
God in prayer? Does it not sometimes life me up, even above my self, in
heavenly breathings and pantings after Jesus Christ? and sometimes lay me low
in the convincing sight and sense of my own baseness and unworthiness? Sure I
am, that flesh and blood could never carry me out, or furnish me with such
enablements? etc.

Again, These assistances may bestead thee in a dark day, when thou art under
the hidings of Gods face, in a state of Desertion, and want the sensible
presence and lively workings of Gods Spirit: Then may these experiences be a
heart-cheering Cordial: Then may thou call to remembrance thy Songs in the
night; thy prayers, thy holy breathings and enlargements, and the very
remembrance, may prove reviving to thy soul; and by such Musings the fire may
kindle again, which seems almost extinguished.

3. Improve the Spirits assistances, as a Motive and inducement, to be more
frequent and constant in this duty, and against the pull-backs and
discouragements from it, which at any time thou meerest withal: Thus bespeak
thy soul: Why so dull and beartless? Why so backward to a duty, wherein thou
have found, and may still hope to find so mighty a Helper? True indeed, it is
a duty of much difficulty, and utterly above my own ability, but why should I
be discouraged? I can do all things through the Spirit strengthening me. How
soon can the Spirit turn this barren Wilderness of my heart, into a standing
water; and this dry ground, into water-springs? How quickly can be breathe upon
me, and cause these dry bones to live? Why should my own Impotency discourage
me, when I may expect the help of Omnipotency? What though I can do nothing in
my own strength? cannot the Spirit of Grace, make his strength perfect in my
weakness, and enable me from a like experience to say (with the Apostle) when I
am weak, then I am strong? Remember that our blessed Savior has promised, to
procure the sending of a Comforter John 14. 16.
that shall abide with us for ever: and therefore however you may not at
present feel its lively assistances, yet you may be assured it is in you (since
you have experimentally known its power and influences) and this may encourage
you to set upon duty, even when under the greatest indispositions and
discouragements, in hope that when you begin to lift, this powerful Helper will
lift with you. It is much to depend upon another, we do (in a sort) engage them
to do for us, when we tell them, we will trust to them. So, if under wants,
weaknesses, indispositions, discouragements, we would yet go upon our work,
depending on the Spirit, and expecting his enablemants, it would be a singular
means to engage his assistance. And here, let me advise the complaining
self-discouraging Christian, Thou that complainest of thy deadness,
distractedness, inability, and that thou want the Spirits help as formerly;
Take this word of counsel, and make trial of it. Turn thy sad complaints into
humble confidence; resolve with thy self, not to be discouraged from duty: Say
thus, Well, I am unable to do any thing, I know not what to ask, nor how to
pray; but I will go notwithstanding, and the weaker I am in my self, the more
confidently will I expect the assistance of that Spirit, whose work it is to
help our infirmities, and to make intercession for us, with groanings that
cannot be uttered: I am assured he can, and I shall humbly hope he will,
quicken my deadness, enlarge my straitness, and make up all my wants from his
abundance. Thus to improve your experienced assistances would be the best way,
to have them continued to you; for hereby you give the Spirit of God much glory.

4. And forget not to improve them into thankfulness. Let not God lose his
glory, and thou shall not want the comfort. Improve the Spirits assistance, as
well in blessing God for what thou have, as in begging what thou want: and
amongst other mercies, forget not to be thankful for this mercy it self, as
being one of the choicest: Say as David, Who am I Lord -- that I should 1 Chronicles. 29. 14.
be able to serve thee with such alacrity, to pray (though alas, with much
infirmity, many distractions, yet) with such a measure of faith, fervency,
importunity? It is because thy Spirit enables that thy servant has 2 Samuel 7.
27.
found in his heart to pray this prayer before thee. Oh when thou feel at
any time the warming, enlarging influences of the Spirit of Supplication, rise
not off thy knees, till thou have made thy thankful acknowledgements to him,
who has drawn out and held up thy heart in duty. Thus I have said a little of
what might be spoken upon this account. The sum of it is this, Improve the
Spirits assistances for the ends they are vouchsaf't, and by so doing, you
shall procure the continuance of them. This is the Third Means.

4. Beg earnestly the continuance of the Spirit with you: as it is obtained, so
it is continued by asking. It will stay with you upon your importunity. Do
therefore, as the two Disciples dealt with Christ ((...)) Luke 24. 28, 29.
they constrained him, not by violence, but by entreaties; even as Lot dealt
with the Angels, whom he took to be Travailers, he Genesis 19. 3.
pressed upon them greatly, and they turned in unto him: Thus deal with the
Spirit of God, earnestly importune his continuance, as the Judge. 19. 6, 8, 9.
Levites Father-in-law, persuades him time after time to stay with him. Take up
David's words, praying for the continuance of that willing, cheerful frame,
which the people manifested, in their contributions to the building of the
Temple. O Lord God of Abraham -- keep this for ever in the imagination of the
thoughts of the heart of thy people, and prepare (or establish) their heart
unto thee. So when thou feel the vigorous motions and influences of the
Spirit, pray that the Lord would establish thee with his free Spirit, and that
he will not take his holy Spirit from thee. Breathe out thy soul in such
expressions: Oh sweet Dove, Oh blessed Spirit of Grace; how unspeakably
delightful is thy heavenly company, how easy, sweet and pleasant, is this yoke
of Duty, when thou helpest to bear it! How powerfully sweet, and sweetly
powerful are thy assistances! Ere I was aware, my soul made me like the
Charets of Amminadab [ or set me on Cant. 6. 12.
the Charet of my willing people] What a Heaven upon Earth is it, to perform
spiritual duties, with spiritual enablements! What Oil to the Wheel, what
refreshing baits in ebe up-hill way of duty, are thy seasonable Incomes! Oh let
me never want thy blessed help, do thou draw, and I will run; What am I but a
dead lump, a breathless carcass, if thou withdraw thy quickening influences? O
do thou continually inspire me. I am a dry tree; do thou cause me to bud and
blossom, and bring forth fruit unto perfection: Let my root be spread out by
the waters of Job 29.19.
thy Grace, and let thy dew lie all night upon my branches. Great and continual
are my necessities, troubles, temptations; Prayer is the only way to procure
supply, support, sanctification, victory; but I cannot, alas I cannot, turn
this Key, whereby the Door into Heavens Treasury is opened; except thou
strengthen my hand, I cannot wield this conquering Weapon, except thou teach my
hands to war, and my fingers to sight: Wherefore let me ever enjoy thy
presence, let me seel thy help, let thy power be made perfect in my weakness.
Awake, O North wind, and come thou South, blow upon the Garden of my soul, that
the Spices thereof may flow out.

5. But especially, be willing to follow the conduct of the Spirit; you read of
being led by the Spirit, of walking in and after the Spirit. Romans 8. 3, 4, 14.
This do, and you shall not want its seasonable help. If you would know what I
mean by following its conduct: In short, I intend not any Enthusiastical
Unscriptural motions or impulses, but to hearken to its motions and counsels,
pressing you to follow the directions of the Word. The Spirit of God speaks no
otherwise in the hearts of Gods people, than it does in the Bible. To the Law,
and to the Testimony; if it speak Isa. 8. 20.
not according to that Word, it is none of the Spirit of God; it is a lying
deluding Spirit: But when this Holy Spirit, either by the Ministers of the
Word, or in a more immediate way, presses you to holy walking, calls you from
looseness, worldliness, from a vain conversation, from any particular course of
sin, which you have been addicted to; or invites you to the performance of any
neglected duty, to order your conversation according to Gospel-rule, to come
nearer your pattern Jesus Christ; to be more humble, heavenly, more profitable,
more exemplary, etc. Let your ear be open to its counsels, follow its
directions, be as obsequious Matthew. 8. 9.
to the Spirit, as the Soldiers to the Centurion; if he say go, then go; if
come, come; if he bid do this, do it. They that obediently follow the Spirits
guidance in the course of their life, shall not ordinarily want his assistance
in the course of their duties. And let us not think, the Spirit will be at our
command (or help when we desire and need him) if we will not be at his command.
It you will give way to looseness, vanity, pride, carelessness, worldly lusts,
neglect of duty, think not to have the Spirit long to help you in duty. Res,
mihi creds, delicata est Spiritus (says one) the Spirit is a tender thing,
soon grieved: It will not be our Comforter, if it must not be our Councellor.

6. Abide in Christ, if you would have his Spirit abide in your hearts: all
communications of the Spirit, are from the Father, through Christ. How often,
is this abiding in Christ, inculcated in that one place, John 15. 4, 6, 7, 9,
10. and note especially what is said in v. 7. I^^ye abide in me, and my words
abide in you, ye shall ask what ye will, and it shall be done unto you. Here
you have both the Duty, and the Privilege; the Duty abiding in Christ, the
best evidence whereof is expressed in the next words [ and my words abide in
you] to abide in Christ, then, is to continue in the Faith of the Gospel, not
to depart from the Truth; nor only so, but to have the Word a lively,
operative, commanding Principle in the heart, directing our steps. [ Manent in
Christo, qui Verbum ejus Gualt^r*
audiunt, audito credunt, and toti ab eo dependent.] Well, what is their
Privilege? The next words tell you [ Ye shall ask what ye will, and it shall
be done unto you] a holy freedom, boldness, and success in prayer. I take those
words [ Ye shall ask what ye will] not only to import leave or license, to ask
what they desire, but that which the Scripture else where calls ((...))
freedom, liberty of speech, and confidence to be heard in our Petitions: Now
this cannot be without the Spirits assisting and encouraging: So that it
amounts to thus much. If ye abide in me, ye shall have a Spirit of Prayer,
liberty, and confidence in asking, and the grant of your Petitions. Therefore I
say, abide in Christ: and in so saying* I would be understood to mean these
things.

1. Abide in the Doctrine of Christ; I mean the great Doctrine of Justification
and Salvavation by Christ alone. Take heed of a Popish Linfie-woolsy Merit; Mix
not the Woollen of men's supposed super-erogatory Merits, with the clean white
Linen of the Saints: The Spirit will no longer be an Intercessor in our
hearts, than we rely upon Christ alone as our Intercessor in Heaven. I am
confident the Spirit never went along with prayers, put up in the name of the
virgin Mary, Peter, Paul, etc. Abide then in this Doctrine.

2. Abide in the Faith of Christ: I mean a personal applicatory Faith, whereby
we depend on Christ and his merits, for acceptance of our persons, and audience
of our prayers. It is not enough, that we assent to the Doctrine, but we must
also rely on the merits of Christ* We can no longer pray in the Spirit, than we
pray in Faith; If we stagger in our affiance, we shall want our wonted
assistance.

3. Abide also in the love of Christ: maintain a singular and superlative
esteem of him in your hearts; count him the chief of ten thousand, altogether
lovely. To abide in Christ, is to continue and abide in his love. But John 15.
9, 10.
what is this to the purpose in hand? How will this procure the Spirits
continued assistance in prayer? Very much: Love to Christ is one of those sweet
and fragrant flowers (indeed of his own planting) wherein the Spirit is much
delighted. Observe that Text, If a man love me, be V. 23.
will keep my words. and my Father will love him, and we will come unto him,
and make our abode with him. How else do the Father or Son make their abode in
a soul, but by the Spirit? Where, then, the Love of Christ is, there the Spirit
takes up his abode; and where he abides, he cannot be idle and unimployed. He
is like some friend, that though they come but a visiting, will further, and
not hinder business: though indeed his coming to the John 14. 16.
soul, is not to give us a visit, but to abide with us for ever.

And so much in answer to this fifth Case.

CHAP. VII.
IN the two last Cases, I have proposed something, 1. In order the Attainment
of the Spirit of prayer: 2. In order to the Preserving and continuing it. The
next will be,

Case 6. What may I do to recover the Spirits help and enablements, its
quickening motions, its lively stirrings and assistances, when they are
withdrawn?

I need not say much of the usefulness or necessity of this Case: What I spoke
of the former, is easily applicable hither. The frequent complaints of Gods
people concerning their indisposition, coldness, straitness and inability to
prayer, sufficiently tell us, that it is needful to propose what may be thought
effectual in this Case.

Something is fit to be premised, though in effect it has been hinted before.

1. We may be said to lose or want the Spirits assistance: either,

1. As to that degree of liveliness and ability, which we have formerly found.
There may be abatements of that fervor, enlargement, and vigor of affections
that we have exercised in prayer. This is the common experience, I believe, of
all Christians; They do not always enjoy the same measure of divine
enablement; sometimes they sail swiftly, Wind and Tide favor them; at other
times their motion is very slow, they drive heavily, much ado to bear up
against the Wind and Waves.

2. Sometimes we may seem wholly to want the Spirits assistance; not one good
motion, no heart to pray. I say not, that we may lose the Spirit, as to its
Indwelling; but as to its operations, there may seem a Cessation of any lively
breathings: As in a Swoon, the breath may be stopped, the pulse not beat
sensibly, so that one may not feel himself alive, and may be judged by others
to be dead; Though (as Paul said of Eutychus) Act. 20. 10.
his life is in him. Now I would be understood to speak to both these. What is
to be spoken, may respect both the remission and abatement of degrees, and also
the intermission or cessation of acts of Spiritual life. Both sorts need
Counsel.

2. The Spirits Return must be an act of free grace; and indeed, of rich grace.
For I suppose, it will be granted, that the Spirit withdraws not, but upon some
great Provocation: though God may have (as you have heard) very gracious ends
in such desertions; yet, I can scarce think he does it, till we have justly
deserved it, and in a manner, driven a way his holy Spirit. Now you may easily
see, that to sin against the Spirit of God, after we have enjoyed his presence,
found the sweetness of his assistance, and known the advantage thereof; must
needs be a very provoking sin; it carries in it much of ingratitude and
dis-ingenuity. Solomon's sin was the more heinous, because 1 Kings 11. 9.
his heart was turned away from the Lord his God, who appeared unto him twice.
How ill then, must God needs take it, that thou should grieve his Spirit, and
abuse his goodness, who has appeared so often, so sweetly and comfortably to
thy soul? Who has helped thee at many a dead lift, and put many a good motion
into thy heart, and held thee up in duty? So that thy sin is not a little sin;
it calls for a deep humiliation; it may cost thee many a deep sigh, many a
brinish tear, before thou recover thy former state. Nay, possibly God may set
just cause, never to return to thee in that degree of enlargement, and those
gracious manifestations, which thou have sinned away* Thou may lay down thy
head in sorrow, though thy eternal condition be secured* This I say, not to
break any bones, or to discourage any from using means; but to let them know,
that its dangerous to grieve the Spirit of God: and that it requires the utmost
of their diligence and industry, to recover from under such desertions. And now
I come to lay down something in answer to this Case.

Direct. 1. Thy first work must be to endeavor to find out the sin or sins,
which have robbed thee of this Privilege. Search and search again, till thou
find out the Achan, that has thus troubled thy soul. Here I cannot reckon
up every particular sin, that may possibly be a cause of the Spirits
withdrawment; but only hint, what probably may be, and ordinarily is the
occasion of it. It is not every miscarriage, that grieves away the Spirit; then
who should enjoy that Privilege? The Spirit helps our infirmities* It pitties
us under weaknesses: therefore mere failings do not provoke God, to take away
his Spirit. Nor yet every greater sin, if speedily repented of. You can scarce
imagine a sin more heinous for the nature, than Peter's: or more aggravated by
its circumstances. Yet it appears not, that he lay under desertion; he wept
bitterly: and it is not likely, his tears were prayerless: and no sooner is our
Savior arisen, but he must have the Tidings with the first. Such things
intimate, that he fell not under desertion. His repentance was as speedy and
serious, as his sin was heinous. Well, what sins then then do most probably
cause the Spirits withdrawment? I answer,

1. Sins that carry much of the will in them, presumptuous sins, when light is
held prisoner, and captivated by lust.

2. Or sins long lien in; when we wallow (as the Swine) in the mire of sin. It
is supposed, David lay some Months in the sin of Murder and Adultery, before
he repented: and he intimates (as you have heard) that he wanted the joy of
Gods salvation; he felt decays, and fears tho taking away of Gods Spirit.

O^ 3. Sins more directly against the Spirits guiding or assisting; when we
will not take its directions, hearken to its counsels; or when we abuse its
grace and assistances. See then, whether thou have not cause, to charge such
kind of sins upon thy self: Have thou not shut thine eyes, against some beam of
spiritual light? Have thou not known the will of thy heavenly Father (as to
some sin which thou ought to abandon, or duty which thou ought to set
upon) and yet neglected to do it? If such sins be upon thee, thou may
probably conclude, they are those that have grieved the Spirit. Again, Is there
not some sin, that has been thy old acquaintance, that thou have lien and
lived in a long time? what sin or sins are they, that (like Rehoboam's young
Counselors) have been brought up with thee? Those also may have robbed thee of
the Spirits gracious assistance: But especially, S^^ if thou have not refused
the Spirit as a guide: when it called thee to duty, have thou not neglected,
put it off, slubber'd it over? When it has dissuaded thee from some sin, or
persuaded to some duty, Have thou not pulled away the shoulder? Have thou not
withstood its motions? Been like green Wood, that did not take fire by those
heavenly sparks? So for its assistances, have thou not quenched, discouraged,
slighted them. When he has called to open, and put in his fingers by the hole
of the door, thou have seigned excuses; Worldly concernments have called thee
another way. Or, may be, when he has breathed upon thee, and carried thee
above thy self in any duty, thou have grown proud, secure; and applauded thy
self, instead of ascribing glory to God. See if some, or many of these, or the
like, be not found in thee. Nor rest in a general discovery (for its easy to
say in general, that such sins are ours) but labor to be as particular and
distinct as possibly thou can. Recollect times and places, when thou have
been especially guilty. Remember what good motions thou have had and rejected:
Such a time, God by his Spirit gave me a lively Touch; Oh, I felt the Babe
spring within; but how did I smother it! Such a time I came off proud of my
enlargement: Such a time, I had clear discoveries, powerful convictions,
strong impulses, but gave them cold entertainment; dismissed them with fair
promises, and ineffectual purposes, etc. These, O! these, are grievous to the
holy Spirit of God.

Direct. 2. Humble thy self before the Lord; confess and give glory to God,
Accept of the punishment of thine iniquity; and Lev. 26. 42.
this with all seriousness, with real grief, shame, and self-abhorrency:
aggravate thy sin before the Lord; acknowledge how gracious he has been, in
vouchsafing thee such experiences, and how ungrateful thou have been in
slighting and abusing them. Shall I put words into thy mouth (but O that they
may not be mere words! Oh that they may be the very sense of thy soul, and
breathings of thy heart!) Let these therefore be the workings of thy soul:
Righteous art thou, O Lord, and just are thy judgments; What can be more
highly agreeable to the Rule of Justice, than that from Matthew. 13. 12.
him that has no^, should be taken even that which he has? Especially, when
the having was without desert, but the taking away is most justly deserved,
What saw thou in me, O gracious God, that thou should ever bestow so high
a favor on me? That thy blessed Spirit should ever take up its abode in such a
filthy polluted soul? That it should strengthen my hands, and enable me to
wrestle and prevail with thy glorious Majesty? Oh the heavenly transports, the
kindly meltings, the over-powring motions, that my soul has felt! the sweet
sallies and Eruptions of my Spirit in prayer, when quickened and enlivened by
thy grace! How could I run the way of thy Commandments, Psalm. 119. 32.
when thou had thus enlarged my heart? Being thus drawn, how could I Cant 1.
3.
run after thee? Having continual supplies of new strength, by thy blessed
Spirit, how could I mount up with wings as an Eagle; run and Isa. 40. 31.
not be weary; walk and not faint? Then was Prayer the delight of my soul; yea,
even to pour out my soul in tears for sin, was to me as the Dew of Hermon, and
the dew that Psalm. 133. 3.
descended upon the Mountains of Sion. Those waters distilled by the fire of
thy Spirit, became Wine of consolation to me. Those groanings not to be
uttered, how did they ease my heart? How often have I, with Hannah, come before
thee in bitterness of soul, with a sorrowful Spirit, but being through thy
grace enabled to pour out my soul before thee, I have gone away, and my
countenance has been no more sad -- But, O monstrous Ingratitude! This rich,
this superabundant grace have I turned into wantonness: these precious
experiences and peculiar vouchsafements have been made fuel for pride and
security. I have robbed thy blessed Spirit of its glory, and gloried in that as
mine, the praise whereof was wholly due to him. Yea Lord, many a time have I
quenched the Spirit, and powered water upon those sparks of good motions, which
he has cast into my soul: Even then, when I have known his voice; yea, when he
has knocked with much importunity, I have chosen rather to lie slugging upon a
bed of ease, than to rise and open, though I had known by former experience,
that he was no empty handed guest. What could I expect less, than what thou
have inflicted? for, Should the Majesty of Heaven always put up such abuses?
Should I think to grieve the blessed Spirit of God from day to day, and yet
have his company and assistance as before? No Lord, thou art righteous, but I
am wicked; and should thou for ever hide thy face, should thou leave me
under a prayerless, senseless frame, and let me grow into a seared condition;
should thou make me at last lie down in sorrow, yea, in the lake of fire and
brimstone for ever, it were but what I have deserved. Alas! how many thousands
are in those flames, that never sinned at that rate that I have! They knew not,
and did not, and therefore deserve a few stripes; but I have known thy will;
nay, thy gracious Spirit has stirred me up to do it; yea, has offered his
help in the doing of it; yet I have refused and slighted his offers, and
therefore deserve many stripes. Oh ungrateful, Oh disingenuous! Thus, humble
and shame thy self before the Lord: get into Ephraim's posture; Jer. 31. 19.
smite upon thy thigh, be ashamed: yea, even confounded: with Job, abhor thy
self in dust Job 42. 5.
and ashes: with the Publican, smite upon thy breast, and cry, The Lord be
merciful unto me Luke 18. 13.
a sinner. Such self-loathing for our unworthy carriages toward God, will draw
pity from him. What a sweet return is that to Ephraim upon his R^pentance? Is
Ephraim my dear son? he is a pleasant child: for since I spoke against him, I
do earnestly remember J^r. 31. 20.
him still -- So, in Ezekiel. 43. 11. If they be ashamed of all that they have
done, show them the form of the house. Thus may God deal with thee, if thou be
really ashamed, and thoroughly humbled for thy dis-ingenuity.

Direct. 3. Yet humbly and earnestly beg the return of the Spirit, both to
assure thee of pardon, and assist thee in duty. The Spirit of God is (as the
wisdom that proceeds from Jam. 3. 17.
it) gentle and easy to be entreat^d: importunate prayers have brought God
back again (be it spoken with humility) when he has been departing from a
people; and when he has turned his back upon them, have prevailed for the
turning of his face toward Numb. 14. 13. 21. and 16. 47.
them. Moses oftener than once, found the prevalency of it. And in this thou art
not without great encouragement, if ever thou have felt and found the gracious
assistances of Gods Spirit (and upon the supposition I am speaking to thee)
know that he is an abiding Spirit, however his influences may be suspended, his
presence shall John 14. 16.
never be totally removed: he may be turned aside, but is not out of call. And
(what Paul says concerning Onesimus) perhaps he therefore departed for a
season, that thou should receive him for ever. Therefore with what ^aith and
strength thou have wrestled with the Lord, plead his free and gracious
promises, notwithstanding thy unworthiness. Thou have David for a pattern,
though his sin was heinous, yet he p^ayes, Psalm. 51. 10, 11.
Take not thy holy Spirit from me; stablish me with thy free Spirit. Take up
Shimei's words to David; Let not my Lord impute iniquity 2 Samuel 19. 19, 20.
unto me, neither do thou remember that which thy servant did perversely -- for
thy servant does know, that I have sinned -- Thou have one to deal with,
infinitely more merciful than David: A God, that pardons iniquity, that
passes by the transgressions of the remnant of Mich. 7. 18.
his heritage: who retains not his anger for ever, because he delights in
mercy: who will say to thee, I will heal thy backslidings, I Hos. 14. 4.
will love thee freely, for mine anger is turned away from thee.

Object. If you should reply, What is all this to me, who am destitute of the
Spirits help? It is as if you should promise me a rich treasure, upon
condition; I shall mount up to the Sun, or drain the Ocean. These are things
which cannot be performed without the Assistance of that Spirit, the want of
which it my complaint and grievance. Alas, I cannot repent, I cannot pray as I
ought, etc.

Answ. This Objection in effect, has been answered before, in speaking to the
fourth Case; whether I refer you. Only this further: I am speaking to such as
are not quite void of the Spirit, only they are deprived of his lively, actual,
sensible assistances. I hope it is not in vain, to bid such, stir up the gifts
and graces that are in them, or blow up the sparks, that for the present lie
hid in the ashes of corruption, or to bespeak the Spirit of God, in the
language of the Spouse; Awake O North Wind, and Cant. 4. 16.
come thou South, blow upon my garden -- There is a secret assistance, where it
is not sensibly selt: it is from the Spirit, that you can so much as be
sensible of the want of it; the dead soul feels no want. Therefore put out your
endeavors in these things.

Direct. 4. Desist not from duty under these withdrawments; but rather double
thy diligence; and (as I may allude to that) If the Iron be blunt, thou must
put to Eccles. 10. 10.
more strength. If ever the Spirit return, it must be in a way of diligent and
humble waiting upon God: Laziness, that is an ordinary cause of its
withdrawing, is a very improble way to procure its return. No, when God sees
thee humbly and conscientiously waiting, doing violence to thy corruptions,
struggling and tugging at it, then will he pity and help thee. God delights to
encourage diligence. Exercise is the way (as to preserve, so) to recover
health. Nothing more seeds and increases an Asthmatick Distemper (that is,
short-breathedness) than sitting still. Whence, by the way, you may take
notice, how pernicious that Doctrine is, of not praying till the Spirit move:
indeed it is nothing else but a subtle shift to put off duty, a cloak for
laziness, and the next way to be deprived of the Spirits gracious assistance.
If God deny his Spirit, it is but justice; but for us to lay aside duty upon
that account, is injustice toward God, and the greatest injury we can do our
own souls. Therefore be diligent, do in obedience, though thou can not do
with al^crity; if the Wind fill not thy Sails, yet lay not the Oar out of thy
hands.

Direct. 5. Make much of, and be very thankful to God for any degree of help
thou yet have, and welcome any spark of heavenly motions. Thou can not, it
may be, pray, with a full Sail of faith and affection: but if thou have any
weak breathings, if thou can pray with groanings, that cannot be uttered, for
their weakness; if thou art but as smoking flax, not yet in a flame; for this
measure bless God. This is to be faithful Luke 19. 17.
in a little, and to such, much is promised. Thou can not express thy
particular ailments, but thou feel all is not right with thee: thou love
prayer, have high thoughts of, and pantings after a praying frame; here is
matter of thankfulness; bless God, that thou have not quite cast off the Duty;
that thou art neither, amongst those that pretend to be above the duty, nor
those that scorn and deride it. To be thankful for a little, is the best way to
procure more.

Direct. 6. During the Spirits withdrawments, be very playable to its commands,
motions and suggestions, labor to be more ingenuous in thy obedience. It is
ordinarily some stubborn resistance, or affront of the Spirit, that drives him
away; at least, some palpable neglect of yielding obedience to his motion:
therefore a yielding pliable frame, is the next way to a recovery. Even to say
and practice, as Elihu teaches Job, I have born chastisement, I will not
offend any more. Job 34. 31, 32.
That which I see not, teach thou me* if I have done iniquity, I will do no
more. This is to comply with Gods end in such dispensations. When the Father
takes the Rod in hand, his expectation is, that the Child should be grieved for
his fault, and become more observant of him. That soul, that under such
withdrawings, grows more pliable, is in the way of Recovery. Therefore resolve
thus, I have already grieved the holy Spirit, by neglecting his assistance,
abusing his grace vouchsafed; I will not add this more, to continue stubborn to
his commands; I will not thus add Job 34. 37.
Rebellion to my sin. I have already found, that it is an evil and bitter
thing, to abuse and grieve the Spirit; his presence is unspeakably sweet, his
absence a want unconceivable. None but those that have had experience, can
conceive either the happiness of the one, or misery of the other.

So much may suffice in answer to this Case. Let the dejected soul set upon
these things, and add perseverance to performance, then will the Issue be
comfortable, at least profitable. Either God will return in a way of assistance
and enlargement, or will so sanctify this severity, that it shall end in
mercy, and turn to thy eternal advantage.

CHAP. VIII.
Case 7. THere is yet one Case more, to which I desire to speak something: viz.
Whether set and stated Forms of Prayer, are Impediments to the Motions and
Assistances of the Spirit? By Forms, I mean a tying up ones self, or being tied
up by others, to words and expressions, not to vary from them, but constantly
to use the very same, without variation. Not only to have some Model, Method,
or naked Heads in our minds, which we may enlarge upon more or less; or to
which we may add, or alter, as our occasions and necessities require, but to
utter the very same Words and Syllables constantly in our addresses to God by
prayer.

Now here I meet with some on the one hand, who utterly decry all use of forms,
as unlawful, or highly inconvenient, as unbeseeming a Christian, and
restraining the Spiof Prayer, by neglecting to make use of those gifts and
helps, which the Spirit ordinarily bestows upon Christians: yea, they think it
next an impossibility* to perform the duty, with any affection or acceptance in
that way.

Others on the other hand, ^re so devoted to forms, that they condemn and
deride all conceived prayer, as if none could attain to that ability, as to
express their own or others wants to God, except they have a form of words:
yea, they charge all extemporary conceptions, as guilty of Tautologies,
Extravagancies, I* reverence, and savouring of Enthusiasme. I shall declare my
thoughts in the following Conclusions; nor indeed mine only, but the judgment
of others, that have been esteemed Pious and Orthodox, who have gone a middle
way betwixt these extremes, nor need I add much to what is said.

Prop. 1. Set and stated forms are lawful, and may be useful and helpful to
some Christians; yea, in some cases necessary. Touching their lawfulness* much
is said by others; I shall briefly hint at it* The approved practice of the
S^ints in Scripture, especially the Sea Numb. 10. 35, 36* and 6. 23. --
forms of Blessing and Thanksgiving prescribed in Scripture, and the Psalms;
the Titles of some showing, that they were composed for the public use of the
Church, to be sung upon occasion; and what are they but forms of prayer and
praise? Yet some of those that stick at the lawfulness of a form of prayer,
will not stick to use those without scruple; and the experience of many, may
tell them, that the use of those, are no restraint upon the Spirit, but a help
to raise and enlarge our hearts. Yea, it is remarkable, when the Apostle bids
us be filled with the Spirit; he immediately subjoyns, Ephesians. 5. 18, 19.
speaking to your selves, in Psalms, and Hymns and spiritual Songs -- q. d. you
cannot give vent to the Spirit in a better way, than Vi^. Sydenham's
Exercitation on Infant Baptism, and singing Psalms.
by singing and making melody in your hearts to the Lord: and (as Zanchy with
others, have observed) the three Titles of the Psalms in that Text, as also in
Col. 3. 16. are the very same, that are given to* David's Psalms, lest we
should think, the Apostle meant some others of humane or extemporary
composure. But to return to the thing in hand. I would add this, as to the
lawfulness of a form, God has made prayer our daily and constant duty; but, he
has no where forbidden us, to use the same words, or enjoined us to use no
other, but our own extemporary conceptions: Except therefore the Dissenters
will say, that to use a form, is to destroy the very Essence of prayer, (which
will scarce be proved) they must grant a form lawful and warrantable.

Moreover, I say, it may be useful, and in some cases necessary. I will say
little more to this, than what is said by a Reverend Author, who is not to be
suspected of too Ames. Cas. Lib 4. C. 7. Q. 4.
much inclination to Forms or Ceremonies.

1. Some even amongst Christians and Professors, are so rude and ignorant
(though it may be spoken to their shame) that they cannot tolerably express
their desires in prayer, Must such utterly neglect the duty? Is it not better,
during their gross ignorance, to use the help of others gifts and composures,
than not to pray at all? or to utter that which is senseless and impious? I
speak it not, to excuse their ignorance, or that that they should be
encouraged, to rest satisfied herein, but for the present necessity.

2. Some again, though they can do it privately, and so far as my suffice in
their secret addresses to God; yet when they are* to pray before others, want
either dexterity and fitness of expression, readiness of utterance, or
confidence to use those abilities they have (whom yet I will not excuse from a
sinful bashfulness) and for expression, though it is partly a gift of the
Spirit, yet it may be in a great measure acquired and improved by reading,
meditation, and exercise.

3. It is possible, that some bodily distemper, or sudden distraction, may
befall such as are otherwise able, which may beclowd their minds, weaken their
m^mories, and dull their parts, that they may be unfit to express themselves in
extemporary conceptions. This may happen in case of Melancholy, cold Palsies,
or the like distempers. I may add (what the forecited Author notes) that it is
profitable for some to have their desires and meditations regulated by such
helps; for all, that have expression, cannot so methodize their thoughts in
praying with others, as to avoid disorder and confusion.

I conclude then, that in the Case aforesaid, or the like, a form may be
profitable and helpful. Nor is it a tying up the Spirit; but, if conscionably
used, may be both attended with the Spirits assistance, and find acceptance
with God.

Prop. 2. Yet it will not hence follow, that any should satisfy themselves in
such stated and stinted forms: much less, that those who have praying
abilities, should be enforced by others to rest in them. If ignorance,
bashfulness, defect of memory, of other distemper, may render it excusable and
necessary to some, is it fit, all should rest in their measure? Where then will
be, that coveting earnestly the best gifts? or why 1 Cor. 12. ult.
should those who are excellently gifted that way, be hindered from the use and
exercise of that gift, because others want it? Perkin's Casts, lib. 2. cap. 6.
They that allow such helps, do but look upon them as Crutches to support those
that cannot go without them, why should they that are whole and sound be
compelled to use them? I think I may lay down this, as an undoubted Truth, that
by the use of those helps which God has afforded us, not only Ministers, but
most ordinary Christians (except in case of some extraordinary defect of
memory, or distemper of mind or body) may attain to a competent measure of
ability this way: Let but Christians study the Word, and their own hearts
together, labor to acquaint themselves with their own sins, wants,
temptations, afflictions, and then give themselves to the conscionable practice
of this duty in secret, and doubtless they shall find themselves grow in
abilities. What Solomon says in another Prove. 22. 17, 18.
case, I may apply hither: Bow down thine ear, and hear the words of the wise,
and apply thy heart unto my knowledge. For it is a pleasant thing, if thou keep
them within thee, they shall with all be fitted in thy lips. Let the Word have
entrance into the heart, it will (even as to this duty) teach thee utterance.
Let thy heart be inditing good matter, Psalm. 45. 1.
it will make thy tongue as the Pen of a ready Writer. If the heart be stored
with spiritual knowledge, it will get it self vent, even this way:

-- Verbaque praevisam rem non invit a sequentur. Horat.
I speak nothing but what may be confirmed by the Instances of many able
prayerful Christians, whose gifts this way, may put those to the blush, that
carry the name of Ministers of the Gospel, and yet not only fall short of them,
but do not so much as endeavor the attainment of that gift. Well, such gifts
are ordinarily attainable, and therefore we should labor after them: and this
I shall (I think with good reason) affirm, That in case we have such abilities,
or may in the use of means attain them, but yet through laziness, or in
compliance with the times, or men's humors, will not labor after them; or
having them, will not improve them; here, to accustom our selves to a constant
Road or Track of words and expressions, without variation, must needs be a
restraint upon the Spirit. I shall here again take the liberty, to speak in the
words of the Author, who has given us Amesius ubi supra.
three or four solid Reasons, why such forms are not to be rested in.

1. Because a prescribed form, since it does not follow, but lead our
affections, does that less perfectly, which is of the nature of prayer. He
means, if I rightly understand him, that whereas prayer mainly consists in the
expatiating of the affections and reachings of the soul after God; words being
but the overflowings, as it were, of the heart, (especially in secret prayer)
it must needs be, that our affections must be tied up within the compass of our
expressions, and cannot so freely expatiate, have not so large a field to walk
in; so that a form in this cafe, is much like a weight which Huntsmen hang upon
their swiftest Dogs, to make them keep even with their fellows: To him that
has abilities, it is a Hysteron Proteron, and makes the Affections follow,
which should lead in that duty.

2. In a prescribed form we cannot so particularly express our desires and
wants to God. He that knows any thing of his own condition, knows, that he is
subject to daily changes, which it is impossible ^^ stated form should reach.
New corruptions and temptations to be prayed against, new sins to be confessed,
wants to be supplied. Changes of condition, and occurrences of Providence, call
for suitable confessions, petitions, thanksgivings, besides the concernments of
Church, Nation, Family, neighborhood, particular Christians, to which a
stinted form cannot be accommodated. It is true, there may be such general
Heads couch't in a form, as may glance at all these; but these cold generals
cannot so affect us, as we ought to b^ affected. God knows before we ask, and
better than we can tell him, what our sins and wants are (and indeed if it were
the end of prayer, only to inform God, we might spare our labor). But he would
have us feel our own sins and wants, and to be affected with the condition of
his Church and people; in which respect, our prayers should descend into
particulars: for as he says, specialia pungunt, particulars impress most, and
do most deeply affect us.

3. The Spirit of God is wont in prayer, to excite special affections in our
hearts, which are often hindered, by our constant sticking in a form, there can
be no further excitations, than the matter of the prayer is apt to beget,
whereas in conceived prayer, the Spirit of God has (as I may say) more room
and liberty to work upon* our hearts; to cast in suitable promises, which we
may plead with God, etc.

4. Under a prescribed form, oscitancy and sluggishness is more apt to seize
upon us. I say not, that it must necessarily be so; but I fear, it is the too
ordinary experience of those that use a constant form. It is too true* that
formality may, and does creep -- into our duties, when performed in the most
spiritual manner: how often, alas, is the gift of prayer exercised, where
praying graces are not? Yet surely, in a conceived prayer, there is something
more to call out the soul to attention, while we are clothing the sense of our
hearts in fit expressions; and as it were, digging the matter of our prayers,
out of our own feelings and experiences, it must needs keep the heart closer at
work.

5. I add, that as to others that join, a prayer accommodated to the present
condition of Church or Nation, to the present state of the Place, Town, City,
or People, must needs stir up more kindly affections, and carry their hearts
more along with it, than a cold general form, that is no more fitted to one
time, or place, or condition, than to Prove. 15. 23. and 25. 11.
another. A word (and so a prayer) in season, how good is it? A word fitly
spoken (upon the wheels) is like Apples of Gold in Pictures of Silver. For
instance; we will suppose a poor creature struggling with despair, lying under
that insupportable burden of a wounded Spirit: How sweet is it to such a soul
(if the Lord please to go along with it) to have his condition spread before
the Lord? to have his very fears, complaints, doubts, troubles expressed in his
own language? to have a faithful Minister, or prayerful Christian bespeak God
for him, as if himself was in the very same condition, to urge and plead
suitable promises, and wrestle with the Lord on his behalf? Must not this needs
more affect the poor wounded soul, than a dull form, that comes not near his
condition. I will in short give you Clark in the Life of M. Perkins.
a relation to this purpose: It was the custom of Reverend Mr. Perkins, to go
to the place of Execution, with the condemned Prisoners: Once a young lusty
fellow going up the Ladder, discovered an extraordinary lumpishness and
dejection of Spirit; Mr. Perkins observing it, said to him, What man? What is
the matter with thee? Art thou afraid of Death? Ah no, said the Prisoner
(shaking his head) but of a worse thing. Whereupon Mr. Perkins bid him come
down, and see what Gods grace would do, to strengthen him: who coming down, Mr.
Perkins took him by the hand, and made him kneel down with himself at the
Ladder foot. Where that blessed man of God, made such an effectual prayer, in
confession of sins, and aggravating thereof in all circumstances, with the
punishments due to the same; as made the poor Prisoner burst out into abundance
of tears. Mr. Perkins perceiving, that he had brought him low enough, even to
Hell Gates; proceeded in the next place, to show him the Lord Jesus Christ,
stretching forth his blessed hand of mercy* and power to save him -- which he
did so sweetly press upon the soul of the Prisoner, as cheered him up again, to
look* beyond Death; and made him break out into new showers of tears, for joy
of the inward consolation, which he had found; and gave such expression of it
to the beholders, as made them lift up their hands, and praise God, to se^ such
a blessed change in him; and so took his Death patiently and joyfully. See here
the effect of a prayer in season; though I would neither rob God of his glory,
without whose blessing, no such effect could have been wrought; nor attribute
it to prayer, as being conceived, and extemporary; but I think I may, under
God, ascribe something to the suitableness of it, to that poor creatures
present condition; upon which account, I must needs prefer it to such, as being
framed in such general expressions, as may reach any condition, cannot be so*
accommodate to a particular time, person, or occasion. In short then, a
conceived prayer has these advantages above a form.

1. It leaves the soul more freedom, to exert present affections; and makes
more room for the Spirit, to excite graces in the soul, suitable to all
occasions and emergencies.

2. It affords more opportunity to put up suitable petitions, to the many and
various Wants, Temptations, Providence, and other emergencies, respecting our
selves, or those we pray with and for; which must necessarily be attended with
more kindly stirrings of affection, and exercise of grace, than under cold
generals.

3. It more calls out, and imployes the soul; makes it more attentive to what
it is about* and how necessary it is, to use the best means, to keep the heart
to its work in duty, there is not an experienced Christian, but can tell, from
the sad experience he has of his own wanderings and extravagancies.

4. And (which I look upon, as not the least excellency of it) it is singularly
helpful for edification. By the mutual participation of each others gifts
exercised in this kind, Christians build up one another: they not only help to
excite present affections and graces, but they furnish one another with matter,
and arguments in prayer; So that by this means, the body fitly joined together,
and compacted by that* which Ephesians. 4. 16.
every jo^nt supplyeth, according to the effectual working in the measure of
every part, makes increase of the body, unto the edifying of it self* in love.
They that 1 Cor. 14. 12.
excel in this gift, excel to the edifying of the Church.

5. It helps a man better to discern the present frame of his own heart. The
beating of the Pulse, is not a better Trial of the Temperature of the Body,
than prayer is of the frame of the soul. Something, it is true, one may
discern, even under a form; but it is much better discerned, when out of the
Mat. 12. 34
abundance of the heart, the mouth speaks: How may a poor soul sometimes
discern its want of faith, love, desire after God, delight in God, want of
godly sorrow* compassion, and fellow-feeling of his Brethrens miseries, by his
coldness and straitness in prayer, when at sometimes, he can scarce utter a
word with any feeling; at other times he has plenty of expressions, but no
stirrings of affection? Again, at another time, how sensibly are these graces
exercised in prayer? How can he stir up himself, to lay hold on God? Confess
sin with a bleeding heart; beg and plead, and pursue God with arguments. How
tenderly can he represent before the Lord, the affliction and condition of
others? and put his soul in their souls stead? So that he may judge very much
of the present state, by his straitness or enlargement in this duty: yea, he
can better discern, when he has the Spirit helping his infirmities, and when
he is under a desertion.

These are some of the Advantages of conceived prayer, above stated forms. And
now in a few words, to apply what I have said to the Case in hand.

To which, that I may give a clearer Solution; be pleased to distinguish with
me,

1 Betwixt the Absolute Power of Gods Perk. Amos.
Spirit, whereby he being God, can do all things he pleases: and his Ordinate
Power, whereby he works according to that ordinary way, and connection of
causes, which God has decreed and appointed. You may thus conceive; By Gods
Absolute Power, he could rain down Manna from Heaven, to feed the Jews in the
Wilderness; but when they came into the Land of Canaan, that ceases; and he
feeds them in the Ordinary way, by plowing, sowing, reaping, etc. according to
that Series of Causes; I will hear the Heavens, and they shall hear the Hos. 2.
21. 22.
Earth, and the Earth shall hear the Corn, and the Wine, and the Oil, and they
shall hear Jesreel. Now, according to this distinction, I say that the Spirits
Absolute Power is not restrained by stinted forms. He can make the dullest form
effectual, to excite and quicken the soul; no matter what the Tool be, if
Omnipotency put forth it self, the work shall be effected. But in the Spirits
ordinary way of working, which is, (as you have heard) a rational argumentative
way, wherein he makes use of means, according to their natural virtue and
efficacy; So a form cannot have that effect upon the soul, as a conceived
prayer, uttered by such as are competently qualified with that gift; partly,
because the customariness of it dulls the souls attention: chiefly, because it
cannot be so accommodated to the various conditions of the soul, and to several
occasions, times, and Providence; by which, being made the matter of prayer,
the Spirit of God usually stirs up more lively and kindly affections.

2. Thus distinguish: The Spirit may be said to be hindered: either,

1. In totum, wholly, so as not to afford any assistance: or,

2. In tantum, as to the degrees of assistance, when it does not work so
vigorously and kindly upon the soul.

I will not deny, but that the Spirit of God may concur with a form, being
conscionably used, and attended: but there is that in the Nature of a Form,
that may hinder it, as to those lively and vigorous motions and affections it,
might stir up in the soul, or (as I have already said) a form does, as it were,
confine the Spirit of God within its own compass, and leaves him less room to
exert his operations.

3. Distinguish also (as has been hinted before) of the causes, why a form is
used, and the persons that use it.

1. Some may use it of necessity, because they want abilities; and must either
pray so, or not at all. In this case a form may be a help; and if conscionably
attended, the Spirit of God may go along with it. This (says Mr. Perkins) is
no binding of the Holy Ghost; but a helping of the Spirit, which is weak in us,
by a Crutch to lean upon.

2. Others use it, through laziness, prejudice against the use of gifts,
bashfulness, or the like cause, when they might attain abilities, if they would
use means. In this case I cannot excuse such, from a neglect of stirring up the
gifts that are in them, and of using that means, whereby the Spirit might put
out his power more freely and vigorously.

4. Distinguish of the manner of men's using both forms, and present abilities.
Some may use a form humbly, conscionably, and in sincerity: Others may use
gifts in pride, ostentation, and hypocrisy. Here the Spirit of God, may rather
be expected to go along with the former, than the latter: for God resists the
proud, but gives grace to the Jam. 4. 6.
humble. But this is not the fault of the prayer, but of the person. Where
gifts are exercised in humility and sincerity, they are to be preferred before
the best of forms, upon the grounds abovementioned. I cannot therefore but
conclude, That he that having both natural abilities, and helps at hand, (as
most Christians have in our days) to attain the gift of prayer, yet sitsdown in
form; must needs do himself much injury; does both put fetters upon his own
Spirit, and limits the holy Spirit of God within the compass of that form; and
in a word, deprives himself and others, of those and the like advantages above
mentioned, which might accrue by the exercise of his gifts: yea, if a Minister,
Master of a Family, or one who is the mouth of others in prayer, he becomes in
a great measure guilty of that deadness, carelessness and insensibleness, which
others contract under his formality. So that though I would, that those who
have no better abilities, or helps to attain them, should rather use a form,
than neglect the duty (and in that case, I doubt not, but the Spirit of God,
would afford his quicknings and assistances in the conscientious use thereof);
Yet let none, through idleness, bashfulness, or a conceit, that it is only for
Ministers, or men of Parts and Learning; or that it savours of Enthusiasm, or
on any other pretense, neglect to get that gift, that you may be competently
able to represent your own, your families, the Churches, or Nations condition
to God, in your own words: Say not, it is unattainable: there are, through
mercy, many poor Christians, who have neither the advantage of Learning nor
Education, that may shame some Ministers in the exercise of this gift: and
though I acknowledge, that after all endeavors, there will be a great
difference amongst Christians; yet, we should not therefore hide our own Talent
in a Napkin, lest we at last fall under the censure of Matthew. 25. 26.
wicked and slothful servants.

This is that, which I conceive to be the Truth. I would not discourage the
weak conscientious Christian, from the use of necessary helps; nor would I
encourage any, to satisfy themselves in stinted forms: but labor to increase
in knowledge and experience, that they may be able to go without those Crutches.

And now it may be, some would desire to be directed, what means they should
use, for the attainment of this gift, how they may get above a form?

To this I answer, That much is already done by others: as Brinsley, Wilkins,
Ambrose, etc. who have laid down many profitable helps this way; into which
Treasury, I have also endeavored to cast my Mite, in the Treatise hereunto
annexed, being a familiar plain Exposition, with Notes and Application of the
Lord Prayer, in such a Method, as I conceived most helpful that way. What use
it may be of, and how to improve it; the Epistle prefixed to both these
Treatises, will acquaint you* yet, I shall here also add something by way of
Advice, to the willing weak Christian.

Direct. 1. Acquaint thy self with the Word of God (which is the general Rule
and Directory of Prayer) especially observe the Petitions and Arguments, which
holy men in Scripture used in prayer. The Book of Psalms, is a choice portion
of Scripture for this purpose: there you may store your selves with choice
Petitions, Arguments and expressions, suitable to any condition, which your
selves and others can be in. I have heard, that Mr. Dod commended to one in an
afflicted doubting condition, the 51 Psalm as a pattern to pray by. And indeed,
I know not a better help to this duty, than to have the Word of God dwell
richly in all Col. 3. 16.
wisdom: to have store of Promises, Providence, Experiences recorded in the
Word, laid up in our hearts, well digested by Meditation. Unskilfulness in the
Word, is a great hinderance in the exercise of the gift of prayer.

Direct. 2. Retire into thy own heart, for mattersuitable. Take notice of thy
sins, wants, corruptions, temptations: Look out also upon the Church and
Nation: take notice what dispensations they are under. This will furnish thee
with matter; esp^cially thy own condition, if thou be once thoroughly sensible
of thy sin and misery, of thy slavery Bolton's Self-enriching Examine. p. 169,
170.
to Satan, etc. I shall not think it tedidious to transcribe, what a Reverend
and experienced Divine has written to this purpose. Let us suppose, that the
most ignorant and simple man, should by some merciless enclosing Landlord, be
turned out of doors, so that he had no where in the wide world to hide his
head, either for himself, Wise or Children. Now in this case and discomfort, a
friend comes unto him, and tells him, There is an honest Religious Gentleman,
will without all fail, bestow a better thing, a richer Farm upon him, if he can
sufficiently bemoan his case, tell his tale, and lay open his misery, and want,
before him: Do you think, this man, though never so simple and ignorant, would
lose it for asking? Or would he come only bluntly and briefly thus? I pray you
Sir, give me this Farm. No, undoubtedly without any help or learning, he would
find plenty both of reasons and words, with many moving terms, and passonate
eloquence, to unfold his distressed estate, and to stir up compassion: He would
tell him the Story of his hard and cruel usage by his former Landlord; how he
had first raised his Fines, then his rents, etc. and at length turned him out
of all into the wide and hard-hearted world -- And therefore upon the knees of
his much vexed and broken heart, he bigs and entreats, that he would be good to
him* else he, and his Wise, and his many poor Children, are like all to go a
begging -- If he would please to give him succor and a resting place in his
great distress and misery, he and all his should be bound to pray for him, and
do him their utmost service faithfully so long as they lived. Want of earthly
necessaries, would enforce and furnish the simplest man in the world to speak
thus, or in the like manner -- How much more then, if a man had sense of his
spiritual miseries and wants, would he find words enough, with fervency of
Spirit, to sue unto the Lord of Heaven? Thus that Pious and Learned man, with
more to that purpose. Misery felt, will teach both Rhetoric and importunity.
Whence that Proverb had its original ( Qui nescit orare, discat navigare.) He
that cannot pray, let him go to Sea. The Storm could teach those Mariners in
Jonah, every Jonah 1. 5. Hos. 5. ult.
one to call upon his God. In their affliction they will seek me early.

Dir^ct. 3. Exercise, and conscientious practice, is a singular help to
improvement. This in all things, Arts, Sciences, and Mechanic employments,
begets dexterity. This the Apostle prescribes to Timothy: Exercise 1 Timothy 4. 7.
thy self unto Godliness. ((...)) a word borrowed from Wrestlers, who practiced
naked, and imports both industry and frequency. (Godliness (...)) the word
principally imports the Worship of God, whereof prayer is a special part.
Without this, it is impossible to arrive at any good measure of ability. And
here it would be expedient for those, that desire praying gifts, to be much in
secret; not merely, that they may exercise it as a gift; but that they may with
more freedom, pour out their soul to God; or to join with some bosom friend,
before whom they may with less fear or shame fac'tness use what gifts they
have. Nor will be amiss, to have some Heads or expressions laid in as a
foundation to build upon; amongst which, what can be more full, than the
pattern, which our blessed Savior has prescribed: of the use whereof, I have
spoken elsewhere.

Direct. 4. Join thy self in society with those that are able and best
qualified this way. Propose such for thy imitation. Others gifts exercised, are
(as you have heard) very edifying. And hence it is, that those that have had
their Education in prayerful families; though sometimes vile and debauched in
their practices, have attained great abilities in that kind. He that walks
Prove. 13. 20.
with wise men, shall be wise. Nature it self leads us to the imitation of, and
conformity with those we converse with. If Joseph in Pharaoh's Court, could
learn the Court-Oath (however some excuse it); Why may not we by conversing
with praying Christians, get praying abilities? Examples are the shortest cut,
to attain any kind of Art, (though I would not have Christians only art in
prayer; or as Simon Magus, desire the gift, that they may make advantage of it)
but desire it for thy eternal good. It is to be sadly lamented, that some,
otherwise godly and practical Christians, yet having spent their younger years
in prayerless families, can never be brought to the practice of this duty
(except in a form) and this is it that makes the gift of prayer, not only rare,
but to be scorned, and derided as a piece of Fanaticism. Therefore join thy
self to prayerful Christians.

Direct. 5. But above all, earnestly (as thou can) beg of God a serious
gracious heart, without which, could thou pray with the tongue of men and
Angels, it would profit thee nothing. Yea, it would be a Talent of Lead, to
sink thee deeper into Hell. This will both furnish thee for, and engage thee in
the duty. This will lay such a necessity upon thee, that bashfulness, or what
else hinders thee, will be laid aside: And it will furnish thee with such
affections and graces, as will suggest tolerable expressions, such as neither
God will reject, nor good men dare despise. Since prayer rightly performed, is
grace exercised; and affections dictate expressions: Where these are, there
will not not be a total defect of those. No sooner is Paul converted (as is
above noted) but Behold he prays. Labor therefore to lay Acts 9. 11.
the foundation of praying abilities in sound conversion: Get the Spirit of God
to sanctify, renew, and quicken thee, and thou shall not want its assistance
in what measure God shall see it convenient for thee. In particular, Beg to
have thy heart convinced of the necessity of the duty, and then beg ability to
perform it: then pray that God will heal thy sinful bashfulness, that thy
stammering Tongue may speak plainly, etc.

Thus I have in speaking to these seven Cases, occasionally touched upon most
of that practical matter, which would have fallen under several Doctrines, if I
had handled the Text in an ordinary Sermon-Method. I hope, through Gods
blessing, it may not be less profitable to your souls in the review of it, as
it has not been less pains to me in the composing of it.

CHAP. IX.
THE Second Doctrine, from the Relative consideration of the words remains to
be spoken to; which was this,

Doct. The Spirits help in prayer, is a singular Privilege and Comfort to Gods
Children in affliction.

The ground of the Doctrine is clear. The scope of the Apostle, is to comfort
Believers under pressing afflictions. Having therefore laid down other grounds
of comfort, he brings in this with a connexive Particle ((...)) likewise also:
q. d. add this also as a special ground of comfort, that the Spirit it self
helps --

The Doctrine for the more distinct handling, falls into two Propositions.

1. That God vouchsafes the Spirit of prayer to his afflicted children.

2. That it is a singular comfort to enjoy it. I shall touch upon each
severally, and then apply them together.

To the first; Saints under trouble, have the Spirits help in prayer. When a
load of afflictions is on their backs, God sends his Spirit into their hearts,
teaching them to cry Abba Father; then especially, though not only.

I would be understood thus:

1. Not always in a full measure, with enlargements of affection and
expressions: sometimes they can only chatter, and figh out their souls
grievances: yet even these silent mournings, are loud cries in Gods ears.

2. Except this be their trouble, that they are under desertion and
withdrawments of the Spirit, which God sometimes sees expedient to exercise his
people withal; yet even then, there is (as you have heard) a secret assistance,
which makes a soul, though he thinks himself cast out of Gods sight; yet
resolve Jon. 2. 4. Job 13. 15.
to look again toward his holy Temple, and though the Lord kill him, yet (with
Job) to trust in him. But in other troubles, and for the most part, the Spirit
is then most powerful in the heart of a Believer, when afflictions are most
pressing.

For confirmation, I shall only lay down this: That the Saints in their
troubles have ordinarily prayed more, and more fervently and importunately,
they have then doubled their diligence, and plied the Throne of Grace with
restless cries, have given God no rest. This will easily appear in a few
instances of some of the most faithful servants of God. Jacob is a famous
instance: when he hears of his Brother Esau's approach with Genesis 32. 9, 10, 11,
12.
four hundred men at his heels, he is (not without cause) greatly afraid and
distressed; and see how sweetly, and with what sinewy arguments he bespeaks
God: there, he goes through many Topics of Invention, claims Relation to, and
Interest in God, upon the account of a Covenant struck betwixt God Genesis 32. 9.
and his Ancestors; O God of my Father Abraham -- Then fastens on that Name
Jehovah (the Lord) which imports Gods eternity and immutability: Next pleads a
twofold word of God: 1. Of Command, Thou said unto me, Return unto thy
Counttey -- q. d. I am now performing an act of obedience, and therefore expect
protection; I am doing thy Commandment, and therefore expect thy salvation. 2.
A word of Promise ( and I will deal well with thee) q. d. If thou give me up
into the hands of my merciless and hard hearted Brother, it will look like a
falsification of that Promise, V. 10.
thou have made me. Then he sweetly insinuates himself into Gods favor, by a
grateful commemoration of the former kindnesses that God has showed him, and
his utter unworthiness thereof ( I am not worthy of the least of all thy
mereies, and of all the truth which thou have showed unto thy servant --) Th^s
having (as I may say) V. 11.
sweetened God, and made way for his request; he puts up his particular suit,
Deliver me, I pray thee, from the hand of my Brother -- which he again
enforces, by minding God of his word of promise [ And thou said, V. 12.
I will surely do thee good, and make thy seed as the sand of the Sea] which,
how shall it be performed, if thou now permit my bloodyminded Brother to come
and smite me, and the Mother with the Children? Whence can this proceed, but
from the Spirit of Supplication? Yet, this is not all, Jacob is left alone (
his Wives and Children being passed over the V. 22.
Brook Jabbok) and now he will have the other bout with God, he will keep a
night on it, a man wrestled with him, till the breaking of the day -- I will not
trouble you V. 24.
with Niceties; you may expound this, by that of the Prophet, He had power over
the Hos. 12. 4.
Angel, and prevailed; how? he wept and made supplication unto him -- There was
something of corporal struggling, as the word shows ( Jacob goes halting away)
but the main business was prayer: thereby he holds the Angel; thereby he
conquers, and obtains this Testimony (stamped for a memorial upon his new name)
as a Prince thou have power, with G^d and with men, and have prevailed. V. 28.
Here is an afflicted Saint, and you see he is a wrestling and victorious
Saint. Whence had Jacob this strength, but from the God of Jacob? He wrestled
both in and against Jacob, and (as he said, In Jacobo Ma^t. in Jude v. 20.
Deus est seipso fortior) God in Jacob conquers himself. I have insisted upon
this Instance for your imitation, I shall leave others to your own meditation
and enlargement. Job (notwithstanding he is much taken up with complaints) yet
is not wanting this way. Read his whole tenth Chapter, and see what variety and
strength of Argument* he urg^^ God withal. David much in the deeps of
affliction; and no less in the exercise of this duty. Out of the depths have I
cried unto thee O Lord, Lord hear my Psalm 130. 1, 2. 12. 2. 28. 1.
voice -- O my God, I cry in the day time, but thou hear not; and in the
night-season, and am not silent. Unto thee will I cry, O Lord my Rock, be not
silent unto me -- But what should I insist upon particulars? Peruse the Psalms;
what ever strait you find David in, still prayer is his asylum; and the more
pressing affliction, the more vehement his affections; the more importunate his
prayers. Do enemies pursue him, with words of hatred, reproach him, charge him
wrongfully? Do friends forsake him, deal deceitfully, falsify their Trust? Is
he driven from his own Palace into a Wilderness, by a rebellious Son? Is he
hunted as a Partridge upon the Mountains, by an envious Father-in-law? Is he
fallen into grievous sins, and fears Gods wrath, and feels the withdrawments of
his Spirit? In all these, and all other troubles that befell him, still you
find him crying, pressing in unto God, humbly supplicating, and powerfully
pleading. What should I mention H^man and Asaph (if they are the Psalm. 77. and
88.
Authors of those Psalms) who being under sad pressures, struggling with
distractions and despair, vent themselves this way? Or Hannah, who in the
bitterness of her Spirit, poured out her soul before the Lord? Or Paul, who
being buffeted by the Messenger of Satan, prayed thrice, that it might be taken
from him? When the Word represents it, as the very Genius of the Godly. For
this shall every one that is godly pray unto 2 Cor. 12. 8, 9. Psalm. 32. 6.
Psalm. 102.
thee -- And the Title of the Psalm, A prayer of the afflicted, when he is
overwhelmed, and pours out his complaint before the Lord* that is, the godly
afflicted, whose practice i^ so to do. One Instance more, and that i^ our
blessed Savior (who had not the Spirit by measure) He being in an agony prayed
Luke 22. 44.
((...)) more servently he extended prayer. And in the days of his flesh, when
he had offered up prayers and supplications, will Heb. 5. 7.
strong crying and tears unto him that was able to save him from death, and was
heard in that he feared. Every word here has an Emphasis in it. In the days
of his flesh (and those were days of trouble) In that ^e Vid. Calvin in locum.
feared. (viz. with a Natural fear left he should be overwhelmed with trouble)
Now this day of fear and trouble, what brought it forth? how wrought it? You
see it produced prayers, supplications, strong crying, tears, ardour and
vehemence in prayer.

Object. You have abundantly proved, that the Saints in their troubles, were
much in prayer; but, what is this to the purpose? How appears it, that they had
the Spirits help? Might not nature and a desire of self-preservation, prompt
them to this course? Will not even wicked men pray and cry under troubles?

Answ. True: Nature may do much: It can make an Ahab put on sackcloth, and
humble himself, and go softly. It can make a Pharaoh in a strait, beg Moses his
prayers, etc. yet, if you take along these two considerations, it will be
evident, that they were assisted by the Spirit of supplication.

1. Consider, how they prayed: and that with extraordinary fervor, strong
cries and importunate wrestlings: this speaks, that they were strengthened with
might by the Spirit in their inward man. A natural man can bowl upon his bed
(observe that) and Hos. 7. 14.
they can assemble themselves f^r corn and wine (note what they pray for) It is
but howling, it is but lazy upon their beds; it is but for corn and wine: but
now read the prayers of the afflicted Saints, you may see an impress of
Divinity upon them, they even breathe out that Spirit, by whom they were
indicted. Oh, the confidence mixed with humility! Oh, the strength and sinews!
Oh, the sweet infinuations, pressing importunities, etc. that may be observed
in them!

2. But if this be not sufficient, consider (in the next place) how they sped*
what success and acceptance they had with God* what their efficacy and ver^ue
was, what gracious returns they had. Now, when God causes his ears to hear, it
is an argument he first prepares their hearts. No prayer is Psalm. 10. 17.
acceptable to God, but what is the breathing of his own Spirit. The Text tell
you, he kn^weth (that is, accepts, is well pleased with) the mind of the
Spirit: God can distinguish betwixt what is ours, and what is his* own. That
twofold intercession of Christ in Heaven, and of the Spirit in our hearts, is
jointly necessary to procure the acceptance of our prayers with God. Now look
back upon the Instances I have given, Jacob, David, Paul, etc. yea, see how
graciously God answered their requests: whence it is evident, those prayers
were the operations of his own Spirit. Thus of the first Proposition.

2. As to the second, that it is a singular Privilege and comfort to Gods
afflicted children, to have the Spirits assistance in prayer: it is already in
a great* measure proved, in what has been said to the several Cases proposed;
yet something I shall add, as to the advantage of it in afflictions, which I
shall discover in five or six sweet effects of it in an afflicted state; but
know this, that when I have said all, your own experience will make you say, as
the Queen of Sheba concerning 1 Kings 10. 6, 7.
Solomon: Behold, the half was not told me. It is an inexpressible advantage^
Sampson's riddle is in this sense verified, the Judge. 14. 14.
Spirit of prayer out of the eater brings meat, and out of the strong
sweetness. Particularly,

1. The Spirits help in affliction, carries in it much of Evidence. The Spirit
of supplication is the Spirit of Grace. When in our afflictions Zech. 12. 10.
Romans 8. 15.
we can cry Abba Father, it shows that we have received the Spirit of Sons:
Hereby we have a singular proof, that we Gal. 4. 6.
are Christ's: for as it holds Negatively, that* If any man have not the Spirit
of Christ, he is none of his. So Positively, he that has the Spirit, is
Christ's; for as many as are led by the Romans 8. 9, 14.
Spirit of God, they are the Sons of God. And what more lenifying or sweetning
ingredient* can be put into the bitter cup of affliction? What an allay is this
to the saddest, sharpest Trouble? It were easy here to cut this River into
many streams, and to show what abundant comfort in affliction, flows from the
assurance of our Adoption: but I forbear particulars, Only to hint something;
Hence we know, we are in the hand of a loving tenderhearted Father, who does
not Lam 3 31, 32, 33.
afflict willingly, nor grieve the children of men (much less his own
children): who will not cost off for ever; but though he cause grief* yet will
have compassion according to the Isa. 63. 9*
multitude of his mercies, who is himself afflicted in our afflictions. Hence,
we may be assured, that our afflictions shall be proportioned, timed, limited,
so as we shall be able to bear them, that they shall be for our good, that we
shall have deliverances, and that in the best season, etc. So that the very
reflection upon our prayers, put up in faith, humility and fervency, does much
alleviate our burden; and if not take away* yet much abate the bitterness of
the Cup.

2. (Which follows upon the former) It brings case with it; it may well be
called hearts case. Experience tells us, if we have but a faithful friend, to
whom we may impart our grievances, and freely unbosome our selves; it much
lightens our burden. And what friend like God? By this means Hannah cased her 1 Samuel 1. 18.
grieved heart, and cheered her sadded countenance. This has been the Saints
practice; David still had recourse to God by prayer; and you may in many Psalms
observe, how the case is changed, and his soul refreshed before his prayer be
ended; he got renewed strength: In the day when I cried, thou answeredst Psalm.
138. 3. Psalm. 55. 22.
me and strengthnedst me with strength, etc. Hearty servent prayer is one way
of casting our burden upon the Lord; and in so doing, he has promised to
sustain us; and surely he cannot but have much case (under whatever burden) who
has an almighty arm to lean upon. How often had the backs and hearts too, of
Gods persecuted servants been broken, if they could not have poured out their
souls to God? I noted above, from the Title of that Psalm, that it is the
practice Psalm. 102.
of the afflicted and almost overwhelmed people of God, to pour out their souls
before the Lord. Other friends sometimes can and will not, sometimes would, and
cannot relieve us. 2 Kings 6. 27.
If the Lord do not help thee, how can I? -- But God wants neither pity nor
power to help. Yet I here speak not so much of actual deliverance, as of that
inward quiet and serenity, which prayer brings into the soul.

3. The Spirit of prayer administers a ground of strong confidence to a soul
under affliction. The more servent in prayer, the more lively are its hopes,
the stronger its confidence, either of support under, or deliverance from its
afflictions, however that thereby some special good shall accrue to it. And it
cannot be otherwise; for there are many precious Promises made to prayer; Call
upon me in the day of trouble, and I will Psalm. 50. 15
bear thee. And ye shall seek me, and find me, Jer. 29. 13.
when ye shall search for me with all your heart -- And it shall come to pass,
that before Isa. 65. 24.
they call, I will answer, and whiles they are yet speaking, I will hear. How
can a soul but grow in hope, as he feels the Spirit of prayer more and more
powerful in him? In the fear of the Lord is strong confidence. Prove. 14. 26.
Prayer is a singular part of the fear (or worship) of God; and causes
confidence. Prayer has had such attestations from Heaven, and is propt up with
such promises in the Word, that when it is spiritually performed, it cannot but
elevate the soul to a high pitch of expectation, Psalm. 22. 1. 6. The Psalm. ^ 1.
6.
Church prays earnestly for the King, and then concludes with confidence, Now
know I, that the Lord saves his anointed, he will hear from his holy Heaven,
with the saving strength of his right hand. When God prepares Psalm. 10. 17.
the heart, it is a certain pledge he will cause his ear to hear. We may argue
in this Case, as Manaoh's Wife; If the Lord were pleased to kill us, he would
not have received Judges 13. 23.
a burnt-offering, and a meat offering at our hands -- So, if the Lord would
not hear our prayers, he would never put such a Spirit of Supplication into our
hearts.

4. The Spirit of prayer also se^cheth in support under affliction: it draws
down strength from Heaven; as in that of David before mentioned, In the day
when I cried, thou Psalm. 138. ^3
answeredst me, and strengthnedst me with strength in my soul. Strong cries
bring fresh supplies of strength, and procure ability to bear. Paul, when he
prevails not, for the removal of that Thorn in the flesh, yet has this
comfortable 2 Cor. 12. 8, 9.
answer, My grace shall be sufficient for thee: q. d. I will not remove thy
burden, but I will renew thy strength. This is promised in that sweet
Scripture, They Isa. 40. 31.
that wait on the Lord (and prayer is a singular way of waiting) shall renew
their strength -- -- Faith, Hope, Love, Parience, and every other grace is
exceedingly strengthened by prayer: and in this respect it brings case (as was
showed above) as a man at full strength can with a little finger bear away,
what a Child cannot lift. Paul could do (or suffer) all things through Phil. 4.
13.
Christ strengthening him: this strength is derived by prayer rightly performed.
Therefore is it, that he prays so earnestly, that God would strengthen the
Ephesians with Ephesians. 3. 16.
might by his Spirit in their inward man.

5. By this also, the sanctification of afflictions is procured. It not only
procures strength to bear, but grace also to improve. It is the true
Philosophers-Stone, that turns all it touches into Gold. Like the skilful
Apothecary, it makes, out of Poison, an Antidote against Poison. As every
creature, so 1 Timothy* ^. 4, 5.
every cross and trouble is sanctified by prayer; so that they become blessings
to us: Prayer draws our the virtue of that great Gospel-promise, that all
things shall work together Romans 8* 28.
for good -- And who knows the benefits that are brought to Gods people, by
sanctified afflictions? How are corruptions mortified, graces refined,
envigorated and purged from their drossy mixtures? How are the after visits of
Heaven, rendered abundantly sweeter? and (which I would especially instance in)
by pressing afflictions sanctified, we learn to press more into the Divine
presence; where the Spirit of prayer is: it rises higher by afflictions, as
Noah's Ark did by the increase of the waters. Let not therefore the ignorant
world wonder, that the Saints in the midst of pressing afflictions, 1 Pet. 1.
6, 8.
can rejoice with joy unspeakable and full of glory: for the Spirit of prayer
going along with those afflictions, turns them into singular advantages. Well
may they count it all Jam. 1. 2, 3.
joy, when they fall into diverse Temptations, knowing that the trying of their
faith, works Romans 5. 3, 4
patience; and patience, experience; and experience, hope, which makes not
ashamed. This effect David found; that his Corrections became Psalm. 119. 67.
Instructions. Before I was afflicted, I went astray; but now have I kept thy
word: and therefore saw cause to say, It is good for 71.
me, that I have been afflicted, that I might learn thy Statutes: yea to
acknowledge, that in faithfulness God had afflicted him. Now 75.
this happy fruit, is the product of prayer; God may indeed turn the
afflictions of a wicked man, to good; but it is by teaching him to pray.
Manasseh, when he was in affliction, besought the Lord his God, and 2. Chron.
33. 12, 13.
humbled himself greatly before the God of his Fathers, and prayed unto him,
and he was entreated of him -- -- Afflictions stir up prayer, and prayer
sactifies afflictions; and sactified afflictions may be put into the Catalogue
of our choicest blessings.

6. And this also (when the Lord sees it good) procures a happy issue and
deliverance. It is the means which God has appointed. The sorrows of Death
compassed me, and the pains of Hell gate hold upon me -- Then called I upon the
name of the Lord -- Psalm. 116. 3, 4, 7, 8.
and the issue was, God dealt bountifully with him, delivered his soul from
death, his eyes from tears, and his feet from falling. Prayer rightly
performed, has this certain effect, to procure deliverance, with one only
exception, unless God in his infinite Wisdom, see it more for his glory, and
for our spiritual and eternal good, to be kept still in the surnace; and this
is such an exception, as every gracious soul will gladly admit of. But I may
yet rise higher: The Spirit of Prayer, not only procures deliverance* but
deliverance in mercy; deliverance sanctified, and that is a pledge of eternal
deliverance. Others may be delivered, but theirs is not so much a Preservation,
as a Reservation to some sadder calamity; but there is this in Deliverance
procured by prayer, that the soul may be assured, God intends him good by it.

These are a few of those infinite advantages, which the Spirit of prayer
brings along with it to Gods afflicted servants; but it is impossible, to
enumerate all: These are but as a cluster or two, in comparison of the full
Vintage. Do but look over the precious promises made to the people of God in
their straits; take notice how many, how great things are promised, and so many
are the Advantages which the Spirit of prayer brings with it; for that is the
key which opens those Treasuries, that sets those Conduits a running, and
drains out the sweetness and virtue of them.

Thus you have each part of the Doctrine confirmed and made good: Let us now
see what Improvement may be made of this comfortable Truth.

CHAP. X.
I Shall not make my Superstructure in the Application, so large as the
foundation would bear, but confine my self to speak something*

1. To those that want this sweet Privilege, who are destitute of the Spirit
of Supplication, either really, or at least in their own apprehension.

2. To those that have it, and do or may find, or have found the sweetness of
it.

1. The first sort are those that want the Spirit of Prayer; And amongst these,

1. Some scorn and deride it, thinking it a mere fancy: Tell them of praying by
the Spirit, they are ready to scoff at it, or wonder John 3. 4.
(as Nicodemus) how can these things be? This is Fanaticism, Melancholy, a mere
dream of a few brainsick persons: they will cry out as Festus against Paul,
Thou art Act. 26. 24.
beside thy self, much learning has made thee mad. Or as they did against our
Savior, He has a Devil, and is mad -- I can scarce John 10. 20.
hope, that such will vouchsafe the perusal of these lines, and therefore I
shall not spend many words upon them. Only this: Let such know, that either
extremity of misery here, or eternity of torment hereafter, shall convince
them, that themselves are possessed with that madness which they charge upon
others. When misery is upon them, and they cannot pray, except the Lord give
them up to desperate madness (as he has done some) to rage and blaspheme, they
will wish, Oh, for a heart to pray! Oh, that I had that Spirit of prayer, which
I have so often scoffed at* then, send for a godly Minister, a prayerful
Christian, as David Psalm. 141. 6
speaks in a like case, When their Judges are everthrown in stony places, they
shall hear my words, for they are sweet: So they, How gracious Jer. 22. 23.
will they be, when pangs are upon them? When (with Manasseh) they are caught
amongst 2. Chron. 33. 11.
the Thorns, they will then know the benefit of prayer, either by the want of
it, or, if God give them a heart to pray, by the exercise of it. Then to be
able to pray with assistance and acceptance, will be worth something. Or
suppose, they never come into such straits, or be given up to a reprobate mind,
or to desperate hardiness, if they be so far given up, as to blaspheme the God
of Heaven, because Rev. 16. 11.
of their pains; yet eternal torments, will beget a late and fruitless
repentance; then will they wish they had been of the precisest of those, whom
they now scoff at* But I shall speak something to the second sort, which may
also concern these, if they will vouchsafe to hearken to it.

2. Some neither have, nor care for this Privilege. It is a thing above their
capacity: They never trouble their heads about it; nor ever consider, whether
it be a fancy or reality. As for afflictions, they either promise themselves
immunity, or if they should fall into trouble, they cannot apprehend what good
Prayer can do them; they cannot believe, that it will bring case or comfort,
because they see these often to drink deepest of the Cup, who give themselves
most to prayer; besides, they have better shifts, they have riches, friends,
policy, etc. These will bestead them more, than to go and whine out a prayer to
God in their trouble. Let me tell these careless, senseless persons, that
ignorance and presumption blind their souls, and beget these sad mistakes. The
reason why they think so slightly of this privilege is, because they know it
not; and therefore neither, can they desire it. I may say, as our Savior to
the Woman of Samaria, If thou knew the gift of God -- If you knew the John
4. 10.
sweet revivings, the overflowing comforts that a soul in troubles gets by
earnest prayer, you would not so disregard it: but alas! I cannot expect you
should esteem what you know not, nor indeed can conceive, till experience teach
you; yet in hope, that God may set in with my poor endeavors by his holy
Spirit, I shall lay before you some considerations, which may show the sad
condition of those that want the Spirit of prayer: Especially, in a time of
affliction, which (by Gods blessing) may awaken you (and those also I spoke of
in the first place) to labor for it. 1. Then, Consider with what sad
temptations, afflictions come armed upon a prayerless person: they are not mere
troubles, but temptations also: and it is a thousand to one, he that cannot
pray in an affliction, will both sin and sink under it. Man under affliction,
is impatiently desirous of help, and ready to catch at any Twig to keep himself
from drowing, Self-preservation is so rooted a Principle in man's nature, that
he thinks any thing lawful, that seems probably conducing that way. Now he that
cannot go to God by prayer in a strait, and ease himself that way; what will he
not do, to save himself? Whither will he not go? For instance:

1. He will be ready to run to helpless helps; such as will afford him no
comfort or relief. So it will be at the day of Judgment (if we so understand
that Text) They shall call to the Mountains and Rocks, Rev. 6. 16.
saying, Fall on us, and hide us from the face of him that sits on the
Throne, and from the V. Isa. 2. 19. Hos. 10. 8. Rev. 9. 6.
the wrath of the Lamb. The like to which, is foretold of wicked men in their
distress in other Scriptures: What improbable courses do men take for relief in
their distresses, when they have no interest in God? Whereas, a soul that has
the Spirit of Adoption, can betake himself to God, he has a ready way, he is
never to seek for a refuge: God is his hiding place; thither Psalm. 32. 7. and
143. 9.
he flees, to hide himself: by prayer he commits and commends himself into the
hands of God: he dwells in the secret of the Most High, Psalm. 91. 1.
and lodges under the shadow of the Almighty. Oh, what a helpless creature, is
a prayerless soul? he goes to friends, but they know him not: he may take up
Job's complaint; Job 6. 15.
My Brethren have dealt deceitfuly as a Brook, and as the stream of Brooks they
pass away. He tryes what his riches can do; but they profit not in the day of
wrath; Treasures of wickedness profit nothing: Neither their Silver nor Prove.
11 4. and 10. 2. Ezekiel. 7. 19. Zeph. 1. 18.
Gold is able to deliver them in the day of the Lords wrath: He makes lies his
refuge, and under falsehood he hides himself; but the Hail sweeps away the
refuge of lies, and the waters overflow the hiding place. This bed (of sinful
policy and base practices whereon he thought to be at ease) is shorter then
Isa. 28. 15, 17, 20.
that he can stretch himself upon it: This covering (of hypocrisy) narrower
than that he can wrap himself in it. Whither will the poor forsaken wretch go?
Pray he cannot, he wants that Heaven-engaging faculty. Oh, the advantage of a
Spirit of prayer in a day of distress! But,

2. He will be ready to go to those that will distress him, instead of helping
him: as the Jews found Pharaoh, of whom God witnesses, that when they took
hold of him Ezekiel. 29. 7.
by the hand, he did break and rent all their shoulder* and when they-leaned
upon him, he brake and made all their loins to be at a stand, left them to
shift for themselves, as well as they could; brought them into the Briats, and
then cast them off; or as Ahaz was served by Tilgah-Pilneser King of Assyria, 2 Chronicles. 28. 20, 21.
whom though he hired with a great reward, yet he distressed him, but
strengthened him not. How often do wicked prayerless persons plunge themselves
deeper into misery, by those courses they take, to relieve themselves? and run
into the snare they would avoid, or some worse calamity? The silly Sheep to
shelter it self from the Storm, runs into the Briars, and they pull off its
covering: We run sometimes under a Tree in a Storm, and it drops upon us, and
wets us worse. Such are the shelters of ungodly men; but the Spirit of prayer
puts us out of danger of this temptation; it sends us to one, whose promises
are not more free and full, than his performances will be faithful.

3. Such an one will be sadly tempted to run to sinful helps, to make lies his
refuge (as was hinted before): when he cannot untye the knot, he will cut it,
he will break the hedge of duty, to escape the foulness of his way: He will be
ready to say as she,

Flectere si nequeo superos, Acheronta movebe. If Heaven will not, Hell shall
relieve him. If the God of Israel be his enemy (because of wickedness) or he a
stranger to God, and has no Interest in him, cannot pray to him, he will be
ready to enquire of Baa^z^bub the 2 Kings. 1. 2, 3.
God of Ekron. If God have cast him off, be departed from him, and become his
enemy, he will be ready to go to the Witch of 1 Samuel 28. 16.
Endor. Now the Spirit of prayer is a singular preservative from such sinful
courses* while those that want it, sink in their affliction; and so either sink
themselves deeper into it, or else sin themselves out of it, by debauching
conscience, gratifying the Devil, offending God (which indeed is but to avoid
one mischief, by running into a far greater). He that has the Spirit of
prayer, is plying the Throne of grace, committing himself to God, casting his
burden upon the Lord; he dare not, indeed he needs not take those sinister
courses. Ezra would not so much as desire a guard of the King, because he had
told the King of the hand of God upon Ezra 8. 21, 22.
all them that seek him for good. He had interest in Heaven, he can engage Gods
protection, by a solemn Fast, and humble seeking the Lord. A praying believing
soul scorns those base shifts, that others use. If he cannot pray himself out
of his afflictions, he can pray down support and strength, patience,
cheerfulness, grace sufficient for him; 2 Cor. 12. 9.
and therefore resolves to wait, as the Church, Isa. 8. 18. Mich. 7. 9. as Job,
Chap. 14. 14. Should the Devil or the world tempt him* to an indirect way of
escape, and set him a door open, if he will but accept of such terms as they
propose; it may be, dissemble a little, falter in his Religion, violate his
engagements to God, debauch conscience, etc. He will be ready to say (as Paul,
when Act. 16. 37.
they would have thrust him privily out of the Prison) Nay, verily, but let
them come themselves and fetch us out. So he, God has put me into this
suffering state, and I will stay till he come and take me out of it; and I will
pray and wait, till he come, for be will come, and will not tarry.

4. Such as want the Spirit of prayer, are in danger of being tempted, to break
out into curses, imprecations, blespheming against God, or some such dreadful
courses. Grief will vent it self one way or other, if it do not work out in
prayer, and humble submissive acknowledgements, it will be apt to work the
contrary way. See how Job's grief works. He fell down upon the Job 1. 20, 21,
22.
ground and worshipped, and said, Naked came I -- the Lord gave, and the Lord
has taken away, blessed be the name of the Lord: This kept him from sinning,
and charging God foolishly: and yet you find some mixtures of impatience in
him. And especially in cursing his birthday, Chap. 3. etc. you see what his
impatient Wife prompts and tempts him to; Do thou still retain thy integrity?
Job 2. 9.
Curse God and dye. For I cannot assent to that softer sense that some have put
upon her words; the former clause of the Verse will not bear it, Do thou
still retain thy integrity? She seems to have respect to his blessing God in
the end of the former Chapter (if you will read the words, Bless God, etc. q.
d. Since thou art so apt and ready Dutch Annotat.
still to bless God for all things, as thou did lately; thou had best hold
on still, and see how well he will requite thee -- So that she seems here to
act the Devils part, who is ready to set in with all occasions, and most
commonly tempts to murmuring, impatience and blasphemy, when we are under
affliction, as knowing how subject we are to it at such a time. Well, but Job
had the Spirit of God, which fortified him against such temptations. But now,
where the Spirit of prayer is wanting (which teaches humble submission, and
blessing God) how apt are men to break out into cursing, dreadful imprecations,
and horrid blasphemies? you may note in that Scripture, most of those things
together. Much of that Chapter, is Isa. 8.
a threatening against Israel for their wickedness. Now observe what course men
will take in these straits: They forsake the waters of V. 6.
Shiloah that go softly (a small Brook in Jerusalem, in allusion to which, the
Psalmist calls the special Providence of God over his Church, a River, Psalm.
46. 4. So that they despise the promise of Gods help, looking upon it, as a
little Brook, a poor contemptible thing). Now what course do they take? They
rejoice in Rezin (King of Syria) and in Remaliahs Son, Pekah King of Israel:
but God will bring upon them the waters of the V. 7.
River (in opposition to the River Shiloah which they forsook) strong and many,
even the King of Assyria, and all his glory -- Here they trust to vain helps,
such as shall not afford them relief. Again, Say ye not V. 12.
a confederacy, to all them to whom this people* shall say a confederacy. Here
is another vain and sinful refuge, making confederacies, entering into Leagues
and Covenants with Idolatrous Nations, as Ahaz (to whom this seems to relate)
with the King of Assyria; 2 Chronicles. 28. 16, 20, 21.
but this proved a distress, and not a refuge. Again, when they shall say unto
you, Seek unto them that have familiar Spirits, and unto Wizards that peep and
that mutter -- Here is a sinful course; the wickedness whereof, is evinced by
the following words [ Should not a people seek unto their God?] q. d. V. 19.
Should you not rather believe in God, and enquire of him by prayer? And then
the folly of it in those words [ for the living to the dead?] q. d. What
madness is it, that 1 Samuel 28* 11.
those who are alive, should enquire of the dead (as Saul did)? Yet, such is
the sin and folly of prayerless persons. Then observe again, They shall pass
thorough it hardly V. 21.
bestead and hungry; and it shall come to pass* that when they shall be hungry,
they shall fret themselves, and curse their King and their God, and look upward
(not with an eye of faith, but of impatience, or forced by mere extremity, as 2 Samuel 22. 42.) This is that I am now speaking of; they fall a cursing,
blaspheming, grow desperate. By all this, you see, how sad it is to want a
Spirit of prayer in a day of trouble: Into what snares men run themselves, when
they cannot go to God. Therefore do not make a light matter of it: Think not
the want of the Spirit of prayer, a small thing: you know not how soon God may
change your condition; how soon affliction may fasten upon you: then the Spirit
of prayer would be an unspeakable advantage, and the want of it, will be found
an unspeakable want: however, if by these sinful shifts, you may keep off the
blow for the present; yet sin will increase, and you will by such courses,
treasure up wrath against the day of wrath, Isa. 50. ult. and 8. ult.
your portion will be to lie down in sorrow, you will be driven into darkness.

2. A second consideration, that may show the misery of not having the Spirit
of prayer in affl^ction, is this, that such ordinarily lose the benefit of
affliction, to them it is Ezekiel. 7. 5.
like to be an evil, an only evil. I deny not, but God may do good, and has
done good to very wicked men by afflictions: But I say, you cannot expect or
promise to your selves any benefit, till you can pray in affliction. The
promises indeed are many, of Isa. 27. 9.
benefit by affliction. By this shall the iniquity of Jacob be purged -- I have
sent them Jer. 24. 5.
into the Land of the Caldeans for their good -- All things shall work together
for good Romans 8. 28.
-- But he (God chastneth us) for our Heb. 12. 10.
profit, that we might be partakers of his holiness -- and the like. But all
these promises bring forth upon the knees of prayer. What is it for him, that
has no key, or way of entrance, to know of an infinite Treasure? These wells
are deep; if you cannot draw them by the Bucket of prayer, what the better are
you? Oh, it is an unconceivable loss, to lose the benefit of afflictions. Thus
may a prayerless soul bemoan it self in trouble: This affliction (for ought I
know) may be my ruin, it may be the Praeludium of eternal misery; it may cut
me off, and send me packing to Hell; or, if I live, I may live a miserable
comfortless life; I may be a very Cain, a Vagabond. Or, it may be to my further
obduration, and so heighten and hasten my condemnation: Now, he that has the
Spirit helping him to pray in trouble, may be assured of a blessed issue, and a
sanctified improvement of his sufferings. But of this I spoke something before.
Well, if you desire to derive upon your souls, the influences of all those
blessed promises made to the suffering servants of God, get the Spirit of
Prayer, otherwise you cannot be assured, that one of those good things belong
to you.

3. Where a Spirit of prayer is wanting under affliction, it is to be feared,
that soul is in a state of wrath. I will not be peremtory: In some cases God
may withdraw his Spirit from his people in affliction, when he intends to hold
on their burden for some time; as it was with the Jews in Babylon. Ezekiel. 24. 23.
So foretold: Ye shall not mourn nor weep, (that is, toward God in prayer) but
ye shall pine away in your iniquities, and mourn one toward another: and so
fulfilled: All this evil is come Dan. 9. 13.
upon us, yet made we not our prayer before the Lord our God -- Yea, sometimes,
the with holding of a Spirit of prayer, is inflicted, as a punishment upon Gods
children (of which I spoke in one of the Cases above). Yet this I must needs
say, Where a soul neither prays, nor desires to pray, nor sees a necessity of
prayer under trouble, but thinks of other courses, any whither rather than to
God, it is a shrewd sign, that soul has no interest in God: For afflictions
are Gods Rod; and if we are children, we shall fall at his feet, when he takes
his Rod in hand: and however the Sunshine of Prosperity make a Child of God
cast off his Cloak (as I may allude to that Fable); yet the wind of Adversity,
would make him gird it closer about him. Though a course of peace, health,
fullness, make the best sometimes forget their Rock; yet when misery comes, they
remember God is their Rock, and Psalm. 78. 35
the high God their Redeemer. The Text tells you, it is one of the great
supports of a child of God in a day of trouble, to have the Spirit helping his
infirmities. So that where the Spirit of supplication is wholly wanting, it is
to be doubted, whether that soul has the Spirit of Adoption. Though to pray in
affliction, is not always an evidence of having a Spirit of Prayer: for even
wicked men may, and often do, pray in straits; yet to be prayerless then,
speaks one void of the Spirit. Were there any praying dispositions in the
heart, afflictions would draw them out. But it may be, this is little to those
I am speaking to; what if they be not children of God? What if they be
strangers at the Throne of Grace? etc. Oh but make not light of such a
condition. What can I say worse of a man on this side Hell, than to say, he is
a child of wrath? To such, God is an enemy, and all his dispensations are in
anger; his very blessings are cursed. That is a sad word the wrath of God
abides on him; it hunts and pursues John 3. 36.
him, and (without repentance) will never leave, till it has sunk him into
everlasting perdition. Is this to be made light of? Or can you imagine a
condition more deplorable?

4. Add this also, that, where a soul under affliction, is void of the Spirit
of prayer, the whole weight l^es upon himself. Some by infirmities, in the
Text, understand our weaknesses, Dutch Annotat.
whereby we are unable to bear affliction: Such as in crosses we are still
subject to, as well in our Spirit, which often murmurs against it, as in our
body, which is frail and weak: but where this is wanting, we are like to bear
our own burden: and the least affliction, when it lies wholly upon our selves,
will be intolerable. But I shall leave this to be better understood by their
own experience, who make light of this precious privilege. Mean while, if any
soul by these considerations, be ^wakened into a desire of this great mercy,
and begin to enquire what course he shall take to be possessed of it; let such
look back to the fourth Case, where he shall be directed, what is to be done,
in order to the obtaining of it.

CHAP. XI.
THere are yet a third sort, who (at least in their own apprehension) want this
great Privilege; but their condition much different from the two former, being
so far from scossing as it (as the first) or slighting it (as the second sort)
that they have a singular esteem of it, and it is their great complaint, that
they want it. Oh, if they could but pray in their afflictions, if they had that
Spirit of supplication, how cheerfully could they bear their burden! but this
is their grief, they are overwhelmed, and cannot pour out their souls to the
Lord: Other straits would be nothing, were it not for a strait heart; but they
are bound up, and cannot go forth. Oh, faith one, if a trouble should overtake
me, and I so heartless, senseless, prayerless, what would become of me? Another
complains, A load of trouble is on my back, and no praying dispositions in my
heart; When I remember God, I am troubled, I co^^^ain, and my Spirit is
overwhelmed. Psalm. 88. 8.
This is a condition which calls loud, both for counsel and comfort. Take both
together in the following particulars.

1. Be it supposed, that thy condition be is thou apprehendest, that thou art
under a desertion, and God withholds the Influences of his Spirit, it is indeed
a sad condition; yet there is hope concerning this thing. Look back to the
sixth Case, see what course is to be taken for the recovery of the Spirits
assistance, and what encouragements there are to look up to God, and to cry for
the return of his Spirit; and what gracious ends God may have in exercising
thee with this sad dispensation; thou will find many hints of encouragement,
and some grounds of hope scattered here and there in that dicourse, make use of
them for thy direction and comfort.

2. But what if thy case be not altogether such as thou apprehendest? Thou
supposest the Spirit of God departed, but possibly he Cant. 2. 9.
may only stand behind the wall -- and be but withdrawn a little. Nay, it may
be, thou have his assistance, while thou complainest of the want of it. Christ
may be present with thee, only thine eyes held, that thou Luke 24. 16.
can not know him. We may not always take the report of our unbelieving
hearts. There is (in a spiritual sense) hat makes himself Prove. 13. 7. Rev. 2.
9.
poor, having great riches. I know thy poverty, but thou art rich. Let me for
thy conviction and comfort, expostulate with thee in two or three Questions; to
which, let thy soul make an impartial answer, I mean, that thou belie not thy
condition, by denying what is truth of thy self.

Quest. 1. Whence are these complaints? What makes thee cry out of the want of
the Spirits assistance? I hope thou art in good earnest, thou dare nor so far
wrong thy self, as to say, thou do but dissemble, while thou thus
complainest, or that thou art not sensible, that, to have spirit of
supplication, would be thy joy and the rejoicing of thy heart; as the want of
it, is thy hearty grief --. This then being granted, I ask, Whence these sad
complaints proceed? not surely from any Principle in nature: thou see many a
carnal wretch, who goes from day to day, never lifts up his heart to God, never
desires to have this mercy, nor thinks it worthy the having. Nay, to come
nearer, it may be thou thy self can remember the time when thou could have
lien and lived in a prayerless course, when thou had no sense of the need of
prayer, no esteem of it, no desire to it. Whence then is this change? Surely
from the Spirit it is some degree of the Spirits operation, that makes thee
feel and complain thou want it: when you hear a man complain of stopping and
shortbreathedness; Is it not an undeniable evidence of a principle of life in
him? the dead feel nothing, complain of nothing. I think I may lay it down, as
an unquestionable Maxim, None can really value, heartily desire, the gifts and
graces of the Spirit (except Acts 8. 19.
upon such an account as Simon Magus) but by the Spirit. So that from this very
complaint (if sensible and serious) thou may conclude, there is a residue*
(as I may say) of the Spirit in thee.

Quest. 2. But farther: What meanest thou when thou say I cannot pray? Or
that, thou have not the Spirits help in prayer? Is it, that thou can not
enlarge thy self in expressions? or pour out thy soul in amplified Hos. 14 2.
complaints? Thou can not take to thy self words, and call upon the Lord?
This does not speak thee void of the Spirit of prayer. It is I confess, a sweet
ability, and a great help, to affect our own hearts, when we can do it; but not
of the essence of prayer. The Text has enough to answer to this. The Spirits
help sometimes comes no higher, than to groanings that cannot be uttered.
Inarticulate sighs, are prayer; a man may utter little, and be able to utter
little, and yet pray much: Words are the least part (if I may call them a part)
of this duty. Will you hear how an accurate Casuist describes Ames. Cas. lib.
4. c. 14. Qu. 1.
it? ( Religiosus motus voluntatis nostrae in Deum, ad illum quasi commovendum)
a Religious motion of our will toward God, as it were to move him: Elsewhere
thus: Medull. lib. ^. c. 9.
( Voluntatis nostrae religiosa repraesentatio coram Deo, ut illa Deus quasi
afficiatur) A religious representation of our will (or desire before God) that
he may be, as it were affected with it. Here is no mention of words or
expressions: If this satisfy not, consider how the Word of Truth describes it;
a listing Psalm. 25. 1. 1 Samuel 1. 14.
up the heart, a pouring out the soul -- In short, Words are helpful in some
cases to our selves, needful, when we are to be the mouth of others, but not
essential to the duty in it self considered: Many things may hinder expression,
which yet may heightes affection, and help to prayer. Ignorance* natural
infirmity, sudden terrifying Providence, pressing Troubles, may even stop the
Speech, and indispose the outward* Organ^ -- But thou can not so freely go
out to God* thou want praying affections and dispositions; Faith, Love,
Desire, Delight i^ God, godly sorrow, etc. are at a very low ebb, and scarce
discernable --. I ask, Whence are these complaints? Had thou no love to God,
or desire of him, thou would never complain, that thou can not love him:
There would be no such language as this, Oh that I could love God as I should!
Oh my base dis-ingenuous heart, that returns so little Love, etc. But something
more to this, in the next.

Quest. 3. Suppose it be at sometimes as bad as thou make it: that grace be
at a low ebb, that thou art dead, senseless, unapt, backward, lumpish, can
scarce dragg thy self into the presence of God, and when before the Lord, thou
have neither words not heart to the duty: Is it always thus? Dare thou so
far wrong God, as to deny his gracious assistances vouchsaf't to thee? Can
thou not remember the sweet meltings and enlargements, that thy soul has felt
in duty? the precious experiences thou have had, both as to assistance and
acceptance? Yes, it may be, you will say, and that is it that is the sting in
my affliction. Had I never known what these things meant, I had not had this
sting in my affliction; but this is it that makes my cup exceedingly bitter,
that I have sinned away these mercies, and now want the Spirits help, when I
most need it.

I deny not, but the case is sad, yet there is something to allay it. For
consider, what child of God has not sometime felt and complained of the like?
Who is it that has not his dead fits? Do we not find David and other precious
Saints under the like distempers? Read Psalm. 77. 88, 38, etc. The Text does not
assert this as the constant Privilege of Gods afflicted people, to have the
Spirit helping their infirmities, at least, in that full and sensible manner as
they desire; even these suspensions are necessary, to make us feel the weight
of an affliction, and to make the Spirits return sweeter. Besides thy former
experience is in it self a ground of hope: upon which, thou may bespeak thy
soul in the words of David, Why art thou cast down, O my soul, why art thou
disquieted within me? Psalm. 42. ult.
still trust in God, for I shall yet praise him who is the health of my
countenance, and my God. For however the Spirit may suspend his influences, he
does not depart for ever, he is an abiding Comforter. So that to conclude, Joh.
14. 16.


1. If thou have had the Spirits assistance, if thou have known by experience,
this great privilege in the Text.

2. If thou can still groan and sigh out thy complaints, though not pour out
thy soul in such full expressions, or cloathe thy prayers with words, as
sometimes thou could:

3. If thou art sensible of thy want, and do earnestly breathe after the
Spirits return; yea, could be content, thy burden were doubled, if thou
could but cry and plead with God, as sometimes thou have done; I say thou
have no cause to conclude, that thou art wholly destitute of the Spirit of
Supplication; these things are not found in those that are void of the Spirit,
they neither feel their want, nor desire the assistance of Gods Spirit: Yea,
let me add, that a soul in thy condition, is not fit to be its own Judge; such
complaints, such pantings, speak a soul in a growing posture. Thriving
Christians, like growing children, are aptest to complain, that their clothes
are too little, their graces weak and feeble; which is not because they do not
grow, but because their desires are to grow still more. Like Paul, they forget
that which is behind, and are reaching Phil. 3. 13.
forth to that which is before. Or like that great Conqueror, of whom it was
said,

Nilque putans factum, dum quid superesset agendum. Alexander the Great.
They think they have no grace, because they have not all grace. Well, I shall
look upon it, as a sure sign of an enlarged heart, never to think it self
enough enlarged. Therefore let these complaining souls drink no longer Waters
of sorrow, but take a little Wine of consolation.

Thus much to those that want, or think they want, this precious Privilege.

CHAP. XII.
2. THE other sort to whom I am now to speak, are those who have this great
mercy, and know the Advantage of it, such as can beat testimony to this great
truth that the spirits help in prayer is a great Reality. These also I shall
rank under three heads.

1. Such as have this mercy, but are not at present in Affliction.

2. Such as are in trouble, and do in some measure experience the benefit of
it.

3. Such as have been in the deeps, and have tasted the goodness of God in this
kind, though now delivered from their troubles: to each of these, I shall
propose what I conceive most suitable and edifying.

1. To you that being yet free from calamities, know what it is to be helped in
prayer, The Doctrine speaks by way of Counsel and Advice: and that is, that you
cherish and make much of, and do what you can to perserve this great
Priveledge; take heed of such fins as may grieve away the spirit of such as
have been mentioned above, especially in the 6th. Case. This Advice I give upon
a 3. fold consideration.

1. Though you are yet at quiet, though you fit under your own vine, and under
your own figtree, and the candle of the Lord Job 29. 3, 4.
shine upon your head, and his secret be upon your Tabernacle; you know not how
soon the Case may alter, and the Cup that others drink of may be put into your
hand: David found himself deceived when he said his mountain Psalm 30. 6, 7.
was made strong, and he should never be moved, God hides his face and then
he is troubled. Solomon's days were for a long time peaceable, and no
likelihood of any trouble to arise, God had made him terrible to all 1 Chr. 8.
7 and 9. 23, 24. 1 Ki. 11. 14. 23. 26.
about him, and put the necks of his Adversaries under his seet, all the
bordering Kings are his Feudatories, and Tributaries; yet on a sudden a black
cloud arises, and a succession of Adversaries are raisd up against him. Who
more prosperous then Job? or more likely to live and die in his nest, being not
less pious than prosperous, being a man perfect and upright, one that feared
God and eschewed evil? yet, behold him stripped of all, sitting upon the
Dunghill, scraping him self with a Potsheard. Who can hope to escape, when
neither his piety, nor possessions, can secure him? It may be with you as with
those Acts. 27, 13, 14.
in the Ship with Paul, The South Wind of prosperity blowing softly, you may
suppose you have obtained your purpose, and think you shall be speedily and
safely wasted over the Sea of this world, but how soon may an Euroclydon arise,
which may put you out of all hope of Safety? Then how besteading a privilege
will it be, to have the Spirit helping your informities? what support and
comfort will it bring in? what a difference Compare V. 20 with 25.
betwixt Paul, and the rest in that Ship; he comfort's others with the
comforts where with himself is comforted by God; they are past hope, but he
full of assurance. This was the fruit of Interest in God, and, if a storm
taught the Mariners in Jonah to call every man upon V. 23.
his God, it is not to be questioned that Paul was both frequent and servent in
Prayer at that time; The God (says he) whose I am, and whom I serve. Well as
you desire, in such a condition, to enjoy this Privilege, now prize it, now
quench not the Spirit, be not backward to his motions now: Con^^dering, in the
second place;

2. As you carry toward the Spirit now, so you may expect he will carry
toward you in your distress: if you now sl^ght him and be shie of entertaining
his good motions, expect the like measure. There is much in that word Grieve
not the holy Spirit -- Such Ephesians. 4. 30.
expressions (as they speak in the Schools) import not [ affectum but effectum
in Deo] they do not signify that the Spirit of God is capable of being
grieved, as we are, so as to have our hears sadned, our Spirits of dejected or
embittered; but that the Spirit being provoked by our miscarriages will do as
we do when one has grieved or vexed us: and how is that, Are we not shie of
coming into their company? do we not absent our selves, or show a change of
Countenance we are nothing so pleasant, so familiar till the breach be made
up, yea many times we pay them in their own coin, and do something that may
equally grieve them; Thus will the Spirit deal with us (at least we can expect
no other) he will withdraw, and absent himself, we shall not have his
quickening motions and lively assistances etc. Then will God deal with us as he
threatens, Because I have called and ye refused, ye shall call upon Prove. 1.
24, 28.
me, but I will not answer* ye shall seek me early, but ye shall not find me.
And what the Consequence of this will be, may be gathered from what has been
already said. For,

1. There will be sad reflections upon thy former abusing of God's Spirit, which
will make thy Cup out of measure bitter, and the weight of thy affliction
pressed down, heapt together, and running over. What will be thy thoughts then?
Oh, I might have enjoyed the comfortable presence, and assistance of God's
Spirit in this strait. Had I not abused it in my prosperity: Oh, what a
precious Privilege have I robbed my self of; etc.

2. Hence will follow that thy present burden will be exceeding heavy, as
wholly lying upon thine own back. It will be with you as with Paul, pressed
beyond measure, 2 Cor. 1. 8.
above strength, so that I despaired even of life -- this will aggravate thy
misery, and exceedingly weaken thy strength to bear^i^.

3. And (as you have already heard) there is great danger of running thy self
into the sin of taking indirect Courses: Thou lie open to Satan's Temptations
who often makes our extremity his opportunity to do us a mischief: thou will,
a thousand to one, be tempted either to sinister and sinful courses for
relief, or to take desperate courses; it may be (as some have done) by ridding
thy self out of temporal, to hasten into eternal misery. Oh, then as you
desire to avoid these sad Consequences, avoid that which is the proper cause of
them, namely, grieving, slighting, abusing, quenching the holy Spirit of God.
The only way to have him befriend you in your straits is to Cherish, prize, and
improve his motions now, as you have been already taught in some of the Cases
above. Espiceally, considering in the Third place.

3. Supposing (which yet is scarce possible*) that you should pass through the
world without any considerable affliction, yet you stand in daily and hourly
need of the Spirits assistance: Its not only needful then; though it be
singularly comfortable. Are there not snares in prosperity, which you have need
to pray against? Agurs prayer imports that there is is much danger of denying
God, and saying who is the Lord, in prosperity (that is, of withdrawing our
confidence and dependence* from God to the Creature* or revolting from our
obedience) to him) as of S^ealing, or taking the name of Prove. 30. 9
God in vain, in poverty. Besides, are there not burdens of duty too heavy for
thy weak shoulders without the Spirit helping thee? Add, that how ever thou
may escape other Troubles, yet thou art sure of Temptations, If Christ
himself escaped not, how can thou hope to escape? but without the Spirit of
supplication, these will easily prevail; thou will find the Tempter too
subtle, too powerful for thee, except thou call in Divine Assistiance. Here
is as much need of the Spirit of prayer, as in any other kind of affliction.
Paul sound Prayer his best weapon, and therefore he made much use of it. For
this I prayed thrice -- More over, there are 2 Cor. 12. 9 1 Cor. 1. 28
ordinary Troubles with few escape, Troubles in the flesh, cares about the
things of this life, such as a man is born to, and as naturally Job 5. 7.
subject to, as it is natural for the sparks to fly upward. These will not be
borne, or not as a Christian should bear them, without prayer for support,
direction, sanctification: The most inconsiderable of these without divine
support (setch't in by prayer) will be sufficient to disspirit, to overwhelm
thee, to put besides thy Patience. To conclude then, What need have we to keep
the Spirit our constant friend, that we may have its assistance in all
exigencies? It is as needful as prayer it self is, and that is the very trade,
the very lively hood of a Christian, you may as well live without air or
breath (as you are living Creatures), as to live without prayer (as your are
Christians). Therefore take heed you do nothing whereby the Spirit may be
estranged from you, or be provoked to withdraw his assistance; if you do, it
will be to your unspeakable loss and disadvantage.

If you would be directed in this thing, Look back to the filth Case. So much
to the first sort.

CHAP. XIII.
THe second sort of those who know what it is to have the Spirits help, are
those who are under afflictions, and do find the great advantage of this
precious Privilege: to whom the Text is an experienced Truth, and they can
say, Except the Lord had given me his holy Spirit, I had sunk under my but
then; but through mercy, I am supported, I feel strength renewed and increased,
as my burdens are renewed, I find there is no allay to trouble like this, even
to pour out my soul to the Lord, which by the help of Gods Spirit I can do, in
some weak measure, this is hearts-ease, I can upon this account glory in my
(sorrowful) infirmities, that the power of Christ may rest upon me. Therefore I
2 Cor. 12. 9, 10.
take pleasure in infirmities, in reproaches, in necessities, in perseoutions,
in distresses for Christ's sake, (or in other Troubles that come upon me in the
world); for when I am weak (in my self) then (through the Spirits assistance) I
am strong. If this be thy condition and experience, I have two words of
Counsel to impart to thee.

1. Use and improve to the utmost this great mercy, hold on in this duty;
Continue in prayer, while thy trouble continues* I Col. 4. 2.
mean, that thou double and treble thy importunity in reference to the
Affliction thou art under, do as Paul, pray thrice (often); 2 Cor. 12. 8. 2
Kin. 13. 19.
smite with this arrow not three times only, but six or seven, yea an hundred
times. But not to speak in the clouds, There is a threefold improvement, which
you should make of the Spirits help in trouble, all having relation to
Affliction, and exceedingly tending to your advantage in it. Take them in order.

1. Improve the Spirits help especially to beg a blessing upon your affliction:
be earnest for sanctification, and spiritual improvement under it, be not so
importunate to have the plaster taken off, as to have it made effectual to
heal some spiritual distemper. Let thy soul breathe out such desires as these.
Lord make this stroke humbling, healing, quickening: May some corrupt blood run
out at this wound: Let some hidden lust be discovered; let my faith be resined,
my delight in thy ways be increased, as my outward 2 Cor. 14. 16.
man decays, let my inward man be renewed day by day: Thus be more importunate
to find the good of it, then to be freed from the evil of it, as thou seelest
the smart, so be earnest that thou may find the benefit: such prayers are
according to the will of God, and therefore he will return a gracious answer.
Self may prompt us to beg ease and deliverance, but Grace should teach us to
beg spiritual advantage, especially since the promises of doing us good by
affliction are so full, so many, and since there is not a shorter cut to a
sanctified deliverance, than to have affliction sanctified.

2. Improve this mercy as an alleviating consideration: do as those that carry
a heavy burden; they lay something betwixt their shoulder, and the thing they
carry, to make it lie easier. Put this consideration betwixt thy shoulder and
the burden, it will make it abundantly lighter, as you have already heard. Oh
what a calming cheering thought may this be, Well, though I am afflicted yet I
am not cast off. God still holds me up with one hand, as he smites me with the
other: while I have the blessed spirit of God to take by the heavy end and lift
with me, how patient, how cheerful should I be? As it said in a like case, The
Inhabitant shall not say, I am Isa. 33. 24.
sick; the people that dwell therein shall be forgiven their iniquity: which
some thus interpert, q. d. The people shall not be sensible of sickness, and
bodily distempers. Sense of pardon, shall take away sense of pain, their
outward afflictions shall be as no affliction; sin, which is the sting thereof
being taken away. So may the soul under trouble which has this great
advantage, say, This trouble is nothing, so long as I can thus fetch in ease,
support and comfort.

3. Improve it also as a preservative from taking offense at the Cross, or from
taking indirect ways to get from under it. For, think how unreasonable a thing
it were to be offended, to quarrel or murmr, when God does abundantly
compensate the bitterness of thy suffering, with the sweetness of this
experience; Or why should thou go else where for ease and comfort, when thou
have so ready a way to God? He has laid a Cross on thy back, but he has
withal put his Spirit within thee, and thereby thou can fetch in support:
this is enough to bear charges; be the journey (as I may say) never so long or
chargeable: Thus argue; Why should I go elsewhere? I can turn in to my Heavenly
Father, I can commit Psa. 55. 22.
my self to the Lord, and cast my burden upon him, and he will sustain me: What
need I go down to Egypt for help? why should I wound Conscience by base
complyances? why should I ask a guard of Kings? or fly for shelter to brambles
with will but scratch and te^r me, when I can, by Faith and Prayer, dwell in
the secret place of the most high, and abide under the shadow of the Almighty?
Is there not a God in Israel, and have I not that Spirit of Adoption whereby I
can cry Abba Father? why should I got to Baalzebub the God of Ekron? Through
grace I will not sin, nor charge God foolishly, If he strike harder, I will
pray harder, and cry louder. Thus improve this precious mercy.

2. The Second word of advice I have for such, is this. Let thy returns of
thankfulness for this mercy be neither straightened nor slackned, because of thy
affliction: rather be more thankful: delay not to pay God the praise due to
him, nor pay him with the shortest. For consider, this Privilege is not only
an allay to thy affliction, but it changes the very nature of it, it turns
the Cross into a blessing. This, I presume will be readily acknowledged, that
the worst that can befall us is mercy; if it work for the best, if it improve
and fit us for glory, if it make our graces more flourishing and vigourous, and
shall make the Crown of glory more ponderous; Now this is the Effect of the
Spirits help in prayer, it turns afflictions into advantages, our losses become
our gain, and is there not cause of joy and thankfulness? What Paul says of
his bonds and imprisonment, I know this shall turn to Phil. 1. 19.
my salvation, how? through your prayer and the supply of the Spirit of Christ:
The same may you say of your troubles, Be they what they will, I know these
shall turn to my salvation, I know these shall promote my eternal happiness,
through the supplies of the Spirit in Prayer. Therefore bless God, in the midst
of trouble, rejoice in this mercy, and the rather because this will be a
singular means not only to have the Spirits assistance continued, but to have
it more increased. Thanksgiving is a duty that brings meat in the mouth of it:
you cannot give God the praise of any mercy, but he will add another mercy to
it: The thankful Leper, upon his returning to give thanks receives an
additionall Testimony, Go thy way, thy faith Luke 17. 19 Calv. in loc.
has made the whole ((...)) has saved thee. Upon with words Calvin puts a
Question: If we restrain this to the cleansing of his body from leprosy, What
difference betwixt this and the other nine who were also cleansed? He answers
that "Christ did otherwise esteem the gift of God than profane men are wont to
do: he look upon it as a symbol or pledge of God's love to him, The
ingratitude of the other did as it were infect and contaminate their cleanness,
Faith only sanctifies the gifts of God that they may be pure to us -- but he
adds in the close, that together with his outward cleansing, he had obtained
eternal salvation, for the Samaritane is saved by his Faith; how? not only that
he was cured of his leprosy (so were the rest) but because he was received
into the number So Deodate and others.
of God's Children, and had received this temporal cure as a pledge of God's
Fatherly love to him. Thus he: With whom Beza seems to concur, thus glossing,
Christ does good even to the unthankful, but the benefits of God profit them
only to salvation who are thankful. This I have hinted to show the advantages
that flow from thankfulness. He Is thankful for a temporal mercy, Christ
(according to their interpretation,) assures him of eternal mercy: Well, let
not your afflictions make you less thankful, for the goodness of God in
vouchsafing you his Spirit to help you in prayer: nay rather double your
praises, for the sweetness and seasonableness of this mercy. Thus much to the
second fort.

CHAP. XIV.
I Have only a Third sort to address my self to in a few words, and those are
they who having been in the deeps, have there seen the wonders of the Lord: who
can bear witness to this Truth, and say that, had not the Spirit upheld and
strengthened them, they had perished in their affliction, the proud waters had
gone over their Soul: Can thou say as Jonah? I cried by reason of my
affiction, Jonah 2. 2.
unto the Lord and he heard me. Out of the belly of hell cried I and thou
heardest my voice? Has God both prepared thy heart and caused his care to
hear? has he both helped the to pray, and helped thee upon thy prayer, so that
thou have an undeniable Testimony of both parts of the Text. viz. that God both
gives his Spirit to help our infirmities, and that he knows, and accepts the
desires of his Spirit, because they are according to the will of God? What
remains but that thou be pressed and exhorted to this 4. sold duty? To the
doing of which, thy own experience may be motive sufficient.

1. Beg and use the same help in Praise, which thou had in Prayer: If thy
prayers in affliction were spiritual, let not thy joy be carnal, There Is a
great difference betwixt praise and gladness. Then are they glad because Psalm
107. 30, 31.
they be quiet -- O that men would praise the Lord? True joy which has the
Lord for its Object has the Spirit for it is Author; you read of the joy of
the Holy Ghost: well, Romans 14. 17. Ephesians. 5. 18. 19.
labor to get your hearts tuned by the Spirit, Be filled with the Spirit,
speaking to your selves in Psalms and hymns and Spiritual sengs singing, and
making melody in your hearts to the Lord: The Spirit has (as I may s^y) helped
thee into debt, by enabling thee to pray and prevail; now entreat that he also
may help thee out, by enabling thee to give unto the Lord (in some measure) the
glory due unto his Name, and the rather because the mercy coming in a way of
prayer is more then common, and therefore calls for more than ordinary
thankfulness, the high praises of God should be in thy mouth. Thou
shouldst^^ing that new song, which is peculiar Rev. 14. 3.
to the saved of the Lord, which none can sing but by the Spirit of God:
Spiritual praises are a language too high for fools; none can praise aright but
they whose hearts are toucht' and tuned by the Spirit of God. Isa. 43. 21.
This people have I formed for my self, they shall show forth my praise: Till
we are God's workmanship, we cannot righly give God glory. Nor only do we
need habitual qualifications, but actual excitations: Oh, desire this
additionall mercy, that he who has delivered thee at the request of his own
Spirit making Intercession in thy heart, would by the same Spirit raise up thy
soul to a high pitch of Spiritual joy and Thanksgiving.

2. Turn this experience into obedience, be ready at the call of God's Spirit,
as God was at thy call. This is David's improvement: Then I called upon the Lord
-- I was Psalm 116. 4, 6, 9.
brought low and he helped me -- I will walk before the Lord (i. e. in
obedience to the Lord) in the Land of the living. Be careful therefore in
harkening to the motions, and following the conduct of the Spirit under
Enlargements: Oh, resolve through grace (and beg grace that thou may both
resolve and perform thy resolutions) that thou will never grieve thy Comforter
by slighting or sinning against him. When thou art about to do any thing which
might sadden or provoke him, refrain thy self upon a double account --. Let
ingenuity hold thy hands, Shall I grieve him now, that was my greatest Comfort
in my affliction? shall I thus requite his kindness? Oh, I remember his
quicknings, his sweet enlargments wrought in my heart, Oh, what cordials did
he provide me in my sainting fits? how did he stay up hands and heart, and
keep me in a waiting, praying posture till the Lord at last heard my cry and
delivered my soul out of trouble? Think, thou hear him calling, and saying,
Is this thy kindness to thy friend? did I stand by thee in thy affliction, help
thy infirmities, support thee under thy burdens? did I enable thee to pray and
wrestle and prevail to be thus requited? Oh, do not wound him in thy
prosperity, who was thy best friend in adversity.

2. If Ingenuity will not let Prudence restrain thee; The Tables may be turned,
thy present gleam may be overclouded, a storm may be breeding. Then may thou
expect him as much a stranger to thee, as now thou art to him. I think it was
Luthers saying (mihi creed, res delicata est Spiritus ^ita nos tractat, sicut
tractatur) Believe it the Spirit of God is a very tender thing, it will deal
with us, as we do with him: and this know that thy former experience of his
assistance in trouble, will make his absence doubly afflicting: Let therefore
this double cord draw thee to obedience, let ingenuity to the Spirit of God,
let respect to thy own future comfort keep thee from putting forth thy hand to
iniquity, and engage thee in a course of obedience.

3. You that have found the sweetness of this Privilege in a day of trouble,
declare it to others, that they also may seek after i^^ Psalm 66. 16, 17. 18
Have you not David a Pattern in this very particular? Come and hear all ye
that fear God, and I will declare what he has done for my soul. Well, what is
it? I cried unto him with my mouth, and he was enrolled with my tongue. But was
it only mouth and tongue that prayed? No. If I regard iniquity in my heart, the
Lord will not hear my prayer, but God has heard -- q. d. had my prayer
proceeded from hypocrisy, or a carnal principle, God would not have heard it,
but it was put into my heart by his holy Spirit, it proceeded not from
seignedlips, Therefore has he heard it: And, this experience he invites
others to take notice of, to what end think you? surely that they might both
join with him in praising the Lord, and might also take the like course in
their straits. The like Instance you have elsehere: This Psalm 34. 6, 7, 8.
Poor man cried, and the Lord heard, and saved him out of all his troubles, --
Then comludes; O taste and see that the Lord is good -- q. d. take it not up
upon my report, but make trial your selves, do you cry and pray, and see what
a blessed issue you shall have. Well let this be thy practice, when thou see
any poor seals ready to be overwhelmed, direct them to this Course, tell such;
The only way is to beg and make use of the Spirits help. Commnuicate your
experiences, and the unspeakable advantages you have found. How ready are we
to communicate our experiences for the relief of others under bodily
distempers? If you see one afflicted with the Toothache, Gout, Ague or the like
distemper, every one almost has something to propose, This did me good, I
found ease and remedy in the use of such a Medicine. How much more precious are
Spiritual experiments? and how ready should we be to impart them, if we had
that tender respect we ought to have to the Spiritual good of our Brethren?
wherefore be ready to impart such experiences: let poor afflicted souls know
that there is no course like this, even to betake themselves to the Throne of
Grace, and there to give vent to their sorrows, and if they cannot pray in the
Spirit, yet to pray for the Spirit of grace and supplication.

4. In all your addresses to the Throne of grace, beg and use his help, which
you have found so successful in the day of your distress: Praying with all
manner of prayer and supplication Jude 20. Ephesians. 6. 18.
in the Spirit -- Praying in the Holy Ghost -- His help is not only necessary
to bear the Burden of Affliction, but to lift at the burden of duty. Observe
the Text, Though the Special scope and intendment be a ground of comfort under
straits, yet the expressions are general, respecting the duty all times and
upon all occasions: for we are here told that we have Infirmities against
which we need the Spirits help, these are continual, and therefore our need
of his help is continual. Again, we know not what to ask, therefore we have
need to be daily instructed, and to have the Spirit endi^e our petitions for
us. Further, God knows the mind of the Spirit. i. e. he understands, ownes,
approves what proceeds from his own Spirit (and that exclusively) not what
proceeds from our Spirits. Then lastly, He makes intercession for us acording
to the will of 'God. i. e. he teaches so to regulate our prayers for matter,
manner, and end, that we (so far as we are guided by him) ask nothing, nor in
any manner, or for any end, but what is agreeable and pleasing to God. These
Things would have afforded a large field of discourse, but I am willing to
leave room for your own meditations? Only see hence what necessity there is to
have and use the Spirits help in all your addresses to God: you cannot pray
according to God's will, you cannot have God's care open; your ignorance, your
infirmities will hinder, except the Spirit come in, and afford his help: and
let me leave this with you, The way to have the Spirits help it to use its
help. God is not like other friends, Nor his spirit like other helpers. We
think it a piece of impudence to be always troubling our friends, and we may
tire them out, but the oftener the welcomer to God; he that sees most need, and
goes most to the Spirit for help, shall doubtless find him most helpful. This
is what I shall say as to the improvement of this Comfortable Truth;

Now may these poor labors be so attended with his blessing who teaches to
profit, and may that Spirit of grace (whose help is necessary in other duties
as well as prayer) so impress these things upon your hearts, that you may both
desire his help, and experience the sweetness and advantage of it: Oh, that it
might be said of some poor soul that has hitherto lived without God in the
world, as was said of Paul, Behold he prays! Oh, that such as have seoffed
at this Act. 9. 11.
great reality, might not only have their mouths stopped in that respect, but
opened in Prayer, that they might practice according to the advice given by
Peter to Simon the Act. 8. 22.
sorcerer, and heartily pray to the Lord that the thought of their heart might
be forgiven them ^ Yea that he who has received gifts Psalm. 68. 18
for men even for the rebellious -- would bestow upon such rebels this
unspeakable gift, how would they then be in bitterness for their blaspheming
against it? Oh, that those who have satisfied themselves with the form and
shadow of this duty, might experimentally know the difference betwixt words of
Prayer, and the Spirit of Prayer? And those who have tasted of this heavenly
gift, might increase both in the gift and grace of prayer with the increasings
of God! With such breathings, and desires I put these weak labors into your
hands, and now Brethren, I commend you to God, and to the word of his grace,
which is able to build you up, and to give you an inheritance among all them
which are sanctified.

Matthew 6.9.-14. After this manner therefore pray ye, Our Father, etc.
CHAP. I.
PRayer being the Key, which, turned by the hand of faith, opens the door of
mercy, or Cock which draws waters out the Wells of Savation; being the means
appointed by God, for the obtaining what we want, procuring a blessing upon
what we have; for diver^ing what evils we fear, and removing what we
feel, being a singular help to bring down heaven to us, or mount us up to
heaven; I thought it might be of much advantage to instruct you in, and excite
you to, this excellent duty; being desirous (as God enables me) to imitate
both Christ and his forerunner, who taught their Disciples Luke 11. 1, 2.
how to pray. It Is an essential part of practical Christianity, and an
inseparable property of a practical Christian, an immediate effect of the new
birth; Paul, though he was struck blind at his conversion yet, his mouth is
instantly opened in prayer, Act. 9. 11.

We see some Children from their infancy taught the begging Trade, can ask an
aime^, before they can speak plainly: This Trade (in a spiritual sense) God
instructs all his Children in (though he sends them no where else but to this
own Door) Ask, seek, kn^ck, M^th. 7. 7. If any man lack -- let him ask Ja. 1.
5. are the instructions which God gives all his. And as it is honorable to be
even a Beggar at Gods door; so no less advantageous; the gainfullest trade any
Christian can drive, and most becoming a Christian who is always poor and
beggary: It Is a trade will never fail, when there is no fruit in the vine, and
the figtree does not blossom etc. when all refuge fails, and Hab. 3. 17.
no man cares for our soul, yet relief is to be had at God's door: his hand is
not shor^ned nor his ear heavy. What need then that every one of us should
learn this Trade, in a time (confessedly) hard, and when other Trades are on
the failing hand? But (my Brethren) It Is no easy trade, nor can I teach it you
without the concurrence of that Spirit with my poor endeavors which ^eacheth
to cry Abba Father. Rom 8. 15. His assistance is therefore to be implored, that
you may learn this heavenly mystery, and every one of us may be called
Israel's, Princes and prevailers with God.

Were it only canting language, or Rhetorical flourishes, or, would God be
taken with the Arithmetic, Music, Rhetoric or Logic of your prayers, much
then would l^y within the reach of man as to the teaching and learning of it.
But prayer is an act of the soul, the Spiritual motions whereof are from God:
it is not the muttering over a heartless form, it neither consists in
extemporary conceptions or expressions, nor in the most exactly composed and
Methodized forms, but in the pious breathings of a gracious soul: it is an arrow
that from the highbent bow of holy affections is drawn by the hand of faith:
he prays not in prayer whose soul is not in the work: Nor is it that virtual
atten^ion of the soul, which some of the Schoolmen say is sufficient, but the
actual both a tention and intension of it, which gives l^fe to this duty: each
faculty has its proper employment: the Understanding must le^d, the will and
affections follow: This (as all other parts of Gods worship) must be, (...) a
reasonable service. Ye Romans 12. ^
worship ye know not what, John 4. 22. and ye know not what ye ask Mark. 10.
38. was enough to condemn the worship of the one, and petition of the other.
Prayer to an unknown God is no better than the Athenian altar Acts. 17. 22, 23.
a specious Superstition: he that prays aright must as well pray with his own
understanding, as to the understanding of others, if he pray 1 Cor. 14. 15.
with and for others. Now to help you in this, I thought I could not take a
better course, then by proposing and opening to you that excellent pattern
given us by our Savior, which being the Summa petendorum, the sum of things
to be asked, may and ought to be the Norma petendi, our Rule and Directory in
asking. Which, were it needful I might commend to you from its Author,
perfection, brevity, comprehensiveness etc. But I shall content my self to say
only this much: he that well understands what is comprehended in each branch
of this platform, and withal is sensible of his own condition, need not want
either matter. Method or Expression wherein to pour out his Soul to God.

There are two things concerning which I would speak a little, before I enter
upon the prayer it self. viz: 1. The occasion. 2. The end of our Saviors
leaving this upon record.

1. For the occasion it is observable that the two Evangelists that record it
give us a different account, and by comparing them we may easily see that our
Savior did oftener then once commend it (as to the substance of it) to his
Disciples and others.

1. This Evangelist makes it a part of that long and excellent Sermon preacht'
by our Savior in the mount, in which after many other excellent instructions,
he takes occasion to teach them the right manner of Alm'sgiving in this
Chapter from 1. to 5. Verse* Then how to pray 5-16. and this he does 1.
Negatively; he unteaches them, 1. Affectation of applause, and doing it that
they might be seen of men. Verse 5. 6. 2. Vain repetitions and much babbling,
which he condemns as Heathenish, and forbids his Auditors to be like them,
Verse 7. 8. Observe: God would not have us symbolize with Heathens in his
worship. S^e Deuteronomy. 12. 30. Ezekiel. 11. 12. That they did so may be gathered from
1 Kings 18 26. they cried from morning even till noone, O Baal hear us.

Object: But are All long prayers or repetitions in prayer to be condemned?

Ans: No, for he that gives us this precept and pattern here, has also given
us an example both of long-praying Luke 6. 12. (...), he spent a whole night
in prayer (which is warrant enough for us upon occasion to do the like) And
for Repetitions Math. 26. 30, 42, 44. he thrice repeated the same words. Every
Tautology therefore is not a Battology, Then is length or repetition in prayer
to be condemned, when its heartless, affected, or when we think either to
inform or engage God by our much speaking, but commendable, when it is the
overflowings of a pious and devout soul, and tends to the warming and enlarging
our own and others affections, or to express the vehemence of our desires. Well
then, let us learn, as not to condemn all prolixity and repetition in prayer,
so to avoid that which is here forbidden. And give me leave to say thus much:
it were well if they that pretend to see a Moat in their Brother's eye (as to
this matter) would first pull the beam out of their own; and that the more
deliberate and studied forms of some were not equally (if not more) culpable of
prolixity and Tautologies then the (so much decryed) extemporary conceptions of
others: But to proceed, Our Savior having untaught them these things does in
the second place positively teach them how to pray, and that by proposing this
short and excellent platform, which I am to speak of. And so much for the
account given, of the occasion, by this Evangelist.

2. The other Evangelist Luke: Chap. 11. 1. -- tells us that our Savior
proposed it upon the request of one of his Disciples having (as its probable)
heard our Savior himself pray: whence* note

1. Others gifts excercised are apt to stir up a desire in us of the like
abilities.

2. Its a Ministers part to teach his people to pray* I observe it both from
the argument this disciple uses, Teach us as John taught etc. -- It seems John
did it; as also from our Savior's ready condescension to the request of this
Disciple: and I hope it will not be denied that both of them did it as
Ministers, and Teachers of others: and if so, what account will they give who
endeavor in a great measure to sow up the mouths of Gods Ministers, from the
doing of this duty. It has been said that Example is the shortest and most
effectual way of teaching, but people must have little or nothing of their
Ministers example of the exercise of this gift in this duty, either to excite
them to, or direct them in it, if it may be according to the desire of many.

Thirdly I observe, The Disciples ignorance and inability was our great
advantage, what an Ancient speaks of Thomas his incrednlity, Minus mihi Maria
profuit quae citius credidit, Gregory In Marc. 16. Leo.
quam Thomas qui diu dubitavit: Marie's faith did not so much profit him, as
Thomas his unbelief; And another upon the Slowness of the Apostles to believe,
Gratias agamus divinae dispensationi and little necessariae tarditati; dubitatum
est ab illis, ne dubitaretur a nobis: be thankful for Gods goodness, and their
slowness to believe: they doubted that we might not doubt -- The same may I
say of the case here: their ignorance how to pray procured for themselves and
us this standing Directory. But so much for the occasion.

2. For the end of it, Whether did our Savior deliver it as a standing form of
words to be constantly used in our addresses to God; that we should pray (as
some men have commanded us) thus, and no otherwise? or as a platform and
Directory, by which to frame our prayers and petitions?

A 1. I deny not but it may be lawfully used in the very words of it as a
prayer, provided it be with understanding, reverence, a heart enlarged in the
sense of the things petitioned for (as it is well observed by the Reverend
Bishop Usher, the shortness of the petitions calls for the greater enlargednes of
heart) and that it be not made an Idol of, which in effect they do who
attribute more efficacy to the very words of it, then to the same petitions
otherwise expressed; that it be not made a bolster for Idlen^s, as too many
do^; who think it sufficient if they mutter over the words of it Morning and
Evening without understanding or attention, and rest in it, never laboring to
get abilities in prayer; nor must it be used as a charm, which they do who
think by repeating the words of it to fright away the Devil etc. Nor do I
think it inconvenient that it be made the close of our prayers, that it be
sometimes repeated in public, so that there be not a necessity of using it
supposed.

2. But the chief end doubtless was to be a platform and Directory, to guide
us in the making our peti^ions to God: to teach us, to whom, for what, for whom
and in what manner we must pray. And that this was the chief end of our
Savior in giving and recording it, these arg^ments s^em to prove.

1. By the words of Christ (...), after this manner therefore pray ye, not in
these words and syllables: and though it is objected that the other Evangelist
seems to tie us up to the very words [when ye pray, say] yet we need not
understand him so strictly. For in Luke 11. 1. the Disciple desires that he
would teach them to pray as John -- Now where have we any form, or the least
intimation of a form prescribed by John to his D^sciples? But

2. (Which may answer that objection) The two Evangelists do considerably vary
in their words and expressions, which surely they would not, had Christ
intended the very words to be used as a form: it would certainly have been
enjoined (as men now injoyne their forms) thus you shall pray and no
otherwise. But so far is the Holy Ghost from tying us up to words, that he
seems to intimate the warrantableness of variation: and I think I may challenge
the otherwise-minded to give an Instance of any thing twice related in
Scripture, as the speech of one to another, which in so few words has so much
variation. Let us compare the two Evangelists: In the Preface and 3 first
Petitions they agree, in the latter part there is difference.

Matthew. Petit. 4. (...) Petit 5. (...)
Luke. (...) (...)



And then the whole Doxology recorded by Matthew is omitted by Luke: Now had
Christ intended th^s as a standing form to be used in the words and syllables
of it, these imspired penmen surely should not have diff^red one tittle from
each other in the recording and relating of it.

3. Had it been intended as a standing form to be constantly used, the Apostles
would have so used it, and have prescribed it to others: We have diverse
prayers of theirs recorded, as Act. 4. 24-32. Ephesians. 1. 16 -- etc. but there is
not the least hint of their using this form. Not do they in their directions
about prayer enjoin this as necessary, muchless as the only form to be used:
Ephesians. 6. 18. we are taught to Pray with all manner of prayer, and supplication
in the Spirit etc. and 1 Timothy 2. 1. where the Apostle instructs Timothy
concerning public prayers, yet there is no intimation given of the necessity
of using this, which doubtless he would have done, had it been the mind of our
Savior that it should have been a constant form.

4. The nature and brevity of it shows that it was rather intended as a
Directory, then as a form of prayer: it does not comprehend such particular
confessions of sins, to be confessed, or enumeration of the good things we are
to beg, or evils we are to deprecate, as is requisite in prayer: But as the
Commandments contain the sum and Epitome of man's duty, comprehending under
one Species or kind of sin or duty, the whole Genus; so this platform suggests
the general heads of prayer, to which infinite particulars are reducible: and
though we find nothing in any of the prayers of Gods children recorded in
Scripture but what is reducible to some of these heads, yet we find them more
particular in their Confessions, Petitions, and Thanksgivings. See Ez^. 6.
Nehem. 9. Dan. 9. 2 Chronicles. 20. and many of the Psalms.

5. The very nature and ends of prayer may evince this: for, though in
reference to God we need not particularize in confessions or petitions* he
knows before we speak, and better then we can tell, what our Sins and wants
are; Yet in reference to our selves it is necessary. Are not particular
confessions of sin a great evidence of our Sincerity in confessing, and a
singular help to humble and affect us? as Joshuah to Achan, Josh. 7. 19. My Son
give I pray thee glory to the God of Israel and make confession unto him: God
is more glorified, and we more shamed: so in petition, though God knows what
we want, yet he would have us sensible of our wants, and show him (as it
were) the grieved place, Ja. 1. 5, If any man lack Wisdom (and so of any
other grace or goodthing) let him ask it of God etc. Thus it is in
Thanksgiving, we must be particular in acknowleging mercies 1 Thessa. 5. 18.
(...) in every thing give thanks. We are to sum up, as we can, the
particular mercies of God, Psalm 139. 17, 18. how does David in that
Eucharisticall Psalm ( viz.* 18.) amplify upon every circumstance of his
deliverances: so that though this be full, and every way absolute as a pattern,
yet it is not sufficient to attain all the ends of prayer, which doubtless it
should have been, had Christ intended it properly as a form to be constantly
used in the very words and syllables of it. I owe as much Reverence to it, as
those that are the most Z^alous contenders for it, but I cannot see that our
Savior intended it for more then a platform for our imitation and direction.

CHAP. II.
HAving spoken to these two things I now enter upon the handling of it* wherein
I shall propose to my self the same end that our Savior had in giving it: viz.
to teach you to pray: Nor shall I handle every particular Truth which would
arise from the words, but only such as may direct us in prayer, and those in
such a Method as I conceive most helpful to that duty.

The Usual, and most natural Division of this excellent Directory for prayer
is into 3. Heads.

1. The Preface. 2. The substance or body of it. 3. The conclusion or Doxology.

In the Preface [Our Father which art in Heaven] we have the Object of prayer,
or him to whom we must pray, described by way of Compellation, and that

1. From his Relation to us: Our Father. 2. From his eminency above us: which
art in Heaven.
The first Lesson for our direction in prayer will arise from the whole
Preface, as Describing God to whom we pray.

1. Doctr. Our prayers are to be directed to God and him only: A Truth, I hope,
unquestionable amongst us, and therefore needs the less to be insisted on: yet
because we may possibly meet with those that may endeavor to shake this
foundation let me fortify you with an Argument or two, and then a Reason.

God command' s it, as a special part of that worship which is due to him as
God, and therefore not to be yielded to any other. Psalm 50. 15. Call upon me^
-- Amos 5* 4, 5, 6, 8. Seek not to Bethel -- Seek the Lord -- Seek him that
makes the 7 Stars -- Isa. 8. 19. When they shall say unto you seek unto them
that have familiar Spirits -- should not a people seek unto their God? for the
living to the dead? q. d. that were a most vain and impious thing. The Decree
passed in the Court of Babylon for 30 days Dan. 26. 7. viz. that none should
ask a petition of any but of the King; is past in Heaven for ever, in reference
to the great God, and everlasting King. No prayer or Petition (as part of
worship) is to be put up to any other but to him alone.

2. We have the universal standing practice of the saints of the Old and New
Testament for our direction and imitation: Is there the least syllable of their
praying to Angels, Saints, or other creature? How are they described Psalm 24.
6. The generation that seek the face of the God of Jacob. Psalm 99. 6. 22. 5.
To whom does Paul bow the knee Ephesians. 1. 17. or our Savior direct his prayer
John 17? This is the frequent title of the Saints they are such as call on
God's name (not on any other) Acts. 2. 21. Romans 10 12, 13. 1 Cor. 1. 2. 2 Timothy
2. 22. What is said to the Contrary of the Patriarch's Abraham's and Jakob's
praying to Angels etc. scarce deserves confutation, and is abundantly done by
others: yet I shall hint at it by and by: Take this Reason.

Isa. 42. 8. By prayer we acknowledge God's omniscience: for to what purpose
is it to pray to him that knows not what we want or cannot hear us. When we
pray, we ascribe to him omnipotency that he is able to fulfill our requests,
Mercy and goodness to incline him to hear us, Truth and faithfulness to
perform his Promises; we ascribe to him the glory of our trust and dependence,
for, how shall we call on him, in whom we have not believed? Romans 10. 14. Now
can God (who is especially jealous about his glory and worship) take it well
that we should rob him of these things, which are the Jewels of his Crown? Is
it a light matter to give to the Creature that which belongs only to God? What
can be greater injury to God, or more gross Idolatry?

Thomas Becket etc.
as some of those were which the Church of Rome has Canoniz^d: should you be
assaulted with Temptations to that Religion, have recourse to this pattern,
tell them that tempt you that the unerring Guide has taught you to call upon
God only, that you cannot say to any other but God only, Our Father etc. that
he to whom you pray must have those three properties which none but God can
have.

1. He must be [ Lubens] willing to hear and help, and who is like unto God
in this? Mich. 7. 18. What care so open as God's 1 Pet. 4. 12. What help so
near at hand Psalm 46. 1. But suppose any other willing, yet

2. He must be [ Sciens] one that knows what you want, and who but the all
knowing God can see into your Souls, and know what you stand in need of Matt.
6. 32? Yea he must know better then your selves, for we are very often
ignorant of our wants and necessities; and ask what is hurtful in stead of
what is needful: The Physician must have more skill then the Patient, else
there is little hope of doing him good: But

3. He must be [ Potens] able both to hear from Heaven to Earth, to
understand all languages, yea the secret sighs and groans of our hearts, Romans
8. 26. Moreover he must be able to discern betwixt those that pray in
sincerity, and those that pray in hypocrisy; and he must be such a one as can
Simul and Semel, at once hear all suites and petitions in and from all parts
of* the world, and who but God alone can do all this, 1. nor only must he be
able to hear but, 2. to help, relieve and satisfy all our wants and desires,
which God alone can do Isa. 43. 11. and 45. 21.

Object. But they will tell you, they teach not to pray to Saints or Angels as
Authors of mercy but only as Mediators, as Intercessours to God, and that it is
a piece of humility to make use of such spokes men, that it were too much
boldness to presseimmediatly into the presence of God?

Answ. 1. How expressly does the Apostle meet with and condemn this under the
Notion of voluntary humility, and tells you such are vainly puffed up in their
fleshly mind Col. 2. 18. See more there, Verse 23.

2. Can it be imagined that they should hear us, or know all our wants? Might
not an Elijah renew his Irony to a devout Papist, calling upon Paul, and Peter
etc. 1 King. 18. 17. If the dead know not any thing as Solomon tells us, Eccl.
9. 5. (that is, as to the affairs of this world) how shall they know our
nec^ssities or hear our prayers? Does not the Church acknowledge God her Father
in opposition to Abraham and Jacob? Isa. 63. 16. Doubtless thou art our Father,
though Abraham be ignorant of us, and Israel acknowledge us not, thou O Lord art
our Father, our Redeemer, thy Name is everlasting. And what more unscripturall
and irrational then that Popish fiction of the Saints seeing al things in
Speculo Trinitatis? But suppose this: yet

3. Who gave them the Authority or put them into the office of Mediator* ship?
for the glorified Saints; they are called (...) Heb. 12. 23. Spirits perfected,
and the Angels (...) ministering Spirits Heb. 1. 11. But neither of them
Mediators: yea does not the Apostle tell us there is (...), one Mediator, and
that exclusively, as there is but one God, 1 Timothy 2. 5. And what greater injury
can we offer to him, than either to exautorize him, or of our own heads thrust
others into the same office with him? But to come to another Use.

Behold here the infinite goodness and condescension of God, who is pleased to
be himself the great Master of Requests, the God that hears prayer Psam. 65.
2. and has so far consulted our good, that he counts that an Honor to
himself which is a Privilege to us: How great is his kindness that he does not
put us over to others, that we need no other Blastus or Spokesman (except his
own Son) to prefer our petitions, or procure us audience? would it not be
judged a high favor if the great Monarch's of the earth would vouchsafe to
read over the petitions and grant the requests of all their subjects in their
own persons? and what ridiculous folly is it to pretend humility where we are
warranted boldness? should the King say to his subjects, Come to me, I will in
my own person hear and grant your petitions were, it not a piece of
unmannerliness rather then humility to refuse it? Since God has commanded it,
it is not presumption but duty to do it; and the not doing it, is not humility,
but injury and disobedience. Therefore when we have any suit to God, let the
consideration of this privilege raise our hearts to an high pitch of
thankfulness and admiration.

himself in this and will say as Joseph's Brethren of the Cup which they were
charged to have stolen: Genesis 44. 9. with whom soever this (sin of praying to any
but the true God) is found, let him die; But I fear upon a closer trial many
will be found Guilty who little suspect themselves, though it may be not in
that gross manner as Idolaters and Image-worshippers, yet in a way less
disce^n^ble but not less displeasing or dishonorable to God.

Consid^r therefore, we may be said to pray to God only, two ways. 1. As our
Object: 2. As our End.

Now in both these respects many will be found failing. For;

1. Concerning praying to God as the Obj^ct of our prayers, they are Guilty,
who.

1. Direct their prayers to God indeed, but not such a God as he has revealed
himself, but such as they fancy him: who think God like themselves, Psalm. 50.
21. It would be taken ill (and yet it is undoubtedly true) if I should say,
many never prayed to God in all their life though they have prayed much: for
they which never had right apprehensions of God but framed a false Idea and
conception of him according to their own corrupt imaginations, never prayed to
him, but to an Idol created in their own brain.

2. They never directed their prayer to God as the Object, who never trusted in
God, and expected from him the things prayed for: a man in reality prays, not
to him to whom he speaks, but to that in which he trusts: Many speak to God
in prayer, but trust in themselves, in friends, in carnal refuges etc. Psalm.
17. 2. Early will I direct my prayer to thee and look up: then is our prayer
indeed directed to God when we look up to him for the thing prayed for, with
an eye of waiting and expectation.

3. They do not direct their prayers to God as the Object who have no sense of
that God to whom they pray: When there is no dread nor awe of his Majesty, no
trust in his mercy etc. And indeed what difference betwixt praying to a Stock
or Stone, and to a God of whom we have no other apprehensions than as if he
were such? These (my Beloved) are more secret and close acts of Idolatry
(though no less sinful) which creep into the prayers of the best of Christians
too often.

2. Concerning directing our prayers to God as the End (though it is not so
properly here meant): then do we pray to God as our End, when it is in our
hearts to desire nothing but what may be to the glory of God: when in the close
of every petition or prayer we put up, we can from our hearts say, Lord what
I ask is I hope for thy glory, I have begged every thing for this as my highest
end, that I might glorify thee with and for it: if thou in thine infinite
wisdom see it would not tend to the end for which I beg it, I desire and
beg a denial of it: I know thy glory and my good are so twisted together that
nothing can be for my good which is not for thy glory. Now, how many pray to
God as the Object, and yet to themselves as the End? as Jam. 4. 2, 3. -- ask
amiss that they may consume it upon their own lust, and so instead of serving
God, would serve himselves of God. The best therefore have cause to be humbled,
since they may find much of this in their hearts and prayers.



1. A Spur to it: for who would not look on it as a singular privilege, that
he might upon all emergencies have recourse to any great Earthly Monarch? how
much more should we take delight in approaching to God? when thou feel thy
heart dull and backward to this duty, what a quickening consideration may it be
to think that it is the Majesty of heaven that thou conversest with, in it? Nor
must we think (as that profane wretch I have heard of, who being upon a
sickbed used this as an argument for deliverance, that if God would now hear
him he would trouble him no more) that our frequent addresses trouble God: No,
the oftener* if we come aright, the welcomer, he bids us ask, and chides us
for not asking John. 16, 23, 24.

2. But then it may be a Curb to all rovings and extravagancies, al rashness
and irreverence: ' It Is the God of Heaven to whom thou addresses, Who would not
fear befo^ him? Eccl. 5. 2. God is in Heaven, and thou on Earth, therefore let
thy words be few. It ill beseemes us to be saucy, though we may be humbly bold
with God: So much (of much more that might have been spoken) shall serve for
Application of this Truth.

I come now to a more particular Consideration of the description of God in
this Preface. And 1. By his Relation to us Father: which is amplified by the
Ground and extensiveness of it, for both are employed in that word [ Our].

2. Doctr. They that come to God aright in prayer, must come to him as to a
Father: Relation to, and Interest in God is necessary to make prayer prevalent:
we must be able to cry Abba Father Romans 8. 15. If yet call on the Father, 1
Pet. 1. 17. There must be some hopeful ground of such a relation as a ground
of confidence in prayer.

viz. as the first person of the Trinity: so he is the Father of our Lord
Jesus Christ, as having begotten him from eternity by an ineffable generation,
A mystery to be believed by faith, not apprehended by reason! Thus he is
called Ephesians. 1. 3. Heb. 1. 5. etc.

2. Considered Essentially, the whole Trinity, God in three Persons but One in
Essence, and so he is Father, either

1. In regard of Creation and Sustentation, of all his creatures, especially
the rational creature, Mal. 2. 10. called the Father of Spirits Heb. 12. 9. of
all things 1 Cor. 8. 6. thus the Heathens styled their Jupiter. (...), the
Father of Gods and men.

2. In respect of Adoption, he is the Father of those whom he takes into
special Relation: and this,

1. Either External, when a people are called into a profession of God and the
True Religion: thus the whole body of the Jewish Nation: Romans 9. 2. to them
belonged the Adoption -- See Exodus 4. 22. and Deuteronomy. 32. 6. And in this sense
the whole body of a Nation professing Christianity, and baptized, and partaking
of Gods Ordinances may be called the children or people of God. This is indeed
a great mercy, yet a man may perish from under this privilege, The children of
the Kingdom may be cast out, Matthew. 8. 12.

2. Or Internal, when a man has not only the title but the Spirit of
Adoption: Romans 8. 15. Gal. 4. 5. Ephesians. 1. 13. This may be described, An Act of
God's free grace in Christ taking us into the number and entitling us to all
the privileges of the Sons of God. It Is not an empty title, but a real
privilege. Christ is the head and root of it, the Elect and they only the
subjects, free grace the inward mooving cause on God's part, the word and
Spirit are the instruments begetting and sealing it, Gods glory in conjunction
with man's Salvation the end of it. Now in this sense, we are to understand it
here: Our Father, not only as createing and upholding us, not only as we are
baptized, and partake of Church Priviledges; but as we are begotten by his
Word and Spirit, born again not of flesh, nor of blood etc. John. 1. 13.

Object. But may none pray unto God, or call him Father but those that are
assured of this Adoption?

Answ. Our Common Relation to God as his creatures, and our Relation to him as
Members of the visible Church may be urged as Arguments in prayer: even those
that had special Relation to God make use of them, Psalm. 138. 8. Isa. 63. 19.
We may plead for mercy upon those accounts; but we are not to rest in them.
God may hear our prayers, but we cannot have assurance that he will hear
them: till we can come to him in this way of Special Relation: other pleas
may prevail, but this will never fail us.

Confirmation. Now for proof of this, we have the practice of the Saints both
of the Old and New Testament, they come to God under this Relation. Isa. 63.
16. and 64, 8. Ier. 3. 4, 19. So Christ himself Matthew. 11. 25, 26. John. 17. 1,
5. and 21, 24, 25. This is the Genius and Spirit of Christians, Romans 8. 15.
Gal. 4. 5. 1 Pet. 1. 17. Even Idolaters used to come to their Idols with this
appellation, Jer. 2. 27. they say to a stock, Thou art my Father etc.



1. It helps against irreverence, and rash presumption: there is a natural
impress of Awe and Reverence upon the Spirits of children toward a Father,
there are indeed other Titles more apt to beget fear and trembling, but none
more effectual to strike an awful reverence of God upon the soul, this will
make us rejoice with trembling; Psalm. 2. 11. and fill us with Reverence and
Godly fear Hebr. 12. 28.

2. It helps against Fear and Unbelief; this Relation fills the soul with
boldness and confidence: Had we been taught to call him King of glory, we
should have been dashed out of Countenance with his Majesty; if we had called
him The Lord of Hosts, it would have made us tremble at his power; or if he
had been styled Judge of the world we might have feared his justice. But the
Title of Father begets boldness, and gives encouragement: what may not a child
hope to obtain from a loving and tender Father? It Is the lowest Title to which
humility could condescend, and the highest to which love could aspire: This
begets assurance that he will give us, if not what we ask, yet what is best
for us: A Father will not in stead of bread give a stone, nor in stead of a
fish, a Serpent, nor in stead of an egg a Scorpion, Luke. 11. 11, 12. This
Title speaks our Interest in God, and his affections and bowels toward us.
Confidence and boldness is necessary in prayer, Jam. 1. 6. We must ask in
faith not wavering, and what Relation more apt to beget it than when we can
come to God as children to a Father?

3. It helps against that backwardness and unwillingness which we are
naturally subject to: we are apt to withdraw from that duty, unwilling to
beg: Now this title, sweetens the duty to us, and invites to it. Little
children take delight in speaking to their Father; when they have nothing else
to say, yet they will be calling Father: God would have us delight in duty, and
therefore he teaches us to come to him under this most endearing and
encouraging Title. As himself takes delight in the approaches of his people
Cant. 2. 14. Let me see thy Countenance, let me hear thy voice, for sweet is
thy voice, and thy Countenance is comely; so he would have us come cheerfully,
and therefore puts this Appellation into our Mouths and teaches us to call
him, Our Father.

enemy; Nor yet with a stranger in whom we have no interest, and with whom we
have no acquaintance: No but we come to a Father, Think with what affections,
with what hopes and expectations, what courage and confidence a child goes to a
loving and tender Father, yet with what awe and reverence, and thus may thou
go to God in prayer. How seldom do we consider this or act up to it? we
come not to the duty as our privilege or to God as Our Father. There are three
tempers of Spirit (partly hinted before) very unsuitable to this Privilege.

1. A lumpish, backward and withdrawing Spirit: when we must be dragged and
forced to prayer: when neither apprehension of the privilege, nor conscience
of duty will bring us before God: How unsuitable is this to the Spirit of
Adoption which teaches us to cry Abba Father? And yet which of Gods children
do not sadly experience this distemper often upon them? Oh, let us be ashamed
of it, bewayl it and labor against it: what? shall not the Title of Father
invite us, and beget a willingness, yea an holy forwardness and eagerness to
this duty? Bespeak thy lumpish Spirit, what? o my soul, has infinite Majesty
condescended so low to become thy Father, and engage thee so to call him, and
will not this sweet Relation draw thee into his presence? Were it a enemy, a
stranger with whom thou have to lo, well might thou be backward: but who
would not delight to converse, with a Father, such a Father?

2. A diffident and distrustful Spirit: This much unbeseems the Relation of
Children to a Father (especially such a Father): we should not ask tremblingly
having a Father to ask, a Son in whose name we are taught to ask, a Spirit to
indite our petitions, and so many Promises to plead, Jam. 1, 6. Ask in faith
nothing doubting. Qui frigide rogat, docet negare. A cold asking begs a
denial: God allows and we may use an humble boldness and familiarity. Isa.
45. 11. Ask of me things to come concerning [MY SONNES] and concerning the
work of my hands command ye me; that is a high expression: and shows how
condescending God is, and how humbly confident we should be.

3. A careless irreverent Spirit. He is little sensible either of the Majesty
of God, or the Relation in which he should approach to God, that comes
irreverently into his presence. W^e forget the Relation of Father when we
despise or irreverently take the name of God into our Mouths; when Mal. 1. 6,
7. Hebr. 12. 28.
we do not serve God with reverence and Godly fear* we do not serve him
acceptably, nor suitably to our Relation. Is this to come to God as a Father
when you come rushing into his presence without any awe or dread of his Majesty
upon your Spirits? dare you laugh, and gaze, and trifle in prayer? dare you
carry more irreverently and lightly, than you would in the presence of some
Earthly Potentate? or in the presence of your earthly Parent? Oh, how
unbeseeming is such carriage to the Title and Relation in which you approach
unto God? Remember how great your privilege is, and how disingenuous it is, so
to abuse it!

Children, else how can you cry Abba Father? As all are not endued with Ability
for prayer, so all are not in a Capacity to come to God aright. Oh see that you
can make out your Relation: I might here be very large in laying down Trials
and evidences of sonship, but I should make this part too big for the rest of
my intended building, besides I have lately (in speaking to the Privilege of
Adoption) spoken to this at large: I shall content my self with 3. Characters
of a Son: which if found in you, you may conclude your selves to be Children
indeed.

1. The first note of a child is, Resemblance to his Father. It is not always
so as to earthly, but it is so, as to our Heavenly Father. God begets all his
children, as Adam Genesis 5. 3.
his, in his own likeness, after his image: They have the Spirit of God, by
which they are changed from glory to glory into the image 2 Cor. 3. 18. Ephesians. 5.
1.
of God: they are followers of God as dear children: merciful, as their
heavenly Father, holy, haters of sin, lovers of Righteousness. Now where shall
we find this Character impressed? May we not say of many (as John. 8. 44. Ye
are of your Father the Devil -- What shall we say of those that manisest to
the world that they hate God and goodness? of the common swearer etc. -- Do
not these bear the very image of Satan? are they not as contrary to God as
darkness to light? with what face can thou call God Father, since thou have
no part of the Image of God upon thy Soul? Well: if you would be sure to speed
in your addresses, prove your selves Children, by your Resemblance to God,

2. Obedience is the Character of a Child: there is a Spirit which makes them
pliable to the Fathers commands: they are begotten unto obedience. 1 Pet. 1. 2,
14. True, they are not perfectly brought under, there are in them unruly lusts;
they have in them flesh, as well as Spirit: yet there is a Law in their minds,
they delight in the law of God Romans 7. -- Ephesians. 2. 2. and 5. 6.
according to the inner man; they are a willing people. Psalm. 110. 3. whereas
the wicked are (...), Children of disobedience, or such as will not be
persuaded to yield obedience to God. Try then, is there such a childlike
obsequious principle in you? can you yield to the Will of God when it crosses
yours? he that would try his obedience, must take a trying command (such as
God gave Abraham Genesis 22. 1.
about sacrificing his son) such as thwarts his humor, Interest etc. Oh, how
few will obey, where any disadvantage to their carnal Interest attends their
obedience? Well, but I tell you, this is so essential to a child of God, that
without it (in some measure) it is impossible we should be Children.

3. Dependnece on the Father is the Genius and disposition of a child
(especially in its minority); so it is with a child of God, his dependence is
upon God, his hope in him, his expectation from him. Psam. 39. 6. and 56. 3.
and 4. ult. 2 Timothy 1. 12. all these and abundance more of clear Scriptures
declare that the whole affiance of a child of God is in his heavenly Father.
How is it with us? where is our confidence? It may be we go to God, when we
want a mercy, and we are not so atheistical but we will acknowledge that we
cannot have it without Gods giving; yet, Do we not more rely on the Physician
then on God for our health? more on our own wisdom, or friends advice then on
Gods providence for the management of our affairs? Oh, there lies much of
secret. Atheism in this, when we pray to God, yet rely on our selves or
others: well, but if thou art indeed a child, thou have learnt to commit thy
way to the Lord, to east thy burden upon him, to entrust thy self and all thy
concernments in his hand. These may be helpful to discover your Sonship, and
consequently to encourage you to go to God in prayer with considence.



1. Carry as children in your immediate addresses to God: in prayer, hearing
etc. And that is by putting on those affections wherewith it becomes a child to
approach his Father: such are humility, reverence, awe, yet joined with
confidence: only remember, that your distance from God is infinitely greater,
then of the child from his earthly Parent, and therefore your reverence must be
the greater.

2. Nor only in your more immediate addresses, but in the whole course of your
lives. Its a wretched thing to go to God Morning and Evening with [ Our
Father] in your mouths, and to carry all day as R^bels: 1. Pet. 1. 14. As
obedient Children -- and verse 17. If ye call on the Father -- pass the time
of your sojeurning here in fear. You contradict your prayers by unchildlike
carriages, and proclaim to the world that you are not what you pretend: you
give God just cause to say to you as Mal. 1. 6. If I be a Father, where is mine
bonour -- Well then, as the Apostle urges, let every one that 2 Timothy 2. 19.
names the name of Christ, so I let every one that names the name of Father,
that calls upon God as a Father depart from iniquity and endeavor a
deportment suitable to that Relation.

Thus much for the Relation, Father: I now proceed to the Ground and Extent of
this Relation, both employed in that sweat Monosyllable [ Our:] which (as
Expositors judge,) has a double reference.

To Christ; and so it imports the ground of this Relation, q. d. Thou, O Lord,
who art the Father of our Lord Jesus, Christ and, in and through him, Our
Father. Though Jesus Christ be not named in this exact form, yet the very Title
of Relation [ Father] and this word [ Our] do intimate in whose name we ought
to come, and by whom we must have access to God.

2. To all Believers: q. d. my Father, and the Father of all those that believe
on Christ. The Father of that great family in Heaven and Fph. 3: 14, 15.
Earth. And according to this double reference, there is employed a 2. fold
grace which we should especially bring along with us in prayer, viz: Faith in
Christ, and Love to the Brethren, without both which we cannot say Our Father,
in Truth and Sincerity, nor call on God with acceptance. I shall according to
this double respect of the word lay down a 2. fold observation handling them
with that brevity as I have done the former, and endeavoring to make each
Doctrine (as it were) a particular Rule or Directory in prayer, which is my
design in this whole work. The first of these is taken from the word as it
relates to Christ. It is the 3d. Doctrine in order.

They that come to God as a Father, must bring Christ along with them: we must
not say My Father (though in regard of each Christians peculiar Interest in God
I deny not the lawfulness of it) but we must say Our Father, that is, the
Father of our Elder Brother first, and then ours through him. However, the very
word of Relation, Father, (importing our adoption) does sufficiently intimate
this Truth. We cannot come to God as Father but by Christ as Mediator; nor
will he own us as Children, if own not Christ as our Elder Brother. As no man
comes to Christ but by the Fathers power John. 6. 44. so no man comes to the
Father prevailingly but by the Sons merit and mediation. John* 14. 6.

1. The Types of the old Testament For proof.
Shadowed out this Truth. Christ was the substance of those shadows, and many
of them did shadow out this particular of Christ, viz. his being our way to the
Father. This was prefigured by the High-Priest's entering into the Holy of
holies in the people's behalf, as also by Gods commanding the sacrifice to be
brought to the Priest, to be offered by him, and forbidding the people either
to offer their own sacrifices, or to put incense thereto, because this must be
done by the Priest. Read to this purpose, Levit. 5. 8, 12. and 17. 3. -- 10.
and 8. 11. and 16. 12, 13. And what did all this teach, but that we must come
by Christ our high Priest unto the Father? the same was intimated by the blood
of sprinkling, the Hysop, the scarlet wool, etc. which for brevity I omit.

2. The express commands of the new Testament do teach this lesson, hence
Christ is called our High Priest Heb. 2. 17. and 3. 1. and 4. 14. and 10. 21.
our Mediator Heb. 9. 15. and 12. 24. that is, one that stands betwixt God and
us: By him we have access and Manuduction into the presence of God, Ephesians. 2.
17. Through him we are commanded to offer the sacrifice of ^ praise to G^d.
Hebr. 13. 15. So that as Joseph's Brethren might not see his face, unless they
brought Benjamin with them, so neither can we see the reconciled face of God
without Christ: all our addresses to God in prayer, and returns of praise, must
be through him. John 16. 23. Hebr. 13. 15.

Col. 1. 21. Ephesians. 2. 13. We were indeed the Sons of God by Creation, and might
have had, in that primitive Condition, immediate access to, and communion with
him, but, together with our purity, we lost our Privilege, and now there is
no such emboldning Relation but by Christ. The way of immediate communion is
shut up; and now Christ is our way. We are adopted in him Ephesians. 1. 5. and
therefore all the privileges of our Sonship are derived through him. What high
presumption would it be for a Beggar that has no Relation, to come to a King
or great Person and call him Father? the like presumption in a higher degree
are we guilty of, when we presume to come to God as Father, without Christ:
and as its likely the King would punish an act so presumptuous with great
severity, so doubtless will God. What had you to do to call me Father (will
God say) who never had, nor would have Interest in him by whom you should have
power (or privilege) to be called the Sons of God? Bold, John ^. 12.
and audacious Sinners! prove your Relation, Did you ever accept my Son for
your Elder Brother? were you ever implanted into him? where is my Benjamin, why
have you not brought him along with you, if ever you hope to see my face? Oh,
how will this confound and put to silence every such presumptuous soul, that
durst groundlesly come to God with mere pretense of Relation? It is a sweet
note of an Ancient upon that Scripture John 20. 17. I ascend unto my Father,
Greg. in locum.
and your Father, and to my God, and your God. Since (says he) our Savior
calls God, his God and theirs, why does he not say in common, our God? to
wit, because he and we have not God our God in the like manner. My Father by
nature, yours by grace; My God from whom I descended, yours to whom you shall
ascend: Mine first, and because mine, therefore yours also that believe in me.
So that all our Interest in God, as our Father, in a special manner flows
from Christ* and our approaches to him must be by Christ.

Goel, our Kinsman, our only friend in the Court of heaven, by whom we have
admittance, audience, and acceptance. Therefore we should by no means neglect
to take him along with us in all our addresses to the Father. Paul's Mediatory
letter on Onesimus his behalf (who had been an unfaithful servant and a
fugitive) was not so prevailing to procure Philemon's acceptance of him again
into his service, as is Christ's Intercession to procure Gods favorable
respects toward us.



1. The notorious ignorance of many about Christ, and his mediatory office. I
may say as the Apostle 1 Cor. 15. 34. Many have not the knowledge of God (so of
Christ) I speak it to your shame. They have the name of Christ often in their
mouths (it may be to swear by it) but alas! they are utterly strangers to any
distinct knowledge of him: what he is, or how he is made ours, or how we are
to come to God by him, are to them unintelligible Mysteries, and as a book
sealed. Now it is impossible they should come to God by Christ, who are grossly
ignorant in these things: Knowledge of Christ is necessarily presupposed to
interest in him, and without interest there is no coming to God by him Oh think
how often many of you have called God Our Father, and yet are ignorant of the
Son, by whom he is Our Father.

2. The palpable unbelief of many evinceth their guilt in this particular.
Faith is the ground of our Interest, and the hand with which we take hold of
Christ. But alas! may I not take up the Prophet's complaint? Isa. 53. 1.
Who has believed our Report? who, say you, why all of us, we hope; pity he
should live that will not believe on his Savior* we are verily persuaded (and
none shall drive us out of that persuasion) that Christ died for us etc. Poor,
self-deluded souls how easy is it to deceive your selves with such a
presumptuous conceit? but I must tell you, Faith is no such easy matter, nay it
is a sad sign that such never knew what it was to believe, that come so lightly
by it, and can keep it up constantly without trouble or interruption: But let
me ask you, Where had you your faith? by what means came you by it? Romans 10.
14, 17. Faith comes by hearing etc. Did you ever experience your hearts bowed
and persuaded by the word to close with Christ? Again, what effect has your
faith upon your heart? if true, it purifies the heart Acts. 15. 9. Where are
the fruits of it that should demonstrate it to others? faith is no better than
dead, if alone, Show me thy faith by thy works. Jam. 2. 14. -- Alas! are not
the irregular, and Atheistical lives of many men undeniable evidences of their
infidelity? what surer demonstration of unbelief reigning in the heart then
impiety and profaneness prevailing Psalm. 36 1.
in the life? so that as, the Transgression of the wicked said in David's heart
( i. e. convinced and persuaded him) that there was no fear of God before his
eyes; so may I say, that the open debauchery, fraud, oppression, atheism,
uncleanness etc. of many say plainly that there is no faith in their hearts:
and where there is no true faith, it is impossible the soul should come to God
by Christ, since faith is absolutely requisite in that case.

3. The Pharisaism and self-confidence of many, shows they do not come to God
by Christ. For, to depend on Christ, and on our own righteousness are
diametrically opposite Romans 10. 2, 3. Now do not most of the common sort of
professing Christians think to be heard for their civil honesty their good
meanings their uprightness? had not my own experience in conversing with many,
confirmed me, I could scarce have believed that so many professing the
Protestant religion, had retained this Popish principle. I fear many look but
with a ^quint ey (at best) upon Christ, and though they name the name of Christ
in duty, yet (as those women Isa. 4. 1: they wear their own apparel, come
to God, rather trusting to their own supposed worthiness, than the merit of
Christ. Well: it is impossible you should come in the name of Christ till you be
beaten out of this hold. They that serve God in the Spirit, and rejoice in
Christ Jesus, will put no Confidence in the flesh: These may serve as
convictions of your Phil. 3. 3.
guilt. Therefore reflect upon your approaches to God, bewayl your presumption
in daring to call God Father while you have come without Christ. I sorbear to
aggravate this sin upon your Consciences.

Many shall say, Lord we have prophesyed (and so prayed) in thy name, and yet
he will disowne them. It Is not the vehemence of words, but the reality of your
relation, that will prevail. And therefore,

1. See that your faith in Christ be right; Examine-proove, know you not etc. 2
Cor. 13. 5. The Apostle is serious and urgent in this matter, and it is whether
you be in the faith -- his redoubling the exhortation speaks both the
difficulty and necessity of the thing. The Truth of our special relation to
God depends upon the sincerity of our acceptance of Christ, and upon that
relation lies the stress of our assurance to speed: what need have we to see
that our faith be right?

2. Nor is it enough that we have faith (in order to our coming to God by
Christ) but we must act it: while our mouth is opened in begging, our hand
must be employed in tendering Christ. Prayer is neither right nor prevalent, if
it be not more in the exercise of grace, then in bodily contention: as we must
have one ey to God the Father, expecting what we ask from him: so we must
have another upon Christ, expecting it though him as our Intercessour.

3. See that both your person and performance be worthy of or rather suitable
to, such a Mediator: that is, that you be such for whom he may intercede, and
the duty such as he may tender to the Father: I am far from thinking that we
can perform such duties which may by any virtue in them engage Christ to tender
them, yet our duties be such as may be fit for Christ to tender to the Father:
The Reverend Dr. Preston Saints daily Exercise.
has well expressed my meaning. Under the law (says he) besides that the
Priest must offer the sacrifice, two things were required.

1. That the Person should be legally clean, and this is still required: viz.
that every one that names the name of Christ ( i. e. either calls himself a
Christian, or calls 2 Timothy 2. 19.
upon God by Christ) should depart from iniquity: It Is high presumption to call
upon God with polluted lips, to come into the presence of God with a stinking
breath: they that draw nigh God must cleanse their hands and purify their
hearts. Jam. 4 9.


2. The sacrifice must be without blemish: so under the Gospel the duty must be
holy, the prayer ten red by Christ must be according to the Will of God: if
either of these be wanting we cannot rightly come to God by Christ: such
defects either in the person or performance will weaken confidence, as a child
when conscious of any wilful miscarriage fears his Father's presence; the
Truth is, where such defects prevail, the acting of Faith upon Christ must
needs be hindered, and then we do not rightly come in his name to the Father.
So much for this Truth. D. 4.


The word [ Our] may relate to the community of Christians, and so it teaches
us charity; to take others into our prayers. God is the Father of the whole
family, Ephesians. 3. 15. and therefore must be prayed to as our common Father: it is
observable that Our Savior instructs his Disciples to pray thus not only in
their public and joint addresses, but in secret, and in our single
applications. Verse 6. when Thou prayest -- so that the point is: God in all
our addresses is to be prayed to as the common Father of the faithful. We are
to take in others into our prayers, not appropriating God to our selves only.

We have frequent Instances in Paul's prayers, 1 Thessalonians. 1. 1. and 3. 11. 2 Thessalonians. 1. 2. and 2. 16. Though he alone pray, yet he prays to God as a
common Father. And this we must do.

Our Father, we acknowledge God the Author of all Spiritual life and grace
to all believers. It Is as if we should say, Thou O Lord, the fountain of all
grace, who begettest all that are begotten to a Spiritual life, the God in
whom all believers live, and moove, and have their being spiritually. This sets
God far above all others, who are but particular and isntrumental Fathers.

2. To import our membership in that body which is spiritually begotten: q. d.
Lord, I know there are a peculiar number, which are begotten of thee, and which
call upon thee as a Father. Of that number I hope and profess I am: therefore
on thee I call as one of that number: so that it is a singular foundation and
strengthening of our faith, when we can confidently say, our Father, we own
our selves to be of that body whereof Christ is Savior.

3. But chiefly it imports that union of hearts and communion in prayers which
should be amongst all that call upon the Lord, that they should be so
charitably affected toward each other, as to interest the whole community in
the prayers of each particular believer. So that the sense is: Lord, I call
upon thee not only as my Father in particular, but of all the faithful, I come
to thee as with a desire to share in the prayers of all the faithful, so to
Interest them in mine: and this I intend as the maine sense of the Doctrine:
That Christians should not be private-Spirited in their devotions, nor confine
their prayers to their private concernm^nts; but should be so affected toward
all true believers, as to concern their prayers in their Brethrens necessities.
A duty practiced by all the genuine children of God. See Psalm 25. ult. and 51.
ult. and 122. 6, 7, 8. and 137. 5. Neh. 1. 4, 5. Isa. 62. 1, 7. Ephesians. 1. 16. 1 Thessalonians. 1. 2. Phil. 4. etc. Col. 2. 1, 2. And lest you should think that this is
only the duty of public officers (as Paul was) the injunction is upon all and
for all Ephesians. 6. 18.

Saints is this narrow-spiritedness? Our prayers should be like the Sun whose
beams and influences are universally communicated; or rather we should be
like our heavenly Father, who causes his Sun to shine -- Matthew. 5. 47. how
seldom do we say Our Father with any Enlargement of heart, toward others?
nay so far we are (I fear) from remembering the common concernments of the
Church, that we are too little mindful of our Relations, families,
Neighborhood: Christians, this is not a right Gospel Spirit; we follow not
our pattern when we thus confine our devotions.

2. Let us therefore put on bowels of Brotherly tenderness and compassion, that
we may put up hearty prayers for others; for all the Saints: the way to
attain this general Spiritedness is, to look more at the grand concernments
of Gods name and honor; then will our prayers be more public, when we prefer
the glory of God (which is chiefly bound up in the public concernments of his
Church) before our own welfare. To put you upon getting this frame, consider

1. Nothing is a better evidence of your real membership in the Church! it is
natural to the members of the Spiritual body to 1 Cor. 1^. 25. 2 Cor. 1^. 28.
have the same care one for another. Herein Paul prooved himself a lively
member by his care of all the Churches; and where this care is, it will vent it
self (as Paul's did) in earnest prayers for the whole Church's welfare.

2. Consider how advantageous this is, how infinitely your charity will be
multiplied in its returns upon you: by thus putting our prayers into the common
stock, we become interested in the common stock; and this is indeed a singular
benefit flowing from that Article of the Communion of Saints: hereby all the
Saints are our Factors, as we are theirs, and Oh what a thriving trade may be
driven by thus making our prayers a common stock?

Qu. But must we pray for none but those of whom we have ground to hope that
God is their Father?

Answ. For these we must especially pray, yet for others also that God may be
their Father (for we know not what is in the womb of Gods decrees toward
those that are yet vile and profligate Sinners). Our Savior prays not only
for those that did, but also for those that should believe on his name, John
17. 20. The Church must travel in birth of those that are yet unborn, even for
unconverted nations, for Sisters that have no breasts* Cant. 8. 8. But so, that
a difference be made in our prayers for them, and the faithful; and our
petitions suited to their condition.

CHAP. III.
Which art in Heaven.
We have heard something spoken to the first part of the Preface, wherein God
is described by his Relation to us: I proceed to the second part which
describes him by his Eminency above us, and this is by the designation of the
place where he eminently shows himself. I shall not unnecessarily enlarge, but
keep me within the bounds of my intended brevity, and my eye upon the mark I
first proposed viz. to teach you to pray: Take what I shall say to this, in
this single Observation.

In our addresses to God by prayer we must come to him as in heaven: our
addresses to God must be directed thither. This Sal^mon minds us of as a Curb
to rashness and vainbabling Eccles. 5. 2. and hither good Jehoshaphat directs
his prayer, 2 Chronicles. 20. 6. It Is needless to multiply Scripture-proofs: rather
let us explain, How we are to conceive God to be in heaven. And then give
Reasons of the point.

a piece of Atheism to limit God there: Joh 22. 12, 13, 14. To suppose God
confined within the circuit of heaven, and not to regard what is done on earth,
is the next way to become an Atheist. There Is little difference betwixt no God
at all, and a God so limited: nor,

Secondly, Are we to imagine (which would follow upon the former) that God
must locally descend from heaven, when he hears or gives answer to our
prayers: his being in heaven does not (nor must is in our conceptions of him)
suppose him at a distance from us on earth; we must remember that of David,
Psam. 139. 1, -- 12. that he is present with us, that he has beset us behind
and before etc. that he is intime nostro intimior, nearer us than we are to
our selves. And as they sung of old, he is extra caelum non exclusus, intra
coelum non inclusus, that he is so in heaven as not included, and so out of
Heaven as not excluded; a circle whose center is every where and circumference
no where: in a word, we are not to frame any conceptions of God, from his
being in heaven, prejudicial either to his general presence in all places, or
to his special presence with his people in their addresses to him. But,

Thirdly, By his being in heaven; we are to understand that more special and
glorious manifestation of himself which he there vouchsafes to the Angels and
glorified Spirits: the more immediate exhibitions and discoveries of his glory,
such as none but they enjoy: in this sense, he is said to 1 Timothy 6. 16.
dwell in the light which no man can approach unto, whom no man has seen, nor
can see. So that in this sense we are to call upon God as in Heaven. And this,



2. (For it is sufficient to name these things) To beget in our hearts awful
and reverentiall apprehensions of the divine Majesty; the place speaks his
sublimity, and he speaks in us humility. This is the Emphasis of that Scripture
Eccl. 5. 2. God is in heaven, and thou art on earth, therefore let thy words be
few: q. d. Speak with that reverence, as becomes his eminency and thy distance.

3. To take off our thoughts from the gross Idolatrous conceptions of a visible
deity, such as the Heathens fancied: and from the carnal Jews conceit of Gods
confining himself to a place, as their Temple, or the Mountain of Samaria.

4. To corroborate our faith and raise up our hearts in expectation of Gods
fulfilling our petitions, since Gods being in heaven imports his power and
Sovereignty, his alseeing eye, and all disposing hand: this the Psalmist makes
the foundation of his confidence against the scornful scoffs and malicious
contrivances of the wicked, and the very foundation of humane help razed, Psalm.
11. 1, -- 5. Verse 4. The Lord is in his holy Temple, The Lords throne is in
heaven --.

5. To hint to us, that it is not the extension of the voice, but the intension
of the heart that must reach God, That right prayer is not merely the lifting
up the hands or exaltation of the voice (for how can these reach heaven?) but
the execrcise of faith and others graces; That the silent groans of a devout
soul, are more prevailing than the loudest heartless exclamations.

6. To put us in mind what things are chiefly to be asked. viz. heavenly: as if
we send for any thing to a friend in a far Country, we will desire such as
the Country affords. This title of God serves as a directory, or a prompter to
teach us what to ask in the first place, and to curb us in our petitions for
inferior and earthly things.

Oh, then when we approach Gods presence, let us remember we come to him who
is in heaven. Away then with all proud thoughts and self-admiring reflections;
pull down your plumes, put your mouths in the dust: This is the genuine frame
of the Saints, Less Genesis 32. 10. Psam. 22. and Isa. 6. 5.
then the least of all thy mercies (says Jacob). A worm and no wan (says
David): Woe is me, I am undone -- a man of polluted lips -- and mine eyes have
seen the Lord of Hosts (says Isaiah). High apprehensions of God, and humble
conceptions of our selves, are a suitable frame to bring to God in prayer.

2. Must we make our addresses to God as in heaven? what have we then to do
with the world, when we draw nigh to God? Do carnal, earthly, sensual hearts
become his presence who is in heaven? We should (as Abraham) leave the
Servants and the Ass at the bottom of the hill, when we go up to converse
with God in the Mount. Sursum corda, is a suitable memento for a Soul drawing
nigh God: Let us lift up our hearts with our hands unto God in the heavens,
Lam. 3. 41. It is not enough to leave our wicked, but we must lay aside our
worldly thoughts. Else we bring Idols in our hearts, and God will answer us
accordingly. Ezekiel. 14. 3, 4.
Thy soul must be upon its wing, must soar above these terrene vanities, else
thy Soloecism will be greater then his who cried out, O Jupiter, or, O heaven,
and yet pointed with his finger to the earth. It Is a contradiction to thy
prayers, when thou prayest to thy Father in heaven, and thy heart lies
grovelling upon the earth.

3. Then all places are alike as to our nearness to God, as the Earth is in
respect of its situation, a center whereof heaven is the circumference, and
lines from any part of the circumference to the center are of equal length, so
is it in respect of Gods hearing of our prayers: wheresoever we are, we are
at the same distance (if I may say distance) to God, I mean no more but this,
that, as to acceptance with God, there is no difference of place, he that is
in heaven respects no more one place on earth then another. John. 4. 21, 2^.
The time is coming when neither at Jerusalem, nor on this Mountain etc. q. d.
you think. God has a singular respect to your Mountain, the Jews have the like
conceit of their Temple, but the Truth is, it is not the place that God
respects but the frame of the heart; as in every Nation, so in every place, he
that fears Acts. 10. 35.
God and works righteousness is accepted of him. It was a gross mistake that
dropped from the pen of a Reverend Prelate, when out of zeal to public places of
worship, he ascribes the success of prayer to the place, and tells us that God
hears a man, non quia precatur sed quia^ibi; As it is not the gift that
sanctifies the altar; so neither does the place, the prayer. The Jews after
Christ's time (and, if I mistake not, before also) had their Proseuchae places
of prayer, but were, I believe, far from attributing such a sanctity to them,
as some now fancy in our publick-places of assembly: let us but judge by the
place where they had their Proseuchae Acts. 16. 13. out of the City, by a
Rivers sid, it is more than probable that convenience, or necessity, or both,
might prompt to the choice of such a place, not any conceit of sanctity in it,
either before or after. Let men ascribe what convenience or decency they please
to the Fabric of Churches; but take heed of imagining in them any sanctity
(except they will call the peculiar appropriation of them to the service of
God, sanctity) or efficacy to further us in the success of our prayers: even
then when God had made peculiar promises to a place ( viz. the Temple) yet he
had not confined himself there, but if in the field, or when carried a far off
into their enemies land they should 1 Kings 7. 46, 49.
there call upon God, he was as able to hear, and as ready to help them. It Is
a sweet consideration that in all places God is nigh unto us in all that we
call upon him for, and that being in heaven he is equally present to the
faithful in any place on earth.

4. Let us then make heavenly things our first and chief requests to God. True,
we may (and this pattern teaches us to) ask outward, but limitedly, and in
Subordination to Spirituals: there is but one petition for them, and that (as
we shall hear) many wa^ (...) bounded: besides, we have Gods word for it,
that upon our seeking heavenly things these shall be cast in as additaments,
whereby God has endeavored to provent our over-sollicitousness about them,
and to take us off from too much earnestnes in asking them: I say not, that
Gods promise of them should make us less prayerfull for them (promises being
encouragments of prayer) but when God has promised them upon condition of our
more earnest seeking his Kingdom and righteousness, he has hereby superseded
our too much earnestnes and importunity about them. Let our main petitions
therefore be for heavenly things, for the things of heaven; since we come to
him who is in heaven: those are (...), the good things in Gods account: What
one Evangelist calls good things Matthew. 7. 11. another interprets to be the
Spirit of God. Luke 11. 13. And if out of an earnest desire of heavenly, we
forget to ask earthly and outward things, God will not forget to bestow them.
God highly approves it in Solomon that he asked not riches, wealth, honor, the
life of his enemies or long life: but rather wisdom and knowledge. And as a
Testimony of his approbation, casts in those as overweight to the bargain, as
Interest to the Principal. 2 Chro. 1. 11, 12.

CHAP. IV.
1. PETITION.
Hallowed be thy Name.
HAving spoken thus much to the Preface, I now come to enter upon the body of
this sweet platform of prayer: which I shall not otherwise divide than
according to the generally received partition, into 6. Petitions, the three
first, relating to God, the three latter to ourselves. I have resolved, by Gods
assistance, to tie up my self to a single Sermon upon each Petition, and
therefore shall crave your greater diligence in attention, as fearing that my
thus confining my self, will both occasion a more succinct handling of them,
and will hinder me from my accustomed manner of repeating what I deliver.

Before I enter upon the Petitions particularly, it will be necessary to give
some general Rules and Propositions, for the better understanding of them, and
of what I shall speak to them.

Prop. 1. And let the first be this (which I have but just now hinted) The
Petitions naturally divide themselves (as I may say) into two Tables: the three
first concern Gods glory, and the means conducing thereunto, (yet so as that
our good is intwisted with it); the 3. latter concern our good both here and
hereafter. And from this order and connection we may take out these Lessons;
which I shall content my self only to name here, as having occasion to speak to
some of them (at least), in handling the particular Petitions.

1. Gods glory and what immediately tends to it, is to have the chief place in
our prayers.

2. So indulgent is the Majesty of heaven, that having sought his glory he
allows us to seek our own good, Spiritual and temporal.

3. Yet our good, is to be sought by us in conjunction with, and subserviency
to, Gods glory.

Prop: 2. Every Petition implies an acknowledgment of something, (as you will
hear in the particular handling more fully); for Iustance, Hallowed be the
name, implies an acknowledgment both that God is worthy to be sanctified, and
that we are unable to sanctify him without his enabling grace. So, Forgive us
our Trespasses imports an acknowledgment of our sins, and c.

Prop: 3. Every Petition includes, together with the good thing asked, the
Means for the effecting or obtaining of it: and deprecates all hindrance to it,
and (as all other prayers do) puts an engagement on them that pray for it, to
use their just and lawful endeavors for the effecting or obtaining of it: for
Instance, Thy Kingdom come, deprecates the hindrances, viz. Sathan's Kingdom,
includes the means viz. the free passage of the Gospel and c. And engages every
one that prays for it to endeavor in his station that the Kingdom of God may
come, and that He alone may Reign: so that in each single Petition (as we
shall see) there are many infolded and included.

Prop: 4. What we beg for our selves according to the places and conditions
we are in, we do also beg for others according to their places and
conditions (for each Petition relating to our selves is in the plural) and we
do thereby engage our selves, as we can, to help them to that thing.

Prop: 5. Under one particular or Species in any Petition expressed, the whole
Genus or kind is included; as under Bread all necessary food, and again under
necessary food, all other necessaries relating to this life; as health,
raiment, habitation, preservation from evils in our bodies, names, estates and
c.

Prop: 6. This Pattern, is so perfect and comprehensive, that there is nothing
we can or ought to beg, but it is reducible to some head in it, yea (as in the
Commandments so here) the same thing in diverse respects is reducible to several
Petitions: as all that we ask in the following, are reducible as means to the
first.

Thus to beg faith may in several considerations relate to every of the
Petitions as you may easily discern by the respect it has to each: and hence
will follow that we cannot give a full and exact account of all the
particulars included in the Petitions, only such general heads as may point
out the particulars; so that, what David says of Gods law we may say of the
Lords prayer, it is exceeding Psalm. 119. 96.
broad, and (as the Jews say) upon every tittle hangs a Mountain of sense:
Se^tentia brevis, sensus infinitus, it is compendious, yet copious; plain, and
yet intricate, s^m^liar, yet sublime; of few parts yet complete, and
comprehensive of what ever we may or should ask in reference to Gods glory, to
our own temporal spiritual or eternal good. And indeed this brevity,
succinctness, and comprehensiveness of it speaks at once the infinite and
divine wisdom of Christ (for there is wisdom to comprehend the Iliads in a
nut-shell, to reduce the almost infinite concernments of God and man to so few
heads, and comprize them in so few words) as also his singular condescension
and respects to man's infirmities. As in the Law, God has Epitomized duty, so
here our Savior has Epitomized the things we are to pray for; and both in
condescension to, and compliance with, man's weakness and infirmity.

Having premised these few things in general, I shall now enter upon the
Petitions in particular: the first whereof respects immediately that which
should be our last and highest end viz. the Glory of God. (...): let thy name
be hallowed or sanctified: In handling which (as all the following) I shall
explain the terms, if necessary; Then draw the Petition into a Doctrinall
Proposition (passing by all other Doctrines that lie coucht' in it): and after
confirmation of the Truth, I shall apply it, chiefly aiming at, what I first
propounded, viz. to instruct you in, and enable you for, the better managment
of the duty of prayer: For this first Petition, some have fancied it Sr.
Rich-Baker on the Lord prayer.
rather a complement and solemnity attending upon the name of God: as the Jews
when they name any of their famous Ancestors, they add some words of
Benediction, as of Moses, Zecharon Libaracha: i. e. his memory in blessedness
(as we say, of blessed memory) and speaking of God they add Hakadosh Baruch
hu. i. e. that holy and blessed One, as it is the eustome of some (and not to
be blamed, if used in sincerity) when speaking of God they add, blessed or
worshipped, may he be: so here. But as the opinion is singular, so the verb
here being in the same mood as in the following Petitions, speaks this to be of
the same nature with the following: I conclude it therefore to be a Petition,
the sense whereof we shall better understand by explaining the Terms of it. 1.
What is meant by the name of God? 2. What by sanctifying?

Thy name] The name of God is put 1. for God himself, an usual Hebraism to put
names for persons, which the Greeks also imitate, Acts. 1. 15. The number of
names were about 120: Rev. 3. 4. Thou have a few names etc. i. e. persons: So
the name of Christ is put for Christ himself Acts. 4. 12. Ephesians. 1. 21. Thus
the Name of God is equivalent to God himself: Genesis 4. 26. Then began men to
call upon the name of the Lord: and this is very frequent and obvious: 2. Name
is put for that which notifies and distinguishes God from all others. So those
Attributes whereby God has revealed himself, are frequently called his name.
Se Exodus 3. 15. 15. 3. Isa. 43. 6. Exodus 34. 5, 6. They that know thy name will
put their trust in thee, Psam. 9. 10. i. e. Thy power, wisdom, goodness etc. 3.
It is also put for fame and celebrity, for the glory of praise that is
publicly given to any one: so it is attributed to God, 1 Kings 8. 41. 42. they
shall hear of thy great Name -- Neh. 9. 10. so did thou get thee a name -- as
we say, A man's name is up when he is spoken of with general applause, 4. Name
is put for, what ever God makes himself known by, as in the 3d. Commandment:
Now the word and works of God are the things whereby he discovers himself.
Here the two first senses are most proper, q. d. Be thou magnified and
glorified in thy Essence and Attributes.

[ Hallowed or sanctified] To open that word, take the following Conclusions.

1. Man is said to sanctify himself, or others: thus God commands the
Israelites to sanctify to him their first born: Exodus 13. 2. and the Priests
to sanctify themselves, Exodus 19. 22. In this sense, to sanctify is to dedicate
and set a part to God a thing or person, or to prepare for any special service.

2. God is said to sanctify Man which is, either to choose him to some peculiar
office, as Aaron and his Sons, Exodus 29. 44. Or else to infuse habits of
graces, and make him holy by real communications of the graces of his Spirit:
of which 1 Thessalonians. 5. 23. and many other Scriptures.

3. God is said to sanctify himself. Numb. 20. 13. when he vindicates himself
from any dishonor or wicked reflections of men's sins. So Ezekiel. 36. 23. I will
sanctify my great name which was profaned among the Heathen, which ye have
profaned in the midst of them: i. e. I will wipe off the reproach which your
miscarriages have brought upon my Name amongst the Heathen. Thus God sanctified
himself upon Aarons Sons, Levit. 10. 3. See also, Isa. 5. 16. But amongst his
own people, God is said to sanctify himself when he restores to them the
purity of his worship Ezekiel. 20. 41. or delivers them from any grievous
affliction, Ezekiel. 28. 25. and 39. 27. In a word when God by any signal
providence declares what he is; or writes any of his attributes so legibly
upon his Providence that men may plainly read it, he does herein sanctify
himself.

4. Lastly, Man is said to sanctify God: Isa. 8. 13. Sanctify the Lord of hosts
himself -- that is, not to make, but to declare God holy and glorious: to
acknowledge him to be what he is, and to ascribe to him what ever speaks his
transcendent excellency. In a word, to refer our whole life and all our actions
and endeavors, to his glory, according to that. 1 Cor. 10. 31.

Now the two last senses are proper to this Petition. Let thy name be
sanctified both by thy self and by us thy Creatures; do thou reveal thy glory,
and enable us to acknowledge and celebrate it.

And, by the way, it is well observed Sr. Rich. Baker.
how generally these Petitions run that relate to God. It is said Hallowed be
thy name, Not [by us] lest we make the Music of too few voices: Thy Kingdom
come, not [to us], lest we assign God too small a Territory: Thy will be done,
Not [by us] lest we stint God to too few Servants. But we say, Hallowed be
thy name, and stop there that no mouth may be stopped from glorifying God. Thy
Kingdom come but not [whither], because we should desire its coming into all
places. Thy will be done, Not [by whom] because it should be done by all: The
sense then of this Petition may be given in these Scriptures, Psam. 80. 12.
Thou that dwell between the Cherubins shine forth -- and Psalm. 21. 13. Be
thou exalted, Lord, in thine own strength -- And Psalm. 57. 5, 11. Be thou
exalted O God above heavens, let thy glory be above all the earth. These may
express it as it relates to Gods sanctifying himself: And then as it relates to
our sanctifying of him: Ps. 67. 3, 5. Let the people praise thee, O God, yea
let all the people praise thee, may be a good exposition or Paraphrase upon it.
So Psalm. 13. 18. etc. The more particular explication I reserve to the
Application. The Point is this,

Cor. 10. 31. Whether ye eat or drink -- do all to the glory of God. If every
thing, if our natural and civil, much more our religious actions: and if the
glory of God must be the highest end of our prayers, it clearly follows that
it must be first and chief in our Petitions, as well as in our intentions: I
shall for further clearing the thing, and preventing mistakes, briefly answer a
3. sold Query, and then apply it.

Quest. 1. Is it necessary that we should always keep this order in our
Petitions? must we always pray in the first place, that Gods name may be
sanctified?

Ans. 1. The glory of God should always fit highest in our hearts: and all our
desires and Petitions should be subordinate to this as their end, and (as far
as we can discern) directed to it: so that all we ask should be, implicitly
and intentionally, Petitions that Gods name may be sanctified, since in what
ever we ask we should chiefly intend this; and our desires should be ever
bounded with this as the condition: if we ask outward, health, riches,
deliverance etc. or if spirituals, grace or comfort, still we must have an ey
to this mark: and the nearer any thing comes to this mark, the more intense may
our desires be, and the move earnest our Petitions about it. So that though I
do not conceive it always necessary to pray or begin our prayers in these or
the like words, yet that we are hereby taught both what to pray for with the
greatest intensness, viz. things that have a more immediate and infallible
tendency to Gods glory; as also with what intention to pray for all we pray
for, viz. that we or others may be in a better capacity to glorify God: That
Text Matthew. 6. 33. Seek first -- etc. does not mainly intend order of time, but
of dignity: first i. e. mainly, principally with the greatest earnestness,
seriousness, industry. So that the Order of this Petition, does not so much
teach us in what order to begin as to what end we should order and direct our
prayers.

2. Yet in reason, that which should be highest in our intentions should
ordinarily be first in our Petitions. I say not, that it is absolutely
necessary that so it should be, but surely in Reason that which concerns Gods
glory and our spiritual good should have the precedence in an ordinary course.
That we give God his glory, before we ask him to give us what makes for our
good, is very reasonable. Though (as we sometimes dispatch smaller buisnesses
that me may be more fit and free for the main, so) it may not be amiss
sometimes to dispatch some Petitions for outward which may be urgent and
pressing upon us, that they may not hinder in our more spiritual, and more
important concernment. But this I make not a rule for our ordinary practice,
but only an expedient in some urgent and extraordinary Cases.

Quest. 2. But what necessity at all of such a Petition, since God will see to
that himself, since he will infallibly earry on that as his grand design, nor
can our prayers contribute any thing to it?

Answ. 1. Were it but to testify our desire, it were something: since that is
our great end, 1 Cor. 10. 31. Our prayers should express the workings of our
hearts toward it: nor does the certainty of Gods effecting any thing supersede
our prayers or endeavors about it: nay rather if the thing be any way our
concernments and within the compass of a promise, certainty of the event should
edge our prayers, (indeed we can pray for nothing absolutely, except we know
God will, or has promised to effect it). The decrees of God bring-forth upon
the knees of prayer: when God had bound himself Ezekiel. 36. 37.
by promise for the Jews restoration, he will yet be enquired of, that he
may do it: it is no small evidence of the Truch of grace when our prayers Echo
back Gods promises, and when the breathings of our hearts are after the
accomplishment of God's grand design in the world.

2. But besides; it is our concernment* for the sense of the Petition (as has
bin hinted) is this; Lord, sanctify thy name and enable us to sanctify it: That
God shall be gloryfied is certain; but, that we may be amongst that number
that give him the glory due to his name, should be the earnest and most
importunate desire of our souls. Especially since,

Thirdly, Upon the sanctifying of Gods name by us, depends our happiness, and
indeed to hallow or sanctify the name of God in glory is our very happiness.
What is our hope, or what should be our desire but to be admitted to join with
the heavenly Quire in singing glory, honor, and praise to God for ever and
ever? This is their both work and wages; and this is the import of the
Petition: q. d. Lord, enable us so to sanctify thy name on earth, that we may
both glorify thee and be glorified with thee in heaven; And who will say, This
is a needless or frivolous Petition?

Quest. 3. Why is this first in order? (though we have partly hinted already)
yet take this ccount.

1. This is the highest end of our Creation and should be of all our actions
(as has bin showed once and again). Now, the chief end should be first in the
intention: this is as the Sea out of which all our Petitions should issue, and
into which they should empty themselves.

2. This chiefly intended, is as the firstfruits that make the lump holy, as
the altar that sanctifies the gift: when we have proposed this as our end, and
praefixt it to our players, what ever else we ask (keeping our eye ^xt on
this) is wel-pleasing to God: yea though we should mistake in the particular,
God will excuse it: If we ask according to 1 John. 5. 14.
his will he hears us; now if we sincerely intend his glory in our asking,
we cannot but in the general ask according to his will, though he may see
good to withold the particular thing we pray for. David designs to build God
a house (herein proposing 1 Kings ^. 18. 2 Samuel 7. 11.
to himself the glory of God.) God approves and rewards this design, though he
will not permit David himself to effect his design. So that when this is
sincerely proposed, it facilitates and opens the way for the attainment of
other blessings: all that we ask after, and in subordination to this, shall
either be given or denied, in mercy. It Is a grand failure in prayer, when we
ask to Jam. 4. 3*
waste upon our lusts, and it is a singular excellency, when a soul can reflect
upon his prayer, and say, he has asked nothing but what he conceives might
tend to the glory of God, and might enable him for that end, otherwise he
would not have asked it.

3. And it is fit we should prefer God and his grand concernment to our own.
Are not we his Creatures, his Servants, his Children? Should not the Servant
gird himself and serve his Master before himself, Luke 17. 8? Should a servant
that is wholly maintained by another seek himself in the first place? God made
us for himself Prove. 16. 4. Romans 11. ult. and therefore we should make him our
principal end: That we first or chiefly pray for Gods glory and the means of
it, is a duty that results from our Relation to God; That we may afterward ask
for our selves is a mercy, flowing from Gods condescension and compassion
toward us: so that we see, There is all the reason in the world why Gods
glory should be chief in our intention, when we pray, if not always first in
our expression.

primum mobile, the spring of all our motions in prayer, This is the Term from,
and to which all our prayers should tend. To moove and persuade to this;
Consider;

Mot. 1. We cannot lightly ask amiss as to particular, if we ma^^ this our
end in general. The same Spirit that directs us to this as our end, will direct
us in asking suitable means to it: The arrow that is rightly fixed upon the
mark, will lightly hit it. God will show us his way, when we make himself our
end: the Spirit will regulate our Petitions, when it has rectified our ends.

2. Nor shall we miss of what we ask so far as it makes for our end: having
made Gods glory our chief design, and put all other things in subordination to
it, we may say with Luther, fiat voluntas mea -- mea, quia tua, Domine: let my
will be done, mine Lord because thine. Your Petitions when thus directed are
such as God can no more deny than he can deny himself; for hereby Gods
Interest is greater then yours, in what ever you pray for; I mean, so far as
the thing asked has a real tendency to his glory: Oh this frame would make us
Isreal's indeed, Princes and prevailers with God. Whereas on the contrary,
prayers that want a good aim, want a good issue, They are Jam. 4. ^ 3.
either not granted, or, if granted, not in mercy.

3. It Is worse then Heathenish Idolatry to propose any other as our highest
end: it is real Idolatry, Jam. 4. 3. Ye ask amiss that you may consume it upon
your lusts, and then Verse 4. it follows, Ye Adulterers and Adulteresses, i.
e. in Scripture Phrase, ye Idolaters. And its worse then Heathenish: they (at
least the wiser sort) direct their prayers, immediately to stocks and stones,
but ultimately to the true God. We direct our prayers immediately to the true
God, but for things which we intend to bestow upon worse then stocks and
stones, even our lusts and corruptions: remember what was said in speaking to
the preface, that God must be both our Object and our End, in worship: we must
both serve God as our Object and seek him as our End: and indeed when we do
not so seek him, and his glory, we do not serve him but seek to serve our
selves of him. Perverting the ends of duty, turns an otherwise commendable and
commanded duty, into a punishable sin: 2 Kings 10. 30. God bids or approves of
Jehu's destroying the house of Ahab: yet, Hosea. 1. 4. he will avenge the
blood of Jezaell upon the house of Jehu: the Reason may be, because though he
did it at Gods command, yet he mist it in the end: so it may be in the case of
prayer: Let this suffice by way of motive: Now for Direction that we may
prosecute this as our end, and that we may imitate our pattern in this
particular (and I shall give the same in each Petition,). Take these Two*



Now that I may more particularly show you what is employed and included in this
Petition (which was purposely reserved to this place.) remember what I laid
down in the preliminary propositions, viz. that, Every Petition did imply
something by way of Acknowledgment, as well as include something by way of
Petition.

1. Then in this Petition, is employed a three fold Acknowledgment, which you
may amplify in your imitation of it.

1. That God is in himself infinitely glorious; that is, There are those
essential excellencies and perfections in God, which ^ender him admirable and
adorable by all his creatures: and that those discoveries which he has made
of himself in his word and works set him above all our blessing and praise. Now
this you may amplify in the language of Moses (for I shall all along hint
Scripture Phrase for your help and advantage.) Exodus 15. 11. glorious in
holiness, fearful in praises, doing wonders, or in the language of God
himself. Exodus 34. 6, 7. The Lord, The Lord God, merciful, and gracious -- or
of David. 1 Chronicles. 29. 11, 12. Thine O Lord is the greatness, and the power,
and the glory, and the victory -- or of Jehoshaphat: 2 Chronicles. 20. 6. Art not
thou God in Heaven? and rulest thou not over all the Kingdoms of the Heathen?
-- Nor only in general, but occasionally you may particularize in Gods
imcomprehensibleness in the words of Zophar Job 11. 7, 8. or Paul, 1 Timothy 6.
16. his Immensity. Psam. 47. 2. and 95. 3. Isa. 40. 15. 22. his power and
faith-fulness Psam. 89. 8. his immutability Mal. 3. 6. Jam. 1. 17. his mercy
Exodus 34. 6, 7* his eternity Psam. 90. 2. his purity. Hab. 1. 13. Psam. 5. 4.
Thus you may acknowledge the excellency of his works and providence. Neh. 9.
6. Psam. 19. 1. -- 4. and 8. 1. and 104. 24. and 145. 10. Thus may you upon
occasion single out one or more of his Attributes, or works; for the reflection
of these upon God, is the glory that we do owe and can only render to God.

2. That as God is glorious in himself, so it is our duty, and the duty of all
his creatures, especially Saints and Angels, so to acknowledge him, that, as
we are his Creatures, much more as his servants and children, we ought to
reflect upon him the glory of his attributes and works. This may be done in the
Psalmists language, Psalm. Psalm. 65. 1.
89. 7. greatly to be feared in the assembly of the Saints, and to be had in
reverence of all them that are about him. And here again, we may enlarge into
the particular obligations that are upon us to give glory to him. As our
Creation, Psam. 139. 14-17. I will praise thee* for I am fearfully and
wonderfully made. Our Birth and the provision. God made for us in our infancy,
Psam. 22. 9, 10. and 71. 6. our protection, preservation, deliverance, Psam.
116. 8. etc. And here you see what an ample field you have to expatiate in:
here you may take occasion to reckon up the most singular and signal
experiences you have had of Gods goodness, as so many obligations upon you to
give God his glory.

3. In this Petition is employed an acknowledgment of your own and others
inability for this high employment: this (as you have heard) is part of the
sense of this Petition, to beg of God grace and ability wherewith to glorify
him. So that it is an implicit acknowledgment of our own insufficiency: This
may be done in Paul's language, 2 Cor. 3. 5. Not sufficient of our selves to
think any thing as of our selves: or in that of the Levites. Neh. 9. 5. or of
David Psam. 106. 2. Who can ^^ter his mighty acts, or show forth all his
praise? Here you may take occasion to amplify upon your own ignorance and
narrow apprehensions of God, in Zophar's words. Job 11. 6, 7. or Agur's Prove.
30. 2, 3. or in those words Job 26. ult. So likewise you may acknowledge the
backwardness of your hearts, the coldness, and straitness of your affections,
employed in that Petition of David Psalm. 51. 15. Thus may you occasionally
enlarge on these things.

2. As there is something acknowledged, so there is something begged, I mean
particular things under this general. I shall reduce what is included by way
of Petition, to these two general heads.

1. We are, according to this Petition, to pray that God will glorify himself,
that he will do that which most tends to his own glory: which we may do in
the words of the Psalmist Psam. 57. 5, 11. and As our Savior, Joh. 12. 28.
Father glorify thy Name.
115. 1. and in order to this end that he will both remove what ever darkens
his glory, and bring about the things that most tend to the advancement of it.
Since as you heard in the Propositions premised, each Petition implies a
deprecation of the hindrances, and prayer for what tends to the furtherance of
the thing prayed for: Now it would be infinite here to sum up all the
particular hindrances of, or means to advance the glory of God: I shall only
hint a few generals.

1. Then, as to the impediments of Gods glory, there are three more general,
whereby the honor of God is darkened and Ecclipsed in the world, which (in
compliance with this Petition) we must pray against.

1. That Idolatry and false Worship which reigns in a great part of the world:
this is a black cloud that darkens the name of God; hereby the glory due to God
is given to others, and his praise to graven Images, Devils, and those that are
no Gods. The host of heaven, Angels, men, bruits, stocks and stones etc. rob
God of his glory: Oh, how should we wrestle with God that these Dagon's may
fall before his Ark? Turn that of the Psalmist, Psalm. 97. 6, 7. into prayer,
Let the heavens declare thy righteousness, O Lord, and all the people see thy
glory. Confounded be all they that serve graven Images that boast themselves of
Idols -- Plead the many promises for the conversion Idolatrous nations that
they may say with Ephraim Hos. 14. 8. What have I to do any more with Idols?
that their Idols of Silver, and Idols of Gold which they made each one for
himself to worship may be cast to the moles and to the bats, Isa. 2. 20. That
he will turn to the people a pure language, that they may all call upon the
name of the Lord to serve him with one consent, Zeph. 3. 9. So that there may
be one Lord and his name one Zech. 14. 9. And that from the rising of the Sun
even unto the goeing down of the same his Mal. 1. 11.
name may be great among the Gentiles, and in every place incense may be
offered to his name, and a pure offering, and his name may be great among the
Heathen.

2. The Blasphemy of Gods name, occasioned by the wicked's mistakes and
misinterpretations of his providence: It pleases the Lord often to obscure his
way Psam. 77. 19. And his providence seem for a time to savor the wicked
Psalm. 73. 3, 4, 5. Job: 21. 8-14. Hence they gather sad conclusions,
dishourable to God, discourageing to the Godly, though at last destructive to
themselves: and hereby Gods glory is for the present much eclipsed, when God
seems to savor the wicked, and to frown upon his own people, when they that
work wickedness Mal. 3. 15.
are delivered, men will call the proud happy. Now though nothing is surer then
that God will vindicate his honor, and wipe off the reproach that is cast upon
him; yet our part is to mind God of it, in the Psalmists words. Psam. 74. 18,
22, 23. Remember this, that the enemy has reproached, O Lord, and that the
foolish people have blasphemed thy name. Arise, O God, plead thine own cause,
remember how the foolish man reproacheth thee daily: forget not the voice of
thine enemies -- We are to pray that God will fill their faces with shame etc.
Psalm. 83. 16, 18. that he will sanctify himself upon them. That he will
hasten the time when judgment shall return unto righteousness, and the upright
in heart may Psalm. 94. 15
follow after it. And so order it in his providence, that men may be forced to
say, Verily there is a reward for the righteous, verily he is a God that
judges in the earth Psalm 58. ult.

3. The profaneness, atheism, impiety, and all manner of iniquity that reigns
amongst those that profess and call upon his name. How do the vile
miscarriages of those that profess themselves worshippers of the true God
obscure his glory, and make his name to stink amongst Pagans and Idolaters?
This therefore we should with all earnestness beseech the Majesty of heaven,
that all that name his Name may depart from 2 Timothy 2. 19.
iniquity: That the wickedness of the wicked may (in this sense) come to an
end; That there may be no root amongst us that bears gall and wormwood Deuteronomy.
29. 18. That no root of bitterness springing up trouble us, and many be defiled
Hebr. 12. 15. That no professing Christian may be a professed Atheist, a
practical blasphemer of that holy name whereby he is called. Thus for the
impediments to be deprecated.

2. As to the means whereby God may glorify himself and which we are to pray
for in order thereunto, they are infinite: nor shall I trouble you with
particulars: a few Instances may serve. Pray we then that God will discover
himself, that he will shine forth and display his glorious attributes to the
world, Psalm. 80. 1, 2. and 94. 1, 2. That he will make himself known Psalm. 67.
2, 3. That men may know that he whose name alone is Jehovah is the most High
over all the earth: for if his Name were known aright, it would be glorified.
Again: That he will take to himself his great power and Rev. 11. 17
Reign; That he so rule all the affairs of the world, as that each wheel may
move in a direct tendency to his glory. Again that the Gospel may be
propagated, Infidels, Heathens, Turks, Pagans, and Idolaters Converted: That
he will confound the wicked, and make bare his arm in the signal and
seasonable deliverances of his Church and people. In a word, that all the
transactions of God in the world may be ordered to the most advantageous way of
glorifying his great Name. This is the first general included in this Petition.

2. We are also according to this Petition to pray that we and others may be
enabled to glorify him, that he will frame our hearts to praise him, and fill
our mouths with his glory; That all the creatures may be as a well-turned
Instrument harmoniously sounding forth the glory of their Creator. In this
sense may we use that (so often quoted) Scripture, Psalm. 67. 3, 5. and 51. 15.
And here also we may amplify in deprecating hindrances and a begging bilities.
To touch on each,

1. Pray we (in compliance with this Petition) that God will remove from us and
others whatsoever hinders us from paying him that tribute of glory due unto his
name: for instance, that ignorance and blinduesse that Reigns in the world:
for* though it is possible that some who know God Romans 1. 21
may not glorify him as God, yet it is impossible that they that know him not,
should so glorify him: therefore we may take up on the behalf of our selves
and others, that excellent prayer of Paul for his Ephesians. Ephesians. 1. 17, 18,
19. So likewise we may beg deliverance from Atheism, Idolatry, Error,
falsehood, from looseness, carelessness, and unsuitable walking; from wretched
profaneness, damnable hypocrisy, self-seeking, aff^ct^tion of applause, and
vain glory, all which stand in a direct opposition to Gods glory: pray that God
will pull down that great Idol self, which like Bell in the Apocryphal story
devoures all, and robs God of his glory: that he will lay* us and others low
in our own eyes, that he will put us in mind we are not our own, 1 Cor. 6.
20.
and therefore should glorify him in our bodies and Spirits.

2. And (as to Helps) pray we that God will work in us those abilities, give
us those graces, bestow on us those blessings, and afford us those
opportunities, whereby, with, and for which, we may most sanctify him. It
would be infinite to particularize: indeed to reckon up the means relating to
this part of the Petition, would be to run through the whole duty of man, and
all the other Petitions are but means subordinate to this: yet to instance in
some things, especially conducing hereunto.

1. Pray for the sanctifying work of Gods Spirit upon your hearts. It Is
impossible you should sanctify Gods name aright, till he sanctify your nature:
man indeed was a well tuned instrument, fitted to celebrate the glory of his
Creator, but the Fall him quite out of order, and no hand but his that made,
can mend it. Put in suit that promise for your selves and others, Isa. 43. 21.
that God will form you for himself, that you may (how forth his praise: and as
Luke 1. 74, 75. we may serve him without fear, in holiness and righteousness
before him all the days of our life. That he will tune your hearts, and open
your lips that etc. That he would work in you all those graces of knowledge*
love, says, fear, delight, zeal, etc. which may be as so many strings sounding
forth his glory: so that your hearts may be as David inditing Psalm. 45. 1.
good matter, that you may make things touching the King even the Lord of
hosts: and that they may be in such a frame as to be apt to take all occasions
to glorify him, ^^ we see David's was from the contemplation of his works and
providence, Psalm. 8. 1. and 57. 7. and 104. Tot: and 108. 1. O God, my heart
is fixed etc.

2. And that God will make us and others fruitful and abundant in every good
work* since, as it is in John 15. 8. herein is our heavenly Father glorified if
we bring forth much fruit. It Is not the great talker but the holy and
circumspect walker that brings glory to God: bespeak God therefore that you and
others to whom the grace of God has appeared may be effectually taught to deny
all ungodliness and worldly lusts -- Tit. 2. 11, 12. That you may be steadfast
unmoovable always abounding in the work of the Lord. 1 Cor. 15. ult: pray that
your light may so shine -- Matthew. 5. 18. That you may be holy in all
conversation and godliness, 2 Pet. 3. 11.

3. A third advantage of glorifying God will be, if we pray that God will so
dispose of us and all our concernments, that we may be in the fittest capacity
to glorify him. That as he has made us for that end, he will so dispose of us
that we may be always isntrumental for it: That all his providence may both
administer matter and excite our hearts to praise him: to this purpose you may
borrow the words of Agur, Prove. 30. 8, 9. Give me neither poverty nor riches
etc. -- left I should be full and deny thee, and say, Who is the Lord. -- Or
left I should be poor and steal and take thy name in vain. q. d. Lord I find my
heart in either extreme apt to dishonor thee, I therefore beg a mean condition
as most fitting me for my main end, which is thy Glory. This should be the
import of our prayer*

4. That our lips may be opened, our tongues touched with a coal from Gods
Altar, that we may be enabled to speak of God with that reverence wherewith
it becomes us, and to give him the calves of our lips the sacritice of praise ^
borrow to this purpose the words of David Psalm 51. 15. Lord, open thou my
lips, that my mouth may show forth thy praise. Pray with him Psalm 71. 8. Let
my mouth be filled with thy praise, and with thy honor all the day: that the
word may be fitted to your lips, Prove. 22. 18. Psalm 126. 2.

5. In a word that when soever Gods glory comes in competition with any
selfadvantage; with any pleasure, profit, o^ worldly accommodation, you may be
enabled to prefer that to all your own concernment, in the words of David,
Psalm. 115. 1. That as the 24. Elders Rev. 4 10, 11. you may take the Crowns
from your heads and lay them at the feet of God: and ascribe all to him,
nothing to your selves. Thus for the matter of your Petitions in conformity to
this.

Direct. 2. But it is not enough that the matter of your Petitions be according
to your pattern, but you are also to endeavor that the frame of your hearts be
suited to the matter of your Petition. It is easy to amplify in words upon this
or any other of the Petitions, but not so easy to get a right frame of spirit.
Therefore,

1. Labor after a frame of spirit exceedingly enlarged in apprehensions of the
infinite excellencies, and essential glory of God, else you do but mock God:
Endeavor that your hearts may be hot within you, Psalm. 39. 3. may boil up
good matter Psalm. 45. 1. Then are our prayers right when our apprehensions are
much wider then our expressions: when it is with us in this case as it was with
Elihu, Job 32. 18. When we are full of matter, and the spirit within us
constrains us: when our belly is as wine which has no vent, and ready to
burst like new bottles.

2. Get a heart very sensible and tender of Gods dishonor: such a frame as
that of David Psalm. 42. 10. As with a sword in my bones they reproach me while
they say, Where is now thy God? When as Psalm. 69. 9. The zeal of Gods house
(and name) eats us up, and the reproaches of those that reproach God fall upon
us: when the darkning of Gods glory goes nearer our hearts, than any loss or
cross in our own greatest concernments. This Petition put up with such a frame
is exceeding acceptable and well-pleasing to the Almighty: Oh, when a soul can
be more sensible of Gods dishonor, and more vehemently beg the vindication of
his Name, and wiping off the dirt that is cast upon it, then any thing relating
to its self, it is pleasant Music in Gods care.

3. Pray this Petition with a heart full of holy zeal, and resolution to do
what you can for the advancement of Gods glory: Prayers are obligations to
endeavors: he that prays: Hallowed be thy Name, and lives a life dishnorable
to God, and his Religion, is the veriest Hypocrite in the world: it is but a
complementing, nay worse, it is but a mocking God: Those desires are but
feigned, and those prayers counterfeit which are not seconded with answerable
endeavors. It Is a cheap thing to say, Hallowed be thy Name, but when we say
and stand to it; when we resolve to live up to this Petition, and lay down
all in prosecution of what we pray for in it; this is highly commendable, and
a resolution necessary, and becoming those that pray thus. I would therefore
say to such profane ones as live to Gods dishonor, as Psam. 50. 17. What have
thou to do to take the Name of God into thy mouth? Either forbear to pray this
prayer with your lips, or resolve to prosecute it in your lives. The carnal
persecuting Jews who hated and east out their Brethren for the Name of Christ,
could say, Let the Esa. 66. 5.
Lord be gloryfied: but, Were they any thing better for saying so? no, God will
appear to his people's joy, and they shall be ashamed. Oh, remember as often as
you take up this Petition into your mouths, you take upon you to prosecute the
Ends of it in your lives, and as often as you act any thing derogating from
Gods glory, you contradict your prayers in your practices: Therefore pray this
Petition, but pray it with a suitable frame and resolution, and prosecute it
with answerable endeavors. So much shall suffice to be spoken to the first
Petition. I proceed to the second Petition.

CHAP. V.
II. PETITION.
Thy Kingdom come.
THis and the following Petitions are all subordinate to the first, and may be
looked on as means conducing to that as their End. You may remember, that the
first Petition had two branches: 1. That God would sanctify himself. 2. That
we might be enabled to sanctify him. This second Petition, Thy Kingdom come,
seems chiefly to relate as a means to the first branch of the first Petition:
then God sanctifies himself when he takes to him his great power and reigns,
I say chiefly though not solely. The 3d. Petition relates most properly as a
means to our sanctifying God: then do we indeed sanctify him, when we do his
will sincerely and universally. And the 3. latter Petitions are, for
Advantages, and Abilities to what we pray for in the former Petitions. This
Petitions then, as having the most immediate tendency to the promoting of Gods
glory is fitly put in the next place, and fitly precedes the third, for till
Gods Kingdom come, his will cannot be done as it ought to be. Gods people will
never be a willing people till the day of Gods power. I shall observe the same
Method in this and the rest, as in the first.

Kingdom] the Kingdom of God is either 1. General whereby the rules the whole
world: of which see Psalm. 47. 2. 7. Zech. 14. 9. he is in this respect called
the King of the Earth: So, the King of Nations Jer. 10. 7. King of Kings and
Lord of Lords 1 Timothy 6. 15. by this God does powerfully, irresistibly and
eternally govern all the world. This Kingdom even the Heathen-Monarchs have
been forced to acknowledge. As Nehuohadnezzer, Dan. 4. 34, 37. and Darius, D^n.
6. 26. They confess it to be over all and to be everlasting. By this he orders
all affairs on Earth, sets up and pulls down Kings and Monarchs at his
pleasure, Prove. 8. 15, 16. Psalm. 75. 6, 7. and 107. 40. he pours contempt
upon Princes, and causes them wander in the wilderness where there is no way.
Thereby he disposes Crowns and Kingdoms, punishes the wicked, preserves the
righteous: this is ordinarily called the Kingdom of his power and providence,
extending to all things in the world, though chiefly conversant about the
rational creature.

2. Special over his Church, in which respect he is called the King of Jacob.
Isa. 41. 21. of Sion Jer. 8, 19. of Saints Rev. 15. 3. By this he rules the
affairs of his Church, gathering, governing and defending it, carrying on his
people by his grace till he complete them in glory* Only know, That though we
thus distinguish; the Kingdom of God is one and the same, and is rather so
distinguished to our capacity, than in the things themselves: for the same acts
of government may in diverse considerations relate to his general and special
Kingdom, though the distinction may well be retained for our better
understanding: Now this special Kingdom, is either,

1. Inchoate (if I may use that word) begun, in this life, commonly called the
Kingdom of grace: which consists in those acts of government which God
exercises over his elect in this world, by certain means of his own
appointment, as the Ministry, Word, Sacraments, conjoined with the efficacy of
his Spirit, whereby he converts, and governs them, bringing them on in grace,
till he has prepared them for glory: in which respects sometimes the Gospel,
Word and Ministry, sometimes the Church militant are figuratively called the
Kingdom of God. Or,

2. Consummate in the life to come, called the Kingdom of glory, in which God
immediately communicates glory to his people* governing them, not by means, as
here but by himself immediately, and wherein obedience is not so much their
work as their wages, and themselves are not so much subjects as Kings,
partaking with God in endless glory and happiness.

Now here the Kingdom of God in its whole latitude, both general and special
and this both in grace and glory must needs be meant; because (as I hinted)
they are but one and the same, though diversely considered. Though chiefly, I
conceive, the Kingdom of grace, in order to that of glory is here intended: yet
even Gods general Kingdom is not excluded, for each of these is subordinate to
other.

1. The Kingdom of power and providence is necessary to the founding and
managment of the Kingdom of grace: God could not gather a Church to himself out
of the world, nor preserve it in, nor deliver it from the evil of the world,
if he had not an overruling hand in the grand affairs thereof: The Church and
people of God are dispersed over the world, and are to be gathered out of all
Nations: To this end, the Gospel is to be preached, and published, a Ministry
instituted etc.

Now such is the opposition that is in man's nature, to this work, and such the
influence of Satan upon the children of disobedience, that this could never be
effected without the influence of Gods general Kingdom: he must order the
great mutations in the world to the gathering and building of his Church, as in
that Deuteronomy. 32. 8. when the most High divided to the Nations their inheritance,
when he separated the Sons of Adam, he se^ the bounds of the people according
to the number of his people Israel: i. e. he so disposed of other Nations into
their Inheritances, as was most for the advantage of his own peculiar people:
or, He had a special respect to his own people in his general disposals of
others. Thus it must be in this case. To this purpose presecuters must be cut
off, Christian Magistrates raised up, Kings and Potentates of the world must be
rebuked for his Prophet's and people's fakes, Psalm. 105. 14. He must overturn,
overturn, overturn, One Monarchy must Ezekiel. 21. 27.
succeed another, and that again must be translated to a third, and that to a
4th. Nation, and all this to make way for the Stone Dan. 2. 45.
cut out of the Mountain without hands which must break all in pieces: Thus God
makes his own design of all men, and Kingdoms, and transactions that are in
the world, not by policy or an after-game, but by overruling the grand affairs
of the world, which is his general Kingdom. So that this Kingdom is
undoubtedly included in this Petition.

2. For the Kingdom of grace there is no doubt but it is here chiefly intended;
both in it self, and as a means to the Kingdom of glory. God has appointed the
Means as well as End: Faith, Repentance, Sanctification, new obedience are the
condition of our reigning with him in glory Luke 15. 5. John 3. 36. For the
effecting of these, the Gospel must be preached, 1 Cor. 1. 21. Nor can the
Gospel effect them without the Spirit's efficacious concurrence. Now this (in
part at least) is the Kingdom of grace when the word not only runs, but is
glorified, when God by his Spirit so goes out with his Messengers that Satan
falls from heaven as lightning, the works of the Devil are destroyed, and poor
souls rescued from him, and translated into the glorious liberty of the Sons of
God: and that this may be, is undoubtedly the import of this Petition.

3. Then, for the Kingdom of glory, as being the end and consummation of both
the former, it must need be included, since he that wills the means wills the
end; nor is it only intended obliquely or by the By, but directly and
ultimately, as being the consummation of man's happiness: so that the coming of
the Kingdom of Providence in subordination to the Kingdom of Grace, and of this
in order to the Kingdom of Glory, and of this again as the End and complement
of both, is the scope and import of this Petition.

[ Come]. How can it be said to come in any sense? I Answer; We are not so to
understand it, as if it should remove or be removed from another place; but, as
we say, The Sun comes into the house, meaning not the body but the beams of
it; so for the Kingdom of God to come, is, that in its effects and power it be
extended to, us, that we may feel the day of his power, that as it is Rev. 11.
17. he would take to him his Kingly power and reign; That he would so order
the affairs of the world, as it may appear, and men may acknowledge, There is a
God that reigns in the earth, and so as may tend to his Churches advantage.
What the fuller import of this word is, will be showed in the Application, Now,
had we designed a full handling of things, many Observations would flow from
the particulars coucht' in this Petition: as, That God has a Kingdom: That
this Kingdom comes to places and people: That to have it come is a desirable
mercy: That prayer is a special means for the procuring of it. etc. But I
shall (as I promised) content my self to resolve the Petition it self into a
Doctrinall Proposition, which take thus.

Rev. 11. 17. and 19. 6. so they should pray, that God may reign; that he will
shine forth in his glory, and exert his power for the spreading of his Kingdom
into all the world. It were easy (were it necessary) to produce
Scripture-precepts and examples for the confirmation of this point: but this
were but to light a candle in the Sun shine; I shall briefly resolve a twofold
Query, and then apply it.

Quest. 1. To what purpose is such a Petition? Can we imagine, it will come
sooner or later for our prayers? nay, Is it not every where (in general at
least)? and therefore what need to pray for it?

Answ. This is but the cavilling of Carnal Reason, and indeed such as would,
if it were hearkened to, soon make us leave off praying at all: for we may, at
the same rate, argue about any thing we pray for: Either God has determined,
it shall be or not: if he has decreed it shall be, then our prayers are
needless; if not, they are vain and ineffectuall: but know, vain man, that our
prayers are nevertheless required (as was showed in answering the like cavil
against the former Petition) in order to the effecting of what God has
decreed: And for this in particular,

1. Shall not Gods Children hereby testify their love to God? Is it not an
expression of our loyalty, when we heartily pray for the prosperity of our
Sovereign, and for the speading and flourishing of his Kingdom? But.

2. What room for such a cavil when we have an express command, and
injunction in this standing pattern? When we have Scripture-precept and
pattern for our obedience, and imitation? And promises to encourage us: such as
that, Luke 11. 13. he will give his Spirit (by which he manageth his Kingdom)
to them that ask him?

Quest. 1. Why, or upon what account, should this be the Petition of Gods
children? To hint but a Reason or two.

Reas. 1. In order to the accomplishment both of the former and following
petition: for neither will men sanctify the name of God, nor yield obedience to
the will of God, till they feel the power of God, and he set up his Kingdom of
grace in their hearts: Then is Gods Name sanctified, when both the Godly
celebrate his power and Kingdom, as Rev. 11. 17. and 19. 6.* and the wicked are
forced to acknowledge it, as Dan. 4. 34, 37. and 6. 26* when he executes
judgment in the earth, rescuing the oppressed from the power of the oppressor
etc. And then will Gods Will be done by men when by his grace he overpowers
their wills, and brings them into compliance with his own.

2. We are therefore to pray for the coming of Gods Kingdom, both upon the
account of that advantage that will accrue to us by its coming, and of our
inability to go to it, without its coming to us. For the advantage of it, you
will better discern it when we more particularly unfold it in the application:
meanwhile consider but that Scripture Romans 14. 17. The Kingdom of God is not in
meat and drink, but in righteousness, and peace, and joy in the holy Ghost:
There are three grand benefits accruing from Gods Kingdom, which would afford
an ample field of discourse but I forbear: what greater honor think you can
God confer upon us then to take us into the Relation, and invest us which the
privileges of subjects in his Kingdom of grace and glory? But then we cannot
go into this Kingdom, and therefore have need to pray it may come to us* John
6. 44. No man can come to me (says Christ) except the Father draw him. i. e.
none can accept me as Lord and Savior -- So that the sense (in part) of this
Petition may be this* Lord I and all the world are averse to thy Kingdom, loath
to have Christ ^ign over us, we shall never yield except thou conquer and
overpower our wills by thy grace and Spirit. O let thy power come upon* us and
others, let it be the day of thy power, that we may become a willing people,
Psam. 110. 3.

Psalm. 2. 5, 8.) God will set his King upon his holy Zion, that he will give
unto Christ, the Heathen for his inheritance, and the utmost parts of the earth
for his possession: for (as I should have told you) Jesus Christ is the
dispenser of Gods Kingdom, especially that of grace: see John 5 22, 23.

Mot. 1. Consider but how advantageous the coming of Gods Kingdom will be to
your souls, families, towns, and Nation: do but think (for I shall not run
into particulars), what are the benefits that flow from the most prudent and
pious administration of an Earthly Kingdom: those in a larger measure will
accrue (in a Spiritual sense) from the coming of Gods Kingdom unto you.
Infinite and unspeakable are the benefits of a Government rightly managed, both
as to the preventing of evils and the procuring of good things, but none
comparable to the Kingdom of God: hence righteousness, peace, plenty,
prosperity, defense, safety, unity, and (which results from all) unspeakable
joy and comfort. But I leave this to your own meditation: Study Psalm. 72.
which relates to Christ as well as to Solomon, and those many prophesies which
foretell and promise this Kingdom, and the coming of it; and predicate the
exceeding benefits and advantages of it.

2. Then may you hope it shall come to your comfort, when it is the breathing
of your souls that it may come: it is promised to the upright that they shall
see the King in his glory. Isa. 33. 17. They that like Simeon, wait for the
consolation of Israel, may sing his song when Christ is revealed in the Gospel
Luke 2. 25, 29. One well distinguishes betwixt the being and the coming of Gods
Kingdom amongst a people: it is every where (especially where the Gospel is
preached*) even amongst the wicked, but it comes to the faithful on Earth, to
the Saints in heaven: where it, is it is in power and justice; where it comes,
it is in love and mercy: it may be amongst us, and yet leave us in the Sea to
suffer shipwreck: where it comes, it brings us to a haven: but (whether there
be ground enough for this distinction or no) we may distinguish of its coming:
To some, it comes against their will, and they wilfully withstand it as Luke
19. 14. To others, besides their will; and they neglect it, unless it please
God to open their eyes to see, and incline their hearts to embrace it: but to
others, begging and seeking after it; and these may certainly rejoice, and lift
up their heads. As a King's coming to the Throne is matter of fear and terror
to Rebels, but of joy and comfort to truly loyal subjects. Though, I must
needs tell you, that even such desires and breathings after the Kingdom of God,
speak that God is already beginning his Kingdom in such souls.

3. It Is the sum of what we can or need to ask for our selves or others: As
what we ask in reference to God is included in, and reducible to the first
Petition; so what for our selves to this: As our blessed Savior reduced Gods
Ten-words (so the Hebrew calls the Ten Commandments) to two, and the Apostle
reduces both to one Gal. 5. 14. so might all the following be reduced to these
two, and both to this one; for by the powerful and effectual coming of Gods
Kingdom, in all the branches of it, both the name of God is sanctified, and we
receive a confluence of all good things temporal, spiritual, and eternal.
Tell me, what more would any serious Christian desire for himself or others,
but that he might here be a child of grace, and hereafter an heir of glory?
This is the sum of David's Petition, Lead me by thy counsel, and receive me
into glory Psalm. 73. 24. Should God put you to your Choice as he did Solomon,
What more would the truly wise soul desire, than that God would so order his
providence that he might be brought into, and built up in the Kingdom of
grace, and at last reign with God eternally in the Kingdom of glory? And this
is the import of this Petition.

For direction, I shall give the very same generals in this and the following,
as in the first.

Direct. 1. Labor to get a clear, and distinct understanding what is employed
and included in this Petition: and here (as in all the rest) 1. Something is
acknowledged. 2. Something Petitioned.

1. Something acknowledged. As 1. That, God is absolute and universal
Sovereign of the world. This is clearly employed: we ascribe a Kingdom to God,
and such a Kingdom as we desire might come to us and all the world. So that in
conformity to this Petition we may confess, and enlarge upon the Sovereignty
of God, the just title he has over all the Kingdoms in the world, that all
are to stoop to his Scepter, and submit to his government; as also that he
has that power to command all creatures into obedience, that he has both the
(...) and (...), power and right to govern all creatures. To this purpose
borrow David's words, 1 Chronicles. 29. 11. -- Thine is the Kingdom, O Lord; and thou
art exalted as head above all -- or Psalm. 145. 13. Thy Kingdom, O Lord, is an
everlasting Kingdom, and thy dominion endures throughout all generations. So
Jer. 10. 7, Dan. 4. 34. and 6. 16. etc. And here is a large field field of
amplification upon the grounds of Gods right to this Kingdom, as his Creating
all things, Rev. 4. 11* Substentation Hebr. 1. 3. Providence and provision for
all his creatures, Psalm. 145. 16. and especially his purchasing a peculiar
people to himself by the blood of his Son, 1 Cor. 6. 20. Besides, we may
occasionally amplify upon the excellent properties of this Kingdom, as the
amplitude, equitableness, absoluteness, righteousness, and perpetuity etc. of
it: which will yield infinite matter of glorifying God.

2. Here is also couch't an acknowledgment, that naturally we are not in or
under the Kingdom of God, that we cannot of our selves come to it being Slaves
of Satan, rebels, children of disobedience Ephesians. 2. 2. and 5. 7. that we are
blind and cannot see it John 3. 3. Satan having blinded our minds left the
light of the glorious Gospel of Christ who is the image of God should shine
into us, 2 Cor. 4. 4. Also our wills rebellious, saying as they Luke 19. 14. We
will not have this man reign over us: That we are utterly indisposed and
unwilling to take upon us the yoke of Christ, being wholly led captive by
Satan at his will: And here again is matter to enlarge upon, in consessing and
bewayling our own and others averseness to the Kingdom of God, in all our
powers and faculties, together with the causes and hainousness of it.

3. Here we implicitly acknowledge that all means are ineffectuall for the
promoting of Gods Kingdom, till God himself take to him his great power and
reign, in as much as this Petition is not only to be put up by those who have
not the Gospel (they indeed will not, cannot pray it) but by those especially
who have the means whereby God promotes and exercises his Kingdom. Here then,
we confess with the Apostle 1 Cor. 3. 6. that Paul may plant, Apollo water --;
That except the Father draw us we cannot come to Christ, John 6. 44. That Gods
arm must be revealed before we or others shall believe the report Isa. 53. 1.
So that here we may take occasion to amplify upon the great opposition that is
made against God and his Kingdom; that Satan with all his might endeavors to
keep the world in blindness and rebellion; even he who is the Prince of the
power of the air Ephesians. 2. 2. Who is called principalities, and powers, the Ruler
of the darkness of this world, Spiritual wickedness in high places, Ephesians. 6. 11.
And then that the great Potentates of the world, for the generality of them,
set themselves against this Kingdom in the power of it, as Psalm. 2. 1-5. Of
whom we may complain as the Apostles, Acts. 4. 26. 27. And besides all this,
there is a party within every man naturally as opposite to this Kingdom as
darkness to light; So that hence we may acknowledge that it must be infinite
power, wisdom, goodness etc. that must begin and carry on this Kingdom in any
soul, or place in the world. We may take up the words of good Jehoshaphat, 1 Chronicles. 20. 12. We have no might against this multitude.

2. Something Petitioned: And the particular Petitions couch't under this
general, may be, either 1. Privative, for the removal of impediments, or 2.
Positive, relating to the three fold Kingdom of God.

1. Privative: wherein we deprecate hindrances, that God will subdue all his
enemies. Now though the opposers of Gods Kingdom be infinite, yet they all
sight under one General, and that is Satan; so that the thing we are chiefly
to pray against is the Kingdom of Satan; which is indeed a very ample Kingdom,
he being called the God of this world, The Prince of the power of the air,
and (as Ephesians. 6. 11.) Principality and power. -- So Rev. 9. 11. He is the King
of that black Armado that war against the Saints, called Abaddon Apollion.
We are therefore to beg that this dragon the old Serpent the Devil and Satan
may be bound, Rev. 20. 2. That he may fall from heaven as lightning Luke 10.
18. that Jesus Christ may so come as to destroy the works of the Devil 1 John.
3. 8. Now this kingdom of Satan has diverse branches (as it were so many
Provinces) or it is founded and upheld several ways, has many pillars; all
which we must pray against. For instance,

1. His power and influence upon man by reason of corrupt nature. Here he
keeps Garrison Luke 11. 21. This strong man armed keeps hold in man, and this
Hold fortified, has bulwarks, walls as high as Heaven, has its (...):
strongholds, imaginations or reasonings and 2 Cor. 10. 4.
high things, that exalt themselves against the knowledge of Christ; by this
advantage men are held and led Captive by Satan at his will and c. Now here is
an ample field of prayer to pray down the power of corruption, and to beg
that we and others may be rescued and fnatcht' from the power of darkness, and
translated into the Kingdom of Christ, Col. 1. 13. that the weapons of his
Ministers warfare may be mighty through his power and c. 2 Cor. 10. 4.

2. The gross Errors, Delusions, Idolatry and Superstition which raigns in the
world, is that whereby Satan holds a great part of the world under his
vassalage. Where the true God is not known, the Devil causes himself to be
owned and worshipped as God. What were all the Heathen Oracles but Diabolical
delusions? It Is lamentable to read some relations of the poor Indians, how the
Devil deludes and tyrannizes over them, appearing in visible shapes, and
commanding worship from them. And what is the Turkish Mahomet with all his
impostures, but an Instrument raised by Satan to propagate his Kingdom? What
are the Popish pretended miracles, but powers, and signs and lying wonders
after the (...) of Satan, 2 Thessalonians. 2. 9? And what is the Pope himself, but a
Head raised by the Devil to oppose the true head Jesus Christ, therefore ^tly
called Antichrist? It would be endless to reckon up the artifici^s of this
nature whereby Satan founds and upholds his Kingdom: well, it is our part to
pray down these and the like: to put that in suit, Psalm 97. 7* Confounded be
all they that serve graven images -- that it may be amongst all those
Idolatrous Nations as it was at Ephesus, Acts. 19. 19. that they may discover,
and ^ast away their delusions: that God will shortly trample Satan under foot
in all the world, Romans 16. 20.

3. The influence that Satan has on the great ones of the world; to set them
in opposition to Gods Kingdom. Rev. 2. 13. Satan's feat is said to be at
Pergamos: now Bullinger (as I remember) gives a twofold Reason, why Satan's
seat is said to be there. 1. Because this City for superstition and Idolatry
exceeded most Cities in Asia. 2. Because the Lieutenant or Substitute under
Domitian (Author of one of the ten Persecutions) inhabited there, and
butchered the poor Saints of God. Surely, where wicked men, enemies to God and
his Kingdom, have power, and precedence in a Nation, Satan may be said to
reign there. These are great Mountains before God's Zerubbabels, Zech. 4. 7.
Whereby does Satan more hinder the advancement of Gods Kingdom, than by
interessing himself in the great Ones of the world, and interweaving his
interest with theirs? Has not the secular power in almost all ages of the
Church been engaged against the Gospel, either as to the preaching, or as to
the power and practice of it? How, have the most faithful of Gods messengers
been silenced, imprisoned, banished etc. and the serious and truly pious
Christians suffered grievous things from the hands of the wicked Magistracy?
What then? must we pray down Magistracy, or Magistrates, if wicked? Far be it
from us? It Is Gods Ordinance, they are God's substitutes; Curse not the King,
no not in thy thought, Eccl. 10. 20. No but earnestly pray that they that are
great may be good, that Kings may become Nursing-Fathers, and Queens
Nursing-Mothers to the Church, Isa. 49. 23. that, as they rule by God Prove. 8.
-- so they may rule for him. Pray that prayer for them, 1 Timothy 2. 2.

These are three of the grand pillars of Satan's Kingdom; for the pulling down
of Judge. 16. 30.
which we must bow our selves with all our night in prayer, that Gods Kingdom
may be erected upon the ruins of Satan's. More might be added, but I proceed.

2. Positive Petitions are here included. And these I shall reduce to that
threefold Kingdom of God, which I hinted in the explication. viz. the Kingdom,
1. of Power and providence. 2. of Grace. 3. of Glory.

1. Then in reference to Gods general Kingdom of power or providence;
something (in compliance with this Petition) is to be begged: though (as I
hinted) this Kingdom is not so properly prayed for in it self considered as in
that it relates to God's special Kingdom. So that we must pray,

1. That God will so order the great mutations and transactions in the world,
as that it may appear, that He is absolute Lord and Sovereign over the world:
that he will exert his absolute power and sovereignty. Here, though we must
beware of charging God foolishly, as if he were unjust or imprudent in the
managment of the world's government; yet we may (in imitation of the Prophet,
Jer. 12. 1.) humbly plead with the Almighty, why; seeing he has the regiment
of the world, the wicked are suffered to take root and prosper etc? Such a plea
you find Job 24. 1. -- We may pray that God will in his own time make it
explicit to all the world, that he reigns over the nations, and that there is
one God and his name one. And,

2. That God will so manage the affairs of the world, as may tend to the
increase and happiness of his Church? that by the Kingdom of his providence,
he will make way for the Kingdom of his grace, and fit men for the Kingdom of
glory: To this purpose may you plead those promises Psalm. 2. 8. Isa. 66. 20. --
that the Gospel may run and be glorified.

2. In reference to the Kingdom of grace (which I take to be properly meant
here), our Petitions, in conformity to this; may respect either, 1. The means
of it. 2. Or the efficacy of those means: or 3. The amplification and increase
both of the means, and of the efficacy of those means.

1. As to the means of promoting this Kingdom, they are many: the principal are
these.

1. The pure administration of the Word and Sacraments; which is therefore
called the Kingdom of God, Matthew. 12. 28. and the word of the Kingdom, Matthew.
13. 19. Mark. 4. 15. because of its special tendency to the promoting of Gods
Kingdom: therefore we are earnestly to pray for the spreading of the Isa. 9. 2.
Gospel: that light may arise to them that sit in darkness, and in the region
of the shadow of death: that laborers may be thrust out into the harvest
Matthew. 9. 38* and that he will not suffer them to be thrust out: that those
he ^mployes in this work may open their mouths to speak the Gospel with all
boldness notwithstanding the threatening of malicious ones, Act. 4. 29. so that
the word may run and be glorified, 2 Thessalonians. 3. 3. That the faithful Ministers
of the Gospel may have Liberty, Countenance, and Maintenance, that God will
give the word, and great may be the number of those that publish it: etc. This
(let men think what they please) is the way to bring the Kingdom of God into,
and promote it in, a Nation: and when Gods faithful messengers are suspended,
silenced, cast out; and dumb dogs that cannot bark are set over the flocks,
then do a Nation put away the Kingdom of God from them.

2. Discipline rightly and duly dispensed: See Commenius in his Treatise
presented to our King.
Then does the Kingdom of God come, when the government is laid upon Christ's
shoulder; and he has, what is due, allowed to his officers: In opposition to
which there are two extrems very much infesting the Church: The one is (...) or
(...). An usurpation of the Ministers of Christ upon the civil Magistrates
office, assuming and arrogating to themselves a Lordly domination, inflicting
P^ecuni^ry or Corporal mulcts and penalties, bringing down the Censures of
Christ to the promo^ing of their own humor and Interest, prostituting them to
their own ambitious ends etc. This turns Christ's Kingdom into a worldly
Kingdom, whereas himself has told us, His Kingdom is not of this world; and,
in stead of the Kingdom of God, sets up the power and pride and domination of
men. The other extreme, is (...), the Civil Magistrates intruding into the
affairs of the Church, ordering all in it, as to persons, forms and
administration, according to his pleasure; modelling Ecclesiastical government,
as may be most subservient (not to the salvation of souls, which is its proper
end, but) to his civil Interest. I am far from denying the Magistrate his just
power, See Jus divinum regiminis Ecclesiast. and the Author of Engl. Popish
Cerem:
and I think (were things duly and impartially considered) they that are
charged to be most niggardly toward the Magistrate in stating his power about
Ecclesiastical affairs, would be sound least guilty; and those that pretend to
be most liberal, would be found guilty of the greatest encroachments upon it
(for indeed they but give it with one hand that they may receive it again with
the other). Now, did each keep their due station, and in their station
prosecute the great ends for which God has set them in those stations, it
would be an effectual means to promote the Kingdom of God: whereas these
Usurpations and encroachments of each upon other, set up man to the dethroning
God, and hindering the propagation of his Kingdom. I could here break out
infinitely, in complaining of the sad effects of these things in Nations and
Kingdoms, especially where these intrusions and encroachments are mutual; where
each gives, that he may receive, and is bountiful to the other, that he may
have the same measure back again; Where men thus deal and share power and
honor among themselves, God must needs suffer in his honor and Kingdom; but I
had rather you and I should turn in to God, and complain to him, who only can
redress these grievances: this is unquestionably a part of the import of this
Petition, To pray for a Discipline most agreeable to the Scripture, and most
effectually conducing to the ends of Discipline, such as may put sin to shame,
and bring Sinners to repentance; such a Discipline as was exercised in the
primitive and purest times, which was then most effectual for its end; when
the civil Magistrate not only stood neuter to it, but was opposite against it.
This would be a singular means to the promoting of Gods Kingdom.

3. (Which has been already toucht' upon) A pious Magistracy: that Kings and
Potentates may cast their Crowns at Christ's feet, and set them upon his head.
Oh, if the civil powers did (as they ought to do) seriously prosecute the
Interest and honor of God in the world, there would be no need of disputing
that vexed and perplexing Question about the Magistrates power in
Churchaffairs: then, as he would not arrogate what is not due, so he would
not abuse what God has allowed him. What need then have we to put in suit
such promises as those Isa. 49. 23. Rev. 11. 15. etc. Then, I conceive, the
Kingdoms of the world would be the Kingdoms of the Lord and his Christ, when
the Kings of the Earth, and the body of the Magistracy kiss the Son, and submit
to his Crown and Scepter. Though I can see little ground for that which some
dream of, a personal visible reign of Christ on earth; yet this is doubtless
within the Compass of the promises, and should be the matter of our prayers,
That Christ may reign in his Vicegerents. Wrestle then with God that the
Magistracy of the world may be such as they are described, Romans 13. 4. We
should (like the primitive Church) travel in birth for a manchild i. e. a
truly Christian Magistracy, as that Text is commonly interpreted, Rev. 12. 2.
that they may be such as David resolves to be, Psam. 101. per tot. Then would
the Kingdom of God come.

2. The second head of Petitions relating to the Kingdom of grace, are such as
respect the efficacy of those means whereby it is promoted, especially the
spiritual means: briefly, that God will attend his Word and Ordinances with his
Spirit, that he will make Doctrine and Discipline succesfull for their proper
ends, the gathering and edifying of his Church: that men may from the heart
obey the word delivered to them, Romans 6. 17. that the weapons of our warfare
may be mighty through God, 2 Cor. 10. 4. that not only a wide but effectual
door may be opened, 1 Cor. 16. 9. O^ pray, that it may be the day of Gods
power, and his Arm may be revealed.

3. The third sort relates to the amplification and spreading of the means, and
that in their power; that the Kingdom of God may be both extensively and
intensively increased, and the Gospel may gain both in height and breadth: A
precious promise (amongst many other) is that, Isa. 54. 2. Lengthen thy cords,
and strengthen thy stakes: there is both extension and intension, and a promise
it is (though at first view it may seem a command) as plainly appears by the
following Verses. Well, pray we that this K^ngdom may spread, and gain upon
the Kingdom of Satan, that those that are yet rebels may become subjects;
those that are su^j^cts in profession, may be such in reality; and those that
are in reality so, may walk more answerable to their Duties and Privileges.
Thus I have touched upon the Petitions relating to the Kingdom of grace.

3. As to the Kingdom of glory many things might be mentioned: In short these
three things more especially.

1. That God would so promote the work of grace in our own and others hearts,
that we may be fitted for the Kingdom of glory: That we may come on to
perfection, and may in our hopes and preparations look for and hasten toward
the coming of our Lord Jesus Christ. 2 Pet. 3. 11.

2. That he will complete the number of his elect: and cause the Gospel to
have a speedy passage and effect, that for the Elects sake the days may be
shortened, Nations may be born in a day Isa. 66. 10. We should in this
symbolize which the souls under the Altar Rev. 6. 10. long to see the King in
his glory, and Son the perfection of beauty*

3. (Which follows) That he will hasten the Coming of Christ: that we may
obtain full redemption, and may be possessed of the unfading Crown of glory.
This we may breathe out in the language of Paul, 2 Cor. 5. 2-9. Phil. 1. 21.
or of Saint John. Rev. 22. ult. Come Lord Jesus, come quickly. Thus I have
helped your understanding as to the matter of this Petition, which is the first
Direction. The other respects the frame of your hearts in praying this Petition.

Direct. 2. Labor to frame your hearts to the Petition, as well as the
Petition to the pattern: Ask with a suitable frame of Spirit; which chiefly
consists in these two things.

1. A heart inflamed with desire to see the King in his beauty: to see
Jerusalem a quiet habitation, and the praise of the whole earth: Your hearts
must outcry your voices, and your affections be much larger then your
expressions. And why should we not be thus inflamed? Is there a more
desirable mercy, if I may call that a mercy which is indeed a confluence of
all mercies? whether you consider this Kingdom as to the personal and
particular advantages it brings to your selves and other individual persons, or
the benefits that come along with it to Towns, Nations, and Kingdoms, there is
not a more desirable thing in the world: meditate then on the excellencies and
advantages that attend the coming of this Kingdom, till you hearts be inflamed
with holy breathings after it; then give vent to those pantings of hearts in
prayer; such prayers are highly pleasing and acceptable to God.

2. A frame of heart resolved both to submit to it, and promote it in your
capacities: What notorious dissimulation, and damnable hypocrisy is it, daily
to pray, Thy Kingdom come --; yet set our selves to oppose and hinder the
propagation of it? You are deeply guilty of this who live in manifest
disobedience to the Gospel, will not be instructed, nor submit to the
unquestionable power of the Ministers of the Gospel: viz. to be reproved,
admonished, exhorted, by them: you that wallow in sin, are sold as Slaves to
sin and Satan, and will not take Christ's easy yoke and light burden upon you:
With what face can you pray such a Petition as this? How many that are mighty
zealous to have this form daily repeated in Church or Pulpit, and yet are
notorious enemies both to this and other Petitions, when it comes to the
practice of what is here prayed for? For shame, never plead for the repetition
of this pattern of prayer, while the world may read in your lives a visible
contradiction to each Petition in it.

It Is worse then a Judas kiss, thus to deal with Christ; to pray that his
Kingdom may come, and yet to do our utmost to oppose it: either leave praying,
or begin to practice up to what you pray for, in this Petition, else you do
but in effect pray for your own damnation. This Kingdom will come in justice
and Terror to all its opposers. So much to this Petition.

CHAP. VI.
III. PETITION.
Thy will be done on earth, as it is in Heaven.
THis is the third and last of those Petitions that do more immediately respect
God: it is very fitly connected to the former, for having prayed for the coming
of his Kingdom, that is, that we may be brought under his Government, and
become his subjects, it is fit that his will, not ours, should be done.

Having acknowledged him supreme Monarch of the world, and that all subjection
is due to him, we are very fitly taught to pray that he will so bend and bow
our hearts and bring us into compliance with his will, that we may yield him
cheer-full obedience, as subjects, not as slaves: and that we may be a willing
people in the day of his power, Psalm. 110. 3. In this Petition, you have 1. The
matter of it, that Gods will may be done. 2. The manner how we are to do it,
or to endeavor; and this is, as it is in Heaven. For explication.

Will] The will of God (to our capacity) is ^^ve^sly distinguished: it would be
but mis spent time to trouble you with them: one distinction is sufficient to
our purpose, and that is this: The will of God is either his Decretive Will,
called his Will of Purpose. Or 2. His preceptive Will, or Will of Precept.
There is ground enough for such a distinction (though not in the Will or
effence of God, which is purely simple and uncompounded yet) in the ways by
which God declares and executes his Will. Briefly, it is easy to conceive the
difference betwixt what God will do (that is his Will of Purpose) and what he
commands and requires us to do (That Is his Will of Precept): by the former, God
determines all events, and futurities, and governs those things which to us are
most contingent; by the latter, he determines man's Duty, and what we are to
do. Of the former you may read, Psalm. 136. 6, 11. Ephesians. 1. 5.
To this we are taught submission, Jam. 4. 15. and 1 Pet. 3. 17. By this, he
orders times and seasons Act. 1. 17. and disposes chances and contingencies
Prove. 27. 1. By this he permits, and over rules many actions of men. Of the
latter, read Mich. 6. 8. He has showed thee, O man what is good, and what
does the Lord require of thee --? The word declares it both in the precepts
what we are to do, and in the promises what we are to believe. It Is not
necessary to say more. Only let us inquire.

Quest. Which of these, or whether both be not here meant? for Answer to which
Query, It is unquestionable that the Will of Precept is here meant; the very
words clear it; for, What is meant by his Will being done on Earth etc. but
that it be done by men, more especially, who are the Inhabitants of the earth?
and, What will is it, but that which God has given them in precept? The only
d^ffi^ulty is about the Will of Purpose, whether it be at all included in this
Petition, and if at all, how far, Whether in the whole latitude and extent of
it, or only in part? The Reason of the difficulty lies here, Partly because the
Purposes of God are hidden to us: we know not what shall be de Event^, and
therefore how can we pray concerning that which depends on the secret and
unknown Purpose of God? partly because the permission of many wickednesses and
enormities of men comes within this will of purpose, such as the betraying and
murdering of Christ, Act. 4. 28. Gods hand and Counsel had before determined
it: Now, none will say, that (had we lived before Christ, and understood the
Prophe^ies concerning Judas his betraying Christ etc.) we should have prayed
for these things, so that the question seems to carry some difficulty in it. I
find some quite ^xcluding Gods purposes on^ of our prayers. One quotes Cyprian
speaking thus: [ N^n (...) oramus ut faciat Deus quid vult facere, (...) ut nos
possimus facere, quid vult a nobis (...)] "We pray not here that God would
do, what he wills to do, but that we may be able to do what he wills
^s to do. Notwithstanding which, and ^ome other things that might be urged, I
conceive that the Will of Purpose is neither wholly included in this Petition,
nor wholly ^xcluded out of it: for though much of it ^e hidden, yet something
of it is revealed, and that by way of gracious promises, which ^ertainly may be
pleaded in prayer. And though it take in the permission, and order^ng of the
vilest acts of men (which we are ^o be so far from praying for, as that we
should abominate them); yet it takes in ^ther things unquestionably lawful to
be ^rayed for, so far, and in such a way as ^hey are revealed to us. The case
is so plain, forbear Instances: more will be said to this when we come to
Application.

2. [ Be done] i. e. not only intended, ^urposed, endeavored: so that we are
here ^ught to pray that we may not only pro^^ss and pretend obedience, as
those Jer. 42. ^, 6. or as that Son Matthew. 21. 30. who said, I go Sir, but
went not; but that we may actually and thoroughly perform his will: that he
will work in us, to will and to do of his own good pleasure Phil. 2. 13. that
we may not deceive our own souls, that we may not be forgetful hearers, but
doers of his will Jam. 1. 23. -- 26. That it may be done by us, though our
corruptions be never so opposite, and upon us though flesh and blood think it
never so grievous; and we cheerfully yield obedience to the one and submission
to the other.

3. [ On earth as in Heaven] that is, by us and others on earth, as by the
Angels in heaven, so that hereby we are taught, ^^ what height we should
endeavor and pray for obediential grace; not any degree: We^ should not
content our selves to bungle (...) a duty, but to be exact and exquisite in it*
that we may do the will of God with the same readiness, sincerity, zeal,
constancy* etc. as the Angels. Of this more particularly, in the application.
Only to take away a scruple.

Object. To what purpose is it to pray so^ this degree of obediential grace,
since w^ know it unattainable? Are we not clog'^ with corruption, and in many
things (...) all? what hope then to have this Petition granted? or to what
purpose to put up Petition which we cannot hope shall b^ granted?

Answ. 1. As to the impossibility of attainning this, Know, that things are
impossible either, 1. Absolutely, and as to any power, whether finite or
infinite: so, it is impossible for God to lie, for a thing to be and not to be,
at the same time; for a body to be in two places at once etc. Now such a thing
to pray for, would be but a tempting or mocking God: but the thing in the
Petition is not impossible in this sense. -- 2. Or in some respect, as for man
in his own strength to obey the Law of God in its exactness, but not if God
communicate grace proportionable. For Adam in innocence had this ability, and
so Christ as to his humanity: Now things of this sort may be both prayed for,
and endeavored after: Phil. 3. 11. Paul's endeavor was, if by any means to
attain to the resurrection of the dead, that is (as I conceive) to that
perfection, which then he hoped for, yet he could not attain it while on
earth. We may make that our aim, which in the perfection of it may be our
attainment. But,

Secondly, I conceive the Petition rather respects the manner than the measure
of our obedience, that we may in our measure imitate the holy Angels. [As] in
Scripture, notes quality and likeness oftentimes, not equality, as Matthew. 5.
ult. 1 John. 3. 3. where [ even as] notes imitation and similitude, not that
we should or can be equal to God in perfection and purity: so that the sense
of this Petition is clear and obvious. The Doctrinal proposition is this.

That Gods will may be done on Earth as in Heaven, ought to be the destre and
prayer of all and every Christian. We must imitate our Lord and Savior who
has taught us not only by word here, but by his own example Matthew. 26. 39,
42. and to say as old Eli, 1 Samuel 3. 18. And this (not, as too many do,
feignedly or inconsiderately, but) with the greatest seriousness, and
intenseness of affection.

Tit. 1. 15.
we glorisy our heavenly Father, when our works shine before others, Matthew. 5.
16. when we bring forth much fruit: John 15. 8. Phil. 2. 16. Nor is it a
titular acknowledgment of Gods Kingdom, but a real submission to it, in doing
what he commands, and submitting to what he lays upon us, wherein our Duty to
him principally consists: this Petition then is the completing of both the
former.

2. Gods Will is the suprem rule of equity, justice, mercy, and all goodness:
This considered, there is Reason sufficient, why we should pray for ability to
do it, for this is the [ totum hominis] the whole Duty of man, to God, to
himself, and to others Eccles. 12. 13. We could not in fewer words express
more as to our duty than in these; God's Will being the [ Regula regulans] the
rule of the Law it self. It is a good expression of Augustine, Injuria fit Deo,
cum causam voluntate Dei superiorem postulamus: We injure God; when we
inquire after a cause superior or antecedent to his Will: for consider, Gods
Will (to speak of it according to our capacity) very much differs from Mins
will; Ours is a blind but heady faculty, depending upon the guidance and
dictate of a finite and fallible understanding: But in God it is his very
Essence, considered as inclined and carried out to himself as the principal
good, and to all other good in subordination to himself; not corrupted by a
blind and dark understanding, but guided by infinite wisdom (the Will and
Wisdom of God being not two distinct qualities in God, but only diverse
inadequate considerations of the divine Essence) nor in it self subject to
headiness or mutability: So that Gods will being such, and we being his by the
most absolute title, it is fit we should both make it our Rule, and desire
grace to obey it.

1. (Which has bin hinted) In regard of Gods absolute Sovereignty over us:
since, as we acknowledge in the former Petition his absolute Dominion, Is it
not fit we should next pray for grace to yield cordial submission? Each of the
foregoing Petitions, nay the very Preface, bespeaks this from us* for, If he
be Our Father, we should bo subject to his Will and pleasure. But,

4. Because upon our doing, or not doing his Will, depends our eternal
happiness or misery. Obedience is the only door into heaven; and Disobedience
is the black character of the Sons of perdition, Ephesians. 2. 2. and 5. 6, 7. 2 Thessalonians. 1. 7. Matthew. 7. 21. To do the Will of God speaks our Relation to Christ:
Mark. 3. ult. By doing the Will of God, I mean here, ob^dience to the Gospel as
well as to the Law: for, as it is 1 John 3. 23. This is the command of God that
we believe on his Son Jesus Christ --. And herein the decretive and preceptive
Will of God concur, I mean, that he that does the one shall be rewarded by
the other. See John 6. 29. This is the work of God, that ye believe on him whom
he has sent, (this is his will of Precept): then Verse 40. This is the will
of him that sent me, that every one which sees the Son, and believes on him,
may have everlasting life, (This is his Will of Purpose). So that, by doing the
one, we come to the good things determined by the other. Again suob as do Gods
Will he hears John 9. 31. Such abide for ever 1 John 2. 17. So that you see,
it is the main Interest of man to do, and his concernment to pray that he may
do, the will of God.

Petition, and imitate the pattern here prescribed you. You see, how much your
Interest and duty lies in it: do I need to add more? Consider two things that
may excite and quicken you to be frequent and servent in this Petition.

Jews and Herod and Pilate, Act. 4. 28. and by Cyrus Isa. 44. 28. yet we be no
better than vile Sinners, or brute instruments: and it may be done upon us as
upon Pharaoh and others, yet for our punishment and condemnation; But condially
to desire and pray in the sense of the Petition, that it may be done by us and
upon us, speaks the truth of grace in our hearts. None but they who are born of
the Will of God, John 1. 13. can cordially and universally desire and pray this
Petition. Naturally man may say, Thy will be done, but only the gracious soul
can unfeignedly pray it.

2. It Is most irrational to desire that our own or others wills should be
done; and most equitable, that we should pray that Gods will may be done:
Should it be as thou will, according to thy mind, says Elihu to Job Chapt. 34.
33? Who are we poor blind creatures, that we should set our Wills against the
wise and just and holy Will of God? Should his will who can will nothing but
what is just and good, give place to ours, who can will nothing that is good,
without his enabling grace? Phil. 2. 13. 2 Cor. 3. 5. How just is it, that his
will should be our Rule whether we consider him as our Creator, our
Sovereign, our Father etc? and besides, should ours be done, would it not be to
our undoing (What greater plague, than for a people to be given up to follow
their own counsels, Psalm. 81. 12? And* Is not the doing Gods Will the high
road to glory, the straight path to everlasting felicity?

Direct. 1. For Direction then (as in the former): Labor to understand the
particular import of this Petition, and 1. Understand what is employed by way of
acknowledgment: Chiefly two things.

1. Here is implicitly acknowledged the absoluteness and Sovereignty of Gods
Will, which you may (in conformity to this Petition) express and enlarge upon:
So that we may express our selves in such Words: "Lord, I know thou art the
Suprem Monarch, and absolute Sovereign of the world, all whost actions have no
other rule but thine own will, and thy Will no rule but thine own infinite
wisdom, justice, and goodness, and therefore it is impossible thou should
will any thing, but what is good and righteous. Therefore it is all the Reason
in the world, that thou whose Dominion is most absolute, and whose will is most
righteous, should be obeyed and submitted to in whatsoever thou willest to be
done, either by us, or upon us. To this purpose you may borrow Ephesians. 1. 5, 9,
11. which declares that God orders all things according to the counsel of his
own will. Psalm. 136. 6. who does what he pleases in heaven and earth, in the
sea, and in all deep places: Job 33. 13. who is not accountable for any of his
doings. Or in the words of Nebuchadnezzar, Dan. 4. 35. etc. Here you may
amplify upon the purity, wisdom, Sovereignty, goodness and graciousness of his
Will; as also upon the reasonableness of its being the Rule of the Creatures
actions and obedience, that the Clay and Vessel should be at the Potter's
disposal, Isa. 64. 9.

2. Here also we do implicitly acknowledge the indisposition and untowardness
of our wills to yield obedience to Gods Will: and our proneness to do our own
will, rather than Gods; yea, that we are led Captive by Satan at his Will, 2 Timothy 2. 26. This may afford large matter of confession, and confusion too.
"Lord, I find in my self abundance of blindness and ignorance, so that I do
not know thy will, and (which is worse) when it is made known to me, I find in
my heart an utter indisposition and contrariety to it: Oh the pride,
stubbornness, and stiffeneckedness of my heart! How apt am I to quarrel at thy
commanding Will when I should obey it; and at thy providencial will, when I
should submit to it? Loath I am that thy will should be done when it thwarts
mine: This you may express in the language of Ephesians. 2. 2, 3. Children of
disobedience, fulfilling the desires of the flesh, and of the mind: you may
borrow the complaint of God against Israel, Isa. 48. 4. an obstinate people,
whose neck has an Iron sinew, whose brow is brass: here you may lament the
Fall, that robbed you of the holy freedom and conformity of your will to Gods,
and your hearts became like Nabal's, dead as a stone, to any thing spiritually
good. Here you may be very large and affectionate, this being the spring of all
the sins and enormities of your lives.

2. Then labor to understand what is included by way of Petition: and these
are (as before), Either,

1. Privative, for the removal of hindrances, which keep us from the knowing,
obeying and submitting to the will of God, which Alas! how infinite are they?
rather to be by you and every person bewailed, than by me expressed: Oh what
need have we to pray that God Will h^al all within us, and help against all
without us, that sets us in opposition to his holy Will? you may reduce them to,

1. Inwards; such as are from within, and arise from a man's self: and these are
as large as the whole body of sin, and as numerous as the members of that body.
There is blindness in the understanding, that we cannot know, what is that
good, and acceptable, and perfect will of God, Romans 12. 2. therefore we have
need to pray as Paul Act. 9* 6. Lord, what will thou have me do? or as we
are taught Job 34. 32. what I know not, teach thou me -- Again, there is
Obstinacy in the will, we have need pray that promise Ezekiel. 36. 26. That God
will take away our heart of stone etc -- There is in us weakness and inability
to good, though a sinful strength to do evil: There Ephesians. 2 3.
are (...) wills of the flesh, which oppose the will of God. We have need pray
that God will make the weapons of his Word and Ministry strong and mighty to
beat down those strongholds, those imaginations, and high things in us -- 2
Cor. 10. 4. That all within us may yield to Gods will, that we may lay down
our weapons, and take upon us the yoke of Christ:

2. Outward, viz. that Slavery which we are in to Satan, who has blinded our
eyes, 2* Cor. 4. 4. Captivated ours wills 2 Timothy 2. 26. and filled our hearts,
Act. 5. 3. working effectually in us the children of disobedience, Ephesians. 2. 2.
Therefore we have need to pray that Jesus Christ may come into our hearts
there to destroy the works of the Devil. 1 John 3. 8. That the stronger man
may come and dispossess this strong man armed Luke 11. 21, 22. May snatch us
from the power of darkness Col. 1. 13. That we being delivered from the hands
of this and all our enemies, may serve the Lord in holiness and righteousness
before him all the days of our life Euk. 1. 74. Oh be earnest, even as a poor
Turkish Gally-slave would be for redemption from his Gally. This shall suffice
to be spoken as to the privative Petitions; or impediments to be removed.

2. Positive: and those may refer to that twofold Will (or rather twofold
conception of the will) of God I have (...)

1. In reference to the Will of Purpose, (which I told you was neither wholly
excluded out of this Petition, nor in its whole latitude included in it) two
things are principally to be begged.

1. That God will bring about his great and general decrees concerning his
own glory and man's salvation, in his own time and way: since he has reveald
that he will have a Church, that he has closen a number out of the world
which in time he will gather to himself, that we may and ought to pray, that
he will bless the means in order to the gathering his Church, and completing
the number of his sanctified ones: In a word (for I might here be infinite in
particulars) all those gracious Purposes concerning the gathering, governing,
defending, delivering, and saving his Church, which God has in his word
revealed by way of declaration or promise, may and ought to be the matter of
our Petitions, For (I think I may safely say) ^ prayer's walk is as large as
the whole compass of the promises. Only we must here be cautious that we do
not tie up God to the fulfilling his purposes, and promises, in a time, place
or way wherein he has not bound himself to fulfill them. We must leave God
as loose as he has left himself, and not add to his words lest we be found
liars, or lest we be tempted to charge God as a liar. For
Scripture-expression, the 2d. 72d. and 87d. Psalms, and many other places,
will abundantly furnish you.

2. That when Gods decrees and purposes are fulfilled upon us or others, they
and we may be taught submission and thankfulness; may learn old Eli's frame 1 Samuel 3. 18. or Aaron's. (...) 16. 3. Hezekiah's 2 King. 20. 19. or those Act.
21. 14. for which we may pray in their language, viz. that we may be enabled
to say from our souls in the darkest and saddest providence, as they did, It is
the Lord, let Him do what seems good in his sight, or, The will of the Lord
be done, or, as Aaron there, may hold our peace. This is the proper Petition in
reference to the Will of Purpose, and this indeed respects it in its whole
latitude (at least so far as it any way relates to us): for though many things
may come within the purpose of God, the fulfilling of which it may not concern
us to pray for; yet it concerns us to pray for a suitable deportment under them
when fulfilled: That we may be silent with David Psalm. 39. 9. That we may
bless the Lord with Job Chapt. 1. 21. under Gods more severe dispensation; That
we may neither despise the chastning of the Lord nor be weary of his
correction Hebr. 12. 5. but may submit our selves cordially, cheerfully,
universally under the mighty hand of God* 1 Pet. 5. 6. And then, on the other
hand, when Gods gracious purposes are fulfilled upon us, or concerning our
selves and others, we should pray that they and we may be enabled to make a
thankful acknowledgment, and answerable improvement. So that we may to this
purpose express our selves; "Lord, I know not what is in the womb of thy
decrees concerning my self or others, only that whatever thou have purposed it
shall in the execution of it, be just and righteous, and I hope good and
gracious: whatever it is, Lord, teach us a right deportment, let not me or
others lay Cross to thy will in any providence; make us willing that thou
should have thy will upon us though it may Cross ours: Let us see so much of
Sovereignty, equity, justice, yea mercy and goodness in thy will, as may teach
us to lay our hand upon our mouths, and where we cannot apprehend to admire*
to lay down our Wills at thy feet, etc.

In these two things, I conceive, consists the sum of what we are to pray
for in that respect.

2. But that which is more especially our concernment as to this Petition, is
to pray for grace and ability to do the commanding Will of God: in reference
to which, besides the hindrances to be deprecated (which are partly the same as
in the former Petitions, our requests may respect.

1. The helps, and enablements necessary to the doing of Gods Commands; amongst
many these two principally.

1. Understanding and knowledge, without which it is impossible to do them
aright, borrow David's words. Psalm. 119. 18, 34, 73, 125, 144. Pray as Paul for
his Ephesians Chapt. 1. 17, 18. and 5. 17. that you may not be unwise but
understanding what the will of the Lord is. Blindfold obedience cannot be
acceptable to God.

2. That God will work your hearts, and your whole man into an obediential
frame, by taking away the stony heart out of your flesh, and giving you a heart
of flesh: Ezekiel. 36. 26. that he will strengthen you with might in the inner
man. Ephesians. 3. 16. that our hearts may be so enlarged, that we may run the way
of his commandments, and so inclined that we may keep his Testimonies, Psalm.
119. 32, 36. that we may see so much equity, taste so much sweetness in his
commands as may draw out our hearts to a cheerful obedience: that the Word may
not only be delivered to us, but we may be delivered up to it so as to obey it
from the heart Romans 6* 17. That though there may be many commands above our
strength, yet there may be none against our will, to do: To this end we may
plead the promises of the Covenant of grace such as Jer. 32. 40. and 31. 33.
Hebr. 8. 10. and that gracious one Deuteronomy. 30. 6.

2. The manner of our obedience, which is expressed in this Petition [ as it is
in Heaven] that, as the Angels and Saints glorified, so we may obey: which do
the will of God (that I may but lightly touch.) in this manner:

1. Freely and cheerfully without murmuring, in which respect the Angels are
said always to behold the face of God, Matthew. 18. 10. that is, to stand
waiting for their errand. Pray we for the like frame. Psalm. 119. 32.

2. Speedily without delay: therefore wings are ascribed to them: What a speedy
dispatch did one Angel make in Sennacherib's. Army in one night 185000. Pray
that we may do so Psalm. 119. 60.

3. Humbly without disputing: If Michael durst not bring a railing accusation
against the Devil when he disputed with him about the body of Moses, much
less dare they dispute the Commands of God. There Is no answering-again in
heaven, nor calling in question any command of their Sovereign, pray that we
may do the like; that we may more consider who commands than what is
commanded: and be more follicitous about our duty, then what may follow upon
the doing of it.

4. Fully without reservation: they (doubtless) stick not at any command, be it
never so difficult or painful in the execution: pray, that we also may have
respect to all Gods Commandments, Psalm. 119. 6, 128.

5. Faith-fully and sincerely without d^ssimulation: surely though they behold
the ^ace of God they are no eye-servants, they look not merely after applause
and commendation: they neither falter nor flatter with God: pray that it may be
so with us, that we may do as Hezekiah professes. Isa. 38. 3.

6. Zealously, not coldly and heartlesly: C^n we think those glorious Angels
and glorified Saints, are so cold and frozen as we (...) in the service and
praises of their God? no surely: they are Spirits and therefore active, yea
they are Seraphims, burning with^eale, excelling in strength, doing his
commands. Psalm. 103. 20, 21. pray that we also may not be flothfull, but
fervent in Spirit serving the Lord, Romans 12. 11.

7. Constantly, without intermission or weariness. In Jacob's ladder the Angels
were all either ascending or descending, none ^anding still: this has been the
work of Angels from the beginning of the world, and shall be theirs and the
Saints glorified to ^ternity, yet no weariness or interruption. Pray we, that
we may be thus steadfast, unmooveable, always abounding in the work of the
Lord; since we know our labor shall not ^^ in vain in the Lord, 1 Cor. 15.
last.

Direct. 2. Get a frame of heart suited to the matter of this Petition: that
we may not only say, Thy will be done, but that we may pray so, i. e. it may
be the breathing of our hearts. Which are then in a right tune to put up this
Petition, when

1. We are in a posture ready to meet God in a submissive subjection to every
act of his Will of purpose, even that to which we are naturally most averse: he
that prays that Gods will may be done, must be ready to submit to it, when it
is done. Prepare therefore in this respect to meet God, Amos 4. 12. else it is
gross dissimulation. And in this respect how much are we defective, how
impatient are we to have our wills crossed and thwarted by the execution of
God's? Like that froward King, 2 Kings 6. 15. who would wait on the Lord no
longer: how ready are we to curse God to his face when he crosses us in our
impetuous desires and too vehement expectations? Oh, but it would become us to
bring our hearts in all things to that frame that we may say, If the Lord
will, as Jam. 4. 15. and to rejoice when Gods will is done, though our desires
be not fulfilled.

2. When we have a frame of heart as wide as Gods precepts: when we resolve to
have respect to all Gods Commandments, Psalm. 119. 6. It Is damnable Hypocrisy
when we pray that Gods will may be done, and yet we do our own: consider
therefore, what is the will of God. Mich. 6. 1. 1 Thessalonians. 4. 3. and 5. 18. etc.
In a word, to fear God and keep his Commandments* Pray that you may do, this
with a full resolution and purpose of heart to do it: Then we pray this prayer
aright, when we desire to know the will of God that we may do it, and when
we endeavor to do what we know of it, and are prepared to do, what we yet
know not, when it shall be revealed to us.

CHAP. VII.
IV. PETITION.
Give us this day our daily Bread.
THus much of the Petitions immediately respecting God and his glory: I now
proceed to those which respect our selves either 1. As to our bodies, and the
things of this life, In the 4th. 2. Our souls, and our spiritual and eternal
good, in the 5th. and 6th* Which I shall speak to in the same Method I have
done to the former.

Quest. It is worth our enquiry, Why this Petition for temporals, is put before
those for spirituals, since we are commanded to seek first the Kingdom of God
and his righteousness, Matthew. 6. 33?

Answ. 1. It might be replied that in the three first Petitions we have sought
the Kingdom of God --. For though those Petitions have a more special respect
to God, yet so as that our chief-good is intwisted therein together with Gods
glory. But.

2. That command of seeking fiest the Kingdom of God (as has been hinted) does
not so much enjoyne the order of the Petition (or other ways of seeking) as
the ardour of affection. First, that is, chiefly, principally, with the
greatest intenseness of desire, and industry. Besides,

3. It is sometimes the manner of Scripture to dispatch that first which is of
the less concernment: And,

4. Outward things of necessity to the preservation of our beings are requisite
in order to spirituals: the soul while in conjunction with the body needs the
body's help as its instrument, and the body in order to this helpfulness must
have necessary supports of food and raiment: it is exceeding clamorous, and
will be attended; the necessities of nature must be supplied, else it will
hinder the soul's operations. Therefore it has pleased Ut^mentes nostrae quasi
per scalas a terra in coelum conscendant. Calvin.
God out of his indulgence to us, to allow us the seeking of these things next
those that concern himself; that these being laid in, we may with more
cheerfulness attend the service of himself and of our souls. As our Savior
cured corporal infirmities to draw men to look to him for the cure of
spiritual. By this means outward things are made a step to spiritual: as it
is an argument of Gods condescension, so it is a help for us to ascend by to
heavenly things. This, for the Order of this Petition.

In the words we have. 1. The Petition Give us etc. 2. The limitations which
are such as respect.

1. The time (...) this day, not for years, or life. 2. Quality, bread not
quails, dainties. 3. Quantity (...), daily (we render it), the word signifies
so much as is needful for our subsistence.

[ Bread]. We hinted before that bread is Explicat.
put by a Synechdoche for all necessaries relating to this life: that which is
called food convenient or the bread of our allowance Prove. 30. 8. and under
this, all other things of the like nature and necessity are included: as
Raiment, habitation etc. And withal, the blessing of God without which all
these are as nothing. So that whatever is necessary for our See Hagg. 1. 6.
sustentation, and that with the blessing of Heaven upon it, is that which is
here understood by bread.

[ Dayly] i. e. that which is needful for the day, or (as before) that which
is necessary and convenient for the upholding and nourishment of nature. Not
supersubstantiall Panem indigentiae. Sir: diei necessarium, Pers. Calvin.
(as the Vulgar Latin) for we are not to think that in this Petition, the
Eucharist or Sacramental bread is meant, as some have imagined because they
thought that in so short a form there should be no mention of earthly things,
how then should this form be perfect when the Scripture else where warrants us
to ask them? besides that the word will not bear, it: (...) Graecis prop^^e
significat, Quod nobis sustentandis optum and accommodatum est, That which is
accommodated to the sustentation of nature, etc.

[ This day] It has been supposed by some that two distinct things are asked
in this Petition viz. 1. Life it self in those words [ This day] 2. The things
of this life, [ our daily bread] though I will not deny the Truth of the thing
viz. that life as well as the things of this life, is asked; yet I see no
reason so to parcel the words; and he that looks into the Greek Text will
easily see that it cannot be: for they run in this order. Give us our daily
(or necessary) bread this day: i. e. for this day: so that it is (as I have
hinted) a limitation of this Petition as to the time for which we ask it.

[ Our]. Bread is called ours, not that God owes it us, but because by his
bounty it is appointed and destinated for us, besides [ Our] that is, that
which we come by in a way of industry, or at least in a lawful way: according
to that 2 Thessalonians. 3. 12. eat their [Owne] bread: i. e. gotten by their lawful
labor and diligence: So that this gives us a hint of that law, Genesis 3. 19. In
the sweat of thy face etc.

[ Give us] This imports (what is hinted before) that all our labor can
neither procure us bread, nor make it or any other creature wholesome and
^o^rishing to us without Gods blessing. That neither the earth can yield, nor
money buy, nor friends bestow it without Gods giving it us: that which is
sufficiently hinted Hos. 2. 21, 22. I will hear -- q. d. If God be deaf to the
creature, it will be deaf to us. More will be said to these things, in the
Application.

Doctr. 9. Necessaries, for this life may and ought to be ask't of God* but
with due limitation. Bread may be begged at heavens door, but so that we keep
within the restrictions hinted in this Petition: and here, I shall briefly
enquire. 1. Why they are to be asked? 2. With what limitations?

Quest. 1. Why are temporal things or necessaries for this life to be sought,
by prayer? A Reason or two shall sufficice.

Reas. 1. That hereby we may acknowledge that both the having, and comfort in
the having, of outward things, depends upon Gods bounty and blessing: that we
neither have any right and title to them without Gods leave, nor can taste any
sweetness or comfort in them, without his love: all our benefits are of Gods
bounty: of him, as well as through him, and for him are all things. Romans 11.
36. He is the giver of every good and perfect gift Jam. 1. 17. he challenges
a propriety in all things Psalm. 50. 10. --. 13. This propriety we ascribe to
him, by asking them of him.

2. That we may be both enabled and engaged to glorify him with, and for them:
And so this, as all the other Petitions, has the respect of a means to the
first as its end (...) P^^il. 4. 17. Paul received their bounty, not because
be desired a gift, but he desired fruit that might abound to their account.
So we must desire these things not only or chiefly for our want of them, but
that we may have occasion thereby to give God the glory of them: indeed, God
allows us to ask for the supply of nature's necessities, but religion and
ingenuity should teach us to propose a higher end than that, in our asking: and
if we must eat and drink, then we must ask what we eat and drink, for the
glory of God: 1 Cor. 10 31.

Quest. 2. What are the limitations with when we must ask outward things?
These are partly hinted in the very Petition, yet give me leave more
particularly to single them out. It is therefore required,

1. That we ask them only so far as they may be subordinate to the things
begged in the former Petitions (this I gather from the order of this Petition).
So that the advancement of Gods glory, the coming of his Kingdom, the doing of
his will, must be out square and measure in desiring and asking these things.
This condition should be always employed, and, occasionally, expressed in our
prayers for Outward. This is the sense of Agur's prayer Prove. 30. 8, 9. as if
he should say, Lord, proportion my outward estate in such a measure as may
render me more prompt and ready to glorify thee, and obey thy Commands.

2. That we ask them in few words: Christ has taught brevity, both in that
he comprised them all in one Petition, and reduced them all to one word viz.
Bread; intimating to us that we should not be so particular in them as in
spiritualls: As to heavenly things the more particular, the better; but in
these temporal we should not extend our prayers beyond those few necessaries
here implied under one word bread, and by the Apostle in two words food and
raiment: 1 Timothy 6. 8. However, if our necessities or afflictions be such as may
draw out larger prayers or complaints, yet we must keep our affections within
their due limits; so much this Petition teaches:

3. That they be not more than necessaries we ask: It Is bread, not dainties,
not varieties, not superfluities, we are taught to ask. Bread being of all
externals most necessary, and the most common and ordinary food. But here we
may consider a twofold necessity, or measure of necessaries.

1. As to our Being, and to the very support of our life, so the measure is
alike to all, that is, so much as may satisfy nature, or so much as may
conveniently nourish us, signified by the word (...).

2. As to our condition, and the Station wherein God has set us, and so that
which may be super^^uous to one, may be but necessary for another: as to a
public person, a Magistrate, or one upon whom many have dependence, more may
be necessary both as to the maintaining of his dependants, and himself,
according to that state or condition, wherein God has set him. Only his we
must beware, whatever our condition be, that we neither through wastfulness
make, nor through insatiableness or wantonness esteem that, to be necessary
which indeed is not.

4. That we ask them not peremptorily, but with submission to the Will of God,
that is the limitation in begging the prevention of evils, or the bestowing of
good things relating to this life, Matthew. 26. 39. 42. Nevertheless, not as I
will but as thou will: and it is intimated in the connex on of this with the
former Petition: If the Lord will must be the guide of all our designs, and the
limitation of all our desires: Jam. 4. 15.

5. That we ask them not with a sollicitous The Arab Version is corrupt, Panem
crastiaum da nobis body.
anxiety, for the future, but only the present. We are limited to this day, and
Matthew. 6. ult: Take no thought for the morrow -- -- Not but that we may both
desire, and moderately endeavor after a competency for our life, and
conveniences for posterity, 1 Timothy 5. 8. Genesis 41. 34. 2 Cor. 12. 14. but we
must neither immoderately thirst, after nor excessively hoard up these earthly
things: nor should we murmur or repine, if we have not in our hand a visible
sufficiency for life: Much goods, and those laid up, and that for many Years
was the rich man's fin and folly, and especially that he did thereupon charm
his soul into a sleep of carnal confidence, and security: Luke 12. 19.

6. And then what we ask, must be in a way of begging not claiming, it is Give
not Pay us: and we must withal remember our usual saying, Beggars must not be
choosers. He that deserves nothing, and worse than nothing, should be thankful
for every thing. Remember, we have forfeited all, it is indulgence if any thing
be given us, it is but justice if we be-denyed in what we ask: God is debtour
to none, and therefore all he gives is of his bounty; but we lie open to his
justice, and therefore all he gives us is both of bounty and merey: Be not
therefore peremptory with God, claim not any thing, disclaim thine own
worthiness of any thing; learn so to ask, that, if the thing be granted, thou
may ascribe all to mercy; if denied, thou may subscribe to Justice.



Mott: That outward blessing; is doubly sweet which is the return of prayer:
he that can so look on his outward things, cannot but both taste more than
others in them, and do more with, and for them. Prayer both fetches the
blessings and a blessing upon them. 1 Timothy 4. 5. Every thing is sanctified by
the word and prayer: it is true; Eccl. 9. 2. No man's knows either love or hatred
by all that is before him: outward are no evidences of the divine special
love. But when we can call them Samuels, Asked of God, they 1 Samuel 1. 20.
carry a more then ordinary impress of Gods favor upon them, especially if (as
28.
she her Samuel, so) we do give them back to God by way dedication and
thankful improvement: There is some difference betwixt having and enjoying:
Eccl. 6* 2. To some God has given riches, wealth and honor -- but gives him
not power to eat thereof. A plague indeed! to Tantalize in the fullness of
outward, to be poor with abundance, but now where outward are* given in, to
prayer, ordinarily they are* improved by praise, and enjoyed with comfort: The
good will of him that dwelt in the Deuteronomy. 33. 16.
bush is more then all the rest of Joseph's blessing, and multiplies each
particular a thousandsold: this is more legibly written upon those good things,
that prayer obtains. Ask them then, but keep to your* pattern: for,

Mot. 1. To ask otherwise is to tempt God* Psalm. 78. 18. that is, to try what
God can or will do, and that is very provoking: God loves to be urged with, but
not beyond* his promises: Seldom does too much eagerness and importunity in
asking temporals, pass without some remarkable token of Gods displeasure. And

2. It is to ask that which is hurtful to ourselves: Rachel is set upon having
children* Genesis 30. 1. God gives her a Ben-oni, a Son of Sorrows, and it costs
her her life. Chapt. ^5. 16, 18. Israel will have quails, and they ^ave them
with a vengennce: they have their hearts desire, but leanness is sent into
their ^^uls: Psalm. 106 15. Therefore be sure to ^eep within the prescribed
limits*

Direct. 1. Labor well to understand what ^^ employed and included in this
Petition. And ^ere,

1. Some acknowledgments are made; as,

1. That God is the supreme proprietor and absolute Lord of all the creatures:
this acknowledgment we may make in Davia's words Psalm. 24. 1. or 1 Chronicles. 29.
11, 12, 14, 16. Yea, herein we acknowledge that ^ven what we have is his,
since even those that have daily bread (and more), are taught to say Give us --
which is an implicit acknowledgment that they may not warrantably use what they
have, till they have (...) Gods leave; nor can comfortably use it, till they
have begged his blessing: so that you are, in compliance with this Petition, to
acknowledge God the owner of all things* else, What ground have you to ask them
at Gods hands?

2. That we have by the Fall forfeited all our right to the creature, and
deserve either to be wholly deprived of them, or to have them cursed to us in
their use: So that when we come to ask any outward blessing, we should come in
such self-condemning language as this: Lord, we confess we are as so many
condemned Traitors or Malefactors, such as deserve not life, muchless the good
things of this life; But since it has pleased thy Majesty to indulge us so
far as to give us our lives, Oh deny us not that which may make our lives
comfortable to us: True, Lord, we have forfeited that title and Interest which
thou did graciously vouchsafe us at first, and therefore we must come upon a
new score; we cannot use them lawfully without thy leave, nor taste sweetness in
them without Thy blessing etc.

3. That all our pain and toil for the getting of outward things is vain,
except God give them in, upon our labor, and industry. Psalm. 127. 2, 3. That
it is in vain to rise up early, lie down late, and eat the bread of* sorrow:
that though we sow much we shall reap* little, that God can blast our Corn in
the field, blow upon it in the Barn or Garners, and when we earn wages, we
shall but put it into a bag with holes, except God attend our endeavors with
his blessing. Hag. 1. 6, 9. And when we have got any thing, it is not in our
power to use it, to his glory, or our own advantage, except he give us power
to do it: Eccl. 6. 2. we shall eat our bread all our days in darkness and
discomfort Eccl. 5. 17. and our immoderate care will only pierce us through with
many sorrows, 1 Timothy 6. 10. We shall labor in the very fire and weary our
selves for very vanity Habb. 2. 13. except the Lord bless our labors.

2 Some Particulars by way of Petition are included: The principal whereof
(together with their limitations) take in the following particulars.

1. That it will please the Lord to preserve our lives so long as he sees good
in his infinite wisdom and as may make for his glory and our good: this is
necessarily included, for, To what end do we ask bread, but in order to the
sustentation, and preservation of our lives? So that in begging bread, we do
much more beg life: Borrow David's words to this purpose, Psalm. 119. 175. Let
my soul live and it shall praise thee: or the prayer of Hezekiah, Isa. 38.
David asked life Psalm. 21. 4. So that our request must be of this import, Lord,
let me live till I have done thy work, and the work of my own soul etc.

2. That he will give us so much of the good things of this life, as he sees
convenient, viz. food, raiment, protection, health, habitation, etc. These
things, so far as they are necessary we may beg, as Jacob, Genesis 28. 20, 21.
If the Lord will keep me, and give me bread to eat and raiment to put on etc.
Thus Agur, Prove. 30. 8, 9. he prays against the extremity of poverty; so may
we, with submission: since, O Lord, there lie so many Temptations in a
necessitous condition, as Theft, lying, envying, murmuring, and taking indirect
ways for the supply of nature's urgent necessities; deliver me (if it may
stand with thy good pleasure) from a condition so urged and encompassed with
temptations; bestow such a measure of outward (if thou feast it good for me)
that I may be rather helpful them needful, since thou have said, It is a more
blessed thing to give than to receive.

3. That in order to the attainment of these things, God will make us careful
and conscientious in our places and callings, and attend our labors with his
blessing: and that he will keep us from unlawful and unwarrantable ways of
getting. This Petition is not a Petition of idleness, but of engagement to
labor and industry: as has been hinted, every Petition (and so this) is an
obligation to endeavor. Pray therefore that he that stole may steal no more,
but labor with his hands the thing that is good, Ephesians. 4. 28. 2 Thessalonians. 3. 12.
and that he will not blast or blow upon, but bless and smile upon our lawful
endeavor: That he will so hear the heaven, that it may hear the earth, and
the earth may hear the corn and wine, and they may hear us, so as to sustain
nature, and supply our necessities. Hos. 2. 20, 21.

4. That he will add his blessing to, and teach us to depend upon for his
blessing upon all our outward enjoyments: upon this account the richest as well
as poorest have need to pray this Petition. Bread is but as a stone, drink will
not quench our thirst, raiment will not keep us warm; nothing will be to us*
what it is appointed to be without Gods blessing: So that all must be
sanctified to us by the word and prayer. 1 Timothy 4. 4, 5* that we may use the
good things of this life hot only by Gods leave, but with his love: Give us our
bread imports more then, let us have our bread: it intimates a desire to see
Gods hand in our obtaining this q. d. Let us see it come from thee: Let us see
it as a Benjamin's m^ss come from thy Table: let us read much of thy love in
our daily provision, and so bless it to us, that each creature may serve us in
its capacity.

5. That he will enable us in every condition to depend upon his providence:
q. d, Help us to look up to, and depend upon thee: If we have little or
nothing, let us wait on thee for supplies; if much, yet let us not trust in
uncertain riches, but in the living God who gives us richly all things to
enjoy. 1 Timothy 6. 16. That, if riches increase, we may not set our hearts upon
them, Psalm. 62. 10. Oh this is a desirable frame, and upon this account the
rich have more need to pray this Petition, that, amidst their worldly*
enjoyments, they may rely on God, as if they had nothing at all: N^cessity will
prompt the poor to depend on God, but it must be grace, and a good measure of
it, that must put the rich into a right fram in this particular. This seems to
be fairly employed in this Petition, as Luke reads it, (...) (...): day by day,
q. d. Though we have bread for our lives, yet let us so seek it, and wait for
it, and for a bl^ssing upon it, at thy hands; as if we were like
day-labourers, that have not a penny to buy them food till they have earned it,
so we not a bit to put in our heads till we have begged it.

6. That we may be contented with, and thankful for, that pittance and
portion of outward good things which God has allotted us that we may be able
to say as David, Psalm. 16. 6. My lines are fallen to me in a large place, I
have a goodly heritage: not envying those who have a larger share of these
things than our selves: This is employed in that we call it OUR bread, i. e.
fit and convenient for us: and whereas w^e say Give us, we seem to intimate our
not deserving it, but expecting it only as a freegift, which must needs (in
reason) teach us contendness and thankfulness with what he gives, since if he
give us nothing he is not unjust, if any thing, bountiful.

Direct. 2. Labor for a frame of heart suitable to this Petition; that, in
praying it, there may be a harmonious concurrence betwixt your affections and
expressions. Therefore,

1. Get a practical belief of that great Truth Jam. 1. 17. that every good and
perfect gift is from above, and comes down from the Father of lights -- else
we but dissemble with God while we seek them at his hands: and here how many
fail grossly? they pray to God in this form, Give us this day -- yet rely upon
their own endeavor, or upon other carnal confidences: and when they have
attained any thing, they ascribe it not to God, but sacrifice to their own
net, and burn incense to their dragge Habb. 1. ult. such do but mock God when
they pray this Petition: You must have a practical persuasion, that you can
neither have nor enjoy any outward blessing aright, without asking it of God:
and when you have it, that God can either take it from you, or curse it to you:
so that in the fullness of your sufficiency you shall be in straits, Job 20. 22.
That it is the blessing of the Lord, more then the endeavors of man that
makes rich, Prove. 10. 22. and that man lives not by bread only, but by every
word (of blessing) that proceeds out of the Mouth of the Lord, Deuteronomy. 8. 3.

2. Get a frame of heart abhorring all unlawful ways of getting, hating the
ways of unrighteousness, and resolved to wait and depend on providence in the
use of warrantable means. What notorious impiety is it, to pray to God to give
you bread, and then to take the Devils counsel and the course he prescribes
for the getting of it? Our Savior would not (though he could) change stones
into bread, because he would not gratify the Devil tempting him to go out of
the way of providence, Matthew. 4. 3, 4. when you get by fraud, oppression,
overreaching your Brethren etc. you contradict your prayers: what damnable
Hypocrisy was that Zech. 11. 5. to get by murder and oppression, and then to
father it upon God, and say Blessed be the Lord, for I am rich? And no loss it
is to ask of God, and seek it by the Devils help: In thus doing, you ask Gods
leave, and then take it whether he will or no.

3. Get your hearts prepared with patience and contentment to sit down with
what God affords you, you must be moderately both prayerfull, painful, and
careful Prove. 27. 23. -- But if God deny his blessing or do not Crown your
labors with that fullness as he does others, you must be patient, contented,
and thankful. Get a frame like that of David, 2 Samuel 15. 25. If the Lord
delight in me, so, if not, so. Like Paul's Phil. 4. 11, 12. Learn to abound
and to want, and in all estates to be thankfully contented: be not like some
sturdy unthankful beggars, who if you give them nothing, will go away rai^ing
and cursing: or, if not what or how much they expect, will throw it in the face
of him that gives it: and to work you into this frame, I know no considerations
or helps more effectual then these two.

1. To consider seriously, the vanity, vexation, dangers and temptations, that
attend these things; especially when our portion is greater than others: Oh,
how has prosperity killed it ten thousands! So that Agur fears and prays
against it, Prove. 30. 8, 9.

2. To get assurance of those better and more durable riches: he that has
tasted that old wine will not much-care for this new: he that has his eye and
heart full of heaven, will be satified with a little on earth: David desires to
be none of those who have their portion in this life, and whose bellies God
fills with his hid treasures, Psalm. 17. 14. And why? because he was assured
that when he awaked (out of the sleep of death) he should be satisfied with
Gods image. So much for this Petition.

CHAP. VIII.
V. PETITION.
And forgive us our trespasses, as we forgive them that trespass against us.
THis and the following Petition relate to our souls: in this we, beg
deliverance from evils past, in the other from evils to come. This is a
Petition for justification, that for sanctification, some have observed that
whereas the three Petitions relating to God have no connexive particle, these
three are tied together with a conjunction, [ And] forgive us -- [ And] lead us
not, teaching us, not to content our selves in the first, or second, without
the third also.

In the words you have 1. The thing Petitioned, forgiveness. 2. An encouraging
ground of asking it, as we forgive them etc. Luke has it thus, for we also
forgive our debtors.

Trespasses:] (...) debts, which Luke calls (...), sins, trespasses,
deviations, or (as the word imports) missings of the mark. What debts are,
properly so called, I need not tell you; some, it may be, know by woeful
experience: but how sins are called debts is not so obvious to every ones
understanding; for it may seem strange, that that should be called a debt to
God which is an offense against God. Therefore know, that Debt is here put
figuratively and improperly. And in reference to God our debt is twofold:
Either,

1. Direct and immediate* which results from our relation to God as his
creatures; and that is Obedience: Romans 8. 12. we are debtours, not to the flesh
-- the opposition is employed, but to God: Now this is not the debt here meant,
we may not pray to be absolved from our obedience, that is a debt God will
never remit, so long as our Relation of Creatures and subjects to him abides.

2. There is therefore a secondary and consequential debt, arising from our non
payment and faileure in the first: viz. satisfaction to be made, either, by
doing or suffering; thus all punishment due to fin, temporal, spiritual, or
eternal, is called a debt, because we are obliged and bound to the payment of
it; so Death is termed a debt: Now here, in calling sins a debt, is a
Metalepsis or Complication of Tropes. For here is 1. a Metaphor borrowed from
one that owes money, or any other thing: 2. A Metonymy, the cause put for the
effect: none will be so absurd as to think sin it self a debt to God, but it is
the cause of a debt; that is thereby we become liable to suffer the penalty of
the law, for the non-payment of our first debt of obedience. The sense is:
Forgive us our sins, whereby we are indebted to the Law, and bound over to
abide the penalty of it. This Metaphor frequently occurres in Scripture. Luke
13. 2. there those that are called (...), Sinners, are Verse 4. called (...)
debtors. See Matthew. 23. 16. 18.

[ Forgive] (...): a word used very frequently in the New Testament: signifies
to dismiss, let loose, or send away. A word borrowed from the releasing debts,
cancelling bonds, or letting loose prisoners: The same thing is expressed by
diverse other like Phrases in Scripture: as by Gods casting our sins behind his
back, hiding his face from them; passing them by: putting them away from him as
far as the East is from the West: not imputing, not beholding, not remembering
them: blotting out; purging with Hysop: etc. In short, forgiving or pardoning
of sin, is not, a taking away the very fact done, that is impossible in nature:
though God may esteem or count it as not done, yet he cannot make it, not to
be done, since to be done and not to be done is a plain Contradiction: [ Semel
factum, infectum fieri nequit] nor is it a taking away the sinfulness of the
fact: for the fact remaining, so and so circumstantiated, it cannot but be in
it self a sinful action. i. e. it carries in it a difformity to the divine
Law: Nor is it a separating the guilt from the fact, that is, its obligeing
nature to punishment: so long as the fact is, and is sinful, so long it has
guilt annexed to it: But, To forgive, is, not to impute this sinful, guilty
fact to us, not charging it upon us to our condemnation: so that the sense is;
Lord we have a numberless number of trespasses, which thou may justly charge
upon us; but, O remember them not against us; let them be (in reference to our
punished for them) as if they had never been committed, cast them into the
depth of the Sea: etc.

[ As we forgive -- ] Luke has it (...): for we also: which we are not so
to understand as if by our forgiving others we put an engagement on God, to
forgive us, but only as an encouragement on our parts to ask it: its true
indeed, that it is a condition without which God will not forgive us, though
not a meritorious cause or reason for which he ought in justice to forgive us:
it may be an argument wherewith we may plead with God for pardon, and it is
drawn [ a minori] from the less to the greater; Thus: Lord, we that are
creatures, whose mercies are but the mercies of creatures, find our hearts
drawn out through thy grace to forgive offenses done against our selves:
therefore we are humbly bold to beg that thou whose mercies are the mercies of
a God (that is infinite,) would forgive us: for, though all injuries done to
us are incomparably less then the least injury we have done to thy Majesty;
yet we know, there is as great a disproportion betwixt thy mercies and ours,
as betwixt the injuries done us by men, and those done by us to thy Majesty:
Thy thoughts are not as our thoughts: this is hinted in that Parable Matthew. 18.
23. -- We may observe a twofold disparity. 1. In the Creditors; there is a
servant indebted to a King, and a servant indebted to his fellow servants. 2. In
the debts; the servant owes the King 10000. Talents that is as some computit. A
Talent 187l. 10s. A Penny 7d. ob.
1875000. Pounds: his fellow servants. owes him 100. Pence, which of our money
is computed to 3l. 2s. 6d. Now as the King is exceedingly more magnificent, to
forgive that greater debt, whereas the penurious servant will not remit that
smaller debt to his fellow servant; so (and far more) is the disproportion
betwixt injuries done to God and to us, and betwixt Gods mercies and ours: so
that you see, in what sense the argument is used, [ As we forgive] notes not
parity but similitude. In short, the force of it may be thus expressed: Lord,
we experience the effect of thy grace upon us inclining us heartily to forgive
offenses done against us, we know the same grace is infinitely more in thee,
therefore we are humbly bold to beg and expect forgiveness at thy hands.

Qust. But does not this seem to put an obligation upon us to forgive all kinds
of injuries done to us, and if so, it is [ durus sermo] a hard condition indeed,
and may expose Christians to injuries and ruin.

Answ. Not so: we may both require D^bitoreshic vocantur non pecuniae, vel
officii alicujus, fed qui ob i'latas injurias nobis sunt obnoxii. Calvin.
debts due to us, and, if necessity require, we may right our selves by Law;
having only a desire of justice in our eye, yea in lawful war, we may kill
our enemy and yet forgive: Take these restrictions. As we forgive, that is,

1. Have inclinations rather to forgive, than to right (muchless revenge) our
selves, except necessity of self-preservation, or preventing our own ruin,
enforce us to other courses: this is the lowest and absolutely necessary
condition of being forgiven by God, that we have a far greater propensity to
forgiveness, and that we be dragged by mere necessary to use rigor.

2. That we do actually forgive all injuries that may be forgiven without
manifest dishonor to God, wrong to others, or very great injury to our selves.

3. That even then when we are necessitated to right our selves in any Kind,
we do it not out of spleen or passion, or any other sinister or private
respect, but for Gods glory; the good of others, or the just reparation of our
name, estate, person etc. And for amendment of those (if possible) who have
done us the injury: so that the trespasses which we are to forgive others, are
not debts, properly so called, but injuries and offenses, and the forgiveness
required is not absolute; but with these limitations. I now proceed to the
Doctrine of this Petition, which shall be this.

Doctr. 10. Rem^ssion of sins is to be sought of God, and may be hopefully
expected when it is in the frame of our hearts to forgive others: it is
needless to insist upon the proof of this so plain and pregnant Truth, which
shines in its own light: and has the concurrent testimony of all the Saints
in their practice: That it is to be ask't of God and him only is plain Mark. 2.
7. I shall briefly answer two Queries.

Quest. 1. Why is forgiveness to be sought by prayer? Reasons might be
multiplied, Take two of many.

1. Reas. God has made humble confession and Petition a condition upon which
(though not a cause for which) he will forgive Sinners, Prove. 28. 13. he that
hides his sins shall not prosper, but he that confess^th and forsakes shall
find mercy, 1 John 1. ul^. Psalm. 32. 4. there David declares his own
experience that when he purposed to confess his transgression, God forgave the
iniquity of his sin, and then Verse 5. For this every one that is Godly shall
pray unto thee etc. q. d. This my experience, shall be others encouragement:
and what lower terms can we imagine, should God condescend to? Should not a
Rebel before he be taken into favor, humble himself in the acknowledgment of
his fault, and beg pardon? Now upon this condition (next to faith in Christ)
God has promised forgiveness.

2. Prayer is the general Condition of obtaining that and every other mercy:
and this is one of the special mercies of God; therefore to be sought in this
way: The rule is, If any man lack, let him ask, Jam. 1. 5. Now, forgiveness is
the first mercy in the Gospel Covenant, and that without which nothing else can
be mercy. This turns all into mercy, or takes away the sting of every
affliction, Isa. 33. ult. The Inhabitants of Sion shall say I am not sick, the
people that dwell therein shall be forgiven their iniquity: the import may be
this; being forgiven their iniquity, sickness shall not be sickness to them;
they shall be in a manner insensible of it, so that sin being the grand evil,
the guilt the saddest burden, and consequently pardon the greatest mercy, at
least the leading mercy, it is fit we should seek that in the same way as we
do all other mercies.

Quest. 2. But why is the condition of forgiving others urged, rather than any
other? It Is certain, that faith and repentance are necessary conditions in
order to pardon, why then is it not, As we believe or, as we repent? Our
answers here, can be but probable, Take two.

Answ. 1. Those conditions doubtless are included, though they are not
expressed. As for Faith, that is a previous condition to the acceptable
performance of any duty Hebr. 11. 6. and more peculiarly requisite in prayer
Jam. 1. 7. So that this condition of believing in order to remission, is
sufficiently employed, in that we are taught to seek it by prayer, since every
prayer must be the putting in suit of some promise, and no promise can be
pleaded aright without faith exercised in it, the very asking then does import
Believing: and for Repentance that is included in the implicit confession of
sin made in this Petition; since confessing and forsaking (which are the sum
of true Repentance) must go together in that soul that hopes to find mercy,
Prove. 28. 13. These conditions therefore are included as previous qualifications
in him that begs pardon: besides that, they, being means in order to
forgiveness as their end, are together with it, included in the Petition,
according to the third of those propositions I laid down before I came to
speak to the Petitions in particular. But.

Answ. 2. Why this of forgiveing others is expressed, rather than any other;
The probable Reason may be.

1. Because of the suitableness of this condition to the thing Petitioned for,
we ask forgiveness, and plead our own forgiving others, so that herein we
desire a kind of retaliation, which is always thought the highest equity: By
asking it upon this Condition, we beg to be dealt with, as we our selves
deal with others, that if we show no mercy, we may find none.

2. And this possibly may be a more sensible Hoc modo voluit Christus
absolutionis nostrae siduciam quasi impresso sigillo melius ratam facere,
Calvin.
evidence of our faith and repentance, which in themselves are not so
discernable, and therefore not so pleadable: Faith and Repentance are more
hidden things: it is easy for a man to deceive himself and others about them
(though I would not be understood as if I thought it impossible for a man to be
certain he has them without immediate revelation) but this is easily
discernable both to our selves and others: we can observe whether our hearts
swell with rancour and revengefulness, or whether they melt into love and
reconcileableness, and for the act of forgiveing, others can judge. Now this I
may say, Where there is a frame of heart prone to forgive injuries upon right
grounds (principally upon the sense of the soul's greater injury done to God,
and its greater need of forgiveness at his hands, or else because God has
forgiven it) there is certainly both Faith and Repentance: for true grace is
concatenate; such a frame speaks the man renewed (naturally we are injurious,
1 Timothy 1. 13. hateful and hating one another Tit. 3. 3. malicious and
revengefull). And where there is a renewing work, it passes over the whole man,
the new man has all his members, every grace, though not in the same measure:
so that our forgiveing others being in it self more easily discernable, and
(where it is indeed) being demonstrative of the presence of Faith and
Repentance in the soul, may be possibly put as the condition, or argument in
this Petition; but certainly it must be understood as in Co^j^nction with those
two graces which are both principal requisites in those that are in the
Covenant of Grace, and conditions in order to pardon: Let me add here, that
there is a natural propensi^y to forgive and forget injuries, sound even among
the Heathen, which being separated from true grace, is no such plead^ble
condition; because it neither arises from the same grounds, nor has the same
inducements, motives, pattern or ends, as this which we are taught to plead:
Then is our forgiving others of the right stamp, when we do it in obedience
to God, in imitation of God, in expectation of greater mercy from God; not
because our forgiving others can merit it, but because upon our forgiving
others he has promised it: Matthew. 6. 14. or when the sense of God's greater
mercy to us, inclines us hereunto, when we can argue, God has forgiven me
Talents, and shall not I forgive Pence? Thus much may suffice in answer to the
Queries.

and beg it as we are here taught. Do I need to add motives in a matter of
such important necessity? Consider,

Mot. 1. Sin makes you debtors (as we have seen) therefore debt if not
remitted will be required: and Oh how great a debt is it? It Is such as all the
world cannot satisfy, muchless can you your selves do it. It was an
impossibility that he promised Matthew. 18. 26. (if we understand the debt
there to be satisfaction for sin, as the impor^ of the Parable seems to make
it) and indeed what will not a man promise when the knife is at his throat, if
his mere promise will secure him from imminent destruction? Let Sinners know,
The price is too great for them to pay, Psalm. 49. 7, 8. Mich. 6. 6 7, 8. There
is no way therefore but to fall down at the feet of God in humble confession,
and earnest Petition fer pardon. Else they are like to be delivered to the
tormentors till they shall pay all that is due, Matthew. 18. 34. and that [till]
will never be: eternity only will be sufficient for it, they shall ever be
paying, but never have paid it. Should not this make us speedily embrace our
Savior's counsel Matthew. 5. 25?

2. Consider what encouragements we have: the Name of God proclaimed Exodus 34.
6. his gracious promises made to him that confesses, and forsakes, Prove. 28.
13. 1 John 1. ult. Isa. 43. 25. etc. the complete satisfaction, and the
constant and ^st. 4. 16.
prevailing intercession of Christ: if Esther would adventure upon the Kings
favor, though not according to Law; well may we adventure to go to God,
having such, so many, and so great encouragements: add this to the former. And
then,

3. Consider what a precious privilege it is that you are pressed to seek by
prayer: it is the inlet to all other mercies, the door into happiness Psalm. 32.
1, 2. A pardoned Sinner may have boldness with God, has free access to God,
audience and acceptance, peace and comfort: Get this, and it brings along with
it all other spiritual blessings, and privileges: For this end was Christ
exalted Act. 5. 31.
to be a Prince and Savior, even to give Repentance and Remission of sins, and
where this is bestowed all other benefits purchased by Christ follow after it.
Therefore be earnest with God for it.

Direct. 1. Understand what is employed and included in this Petition, and here
(as in the former)

1. Something is implied by way of acknowledgment, principally, three things.

1. Here is a clear acknowledgment that you are Sinners, and stand indebted to
the Law and Justice of God: in conformity therefore to this Petition you are to
confess sins, not only in the general but particularly, in the several Kinds,
circumstances and aggravations of them: To which purpose you may borrow
expressions from the acknowledgments of the Saints in Scripture, who have lest
their confessions upon record, such as, Psalm. 40. 12. 51. -- Ezr. 6. Neh. 9.
etc. This is a Theme frequently insisted on: and the manner how sin is to be
confessed is fully taught by others, only to give a touch upon it: our
confessions must be, as much as possible,

1. Both universal, of all sin, so far as we know it; and particular, of every
sin in its nature and circumstances.

2. Cordial and affectionate, attended, with a serious sense of the
hainousness of sin and with shame, grief, self-abhorrency, and detestation of
the fact:

3. Self judging and self-condemning: we are to pass a sentence of death upon
our selves, that Hell is our due, and everlasting destruction might justly be
out portion. Much more might be added. But,

2. Here we are taught to acknowledge that we are non-solvent, that we are in
an utter incapacity for the payment of this debt. Were it possible to be paid
by us, we should never have been taught to ask forgiveness: we must sue for
it, in form a pauperis, as being unable to satisfy. We are never in a right
capacity to ask or obtain forgiveness till we are under a clear conviction of
the impossibility of our making satisfaction. Borrow Job's acknowledgment,
Chap. 9. 3. If he (i. e. God) will contend with him (man) he cannot answer
him one of a thousand: i. e. he can neither justify himself from his sin, nor
satisfy for it: In David's Psalm. 143. 2. Enter not into judgment with thy
servant, for in thy sight shall no man living be justified. Here you may
amplify upon the number, nature, and aggravatious of your sins which render the
debt infinite, and insolvable, especially being committed against a God of
infinite Majesty etc. which renders their demerit infinite.

3. Here also we are to acknowledge that it is in the power of God to forgive
(whether without satisfaction made by our selves or our Suerty, I shall not
here enquire (nor is it necessary) that he has proclaimed himself a sin
forgiving God Exodus 34. 6, 7. that none but he alone can do it Mark. 2. 7.
that it is his property, his glory to do it, Mich. 7. 18. Psalm. 130. 4. Dan.
9. 9. To him belong forgiven^sses: and if it be the glory of a man much more of
God to pass by a transgression, Prove. 19. 11. Here we may amplify upon the free
and gracious promises he has made, and the way and means himself has
provided, by sending his only begotten Son to suffer and satisfy, as also the
great Sins and Sinners he has forgiven, especially the Covenant of Grace
which proclaims pardon and the way in which he will give it. These things
afford ample matter of acknowledgment.

2. Something is included by way of Petition which may relate either,

1. To the things begged; which though included in one word, forgiveness, yet
may be distinguished into four things which follow each other.

1. Pardon it self, which is the non-imputation of sin, and the not-punishing
it upon us, Psalm. 32. 1, 2. We may beg it in David's language Psalm. 51. 1, 2,
7, 9. or the Publican's Luke 18. 13. and may plead for it the free promises of
God. Such as Isa. 43. 25. and 57. 18. Use also Hos. 14. 2, 4.

2. The sense and feeling of it upon the conscience, which David prays for,
Psalm. 51. 8. Make me to hear joy and gladness* that the bones which thou have
broken may rejoice. And Verse 12. Restore unto me the joy of thy salvation,
stablish me with thy free Spirit. Pray for the Spirit to seal this mercy to
you Ephesians. 1. 13. that so you may be filled with joy and peace in believing Romans
15. 13. that your own consciences may give an answer of peace.

3. The continuance of pardon, and fuller Ames. ^medull Theol. L. 1. C. 27..
23. Langley against Winnell, p. 78.
assurance of it: for, though it is true that God never unpardons (as I may
say) a pardoned Sinner, nor repeals or repents his gracious act; yet we may and
ought to pray, that the sins we daily commit may be actually pardoned, (for
actually pardoned they cannot be, till actually committed, though there may be
a foundation for pardon, laid in the soul, before the sin be committed): this
is (as it were) daily bathing and washing our selves in the fountain which God
Zech 13. 1
has set open for Judah and Jerusalem to wash in for sin and for uncleanness,
from our pollutions daily contracted: besides we are to pray for the continued
and increased sense of pardon: its certain, God may let conscience fly in our
faces, and it may be with a soul once truly pardoned, as if it were not
pardoned, as to its own sense and seeling. What need therefore to pray for the
lively sense, and fuller evidences of this mercy? In that Parable Matthew. 18.
36. there may s^em an intimation as if God would reverse a pardon once given;
but we must remember that Parables are only argumentative and of force to
prove, as to their main scope, which, in that, is to show how God deals with
those that forgive not their Brethren; yet it is certain God may reverse the
sense of pardon, and draw a cloud betwixt himself and us, (witness many
expressions in Psalm. 89. 30. 3^.
Psalm. 32. 38. 51. 77. 88. etc. Yea, not withstanding the remission of sin as
to the eternal punishment, yet he may both let fall sparks of wrath into the
conscience, and lash his people with temporal punishments. 2 Samuel 12. 13. 14.
Psalm. 99. 8. (for God no where ^es his own hands in this case) therefore we
have need upon these accounts to beg pardon, that God will not call our sins to
remembrance, nor cause as (as he did Job Chapt. 13. 26. to possess the
iniquities of our youth: yea (to go a step further) we have need to beg pardon
and the continuance of it (I mean as to temporal judgments) in reference to our
children and posterity, on whose backs God often lasheth his own children:
sometimes, by giving up their children to lewd and wicked conrses, so that they
become a grief of heart, and consumption of the ayes to their parents;
Sometimes, by inflicting misery, poverty, war, sickness etc. upon them for
some miscarriages of their Parents (though not without their own also).
Instances of both cases are obvious. Who doubts, but Gods giving up Amnon to
deflour his Sister, and Absalom to contrive the death of his Father, were rods
wherewith God l^s^^ David (though he had pardoned his sin as to eternal
punishment 2 Samuel 12. 13) for his adultery and murder in the buisness of Vrish?
and the falling off of the Ten Tribes from Rehoboam with the bloody wars and
others miseries attending thereon, were undoubtedly a punishment of Solomon's
falling away from the true God The Milevit Council: Can. 7. and 8.
Anathematizeth those that say this Petition concerns Sinners, and not Saints:
or that Saints say it humiliter non veraciter.
to Idolatry: so that in this respect we should beg pardon, that is, the
aversion of temporal punishments from our selves and posterity, which I hope I
may fitly call pardon, though not in the strict and proper The logical
acceptance of the Word. Well, this I have h^^ted, to show in what sense, and
in what respects, even the pardoned sinner may beg pardon: The rather because
some have thought this a Petition fit for sinners to put up, not for Saints:
and that for those who are pardoned, to beg pardon, is but a mocking God: But
there is yet a fourth Particular included in this Petion under Forgiveness* and
that is,

4. The completing act of God, whereby he will publicly justify and acquit
us before the whole World at the great day; the hastening of this we are to
pray for: To give you the words of a Reverend Author. Ames. Med. Theol. l. 1.
c. 17. S. 25.
[ Vt executio illius sententiae, quae in ipsa justificatione est pronunciata,
maturari p^ssit and promoveri.] That the execution of that Sentence which is
pronounced in justification may be ripened (or ha^^ed) and promoted: by which,
if I mistake not, he means that which I have already expressed, viz. the
solemn, final, and public sentence of Absolution, which God will pronounce to
all those that shall be found in Christ: that, is the Maturation, the full Corn
in the Ear, the Top-stone. True, our prayers cannot hasten it toward us, but
in our prayers and preparations we may hasten toward it, in the sense of that
Text, 2 Pet. 3. 12. We cannot hasten Christ's second coming, yet we may in
imitation of the Apostle say, Come Rev. 22. 20.
Lord Jesus: and surely that public absolution is a desirable merey, that,
what we See Ball of Faith. p. 105, 106.
have in the sense of the Gospel Law, by the private certification of God's
Spirit to ours, we may have in the Sentence of the Judge, solemnly pronounced
in the face of the whole world; this being the Top-stone of that Fabric of
mercy which reaches to the Heavens, concerning the matter of this Petition, or
things begged: Other Petitions, included in this general, relate to the means
whereby this forgiveness is to be obtained, for (as we heard) each Petition,
together with the thing, includes the means for the obtaining it.

2. Therefore, there are Petitions included as to the means of pardon:
principally,

1. We are to pray for a deep sense of sin, and for sorrow, and sound
humiliation; this being a qualification to which pardon is promised. Pray for
that Repentance upon which the b^^^^ing out of sin is promised, Acts 3. 19. The
fruits whereof are described 2 Cor. 7. 10, 11. Plead the promise, Zech. 12. 10
and that Ezekiel. 36. 26. Pour out Jeremy's wish, Chap. 9. 1. That it may be so
with you in reference to your sins: that you may be as Doves of the Valleys,
mourning for your iniquities, Ezekiel. 7. 16. God gives one Gift, and crowns it
with another, Repentance with Remission, Acts 5. 31. We must therefore pray for
one in order to the obtaining of the other.

2. That God will give us faith, that we may apply and lay hold on the
righteousness of Christ for our Justification. This is an absolutely necessary
means in order to forgiveness, John 3. 19, 36. He that believes not, is
condemned already: the wrath of God abides on him. Beg therefore with all
carnestness the gift of faith, the exercise and increase of it, in the language
of the Apostles, Luke 17. 5. The Merits and Satisfaction of Christ are the only
meritorious cause of pardon, these are ineffectual to us without faith: this
faith is the gift of God, Ephesians. 2. 8. therefore to be asked of God, in order to
pardon: Therefore be importunate with God for the Spirit of Grace, to work this
Grace, and stir it up in you, that so you may be, according to the tenor of
the Gospel Covenant, capable subjects of forgiveness.

3. Beg also (that which is the condition expressed in the Petition) a
forgiving reconcilable frame of Spirit toward those that injure or offend you:
this is ((...) in the sense explained) a qualification requisite in him that
expects forgiveness from God: and from such a frame, a man may comfortably
conclude himself pardoned of God, since the promise is made to it, Matthew. 6.
14. Pray that God will root out of your hearts all principles of malice,
hatred, and revengefulness; that the Spirit in you which lusts to envy, James
4. 5. may be mortified, that you may put on bowels of mercy -- forbearing and
forgiving one another, Col. 3. 12, 13. That you may be merciful, as your
heavenly Father is merciful; and the same mind may be in you, that was in
Christ Jesus.

Direct. 2. Get a frame suitable to this Petition: It is easy and ordinary to
pray thus in a formal manner, but to have a frame suited to this prayer, is not
so easy. It chiefly consists,

1. In a kindly sense, and deep humiliation for sin: The soul that comes to beg
forgiveness, must be affected with the number, weight, and hainousness of its
sins, the sad effects of them, as the dishonor and displeasure of God, the
reproach of Religion, injury to others, the hardening our hearts, the ruin and
damnation of our souls, etc. The heart must be filled with such things as were
sound in the Corintbians upon their repentance, 2 Co^. 7. 10, 11. That so our
prayers for pardon may be the very sense of our souls, and the deep groanings
of our Spirits. He that is not sensible of his offense, and the ^ainousness of
it, will not heartily beg forg venese.

2. In an earnest hungring and panting after peace and reconciliation with God,
and after the light of his countenance: Such a frame as the Psalmist's, Psalm.
42. 12. and 63* ^. -- not an easy or slight desire, but such as Rachel's for
children, that cannot be satisfied without it: such as David's for Water of the
Well of Bethlehem. This frame well be seems those that come for such a mercy*
resolve to lie at God's door, that nothing shall take you off your suit, that
though God should throw you off, you will catch hold and not let him go, till
he thus bless you; but that (like the Woman of Canaan) you will follow him with
renewed arguments, and greates importunity: with such a frame should we beg
forgiveness.

3. In a resolution against sin for the suture, loathing your selves for what
you have done amiss, and purposing, through Grace, to sin no more. Bespeak God
in the language of Job, Chap. 34. 32. Woa^ I know not, teach thou me; and if I
have done iniquity, I will do so no more. And Chap. 42. 5. I abhor my self in
dust and ashes. Think not that you come to beg leave to sin again* nor let it
be with you as with the Harlot, Prove. 7. 14. who because she had
peace-^fferings with her, and had that day paid her vows; therefore begins upon
a new score, and presumes to sin afresh: he that begs forgiveness with a
purpose to go on in his sin, mocks God, and deceives his own soul: As if R^bels
should come to their Sovereign, and beg his pardon, and then presently take up
their Weapons, and renew their Rebellion; Would not such a carriage aggravate
their Rebellion? Oh, think how injuriously we deal with God in this respect,
how often we beg pardon, and are not resolved to forsake the sin; nay, rather
resolve to go on in it. What more notorious hypocrisy can we be guilty of?

4. In a charitable forgiving frame even toward our worst enemies: actually
forgiving them, so far as it is our private concernment: this is necessary,
since it is the express condition here. What do we then, but beg, not to be
forgiven, while we harbor malicious and revengeful thoughts toward our
Brethren? What impudence is it, to pray this Petition with an uncharitable
heart? Nay, it is a plain imprecation of revenge upon our own heads: Nor will
it serve turn, to say as some do, I will forgive, but never forget. God's
forgiving is in Scripture language, a forgetting, or not remembering, Isa. 43.
25. Jer. 31. 34. Heb. 8. 12. And such must ours be, if we expect forgiveness at
the hands of God: We must so forget, as neither to show any signs of malice, or
withhold any offices of love we can do for our Brother: and here I cannot but
take notice of the simplicity of some people, that think they may (like the
Salamander) live in the fire of contention and malice all their lives, if they
be but in charity when they go to a Sacrament, or when they are going out of
the world: Alas, poor souls, you deceive your selves; a charitable frame is as
necessary in prayer: you must lift up holy bands without wrath: 1 Timothy 2. 8.
You must be reconciled to your adversary, Mat. 5. 25.
before you offer your gift. Purposes of revenging your selves, turn your
Petitions for pardon, into imprecations of revenge upon your own heads;
Consider and Tremble. So much for this fifth Petition: I now proceed to the
sixth and last.

CHAP. IX.
VI. PETITION.
And lead us not into Temptation, but deliver us from evil.
THe former Petition, was for Justification, this for Sanctification and
Conservation; both together include the Complete Means in order to Salvation.
The words would require a more copious handling, than the limits of an hours
Discourse will admit. I shall be as concise as I can, singling out what I
conceive most necessary to be spoken, and most tending to my proposed end.

Some make two Petitions of this, and so reckon seven in the whole; but I shall
follow those who make it one Petition in two Branches:

1. Negative, Lead us not -- 2. Positive, But, deliver us from evil.
Temptation] The word (...), and the Latin Tentatio, properly signify a trial
or probation: So the Hebrew word M^ssa^, Exodus 17. 7. from (...), which
signifies to tempt, try, or prove, Deuteronomy. 8. 2. 16. But the E^ymologie of the
word will not afford us light^ enough to understand its meaning: Let us
therefore consider the thing it self: We may distinguish of Temptations two
ways.

1. From the Author, and so they are either,

1. Divine, Such as God is Author of, Genesis 22. 1.

2. Humane, such as are managed by men whether toward God, Exodus 17. 7. or men,
Luke 10 25. Or,

3. Diabolical, whereof the Devil is Author, 1 Chronicles. 21. 1. who is called*
(...). The Tempter, Matthew. 4. 3. 1 Thessalonians. 3. 5. Sometimes there may be a
concurrence, as 2 Samuel 24. 1. with 1 Chronicles. 21. 1.

2. From the End; and so they are either,

1. Of Trial or Probation, Deuteronomy. 8. 2, 16. Genesis 22. 1. 2 Chronicles. 32 31. Thus
sometimes our faith and other graces, sometimes our corruptions are tried.

2. Of Punishment or Correction: such was David's, 2 Samuel 24. 1. and
Hezechiah^^ 2 Chronicles. 32. 25. with 31.

3. Of Seduction, to draw into sin: thus properly Satan tempts: it is his
design to draw us into sin; he by the false Prophets persuaded Ahab to run upon
his own ruin, 1 Kings 22. 20. and David to number the people, 1 Chronicles. 21. 1.
So he endeavored to draw our blessed Savior to Unbelief and Covetousness, and
unwarrantable attempts, Matthew. 4. he is the grand Fowler, lays snares, studies
the tempers and dispositions of men, that he may fit his baits to their Palats,
1 Pet. 5. 8, 9. In the two former kinds, God has a hand, but never in the
last, Jam. 1. 13. God tempts no man. Which of these is here meant, will
appear in the Explication of the next words.

[ Lead us not] (...): We are not to understand it of any active force or
violence; not, as if God constrained or compelled us; nor, on the other hand,
does it imply a bare permission; but, according to the three forts of
Temptations, it admits a threefold sense.

1. As to the Temptations of trial or probation: Lead us not -- is not, that we
should pray simply and absolutely to be kept from them. We may not so pray:
because such temptations may be, and often are for the great good of those that
are so tempted, Deuteronomy. 8. 16. That he might prove thee to do 1 Pet. 1. 7 Job 23.
10.
thee good at thy latter end. How much did Abraham's trial tend to his
advantage, as tending to the improvement of his faith and experience, etc. But
the sense (as to those temptations) may be this, Lord, if thou do try me by
thy Commands or Providence, or any other way; let me not miscarry under the
trial: let not my corruptions break out, but let my Graces shine forth: let the
trial of my faith (or other Graces) though by fire, be found to praise and
glory and honor at the appearing of Jesus Christ: and when I am tried, let me
come forth as Gold. The Reason of the sense is obvious in the connection of the
parts of the Petition: The l^tter part is limitation or exegetical intimation
how (...) we pray against Temptation; viz. not (...) lutely, but so far as it
is an evil. Now try als are only evil, so far as they draw (...) corruption, or
are occasions of sin; an^ therefore only so far to be prayed against.

2. As to the second fort, viz. Tempta^^ons of punishment or correction, the
(...) may be this: Do not for the punishment one sin, leave us to be tempted to
fall (...) another: It is God's way often to (...) sin thus even in his own
people; as it apparent in the cases of David's (...) the people, and of
H^zekiah in the (...) of the Embassedors of the Princes of Babyl^^ Hos. 8. 11.
Ephraim made many Altars sin, and Altars shall be unto him to sin, (...) I will
give him his fill of what he lo^^ (...) (says the Septuagint) they (...) be
loved by him (a dreadful judgment (...) for the punishment of sin God gives us
(...) to love it and delight in it) or as (...) Versions read it [ erunt ei in
delictum] (...) shall be a charge standing against him, [ in ruinam] for his
falling or stumblin^ that is, They shall be snares to entrap hi^ and draw him
into sin, and so into dest^ction: The sense of the Text seems to^ this, that as
Ephraim had sinned by Alta^ so he should have his fill of them, (...) would
give him up to an insatiable greedin^ after them: This we may and should
earnest^ pray against, as being the worst of temp^^tions: and this sense fairly
corresponds with the former Petition, q. d. Forgive us ^ur sins, and do not
punish for one sin by ^iving us up to the same, or to any other (...).

3. As to the third sort: viz. those of Se^^ction, Lead us not -- implies more
^^an a bare permission: for though it is most ^ertain that God neither seduces
nor intends (...) seduce any into sin Jam. 1. 13. yet God (...) present those
occasions (good in themselves) which may draw out our corrup^^ons, and may be
stones of stumbling to us: ^o that (as to these temptations) the sense (...) be
thus much: O Lord, I beseech thee either to deliver me over to Satan and his
^nstruments or my own heart, to be tempt^d and overcome by them, nor to
present (...) my corruptions those things and occasions which thou know will
draw me into sin, which will be as sparks to the tinder, or ^^tch to the
powder, especially when we (...) in a posture fit to take fire at them. It Is
(...) of Augustine, that he used to bless God ^^at when he had a heart to sin,
he had no ^^mptation or occasion, and when he had a ^^mptation he had no heart:
so, we are to (...) that the fire and Sulphur may be kept ^under, left all be
in a flame. Add this more (...) reference to all the kinds of Temptation, ^^at
we are not absolutely to pray against (...) very temptation, that we may be
kept from it; but that we may not be hurt o^ overcome by it: To be without
Temptation, while on earth, is impossible; never to be overcome by temptations
is to be desired, but can scarcely be expected; but though we be often tempted,
and sometimes foiled by it, yet that we may finally overcome, that we may not
so fall by or under a temptation, but that we may rise again, and recover our
selves; is, and should be, the request and carnest Petition of every pious
soul, in compliance with this: more will be said to this in the Application.

[ But deliver us from evill] (...), Pull or pluck us from it, the word imports
strength and violence: 2 Timothy 4. 17. (...), I was delivered, (violently pulled)
out of the mouth of the Lion: the word may intimate both a forcible holding of
us, by some external power, and an unwillingness in us to come out of
temptation without pulling* like that Jude 23. (...) pulling them out of the
fire with haste and violence, as being of themselves unable or unwilling to
come out:

[ From evil] (...). Its not worth the enquiring whether it be meant of the 1
John 5. 18.
Evil one, who is called some where (...) to* wit the Devil* or the evil thing,
Sin: both may well be understood. Augustine understands it [ de omni malo
praesenti and future] of all evil present and future. And in so short and
comprehensive a prayer it is rational to take the words in their greatest
latitude: yet the evil of punishment being deprecated in the former Petition,
we may most properly understand here the evil of sin, to which ^he evil one,
Satan, does tempt and en^ice us, and especially the malignity of temp^^tion,
and the poison and tincture of it. Now for the Doctrine.

Doctr. 11. To be kept from or delivered out of temptation, and preserved from
the evil of it, is a mercy to be earnestly begged of God by prayer. To enlarge
in proof is unnecessary, we have our Savior's precept, Matthew. 26. 41. Watch
and pray that ye enter ^ot into temptation, and David's pr^ct^se Psalm. 19 13.
Keep back thy servant from presump^uous sins, let them not have dominion over
me. A Reason or two, will be sufficient.

1. Reas. This is therefore to be prayed for, (...) having respect to, and
influence upon, all the foregoing Petitions. Can we sanctify Gods name while we
are under the power of Satan? Or what more ordinary temptations, does Satan
manage against us, than to dishonor, blaspheme, or some way or other blemish
the Name and honor of God? or what greater occasion have we of hallowing Gods
name than when we are kept from, or enabled to withstand Sathan's temptations?
How did God glorify himself, by supporting and delivering Job, when the Devil
was let loose upon him? Again, When does Gods Kingdom come, but when we are
delivered from Satan's power, who exerts his power mainly by temptations? So
that in praying for deliverance from Temptations we pray in effect for the
coming of Gods Kingdom. Moreover as to the doing of Gods will, how can it be
done while we are led captive by Satan at his Will? Luke 1. 75. When we are
delivered from the hands of our enemies, then shall we serve God in
righteousness and holiness. And as to our daily bread, and all outward comforts
and enjoyments, having begged them, what need have we to subjoin [ and lead us
not into temptation?] since we find by sad experience that our corrupt hearts
are apt to make them fuel for lust, and that the D^vel often lies in ambush
behind our lawful enjoyments, making our Table a snare; and that which should
be our welfare a trap? Each condition has its temptations, Prove. 30. 8, 9. we
have need therefore to fear and pray against them; David and Solomon, and
Hezekiah were ensnared by prosperity etc. Then, how suitably this is subjoyned
to the foregoing Petition, is easily discernable; for what good will pardon of
sin past do us, without power against it for the future? how soon shall we run
upon a new score? when God has said to the pardoned soul (as to the impotent
man John 5. 14. when cured) Go thy way, sin no more lest a worse thing come
unto thee, what need have we to pray for grace that we may not return to our
vomit, that we may be kept back from presumptuous sins?

Thus we see how necessary this Petition is as a supplement to all the former.

2. We are therefore to seek this mercy at Gods hand by prayer, because, who
ever the Instrument be, whether man, or Devil, or our own hearts that manage
the temptation against us, God is the suprem orderer of it: he lets out or
restrains, he enables us to conquer or suffers us to be conquered, no
temptation befalls us, but for the kind, manner, time, and all other
circumstances it is disposed by God: The Devil could not tempt Job, David or
Judas without Gods permission or commission, not could he overcome any if God
did not in Justice leave them in his power. To whom therefore should we address
our selves in this case but to that God who is both able and merciful and
faithful? He has the key of man's heart, and can so shut and fortify it, that
the Devil with all his batteries or flatteries, can make no entry or
impression: Nothing in this case can be done without his permission and
ordination.

Use. Pray according to this pattern: Be humbly importunate to be kept, if not
from temptations yet, from the evil of them: make this as well as the former
Petitions, your earnest suit to God.

Mot. 1. Temptations will certainly and unavoidably come, it is impossible to be
in the world, and not be tempted: he that thinks (if any be so sottish to think
so) that he never was, nor shall be tempted, is under the saddest temptation:
Such a soul (like the men of Laish Judge. 18. 7.) dwells careless, quiet, and
secure, and lies open to invasion and destruction. To pray against temptations
is not to pray against a thing that possibly or probably may come, but
certainly will come; nay, if thou art an experienced watchful Christian, I
doubt not but thou will acknowledge that thou art attempted with daily and
hourly temptations; What need then, considering thy weakness, and corrupt
inclinations, daily to pray this Petition?

2. Then thy temptations become thy sins when they are not heartily and
earnestly prayed against. He that will not open his mouth to call for help,
it is presumed is willing to be overcome: Deuteronomy. 22. 23, 24. The betrothed D^msel
that is forced in the City, must be stoned; because it is supposed she cried
not out for help; and therefore there was, on her part, some kind of
willingness or yielding. We are always, as it were, in the City, that is,
within the reach of God; He is always within hearing, Who is our City of
refuge; therefore, our not crying for help will be an interpretative
willingness to be overcome by the Temptation: Nor only when we are actually
tempted, but at all times it is needful to pray this Petition; we are never out
of harms way, and commonly never nearer a temptation, than when we think our
selves furthest from it. There is no time when our enemies are at rest, and
therefore we should give God no rest, but be daily committing our selves to his
care and custody: That temptation is either not at all thy sin* or, if thine,
nothing so heinous, against which thou have importuned Gods assistance.

3. Fervent and faithful prayer against temptations will either keep them from
thee, or thee from the evil of them; 'twill turn that into Physic which was
intended as poison: When a temptation is upon thee, it will either procure a
removal of it, or sufficiency of grace to withstand and improve it, 2 Cor. 12.
7, 9. How often have the saddest temptations, when prayed against, made way for
the sweetest comforts? Even temptations are sanctified by prayer, and those
waters of Marah made wholesome: God never was, never will be, wanting to come in
seasonably to their ressue, who in a deep sense of their own danger and
impo^e^cy do inportunately call upon him.

Direct. 1. Understand what is included and employed in this Petition: And here,

1. For acknowledgments; there are employed especially these four things.

1. That we are subject to daily and continual temptations, beset with snares
and enemies. The Devil like a roaring Lion -- 1 Pet. 5. 8, 9. the world with
its fawning flatteries, frowning threats and injuries, entangling cares, and
perplexities Luk 21. 34. and our own corruptions Jam. 1. 14. are continually
assault^^ng and ensnaring us. Here we may take up David's words Psalm. 40. 12.
Innumerable evils compass me about: and many of those passages which he uses in
reference to his enemies, we may spiritually apply hither. It Is easy to
amplify, in reckoning up the several sorts of temptations wherewith our selves
and others have been assaulted, or lie open to, and the great danger we are
continually exposed to; and if Christ himself was assaulted we have no reason
to expect freedom from them.

2. That God may justly leave us to be overcome by them, to fall into, and fall
by them: that we have that in us for which God may justly give us up, as he did
David and H^zekiah. Here again is matter to amplify upon, in confessing how
often we have given Satan advantage, by coming upon his ground, by letting
down our watch, and laying open our naked breasts to receive his fiery darts;
by quenching Gods Spirit, and yielding to Sathan's injections, by being
adventurous and presumptuous in our own strength: that it might be just with
God to give us up to one sin, as a just punishment for another.

3. That, of our selves, we are both unable and unwilling to resist temptation:
we may say as Jehoshaphat, 2 Chronicles. 20. 12. We have no power against this great
multitude: that our hearts are like tinder, flax, or powder, very fit and
combustible matter for Sathan's fiery temptations to take hold on; that our
earnal minds are so strongly inelined, our wills so violent and headstrong,
that the least spark is enough to set on fire the whole course of nature: how
infinitely may we enlarge here! bewayling that we are so wise to do evil, so
easily drawn by Satan, our hearts so receptive of his impressions; and that
when we have once suffered our selves to be captivated, and our eyes put out,
we are so far from being able to deliver our selves, that we are not willing to
be delivered; but rather choose to have our ear boared and nailed to Satan's
door, and continue his vassails.

4. That the ordering of all Temptations is in Gods hand; that it is in his
power to deliver us from, support us under, and carry us through, every
temptation: which we may allusively express in the words of Asa 2 Chronicles. 14.
11. acknowledging him the God of Salvations, to whom belong the issues from
Death, Psalm. 68. 20. He having promised to tread Satan under our feet Romans 16.
20. So that though we have not only flesh and blood to encounter, but
principalities, and powers, the rulers of the darkness of this world, and
spiritual wickednesses in high places, yet he is far above them in power,
having the Devils in a chain, at his beck etc. That though none can deliver out
of his hand, yet he can deliver us out of any other's hand whatsoever.

2. The Petitions included (at least the principal of them) take in these
particulars.

1 In conformity to this Petition, we may pray that (so far as it may consist
with the will and wisdom of God, and with our spiritual and eternal good) he
will keep us from temptations, especially of Punishment and Seduction: this we
may pray with submission* This is the import of that (so often mentioned)
Petition of Agur, Prove. 30. 8, 9. And what he prays as to the extremes of
riches and poverty, we may apply to other like cases: as for instance: Let me
neither have that fullness of joy, that may make me wanton, or neglective of
duty; nor let me want those necessary supports and comforts, which may carry me
through the many difficulties and discouragements, which I am to encounter in
my passage through the world. We may pray that God will so order his
providence, so dispense or withdraw his blessings, as may least tend to draw
out our corruptions. This is much of that which is meant by leading into
Temptations, viz. so ordering his disposals of us, and dispensations to us, as
that thereby fuel is administered to our corruptions; this therefore we may pray
against.

2. That he will tie and limit S^than, if not wholly, yet so far, that the
precious promise 1 Cor. 10. 13. may be made good, viz. that he will not suffer
you to be tempted above that you are able; And so for inward corruptions, and
the bait and snares of the world, that you may have Interest in that sweet
intercessory Petition of our blessed Savior, John 17. 15. I pray not that thou
should take them out of the world, but that thou would keep them from the
evil^ that he will so restrain our enemies, and so strengthen and sortify us,
that we may have cause to take up that gratulatory Psalm viz. 124th. that,
though Satan or his Instruments may be permitted to make attempts upon us, as
Senacherib against Judah; and the Syrians against Samaria; yet they may have a
hook put in their nosthrils, and return with shame and disappointment: in a
word; That the wicked one may not touch us in the sense of that Text 1 John 5.
18. that is Letaliter, with a deadly touch, or as some [ tactu qualitativo]
with such a touch as may leave an impression of his own divelish Spirit upon
us; such a touch as the needle has from the Loadstone.

3. That he will not withdraw from us in our trials and conflicts; that, if he
call us to fight, he will stand by and encourage us: To be led into temptation
is no great matter, if we be not left in it; and indeed we are never to purpose
led into it, t^ll we be left in it: till God deal with us as with Judas and
Saul, suffer Satan to fill our hearts: this therefore we have need to be
earnest for, that, if Satan must winnow us, our Savior may so intercede for
us that our Luke 22. 31, 32. 2 Cor. 12 9
faith may not fail; if the messenger of Satan must buffer us, the grace of
God may be sufficient for us: Though we cannot peremptorily and absolutely pray
for Victory over every temptation, since we neither know what God has decreed,
nor how far, a foil for a time may advantage us afterward.

4. That he will keep us from running our selves into temptations: this is both
necessary in it self, and doubtless employed in this Petition: though there were
no outward Tempter, no World or Devil, yet our own hearts would be, and indeed
are, our worst Tempters, in many cases our temptations are home-born, though
nursed by Satan: for Instance, when troubles arise for the profession of the
Truth, and we cannot own some Truth of God but we must expose our selves to
hardships and sufferings; how do men act the part of the Tempter upon
themselves? how do our carnal hearts bespeak us in the language of Peter to our
Savior, Master, spare thy self, this shall not be unto thee? What distinctions
and evasions do we study, to escape suffering? While we should be studying duty
and preparing for danger, we are studying to escape the latter, by declining
and shaking off the former; Like Jonah, when he foresaw that he was sent upon a
troublesome and dangerous embassy, he out-runs the work to avoid the trouble:
Pray then that we may not be left to our selves as the Jews Psam. 81. 11. Then
we shall be sure to be our own Tempters.

5. That in those temptations of probation which himself pleases to exercise
us withal, he will enable us to carry as Christians: showing forth our graces,
that we may (like Abraham) if tried, by faith offer up our Isaacs Hebr. 11. 15.
that our patience may shine as Job's did through the clouds of temptation and
affliction; that we may not sin with our mouths or charge God foolishly. How
shamefully do we miscarry when God leaves us, as David and Hezekiah? how shall
we dishonor God, blemish the Gospel, cause the enemy to blaspheme through our
misdemeanors; if the Lord, who lays the trial upon us, do not stand by us in
it, and teach us how to carry under it? Therefore pray, Lord if thou will prove
us, help us that we may approve our selves: If thou will exercise us with
Temptations, fortify us with grace, that the issue of the trial may be thy
glory, and our comfort: If thou try us by prosperity, keep us humble, and
obedient; if by adversity, keep us from despondency, indirect actings, theft,
maligning others, etc.

6. That, if in his infinite wisdom he see it good at any time to suffer us to
be foiled, and leave us to our own weakness for our humiliation, or for other
good and gracious ends; he will not leave us wholly and finally, that it may be
with us as is prophesyed of Gad Genesis 49. 19. A troop shall overcome him, but he
shall overcome at last: That though he chasten us, he will not give us over to
death, but at last restore to us the joy of his Salvation, and stablish us with
his free Spirit: That, with Sampson, we may at last be avenged of our enemies:
that though we fall yet we may not be utterly cast down, but may be at last
more then conquerours through him that loved us, and gave himself for us.

7. That in stead of those things which may prove snares and temptations to
us, he would so order all his dispensations to us as they may incite us to
holiness, this is the contrary employed in this Petition: q. d. Lord, in stead
of Satan standing at my right hand to tempt me, let me have thy good Spirit
always egging and urging me to that which is good; in stead of the wicked
enticeing or discouraging me, let me have thy Saints, by their friendly
reproofs, counsels, exhortations and examples, provoking me to holiness, let
the righteous smite me, it shall be a kindness, and let him reproove me, it
shall be an excellent oil which shall not break my head Psalm. 141. 5. In stead
of that measure of outward which may be a snare, let me have that which shall
be a spur to piety: In a word, Let me have such Ordinances, such providence,
let me be in such company, in such a condition, so order all things about me,
that thy work within me may go on with power, and all things may concur and
(according to that great promise Romans 8. 28.) work together for my good.

8. That he will appoint a good issue of all temptations that befall us
according to that promise 1 Cor. 10. 13. that he will with the temptation also
make a way to escape, that we way be able to bear it, that he will so limit our
temptations, as to measure and continuance, that we be not tempted more or
longer than is for our good, and so issue them at last that we may come out as
Job, and we may have double at our latter end (as to grace and comfort) to what
we had at the beginning; and that at last he will so deliver us from them, as
that we may be set out of the reach of them, being translated into that state
where Satan shall not be able to tempt us any more: this is the highest round
of this ladder, and then both parts of the Petition shall be fulfilled; then
shall we be fully delivered from all evil, and shall soon forget all our sad
conflicts, all our tears, and sighs, and earnest cries in the days of our
fears and temptations, when we have once the Crown of glory set upon our heads,
and the Palms of Victory put into our hands.

Direct. 2. But then that we may prevailingly pray this Petition our Spirits
must be suited thereunto; we must (in this sense) pray with the Spirit, as well
as with our Understanding: therefore,

1. Come to God under a deep sense, and through conviction of our own inability
to resist, and propensity to run into Temptation: as also of our sins for which
God might in justice leave us, and give us up to it: Oh labor to see and feel
your slavery, Epectet. Enchirid. Cap. 65.
how prone you are upon all occasions, emergencies and providence, to run upon
that which tends to your everlasting ruin; how apt to take every thing (that I
may allude to that of the S^o^ck) by the worse handle, and rather abase it
toyou^ hurt, than improve it for your good: Till our hearts be thus affected,
we shall never to purpose pray this Petition: it is not only a sense of misery,
but of our utter inability to help our selves, that will open our mouths wide
in prayer: Till we see our selves, as the Isralites at the Red sea, so
surrounded, that there is no hope of escaping, so entangled and fettred that we
cannot possibly extricate our selves, we shall never heartily and earnestly
pray. Lead us not into temptation etc.

2. Get your hearts under a persuasion of the goodness, power, and faithfulness
of God, and under a firm belief of those many gracious promises which hold
forth succor, relief and comfort to the tempted: be fully persuaded, that God
both can and will help, since he never failed one way or other to rescue the
soul that sincerely sought him: That the weakest unworthiest Christian betaking
himself under his power and protection, shall have seasonable succor, and
deliverance; to which purpose that Psalm. 91. is sweet and suitable both to
meditate upon, and to plead with God: This persuasion is necessary in asking
any thing at Gods hand Jam. 1. 6. But I the rather propose it here, because
under some kind of temptations we are so averse to believe; ready to say, There
is no hope, that (as the Eunuchs Isa. 56. 3.) we are a dry tree, and (as the
Isralites Ezekiel. 37. 11.) our bones are dried, and our hopes is lost, and we are
cut off for our parts. Which of the Saints have not flag'd and fainted under
some kind of temptations? read Psalm. 73. 77, 88. It Is no easy matter to act
faith upon the promises, when we see a contrary series of providence, how
hardly was Moses credited that deliverance was so nigh when the bricks were
doubled? And at the Red Sea, how little impression did that word, Stand still
and see the Salvation of the Lord, probably make upon many of their hearts,
when they saw nothing but imminent destruction before their eyes? But that we
may rightly pray for deliverance, when under temptation, we must labor to hope
against hope, and to believe light shall arise when we see nothing but
darkness: Faith in the promises exercised in prayer is a singular means to
engage Gods power on our behalf for our support and deliverance under and from
temptations.

3. Get a frame of heart full of holy jealousy and self-suspicion, fearing and
declining occasions and temptations which lead us into sin: it is a flat
contradiction to this Petition when we pray Lead us not -- and yet wilfully
throw our selves into temptation: neither have we a promise, or scarce a
president of any preserved from temptations, which through their own negligence
or wilfulness they have run upon: It Is a good observation of one upon that Act.
2. 40. Save our selves -- That God will not save those, that do not endeavor
to save themselves. Practice up therefore to this Petition; never think or
expect that God will give you such a preservative that shall secure you from
the poison of temptation, though you run into any infected and infecting Air
or Company: the precept is, Watch, as well as Pray that you enter not into
temptation, Luke 22. 40. It Is in vain to disjoin these duties which God has
united: prayer without watching is presumption, and watching without prayer is
self-confidence. Happy and safe is that soul that sincerely practices them in
conjunction; we must as cautelously shun occasions, as if all lay upon our
care, and yet as earnestly pray for preservation, as if all our endeavors were
(as indeed they are) nothing at all: Then may we hopefully conclude we shall he
kept from temptation, when in our utmost endeavors to keep our selves we
entrust our selves in Gods hand, and commit our selves to his keeping: With
such a frame therefore, must we come to God.

4. And (which is common to all the rest of the Petitions, and therefore I
would have you subjoin it to each, though I only name it here) with a frame of
spirit full of hearty desires toward others: As we should go to God as a
common Father, so our prayers should be common prayers; others as well as our
selves should be interessed in what we pray for, according to their
necessities; but of this the Preface gave us occasion to speak. Thus I have
done with the body of this complete pattern of prayer: there remains only the
conclusion, which I shall briefly touch upon as having already performed what I
mainly intended.

CHAP. X.
THE CONCLUSION.
For, thine is the Kingdom, and the* power, and the glory for ever, Amen.
WE are now come to the third general in this prayer, which is the Conclusion;
consisting of, 1. A Doxology, or ascription of praise; wherein three things are
acknowledged as belonging to God: A concluding Sealing word common to all
prayers, Amen: Besides, The connexive particle [ for] which is here
Aetiological, showing a reason why we have asked all these things of God, is
remarkable:

I intend not a full handling of it. Whether it was added by our Savior, or
crept in afterward being borrowed from the 1 Chronicles. 29. 11. is a question yet
undetermined: And Daniel 7. 14. says usher.
Erasmus his censure is harsh, who not content to deny it to be of our
Savior's addition, is pleased to say, that they that added it, did [ Divinae
Precationi suas nugas assuere] patch the Lord's prayer with their trifles:
Scultetus (as one quotes him) Seconds Erasmus; telling us, that it is not in
some of the Ancientest Greek Copies, nor in the Arabic version, nor in any of
the Latin Translations: that it is expounded by none, but by the Vulgar and
Chrysostom; and therefore thinks it probable, that it was added by the solemn
custom of the Greeks, and afterward transferred into the Text: yet the
Affirmative wants not its usher Sum and subst. of Christian Relig. P. 378.
Patrones. One (and that one in stead of many) is peremptory for its divine
authority; says, It is causelessly and without warrant omitted by the Church of
Rome; nay he calls it sacrilege in them that steal away this Thanksgiving from
prayer, as if it were no part of it:

Another tells us, that one Greek Copy Lucae Brugensis, Var: Lection:
omits it, one Latin Copy has it; That the Greek Fathers Chrysostom,
Theophylact, Euthymius, and the Author of the imperfect work on Matthew, assert
it; the Latin Fathers Tertullian, Cyprian, Hierom, Ambrose, Augustine, and
others following them omit it, himself leaves it doubtful: I shall only give
you the Reasons of a late Writer for its authentickness.

1. Without it, this pattern had been deficient. Leigh's Annotations:


2. The Greek Copies have it.

3. The Syriack Paraphrast translates it,

4. Chrysostom and Theophylact expound it: which Reasons methinks seem
sufficient to beget at least a probable persuasion of its divine Authority: I
shall acquiesee in these* together with the peremptory assertion of that
aboye-mentioned Reverend and Judicious usher. See also Ward on Matthew largly
disp^^ing the Case.
Author, whose judgment methinks might sway much with the contrary-minded: I
conclude therefore that it is of divine authority, and if not added by our
Savior (which I think most probable); yet at least borrowed from the
forementioned Texts Dan. 7. 14. 1 Chronicles. 29. 11.

We may look on the words, 1. In their respective consideration to the whole
body of the prayer, 2. In their absolute consideration; and in each they would
afford us several Lessons; in the bare naming whereof, I shall content my self:

The words then as connected with the former are an argument enforcing the
Petitions, Thence observe,

Doct. 1. Our prayers should be backed and strengthened with arguments.

Doct. 2. Our arguments should be drawn from God, not from our selves, not from
our own worthiness* this is plain from the words.

Then, considered in themselves as a distinct branch of this pattern of Prayer,
or an appendix to it, we may in the general learn this lesson from them,

Doct. 3. Thanksgivings and gratulatory acknowledgments should be mixed with
our prayers and Petitions. Besides, should we take the words in pieces, and
consider the particulars here ascribed to God, each of them would afford us a
distinct observation.

Kingdom: this was explained before. Here, I conceive it properly signifies the
universal, and absolute Sovereignty of God over the whole world, or that right
of Dominion which is originally and transcendently invested in him; all other
Kings and Potentates being but his seudatories, Prove. 8. 15.

Power: That is proportionable ability (...)
and strength to manage this Kingdom: Some have power and not right Eccl. 4. 1.
on the side of the oppressor there was power or strength. Others have right
but want power, Kings and Princes sometimes become weak as others, God cuts off
the Spirits of Princes, makes them wander in the wilderness where there is no
way: But Right and Power, strength and Sovereignty are never separated in God:
and then,

Glory: Praise, or honor, that is the reflection of both the former things upon
God, or the Creatures acknowledging and ascribeing them as due to God. And all
this not for a time, his Kingdom is an everlasting Kingdom, his strength
everlasting strength, and his glory (as himself) endures for ever. Each of
these would afford a large field of discourse, but I shall wind them up in this
one Proposition.

Doct. 4. Supreme Right and Power belong to God, and therefore Glory is due to
him for ever.

The Seal set to this Form is the word Amen; a word of Hebrew Original, kept
untranslated in most languages; to betoken Ainsw.
(say some) the unity of Faith and Spirit which ought to be amongst believers.
This word is used in the beginning of a Sentence, and then it is vox
asseverantis, a note of affirmation; and, being redoubled, makes the
affirmation more vehement; thus where we read Verily, other languages have it
Amen -- Or else, it is annexed to the end of Sentences or Petitions, and then
it is Buxtorf.
[ fidentis and assentientis particula] a note of assent, confidence,
expectation; as also of ones sincere desire that the thing may be:

The word (...) Amen, in the Original signifies Truth, and being used in the
end of Sentences or prayers, signifies as much as [ firmum, ratum esto, vere
fiat] So be it, even so, so it is: so that it implies both a desire to be
heard, So may it be, as is used Deuteronomy. 27. 15. -- Jer. 28. 6. and so the Note is
this*

Doct. 5. Our prayers should be put up with enlarged desires of audience and
answer.

And it also signifies our assent and confidence, So it shall be, or, So it is.
The Note is,

Doct. 6. Our prayers should be put up in faith, and followed with a believing
expectation of gracious returns from God; this is the sense of that, Psalm. 17.
2. -- and will look up.

These things might have been spoken to at large; but I have rather chosen to
give this light touch upon them, having dispatched what I mainly intended in
speaking to the Petitions; I shall commend you, with these poor labors, to the
blessing of God: only let me beg of you that my pains may not be frustrate by
your casting behind your back the things that have been delivered* my design
was to help those who neglect the duty of prayer (especially in their families)
upon pretense of their want of gifts and abilities; let but such make use of
those helps, I have here proposed, and begin to comment upon this excellent
pattern, and the several Petitions (to which purpose I have hinted
Scripture Phrase and expression) and I doubt not but they shall by degrees
experience their abilities growing, and indeed I know not a better way of
improving the Gift of prayer: But then take ^eed of resting in the gift when
attained. Let the second of those Directions annexed to each Petition be well
heeded; think it not enough, that your prayers be directed by this pattern; but
labor that the frame of your hearts be suited to the matter of your Petitions:
Then may you be assued that God will hear you, and at last you shall be
translated from praying to prayfing, from imitating Christ in this weak manner,
to enjoy him in glory and to sing eternal Hallelujab's to him that fitteth upon
the Throne and Rev. 5. 13.
to the Lamb for ever and ever.

CHAP. XI.
The Observations deducible from the Connection, Scope, and matter of the Lord's
Prayer, had it been handled in that way of Exposition which is now in Use.

1. GOd's foreknowledge of what we want, is no Supersedeas to our asking.
Compare Matthew. 6. 8. with 9. Verse.

2. Prayer is a duty befitting all ranks and degrees of Christians. The
Multitude, The Disciples, Matthew. 5. 1. are taught it.

3. We have need to be taught, and taught again, how to perform the Duty of
Prayer, as we ought: for though Christ here teach his Disciples; yet Luke 11.
1, 2. they desire to be taught again.

4. Under ignorance and inability for Prayer, Christ is both able and ready to
instruct us, and therefore we should beg of him. The Apostle, Luke 11. 1, 2.
finds Christ as ready to teach, as he to desire it.

5. It is no disparagement to be urged to what is good from the example of an
Inferior. Christ takes it not ill that the Disciples urge him with John's
example who was but his forerunner. Luke 11. 1.

6. Jesus Christ in teaching his Disciples, did not so much intend to furnish
them with words, as to instruct them in the matter of Prayer. Non jubet
Christus suos conceptis verbis orare etc. Calvin. This is plain from the
variety of expression in the Two Evangelists.

7. Succinct and comprehensive Methods and Epitome's are an excellent way of
teaching: For, this is here the Method of the best of Teachers, and this
commends Catechizing.

8. The Spirits inward teaching excludes not verbal and ministerial
Instruction. For though the Gospel be the Ministration of the Spirit, and
though all Christ's True Disciples are endued with the Spirit, yet he saw fit
and necessary to leave them this standing Directory for their Instruction.

9. Prayer is a duty of a vast latitude and comprehension. For, within the
bounds of this exact pattern are compehended. 1. The Grand concernments of God.
2. Of our selves, both as to soul and body. 3. And of Others. viz. the Church,
Nation, Neighborhood, our Relations etc. So much is imported in the word [
Our]: which duly considered may 1. Warrant long praying upon occasion, 2. And
show us our imperfections in Prayer.

10. The Concernments of Gods glory and Kingdom should have the pre-eminence
above our own, in our desires and prayers. This is plain from the Order of the
Petitions.

11. The matter of Prayers is not whatever our corrupt Passions, or blind
fancies dictate to us, but what makes for Gods glory, our own or other good
spiritual or temporal, with subordination to his glory. Within these bounds is
the matter of the Lords Prayer circumscribed, which calls upon us to take heed
we offer not strange fire, or ask we know not what, as they Mark. 10. 38.

12. Gods glory must be the Alpha and Omega of our Prayers. The First Petition
is, that his name be hallowed; the Conclusion, is a Doxology, or ascription of
Kingdom, power and glory to him. How seldom do we sincerely and intentionally
make it so? These from the Connection, Scope, and Matter, in general.

From the Preface.
1. GOd alone is to be prayed to. What becomes of Saints and Angels? Will the
Papists say, They are included under the Title Father? But one is our Father
which is in Heaven? Matthew. 23. 9. Or will they charge our Savior as a
defective Teacher, or that out of envy he said nothing of their Mediators as
intending to Monopolize the whole of that Office to himself? He only deserves
it. And as there is but one God to whom, so but one Mediator by whom we pray,
1 Timothy 2. 5. I see not how that Popish fiction can stand without derogation
from the perfection of this pattern.

2. God clothes himself with such Titles as may most invite and encourage us to
call upon him. For what Title can administer more boldness or confidence than
that of a Father? How apt are we to go to God as if we went to an enemy, or
stranger, or one we have no relation to?

3. God is the Common Father of Believers in Christ: For this is especially
here meant, not our general Relation as his Creatures (that't a low and poor
encouragement): and that he is a common Father, the Pronoun [ Our] imports.

4. Reverence and Charity must be joined with our Confidence in prayer.
Reverence, for we come to God as a Father to whom honor and reverence is due
Mal. 1. 6. Charity; for we are taught to take in others, not appropriating that
Relation to our selves alone.

5. Raised, glorious, and heavenly apprehensions of God, become us in our
addresses to God. Therefore are we taught to call upon him as being in heaven*
i. e. giving out glorious manifestations of himself there.

6. God will not be called upon by visible Act. 7* 55. (...) ab (...) intens:
and (...) tendo.
representations. Therefore we are taught to say [ which art in Heaven] to take
off eyes and thoughts from all sensible Objects, and that we may, with Stephen,
look up steadfastly into heaven, and by the eye of faith behold him which is
invisible.

7. God has not tied, nor should his people tie themselves, to set their faces
this way or that way, toward this or that place, under the Gospel; but that we
lift up especially the eye of Faith toward himself. For this expression [
which art in Heaven*] calls us from the Jewish rite of looking toward the
Temple etc.

1. PETITION.
1. THe incomprehensible God has given out such manifestations of himself as
whereby we may know him from all pretended Deities, and according to which we
may conceive and speak of him. All this is imported by Gods Name here, which
the Apostle Romans 1. 19. calls (...)* q. d. that which is knowable of God.

2. The Name of God is peculiarly holy. [ Name] i. e. both God himself and all
those manifestations of himself whereby he has made himself known, whether his
Attributes, Word, or Works. [ Holy] i. e. pure, right, singularly excellent.
[Peculiarly] i. e. Essentially, so God himself, and eminently so all that
whereby he has manifested himself. This Observation is thus grounded: viz. To
sanctify his name, is not (as the word may seem to import) to make it holy, but
to conceive, acknowledge and profess it to be what indeed it is, that is,
peculiarly holy: So that the holiness of Gods name is the grouud of our
sanctifying it: because it is holy, we must so acknowledge it.

3. Though God can sanctify his name ( i. e. manifest it to be holy and
glorious) yet he will have us to testify our desire by praying that He will
sanctify it. For this (as has been explained) is one sense of the Petition,
viz. that God will sanctify his own name, vindicate his honor, and let out
upon the world resplendent beams of his own glory.

4. The sanctification of Gods name (that is, the declaring, acknowledging, and
celebrating of his holiness) ought to be the principal desire and endeavor of
every one that calls God Father. Therefore is this Petition the first in Order.

5. We cannot sanctify the name of God as we ought without enablement from God.
Therefore we are taught to pray this Petition, because our ability for it must
come from God.

II. PETITION.
1. GOd has a Kingdom, durable through all ages, and diffusive through the
world. For, all Gods people in all ages and places are taught to pray, [ thy
Kingdom come]

2. Gods Kingdom in the world is superior to, and yet consistent with the
Kingdoms of men. [ Superiour], Else in vain were it to pray that it might come
if God could not bring it in, notwithstanding men's opposition. [ Consistent]
For he that taught us to pray thus, yet bids us give unto Caesar the Matthew. 22.
2^. 1 Pet. 2. 13.
things which are Caesar's, and, Be subject to every Ordinance of man for the
Lords sake.

3. The bringing of Gods Kingdom into any place or upon any soul, must be Gods
work. Therefore we are taught to pray to him for it, because without him our
endeavors are vain.

4, Though Gods general Kingdom be in all places, and at all times; yet it is
not always alike manifested: In this sense we are taught to pray that his
Kingdom may come. viz. that he will make it manifest, that to him belongs
Dominion and power and glory etc.

5. God has, besides his universal, a more special Kingdom, which comes not to
all places, but whither and when himself pleases. The coming of this Kingdom
is most properly meant here, because this Kingdom may come to a people Matthew.
12. 28. and be taken from them. Matthew. 21. 43.

6. The coming of Gods Kingdom is both a singular means to glorify God, and of
special advantage to those amongst whom it comes. The former, flows from the
connection of this with the former Petition. The later hence, that Jesus Christ
teaches us to ask nothing but what is for our good.

7. Where the Kingdom of God is come yet we are to pray that it may come. This
is not a Petition for Heathens only, but for Christians, Disciples, Believers
of all ranks. And it is necessary, both. 1. To beg the continuance of it. 2.
The enlargement and fuller manifestation of it. 3. The consummation of it in
glory; Till then, this Petition will not be out of date.

III. PETITION.
1. GOd's Will is the Law whereby his Kingdom is governed: and then is his
Kingdom suid to come, when his Will is done. This is fairly imported in the
connection of these two Petitions.

2. Gods Will alone is absolutely good, and just, and righteous. For upon this
foundation stands the Petition; not only upon the mere Sovereignty of God
whereby he can do what he pleases, but upon the Rectitude of his Will, whereby
he Can or Will do nothing but what is just.

3. Man ought to lay aside and utterly deny his own will as to any competition
with Gods Will; yea, to bring his will to a ready compliance with Gods when he
understands it, as Act. 21. 14. Else we cannot pray this Petition, without
notorious Hypocrisy.

4. In prayer, all our Petitions are to have this (at least implicit)
reservation, If the Lord Will, or, According to thy good pleasure; or, Not as I
will, but as thou will. For this Petition confines all the rest of our
Petitions within the bounds of Gods good pleasure. In saying [ thy Will be
done] we in effect say, Lord, in all I ask, I submit to thy Will, whether to
give or withold it.

5. Without the Grace of God enabling we can neither obey his Preceptive Will,
nor submit to his decretive Will as we ought, for therefore are we taught to
pray thus, that God may enable us to do the one, and cheerfully submit to the
other.

6. Every one that calls God Father should not only be contented that Gods Will
be done, but desire and pray that it may be done by and upon himself and
others. This is the scope of the Petition. Yet we must distinguish: It is Gods
Will his Children should be afflicted, yet we are not to pray for afflictions,
but that, if his Will be to afflict us, we may patiently submit etc.

7. In Heaven the Will of God is done with much accurateness and readiness, i.
e. by Christ, Angels, and glorified Saints. Therefore we are taught to pray
that it may so be done on earth. How should this consideration make us sigh out
our desire to be dissolved?

8. Perfection in obedience should be our desire, aim and endeavor, though in
this life it cannot be our attainment: We are taught to pray, that our
obedience may be like the Angels; though some will have it understood as to the
quality of it, not equality; yet I see no absurdity to say, that we may desire
and wish and pray that we might arrive (if possible) at their perfection, for I
conceive much of Evangelical perfection lies in hearty enlarged desires and
prayers after perfection. [ Deus non vult nobis in hac vita praestare
liberationem a peccatis perfectam; and tamen vult nos eam optare, nosque
singulis momentis petere ut omnino liberemur a peccatis] U^sin: in hanc
Petitionem.

9. While our commoration is on earth, we never arrive at that perfection but
that we still need to pray for ability to do and submit to God's Will. For this
Pattern is for the highest Scholars in Christ's School.

IV. PETITION.
1. IN Prayer we have liberty, next to the concernments of Gods name and glory,
to commend our own both outward and spiritual concernments to God. Next. i. e.
not so much in the order of our Petitions (for we may begin with our own) as in
the ardour of our affections. This from the matter of the three last Petitions
which respect our selves.

2. Whatever we ask for our selves must be with reference, and in subserviency
to the sanctifying of Gods name, promoting of his Kingdom and doing his will.
For the three former Petitions being absolute, do confine the following
Petitions within their Bounds.

3. God will have us beg our daily bread, and daily beg it at his door. This is
the sum of the Petition.

4. Even those that have the greatest proportion of worldly blessings, still
have need to beg their bread at the hands of God. This Petition is for the rich
as well as the poor Christians, and there is Reason sufficient. For. 1. They
cannot enjoy what they have without his blessing, Eccl. 6. 2. 2. Neither will
it be bread to them, Hagg. 1. 6. Deuteronomy. 8. 3. 3. Nor can they longer enjoy it
than it pleases God: he can strip them in a moment. 4. Nor have they a lawful
Title to it, till then, before God. 5. Nor the sanctified use of it. 1 Timothy 4.
5.

5. Necessaries only are to be asked of God: for under bread all, and only
necessaries, are comprehended.

6. We are not to desire or beg any thing of God, but what we may lawfully call
Our Bread: i. e. that which becomes ours by honest labor, or other lawful
means, and which God has appointed for us.

7. Even that which becomes ours by our own industry, or by any other lawful
way of getting; We are still to acknowledge the free gift of God: for we are
taught to say, Give us, etc.

8. The care we take, or the Provision we lay in for the future, must be
consistent with a continual dependence upon the Providence of God. For we must
every day say, Give us this Day etc. Which does allow moderate care or
Provision for the future, but ^frbids trusting in either.

9. Prayer is a singular means to procure a supply of all necessaries for this
life. Else our Savior would not have taught us this Petition.

V. PETITION.
1. THough temporal things may be asked, yet we are not to dwell upon them, but
to arise from them to spiritual things: Therefore has our Savior couch't the
infinite necessities of this life in one single Petition.

2. Pardon of sin is a mercy attainable, and one of the first and choicest we
should ask of God.

3. Confession of sin is a requisite condition in order to Pardon, for
therefore are we taught to pray thus, that in so praying we may acknowledge, and
pass sentence upon our selves.

4. Man by sin becomes a debtour to God, and stands bound to satisfy his
justice. For in Matthew, sins are called debts, and the word [(...)] Forgive,
imports releasment, cancelling a debt, dismissing a Prisoner.

5. Satisfaction for sin is an impossibility, as to a man's self. For, could
satisfaction be made by any, this Petition as to such would be unnecessary,
whereas it is to be put up by all: see Gal. 3. 21, 22.

6. Christ's satisfaction is no Contradiction to a free Pardon of sin, but the
Foundation of it: [no Contradiction] for even he that made the satisfaction,
has yet taught us to pray, Forgive us etc. [The foundation of it] for though
it be not mentioned in the Petition it is necessarily employed. 1. In that we
pray for pardon in subordination to Gods glory, but it cannot consist with the
glory of his Truth ( Genesis 2. 17.) to pardon without compensation. 2. We pray
for pardon in a way agreeable to Gods will, but this is by faith on Christ's
satisfaction. Hebr. 10. 10. 3. The Remission which is here begged includes
Reconciliation, Justification, and Adoption (which Divines call the Relative
Ames: Medull. Lib. 1. C. 27.
change) according to that general Rule laid down in our Entrance upon the
Petitions. Now it is certain, all these are procured by the Death and
satisfaction of Christ. See Romans 5. 10. Phil. 3. 9. Gal. 4. 4, 5.

7. All Christians even of the highest seize have need to pray daily for
the Pardon of sin. For this Petition (as the whole) is of general concernment.
The grounds of this you may see in the exposition.

8. Men, while upon earth, will have need to forgive and be forgiven mutual
Trespasses and offenses. So much is imported in that [ as we forgive etc.]

9. It is Gods good pleasure that they that expect mercy from him, should show
mercy to others.

10. A merciful reconcilable frame is singularly pleasing to God, and may be
an encouragement to beg and hope for pardon at the hands of God. These two are
plain from the words.

VI. PETITION.
1. WE have need to pray as well for preservation from sin, as the pardon of
it. Therefore is this Petition added to and conjoined with the foregoing.

2. Temptations are the great means whereby sin is propagated in the world: i.
e. whereby men are drawn into sin and their corruptions are drawn out.
Therefore when we should pray to be kept from sin, we are taught to say [ Lead
us not into Temptation.]

3s Man cannot be brought into a Temptation without Gods permission and
Ordination. For by Leading is imported both the permissive and ordering
Providence of God. See the Exposition.

4. The best of men cannot keep themselves out of Temptation without Gods
keeping: for [ Lead us not into Temptation] is as much as, Keep us that we be
not drawn into it, or run upon it.

5. However we may not absolutely pray to be kept out of Temptation, yet we
should be earnest with God to keep us from the evil of it: for thus the later
clause seems to respect the former; q. d. Lord, if thy will be, keep us out of
Temptation, but however keep us from the evil or hurt of it.

6. To be preserved from the evil of a Temptation, it is sometimes necessary
that we be pulled out by violence. It Is (...), Pull us out. See the Exposition.

7. To be kept from Temptation, or from the evil of it, well deserves the name
of a Deliverance. So we translate it, Deliver us. --

8. Prayer is a singular means to keep us from Temptations, or from the evil of
it. Matthew. 26. 41.

9. God is the great and only Savior and deliverer of his people from all kind
of sinful or sorrowful evils: for though evils of sin be especially meant here;
yet I doubt not but all other evils are also to be referred to this Place.

10. The sum of what we can desire in order to eternal happiness, is, to be
delivered from the Guilt and Power of sin, to be justified: for in these two
last Petitions are comprised all the spiritual good things which are necessary
to fit us for glory: and all these (though they are comprehensive of many
Particulars) are coucht' in these two things viz. Forgiveness of sin, and
Deliverance from Temptation.

THE CONCLUSION.
1. PRayer and Praise are fitly conjoined, Psalm. 116. 13. I will take the Cup
of Salvation, and call on the Name of the Lord.

2. To praise God aright is to acknowledge what belongs to him. For thine is the
Kingdom.

3. Gods Kingdom is peculiar, supreme, and absolutely independent.. For so we
are taught to acknowledge it [ Thine] q. d. wherein there is no Corrival [ The
Kingdom] (...) q. d. Such a Kingdom, so absolute, as none like it.

4. Power indeed and in the proper notion of it belongs only to the Lord, Psalm.
62. 11.

5. Glory is peculiarly, eminently, and ultimately due to God alone.

6. The Kingdom, power and glory belonging to God are eternal. -- For ever.

7. It Is but reasonable to pray and desire that the Name of God may be
sanctified, It Is [(...)] for or because.
his Kingdom may come, his Will may be done. This Doxology being joined to the
Body of the Prayer with the Particle [ for] which is Illative and Aetiological,
gives sufficient Reason for all those Petitions.

8. Because Kingdom, Power, and Glory is the Lord's, therefore it is fit and
reasonable and necessary that we should go to him by prayer for whatever good
thing we need, whether for soul or body. This stands upon the same foundation
with the former.

9. Though in a proper sense God is not Vid. Ursin* in Clausulam Precationis
Dominicae.
moved with arguments ( i. e. persuaded to do that which otherwise he would
not) yet he both allows and requires us to use argument in Prayer.

Thus the Doxology is brought in as an Argument, why God should grant the
Petitions.

10. Our strongest arguments in Prayer are drawn from God himself, and from his
attributes. Here Is nothing but, Thine is the Kingdom etc.

11. Our Prayers should be the breathings of our fouls, and not only the
expressions of our Lips. So much [ Amen] imports, being as it were a hearty
wish in the close q. d. Be it so, Lord grant what we have here desired.

12. Faith should follow our prayers, and wait for a gracious answer of them.
So Amen also imports q. d. So it is, or shall be, I believe that it shall be
even as I have asked.

FINIS.

