Old AESOP AT. WHITE HALL, GIVING Advice to the Young AESOPS AT Tunbridge and
Bath: OR, SOME FABLES Relating to Government.

By a Person of what Quality you please.

LONDON, Printed; and Sold by J. Nutt, near Stationers' Hall. School.

THE PREFACE.
IT is now the Mode, it seems, for Brutes to turn Politicians; and if we may
give Credit to some late Authors, their Houses of Parliament assemble at
Tunbridge and Bath. The Lion who by Prescription has been owned for King,
Nemine Contradicente, pleads it as his Privilege to summon them to his
Banqueting House at White Hall; whence all the Three States may by a short and
easy Walk arrive together at Westminster, and there consult for the Common
Good. He carries a Bundle of Arrows in his Hand, with this Motto over them,
Concordia res parvae crescunt, discordia maxima dilabuntur.

If there be no Mysteries in Christianity, it seems there are some in Policy;
when Jacobites and Commonwealths-Men, who have mutually branded one another
with the harshest Names that Malice and Rancour could invent, should now unite
in a Design against the present Government, as a Common Center. If it be so,
(which Old AESOP is very unwilling to believe,) he has given Commission to his
Beasts, in the following Fables, to declare the first to be (what they always
were) Knaves, and the latter (which he is sure they will be loath to be
accounted) Fools If the Reflections seem too Satirical, they may consider that
it comes from Beasts like themselves. And so Aesop bids them Farewell, but to
take Care not to divide the Prey till it is caught.

White Hall, September. 22. School. AESOP.

The SUMMONS.
THE Jackall did the King of Brutes inform
That some designed to mine, and some to storm
His Royal Fort. At which, with generous Rage
The Kingly Beast, their Malice to assuage,
Sends forth his Summons, That they should appear
At Brutes White Hall, from Quarters far and near,
There to consult; and if they found that any
Better deserved the Sway among the Many
Than Leo did, he would the Crown forswear
And never henceforth any Scepter bear:
But at the same time gives't as his Advice,
'It's better to fill Bag one time than thrice,
'Or three times three. It Is better under one,
'Than many Masters, to lament and groan.
Old AESOP AT WHITE HALL, GIVING Advice to the Young AESOPS AT Tunbridge and
Bath.
FAB. I. The Tortoise and Frogs.
A Heavy Tortose seeing Frogs
Nimbly leap in Pools and Poggs,
Blessed their limber Hams, that they
Could so bravely frisk and play;
Cursed the hard and heavy Pack
That Nature laid on his own Back:
He could neither skip nor dance,
Nor caper A-la-mode de France.
But as soon's he saw the Stork
Could the Fregs from Puddle fork,
And that for all their nimble Heels
They became a Prey to Eels;
Then he quickly changed his Note,
And for's own Coat of Mail gave Vote;
Thanked his Stars that he was free
From Storks and suchlike Tyranny,
By being armed Cap-a-pee.
MORAL.
Did we but s^e through Gallick Sway
How feeble Subjects are a Prey
To the Sovereign's arbitrary Will,
Who can at's Pleasure save and kill;
Did we but feel the Effects of's Sword and Flames,
Saw Virgins ravished, h^ard the Cries of Dames,
When Soldiers sack their Towns, destroy their Men,
Cut off their Children, scarc^ spare One in Ten;
Could we but see Rome 's Priests converting France
With Arguments from Gun, Sword, Spear and Lance,
And then reflect that this h^d been our Doom,
Could James the Just have paid his Vows to Rome,
We would not grumble at the Tax we pay
To ke^p such Monstrous Tyranny away,
But should, That William might live ever, pray.
FAB. II. Of the other Members conspiring against the Belly.
ONce on a Time the Hands and Feet
With Back, and Loins, and Bum, did meet
In a Rebellious Consult, where
The B -- ch as Speaker took the Chair,
And with an uncouth hollow sound
The following Treason did propound:
Brethren, quoth he, you know the Head
Makes us to toil and sweat for Bread,
Yet nothing to our Lot does fall,
But idle Gut consumes it all.
My Friends, if you will be ruled by me,
We will shake off this Tyranny.
If Head and Belly will have Meat,
Let them toil for it with Hands and Feet.
Agreed, says Back, I vow and swear,
For them I Will no more Burdens bear.
Content, says Bum, if it be your Will;
For I love dearly to sit still.
Says Feet, I Will no more Errands run.
The Loins say, Brethren, it is done.
The Hands vow they would work no more,
And wish they would been as wise before.
The Members thus in Holy League
Did bless themselves for this Intrigue.
But suddenly the Hands grew weak,
The Feet grew numb, the Loins did shake,
The Back was feeble, the Bum grew poor,
And Breech the Chairman loud did roar,
Pray cram the Gut, and we'll rebel no more.
MORAL.
It Is hoped this will not be forgot
By those who formed the Tunbridge Plot.
Old Aesop was a Man of Sense,
Such Doctrines never did dispense,
That People should refuse Support,
And pine themselves to starve the Court.
FAB III. The Hermit and the Soldier.
A Pious Hermit seeing a Man of Blood
Come strutting through his solitary Wood,
Accosts him thus: Dear Brother, why do you
In Humane Blood and Gore your Hands imbrue?
Leave off that Trade, be 'Partner in my Cell,
Read, pray, and think, and save your Soul from Hell.
The Soldier looked stern,
But at last did reply,
I am willing to learn,
And G -- zds I Will comply.
We Men of the Sword
Are not worth a T -- d,
But are basely kept under,
Nor have Pay nor have Plunder.
A plague on the Peace
Which makes our Gain cease:
And seeing it is so,
With the Hermit I Will go,
Till the Drums beat again, and the Trumpets do blow.
MORAL.
Just so the Jacks their desperate Cause forsake,
And to the side of the Commonwealth betake;
Since their own King has played the Fool, and's gone,
Ours to molest they turn up every Stone.
The Church, the Church, is ready to take fire,
Is all their Outcry: Brethren, save the Quire,
Take care o'th Steeple, Chancel, Surplice, Crape,
The Church of England Dove's in danger of a Rape,
No thanks to them she did from Father Peter's escape:
Yet when their Prince, and's Priests shall venture over,
They Will swear she is no Chaste nor Turtle Lover,
But did to others her fair Breasts discover;
Then they will be for Commonwealth no more,
But screw Prerogative high as before,
Huff like N -- S -- r, cackle like B -- S -- were.
FAB. IV. The Ass in the Lion's Skin.
A Certain Ass being struck with Shame
Of's native Slavery, and his Name,
Made shift to steal a Lion's Skin,
And boldly stalked about therein;
Shook off his innate sluggish Pace,
And did assume an awful Face,
As if h' had been of Lybian Breed,
And from the Bastinado freed.
But's cursed Ears, and Cathedral Note,
To his great Grief, revealed the Plot;
For when he did attempt to roar,
He could not do it, but brayed just as before.
MORAL.
Thus Nonresistance thinks't no Sin
To put on a true Patriot's Skin,
And plead for Liberty and Laws,
And easy Tax. But mark the Cause:
He would the Government disable,
And lose the Ship for want of Cable.
And by this means it comes to pass,
We know the old Passive Obedience Ass.
FAB. V. The Wolf and Hedgehog.
A Greedy Wolf that ravaged Hills and Plains,
Devoured the Flocks, and beggared all the Swains,
Triumphed and skipp'd. But Plenty causing wast,
At length he knew not where to break his Fast;
But in his Range meets with a Porcupine,
A curious Bit to make Lycaon dine:
His eager Chaps would fain been at the Prey,
But the armed Hedgehog held him at a Bay.
Hungry Lycaon seeing this, cries out,
My little Brother, how comes this about?
Have you forgot the late-concluded Peace,
That you do still your Armor w^ ear,
As if there were new Cause of Fear?
Lay by your Darts, and let War cease.
You cannot think that I will break the League,
And Brother-Brutes surprise by false Intrigue.
Nay, Nay, says Hedgehog, Brother, I don't say
That you will me or other Brutes betray;
But ne'ertheless it does appear,
While you have Tusks, there is Cause of Fear:
Let me first draw your Teeth, and Sans Delay
I Will throw my Quiver and my Darts away.
MORAL.
Thus crafty Jacks do plead our Cause,
Armed Troops in Time of Peace subvert our Laws:
Lay down your Arms, and then we swear,
That our brave Prince will soon appear;
La Hogue you know is very near.
But since Van Trump, and bold De Rutter,
With Ball and Powder made such splutter,
He Is as much 'fraid of Sword and Bomb,
As was his Grandsire in his Grandame's Womb.
Disband your Troops therefore, we pray,
The Nation cannot bear your Pay.
Then come the Wolves over from Campeigne,
And carry all the Sheep away;
Then will our Prince, like Mars, in Warlike Guise,
Encamp at Hounslow to shoot Butterflies.
No Man can say that he will break the Law,
Or us by Standing-Armies overawe;
Since it is clear, as ever was Light of Sun,
His Army never stood, but always run.
Let no foul Tongue our Valorous Prince disgrace,
For he in Person always won the Race:
The Boyn 's fair Flood, and Sarum 's spacious Plain,
Will this great Truth for evermore maintain.
FAB. VI. The Fox caught in a Trap.
ACertain Fox being caught in Trap,
Did lose his Tail by the Mishap,
And cried, Alas!
For his Disgrace,
He could not show Face,
Nor follow the Chase:
But yet, says he, though Reynards do beguile
The other Brutes by some sly Trick and Wile;
I do not know that Foxes are exempted
From being fooled too, if they are fitly tempted.
Then let me go try,
And briskly apply
My Wits, to deceive,
And make Foxes believe,
That the Burden of their Tail,
In Rain, Snow or Hail,
Is intolerably grievous,
And in Hunting mischievous.
^f by this Means I can but prevail,
To have every Fox cut off his own Tail,
Then none of 'em at me will mock, scoff or rail.
Away Reynard goes,
His design to propose,
Says Fathers and Mothers,
Dear Sisters and Brothers,
Don't flout, jeer and mock,
At my mangled Dock:
You know that your Tails,
But little avails,
When you leap over Pales,
To catch Sheep and Fowls;
Then do not like Owls,
Thus burden your Back,
By a thing you might lack.
How brisk and how fine
Am I without mine?
The rest perceiving what his Motive was;
Told him good Brother this will never pass.
When we are hunted by Dogs,
Over Hills, and through Bogs,
On our Tails we do piss,
And their Chops do not miss.
And this was the cause made the Proverb preva^^
He has got a slap with the Foxes Tail.
Then cease Brother Fox,
If we mangle our Docks,
As you do propose,
We Are exposed to our Foes.
Moral.
Thus the cursed Crew who have themselves undone,
And from their Reason, Sense, and Interest run,
Would gladly have us caught in that same Trap;
Ill Men would fain have Brethren in mishap.
FAB. VII. The Fox preaching to the Sheep.
ARavening Wolf the Sheep-Cotes did invade,
And there set up his Butchers Shambles;
Where without trouble of Preambles,
He killed whatever came to hand.
A sturdy Mastiff by the Farmer laid
In the same Fold, preserved the Sheep,
So that in Safety they could sleep,
And feed with quiet in their Masters Land,
The Fox who used with Wolf to diet,
And on the tender Lambs to riot;
Perceiving this.
Says Monsieur Wolf, I am not able
To live at such an ill-spread Table.
Were it amiss,
That I should go and tell the Sheep,
The Mastiff Dog that does them keep
Lives on their Blood;
That he and's Master every Day,
With joint consent divide the Prey,
And make the Sheep their Food.
Wolf answers, Reynard, that is good,
Go tell the Sheep that they should cease
To cloth their Master with their Fleece;
Except he will his Dog remove,
For such a Guard they do not love
In time of Peace.
The Fox gets in amongst the Flock,
And with sly Oratry thus spoke.
Good Men of Mutton,
What do ye with this Mastiff Dog,
He is a mercenary Rogue
Not worth a Button?
For on pretense of keeping guard,
Your Flesh and Bones are his Reward:
Get him cashiered.
The Wolf and I have sworn the Peace,
And our Hostilities must cease,
Noughts to be feared
By him, his Master in disguise
Means'ore the Flocks to tyrannize
On my Salvation.
As I Am a true Son of the Church,
I would not leave you in the Lurch,
Of such Damnation.
The bleating Herd began to grumble,
For Raynard's Logic, made them stumble,
And thus they said:
In Faith the Wolf and Fox we see
Are Enemies to Tyranny;
Their council ought to be obeyed.
Since Ned the Wolf, and Batt the Fox,
Are our good Friends than what a Pox
Should we be plagued with Curs.
We will no more our Fleeces yield,
Nor have our Lambs tore from the Field,
Let Us to our Zeal add Spurs:
And for our Spokesman choose a Ram,
Or sturdy Goat to swear and damn,
And curse Dissenters.
Our greatest Dangers from the Whigs,
And cause they will not pay Tithe Pigs,
The Wolf and Fox on them shall have Debentures.
Content says Fox and there is my Hand,
I Will publish this in Woolfish-land;
Farewell dear Sheep.
The Woolf and I will guard your Cotes,
And pull out the Dissenters Throats;
But unto you our promise keep.
The Flock by Reynard thus persuaded,
That Dog and Farmer them invaded,
Straight left the Fold.
Did through the Hills and Valleys stray,
And from their Guard did run away;
Left him to starve for want of pay:
But mark the end.
The Woolf and Fox, having prevailed
The scattered Flocks straight they assailed,
And did them all in pieces rend.
Moral.
It Is hoped the Sheep of North and West,
Who to the Parliament make haste,
The Moral will reach;
Which is no more
Then the Proverb of Yore,
Let the Geese look to it when the Fox does preach.
FAB. VIII. The Fable of the Sponge.
A Certain Brewer whose Liquor of Life,
Did frequently amongst his Servants raise strife,
Resolved to abridge them, giving each Man his share,
Enough to suffice but nothing to spare:
But the Servants resolving they would not be stinted,
Put their Wits on the Rack, and this Device minted.
They got Gloves of Sponge which they thrust in the Liquor,
And squeezing them often spent their Masters Stock quicker:
Which the Brewer understanding, he seized on the Spunges;
Made his Servants repay him, and with Actions them swinges;
Till he squeezed back his own, and taught them to be true,
To leave off their sly Cheats, and be content with their Due.
Moral.
Those that misapply the Treasure of the Nation,
Ought thus to be squeezed till they make reparation:
We may Tax, and pay on, and the King still be poor,
If the Hands of his Servants be pitched as before.
It Is the Interest of the Nation, our Senate understands,
That those who touch Cash should have clean washen hands.
FAB. XI. The Crumpeter.
A Trumpeter who by his fatal Sounds,
Provoked Mankind to mutual Blood and Wounds;
Being taken in Field did for his Life implore:
I sound the Charge said he, but do no more.
The Conqueror grew enraged at this Defense;
Replies, base Villan, I Will dispatch thee hence,
Down to the Stygian Shades; do thou not know,
That he who counsels Murder, gives the blow.
Moral.
The Fable hits those who in former Reigns,
For love of Faction, or for love of Gains,
Did teach our Monarchs a Despotick Sway,
And damned the People that would not obey:
These were the Firebrands of the Church and State,
And did more Mischief than Jack Straw or Kett:
They caused the War and that brought on the Tax,
Then let the weight often fall on their own Backs;
Why should the Peoples Blood and Treasure pay
To rescue that which Priestcraft did betray.
The Priests advanced the Popeling to the Throne;
The Priests again did force him to be gone;
And now the Priests, like Turn-coats, as before,
Choose Jacks for Senate with Canonick Roar:
And Churches danger slily would infer,
From our great King who bravely rescued her.
FAB. X. The Lion and the Ass.
IT once came to pass,
That the Lion and Ass,
Did meet in a great Consultation;
When the King of the Brutes,
To the dullest of Mutes,
Did seriously make Application.
True Roger, quoth he,
Do but hearken to me,
And I swear I will highten thy Fortune.
You Are now a dull Beast,
But I Will make thee High Priest,
And the rest shall no more dare thee sport on.
Good Sovereign say on,
Quoth Roger anon,
For I am quite weary of Slavery:
I swear by St. Peter
If you will give me a Mitre
I Will serve you, be it Roguery or Knavery.
I thank you says Lion,
Thy word I Will rely on;
The Service that I then command thee,
Is to teach that I must govern,
Like an Absolute Sovereign,
And that those will be damned that withstand me.
Agreed says the Ass,
I will bring it to pass,
And have Passive Obedience in fashion;
They shall all be called Traitors,
And Monarchy-haters,
From the Pulpits, and Desks of the Nation.
But it happened that the King,
Harp'd on another String,
And invaded the Rights of the Asses.
Then Roger turned tale,
Against his Sovereign did rail,
In his Preachments, his Prayers, and Glasses.
Moral.
Thus Tyrant Princes did make use of Priests,
Their Subjects to transform from Men to Beasts.
The Time's well known, you need not ask me when,
But e're from Beasts they turn to Men again,
The Priests must be reformed; such Reformation
Is the only Remedy can save the Nation.
FINIS.

