QUERIES In Order to the Description of BRITANNIA.
WHEREAS John Ogilby Esquire His Majesty's Cosmographer, being Authorized by His
Majesty to make an Actual Survey of His Majesty's Kingdom of England and
Dominion of Wales, in order to the Compiling An Historical and Geographical
Description thereof, more Accurate than whatever has been heretofore done, in a
fair large Volume, sold BRITANNIA: accompanied with another Volume of all the
Principal ROADS of England, ichnographically describ^d in Copper Sculptures.
And being sensible that the Well-performance hereof will render it a Work
highly grateful to the Public, his Request is, That the Nobility and Gentry,
and all other Ingenious Persons, would be pleased to return him, to his House
in White-Eryers, London, such Remarques of the Country or Places of their
Residence, or what other they may be acquainted with, as shall happen within
the Verge of these following Queries.

1. Cities, their Antiquity, Government, Privileges, Commerce, etc. 2. Towns
Corporate, Market Towns, Fair Towns, Villages, and Hamlets, etc. 3. Houses of
Nobility and Gentry, with the ancient as well as present Possessors. 4.
Castles, Churches, Chapels, Schools, Colleges, Hospitals, and other Public
Buildings, etc. 5. Mills, Beacons, Bridges, Crosses, Towers, Pyramids. 6.
Chaces, Forests, Woods, Groves, Parks, Warrens, Commons, Heaths, etc. 7.
Mountains, Valleys, Dikes, Rivers, Brooks, Waterworks, Sluices, Ponds, Meres,
etc. 8. Springs, Wells, Baths, Cold and Hot Waters, Medicinal, Aluminous,
Bituminous, Nitrous, Petrifying, etc. 9. Works and Mines of Gold, Silver,
Copper, Lend, Black-lead, Tin, Iron, Salt, Saltpeter, Allom, Coperas, Gems,
Precious Stones, Glass, Crystal, Marble, Alabaster, Plaster, Fullers-Earth,
Ochre, Tobacco-pipe Clay, Potters Clay, Lime, Chalk, Marl, Freestone, Millstone,
Grindstone, Whetstone. 10. Precincts of Diocesses, Bounds and Limits of
Counties, Hundreds, and Parishes, Peculiars, and Privileged places. 11. Roman
Ways and Stations, Coins and Monuments, and other Antiquities. 12. Extaordinary
Accidents, Calamities, and Casualties. 13. Peculiar Customs and Manners. 14.
Decayed Places, whether Cities, Towns, Castles, Monasteries, Abbeys, or other
Houses of Note. 15. Vaults, Caves, Caverns, Holes, Hollows, Subterranean
Passages, or other Rarities. 16. Places of Birth, Education, Habitation, and
Sepulture of Eminent Persons. 17. Improvements in Husbandry, Mechanics,
Manufactures, etc. 18. Extraordinary Productions of Cattle, Fowl, Fruit,
Plants, Herbs, or other Animals or Vegetables. 19. What Part of the Country is
Arable, Pasture, Meadow, Woods, and Champain. 20. On the Seacoasts, Ports,
Harbors, Havens, Creeks, Peels, Peers, Watch Towers, Landmarks, Light-houses,
Sands, Sholes, Islands, Eits, etc. 21. Productions of the Seacoasts, of Fish,
Shellfish, Amber, Jet, Coral, Herbs, etc. 22. Extraordinary or Irregular
Ebbings or Flowings of the Sea, etc.
To such Ingenious Persons as shall be more Eminently Instrumental herein,
either by themselves or others, the Author will make Honorable Returns of
Books, and carefully discharge whatever necessary Expenses shall appear to have
been laid out in this Concern.

And to whom Money shall be more acceptable, the Author promises such Wages and
Allowances as may handsomely correspond their Pains; Always presuming, That
nothing will be imposed upon him, without sufficient Authority for its
Assertion; Truth being the main of his Design in all his Collections.

From the Office in White-Fryers, London Anno 1573. T.O.


