Blessed PAVL's Trial and Triumph: IN A SERMON Upon the DEATH of Mrs. ELIZABETH
KING.

By JOHN OAKS, Minister of the Gospel; being the last Funeral Sermon that ever
he Preached, before Himself was snatched away to Glory.

MATTHEW xxiv. 44. Therefore be ye also ready; for in such an hour as you think
not, the Son of Man comes.

LONDON, Printed by J. Richardson, for Tho. Cockeril, at the Three Legs in the
Poultrey, over against the Stocks-Market, 1689.

Blessed Paul's Trial and Triumph. A Funeral Sermon ON 2 TIMOTHY, iv. 7, 8. I
have fought a good Fight, I have finished my Course, I have kept the Faith.
Henceforth there is laid up for me a Crown of Righteousness, which the Lord the
Righteous Judge shall give me at that day, and not to me only, but unto all
them also that love his appearing.
HOW pertinent and seasonable the Words I have now read, are for the solemn
occasion we are met about; is obvious to every Eye; although I must tell you it
was not the Object of my own choice, but pitched upon by the Deceased, whose
Funeral I am now to Commemorate. My Text is very copious, and of too great an
extent to admit at present of any Preface, or to permit me to give you any
account of the Epistle, nor scarce so much time as to cast an Eye upon the
Context. Only in a word the time drew nigh when this Blessed Apostle Paul was
to suffer Martyrdom; and thereby Seal his Testimony to those Gospel Truths,
which he had preached and professed; and that by the effusion of his Blood, and
the laying down of his Life: The Enemy had got him in their Pound; confined him
in their Prison; and still he was every day expecting and waiting when the Writ
should be signed for his Execution, as he tells us, verse 6. I am now ready to
be offered, and the time of my departure is at hand. With this he acquaints
Timothy, to whom he dedicates this Epistle not by way of Complaint, but by way
of Encouragement; he being as ready to be offered up at the Will and Call of
God; as they were ready to execute their Rage and Malice against him: Having
told us long before, I am ready not to be bound only, but also to dye at
Jerusalem for (...) 13.
the Name of the Lord Jesus. What were the Cordials that supported him in this
fainting season, and enabled him to look Death (though presented in a very
ghastly dress) in the face with Comfort and Confidence; my Text acquaints you,
I have fought a good fight, etc. In which words you have these two general
parts.

First, Paul's Retrospect, viz. his serious reflection upon the by past Course
of his Life; that is, ever since he had properly lived, ever since he had been
quickened by the renewing Grace of God's Spirit: For all the time we remain in
an unregenerate State is not time lived, but time lost. I have fought a good
fight, I have finished my Course, I have kept the Faith: This was the report
that Paul's Well enlightened Conscience made upon this serious review and
enquiry: The Reflection upon which filled his Heart with Divine Consolation.
Before I proceed to the main point I intend, I shall briefly offer two Notes to
your serious Consideration.

1. That the apprehension of the near approaches of Death does ordinarily
occasion, nay necessitate Men, whether good or bad to take a strict surveigh of
their by past Life; then Men think and enquire of themselves what they have
been doing; and whether they are going? I say ordinarily it is so: Some indeed
are judiciously hardened and given up by God to a blind mind, and to a feared
Conscience that they are past feeling: Living and dying like Beasts, without
any sight or sense of their Sin here, or their Misery hereafter; whose Eyes are
not opened till they drop into Eternal Flames. Except in such a case, not to be
mentioned without horror, all Men not accidentally incapacitated by the
violence of some bodily Distemper, will at Death be upon a review.

2. Note hence, that according to the report that a well informed Conscience
gives in at a dying hour, so it will fill and furnish the Soul either with
Triumph or Trouble, with Joy or Sorrow: If Conscience well instructed bears
Witness for it, that it has done its work, dispatched the business that God
sent it into the World for; then will it be filled with Songs in the Night,
then will it lift up its head, knowing the Luke 21. 28.
day of its redemption draws nigh. Then next to Jesus Christ no such Friend as
Death: Then will it long to be dissolved to be with Christ. Our rejoicing is
this, the Testimony of our Conscience, 2 Cor. 1. 12.
that in simplicity and godly sincerity, not with fleshly wisdom, but by the
Grace of God we have had our Conversation in the World. Self-examination, and
serious Reflection is a Duty (though attended with great advantage) that few
Men understand, but wholly neglect; or at best are very slight and superficial
in the performance of. Most run away with the first overhasty reports that may
be results from a blind carnal sensual heart; taking all things of that Nature
upon trust, rather than put themselves to the trouble of a serious Trial, but
this will not always do; when Death has clapped an Arrest upon thee, and thou
see that thou must in good earnest put thy head into another World; then
matters relating to thy self and future state, must pass through a finer sieve,
and a more severe scrutiny. Oh that I could more thoroughly persuade my self and
all you that hear me this day, to be more frequent and industrious in this
matter now, and never leave till the great business betwixt God and our Souls
be so thoroughly and comfortably stated; that it may remain as a lasting
impression, when all our self-flattering glasses shall be broken in pieces; and
all those false measures which we have taken of our Spiritual State shall
vanish and disappear. Now may be any thing will stop the Mouth of Conscience,
and justify such a conclusion concerning our welfare, that we are Protestants,
that we have been Baptized, that we are Members of this or that particular
Church, that we have been just to all, or that we have been injurious to none,
that we have been no Persecutors, that we have been charitable to the Poor,
that we have kept our Church, that we have said our Prayers; and if after all
this we come short of Heaven, then God help us (say some) though all this while
totally Strangers to the work of Regeneration and Heart-Renovation. For God's
sake Sirs, Consider, and consider it in time; what Christ speaks, Except your
Righteousness shall (...) 5. 20.
exceed the Righteousness of the Soribes and Pharisees, ye shall in no case
enter into the Kingdom of Heaven. And in another place, Verily, verily, I say
unto thee, except a Man be born (...) 3. 3.
again, see cannot be the Kingdom of God. Beloved, I beseech you, see whether
that which is sufficient to stop the Mouth of Conscience how whilst you live
in this hurry, will make you lie at ease then when you come to a Deathbed. But
I must proceed.

Secondly, You have the Apostles Prospect, viz. his looking forward, where he
opens a fresh Spring, whence he draws his Comfort and Confidence at this time,
when he was making his entry into the dark valley of the shades of Death; and
then considers what he had in expectation on the other side the Grave.
Henceforth there is laid up for me a Crown of Righteousness, which the Lord the
Righteous Judge shall give me at that day; and not to me only, but unto all
them also that love his appearing. This was the Joy that was set before the Eye
of Paul's Faith. What appeared to his sense must needs be terrible, and
terrifying to Nature. Death when it comes clothed with the most desirable
Circumstances, must needs make Nature startle at it, Nature will certainly
recoil; and as such cannot bid it welcome. No those that seem most to court it,
that look and long for it, and with submission to Divine Pleasure have great
reason to do so; yet know it is never so for its own sake, but for the sake of
something that it is introductive to; as appears from that of the Apostle after
he had given testimony of his Faith, both as to the reality of the future state
of Felicity, and also of the assurance that he had attained of his personal and
particular interest in that state; as you read 2 Cor. 5. 1. For we know that if
our Earthly House of this Tabernacle were dissolved, we have a building of God,
a House not made with Hands, Eternal in the Heavens. The Considerations of
which, together with the present inconvenience, that did attend their present
Habitation here below; made them give many a long look, and fetch many a heavy
groan to be gone: And no wonder. Which of you that dwell in a pitiful poor mean
tottering Cottage, that know not but every day it may drop about your Ears;
that were sure that you had a Palace richly furnished for you, that stood
ready to receive you, would not do the like? Indeed if you had made no such
Provision, but might expect when ever you were turned out, you must lie abroad
exposed to Storms and Tempest, no wonder then if you (notwithstanding
inconveniences) were loath to depart. Truly the case is much thus betwixt
Sinners and Saints, no wonder you that are yet in a state of alienation from
God; that would never be persuaded to look after any further nor higher
happyness, than what results from a confluence of Creature Enjoyments. I say no
wonder that Death coming as a Messenger to call you from hence, to see you
cleaving and clinging so fast about the Creature, to find you sending post for
this and the the other Physician, and for this and the other Friend; crying out as
that young Man once did, when he was grapling with the pangs of Death; inducias
usque ad mane, Lord tarry till the Morning: When he knew not whether he was
going, but saw he must be exposed to the intolerable, and unavoidable storms of
God's Wrath; but for you Believers, who by an Eye of Faith may see the Heavens
opened, and Everlasting Mansions of Glory prepared for you, and an Honorable
Convoy sent to conduct you into the blessed Presence of a Reconciled God, it
would be a reproach to hang back; yet I observe what the forementioned Apostle
takes notice of: That when they came closely to consider the dark and narrow
entry of Death, that they were to pass through into the possession of this Land
of Light; when they considered the trouble they must be exposed to in their
removal from this Tabernacle on Earth, to their glorious Temple in Heaven* It
put them to the shrug, and occasioned a Contest betwixt Flesh and Spirit in
this matter, verse 4. We that are in this Tabernacle do groan being burdened;
not for that we would be unclothed, but clothed upon; that mortality might be
swallowed up of Life.

There is a double groan that God's people often fetch in this hour, the one of
Nature, the other of Grace.

That of Nature arises from the apprehension and fear of approaching Death,
together with the afflictive Evils that attend it. The other of Grace,
expressive of those earnest desires of that future state of Bliss and Glory,
(whereof they are supposed to have some present prelibations) to be dissolved,
and to be with Christ, which is far better, than the best state on Earth. Now
when the groans of Grace are louder than the groans of Nature, as sometimes
they are; then Death is bid welcome, and they can heartily cry out, as this
Gracious Soul did: Come Lord Jesus, come quickly, and why are thy Chariot
wheels so long a coming?

I know much time, and more than can be allowed for this exercise, might be
spent, and that profitably too in the explication of the Contents of these two
Verses: The handling of which would swell rather into a large Treatise, than be
confined to the limits of a single Sermon. But that I may fulfill the Will of
the Deceased, that gave me no liberty* to speak to any particular branch of it:
but repeated the whole as my subject; and yet not be offensive by too great a
prolixity to the Living, I shall with all possible brevity that may be
consistent with perspecuity, give you little more than a short Paraphrase upon
the whole; waving what ever might be judged ornamental to my Discourse, as not
being so seasonable for such a serious Dispensation; where Death and Eternity
are so immediately in view, and we are to look upon each other as passing and
posting to Everlasting Mansions.

In the words then consider two more general parts:

First, A Christians Work faithfully performed, or a Believers great business,
upon which God has sent him into, and continues him in this World carefully
dispatched; and this expressed under several Metaphors relating to Paul both as
a Christian, in his personal and more private Capacity, and as a Minister of
the Gospel in his more public Capacity, verse 6. I have fought the good fight,
I have finished my course, I have kept the faith.

Secondly, Here is a comfortable and well-grounded expectation of the promised
reward, as consequential upon his finishing his work, and this with a
particular application and appropriation to himself; though not without the
same security to all others in the like case, and as supposed for the main in
the same Spiritual Condition. Henceforth is laid up for me a Crown of
Righteousness, etc.

I shall put both these together into the Doctrine or Proposition, viz.

Doct. That all those, and only those who have good evidences of their having
done and dispatched their great work and business God has allotted for them in
this World, can with comfort and confidence ensure to themselves the
expectation of the promised reward in the other World, at their Death, or day
of Retribution.

This is a plain and undoubted Truth, no well-grounded expectation of our
Reward till we have first finished our Work. Christ himself who was both a Son
and a Servant, sent by his Father into the World; had work appointed him to do,
a work of the greatest weight and importance that ever was put into the hands
of any to dispatch, the reparation of his Fathers Glory eclipsed by Man's
Rebellion and Apostasy, and the Redemption and Salvation of all the Elect
depended upon Christ's finishing this work; and a work to be done within a
limited time; as may be inferred from what our Savior speaks. I must work the
works of him that sent me while John 9. 4.
it is day; the night comes when no man can work. A work that had many works
in it: Here was doing work, and here was suffering work; and upon his faithful
discharge of this great work, a glorious Reward was insured to Christ; and you
may observe, that though the work he was engaged in, was difficult and hard,
too difficult for all the Angels in Heaven or Creatures on Earth to undertake:
In the doing of which he met with inexpressible Discouragements and
Oppositions, both from Friends and Enemies: And the reward he expected was a
high and glorious reward, such a massy Crown as could fit no Head but Christ's,
which might well put him upon earnest longing for it; as you see he did by what
the Apostle tells us, Heb. 12. 2. speaking of this Blessed Jesus, Looking unto
Jesus, the Author and Finisher of our Faith, who for the joy that was set
before him endured the Cross, despising the shame, and is set down at the right
hand of God. Yet we never find that either the consideration of the one, the
difficulty of his work, or the consideration of the other the beauty and
brightness of his reward; did put him upon desiring or expecting the possession
of his promised Glory, till he could say he had done his work; and then indeed
you will see him addressing his Father in this manner. I have glorified thee on
the Earth: I have finished the work which thou gave me to do: (...) 17. 4, 5.
And now O Father glorify thou me with thine own self, with the Glory which I
had with thee before the world was: q. d. I have done my work, and I expect my
reward.

Truly thus it is in all our cases: That God who has sent us into the World,
and has appointed our time, and limited our (...) 14.
boundt beyond which we cannot pass. This God has also prescribed our work,
what we are to do in this short time allotted for us: He has not sent us
hither only to gaze about us; or to feed and gratify the carnal and sensual
inclinations of a corrupt heart, in spending these precious hours in sports and
pastimes. No, no, as God has given us work to do, so he has furnished us with
talents to be improved for the Glory (...) 25. 15.
of that God who gave us our beings: He has committed the care of precious
Souls, (one of which is more in value than (...) 16. 26.
Ten Thousand Worlds) to be recovered out of that lapsed and lost Estate into
which they are fallen: He has given his Word for our Direction, has promised
his Spirit for our help; he has betrusted us with choice advantages and
opportunities for the facilitating of what work we have to do: He has
appointed a day for the calling us to an account, and a Acts 17. 3
Judge to give forth a Righteous Retribution, according to what we have done in
the Flesh, whether it be good or evil: He has proposed and promised a blessed
and glorious Reward; not as merited by our work, but as consequential upon it,
a Reward not of Debt but of mere Grace and Favor: He has threatened an
Everlasting Punishment as the demerit of our neglect of that, great Salvation
set before us: Cutting us off from Heb. 2. 3.
all hopes of enjoying the former, and of escaping the latter, without
finishing the work he has given us to do. These things are so evident in
Scripture, that you whose lot is cast under the Dispensation of these Divine
Revelations cannot plead ignorance; so that if your days be finished, and your
work unfinished: Woe be to that Man or Woman, it had been better for them they
had never been born.

But on the other side, If we can say with Paul in my Text That we have fought
the good fight, and finished our course, etc. Then when Death comes thou may
entertain it with a smile, and triumph over it; and though it closes thine
Eyes, so as to hinder thy beholding of all thy amiable enjoyments here on
Earth. Thou shall see them no more, but must bid adieu to them all for ever.
Yet will thou then by an Eye of Faith with Stephen, See the Heavens opened, and
the Son of Acts 7. 56
Man standing on the right hand of God; ready to receive thee, and bid thee
welcome, to that glorious Inheritance, incorruptible and undefiled, and that
fades not away, reserved in Heaven for you, 1 Pet. 1. 4.

Having thus for brevity's sake hudled matters together in general; I shall now
in order to further instruction reduce the whole under two heads.

1. With respect to the work which we have to do here on Faith: What it is, and
how, and when it may be said to be finished.

2. Somewhat with respect to the promised reward in Heaven, which follows: What
that is, and upon what basis our hopes and expectations of it are bottomed.

In the managing of both these I shall follow the guidance of my Text.

(1.) Then as to the work we have to do in this Life: What it is: I hope I need
not mind you, that the work I am speaking to, relates not to the Duties of your
particular Callings as Men, and as disposed by the Conduct of Divine Providence
into this and that civil and secular Employment, which are many and various,
and which are so to be managed as may best subserve your general Calling as
Christians. But the work I am to speak to is of a far higher Nature, that which
does not so immediately, nor primarily respect our beings or well-beings with
respect to time; as what respects our well-beings to Eternity: A work that has
some resemblance, and bears some parity to the great work that Jesus Christ the
Son of God came into the World for; though to be performed in a far different
manner. Christ's work was reducible to two general heads.

First, The glorifying of his Father: So you read, John 17. 4. I have glorified
thee on the Earth, I have finished the work which thou gave me to do; q. d.
Father that was the work which thou sentest me into the World for, and that
work I have done.

Secondly, Christ's work was to accomplish the Redemption and Salvation of all
God's Elect. This work Christ had upon his hand to do, and he did it: Hence is
he by way of Emphasis styled our Redeemer, our Savior, Ephesians. 1. 7. in whom we
are said to have redemption, the remission of sins through his blood, according
to the riches of his Grace: And so, Heb. 9. 12. Neither by the blood of goats
and calves, he entered once into the holy place, having obtained eternal
redemption for us; and Heb. 5. 9. Being made perfect, he became the Author of
Eternal Salvation unto all them that obey him. This was Christ's work, and this
work he finished on Earth; so far: as his Father had appointed him to do here.

2. Our work comes under the same denomination, and falls under these two heads.

1. Our business is to glorify God. Whether therefore ye 1 Cor. 10. 31.
eat or drink or whatever ye do, do all to the glory of God. It becomes us,
every morning when we rise up, to put this Question to our selves, how shall we
so fill up this day as that God may have Glory from us? and at night, when we
lie down, to ask our own Hearts what glory has God had from us this day?

2. Our work lies in securing our Eternal Salvation Christ's working does not
exclude nor excuse our putting our hand to the same work; no, we must work too;
though not in the same, but in a far different manner, work out your own
salvation with fear and trembling. For it is God who works in you Phil. 2.
12, 13.
both to will and to do of his good pleasure. We work not as Christ did by way
of purchase and impetration; Here we can have no hand; But in a way of
Application and Appropriation, in which neither can we do any thing as of our
selves, but as we are assisted and strengthened by the operations of Gods
Spirit. We are saved by grace through faith, and that not of our Ephesians. 2. 8.
selves, it is the gift of God.

Having thus in plain Terms given you an Account of your work in general, I
shall speak to it as it is metaphorically expressed in my Text.

I have fought the good fight, I have finished my course, I have kept the
faith. This Paul gives us an account of, both with respect to his public and
more private and personal Station, as a Minister and as a Christian. I shall
pass by the former in silence, and speak only to the latter. In the words you
have comprehended the whole Duty of Man, the sum of the practical part of
Christianity; and this under three Metaphors.

1. I have fought the good Fight: In which he compares the life of a Christian
to a Military or Soldiers life, a continual Warfare.

2. He compares it to the running of a Race, where a price is insured to them
who run well.

3. He compares it to a faithful Repositor or Steward to one that has somewhat
of worth and weight committed to his Trust; of which a good account is to be
given. My business is to give you a short Paraphrase of the Christians work, as
veiled under these similitudes.

First, As our Life while here on Earth is expressed by a continued Combat or
Warfare; I have fought a good fight* ^rtamen Evan^licum contra ^iaboli
insidias, ^undi exempla (...) carnis illece^as. Grotius.
A good fight, engaging in a good cause; and that which if heartily engaged in
is sure to have a good issue and event. Thus the Life of a Christian in
Scripture is frequently represented: 2 Cor. 10. 4. For the weapons of our
warfare are not carnal, but mighty through God, to the pulling down of strong
holds, casting down imaginations, and every high thing which exalts it self
against the knowledge of God; and bringing into Captivity every thought into
the obedience of Christ. Hence in the foregoing Epistle, Paul charges Timothy
to war a good warfare; Paul had Tim. 1. 18.
been himself a stout Champion, a courageous Soldier in this Holy War, his
life ever since he was brought home to God, and first had taken Arms in this
good Cause, had been a continual conflict; many a hot skirmish he had had, many
a sharp encounter he had gone through; and possibly many a wound he had
received, but he still kept the Field, and had now upon the matter put his
Enemies to a perpetual Rout, and was himself going out of the Field, through
Christ that strengthened him, more than Conqueror. Beloved, how large and
copious a Subject I have here before me, I need not tell you, but my time will
not allow me. This War my discourse leads me to, is of a far higher Nature, and
the success that such who are engaged in it are concerned about, is of
Everlasting moment. The Enemies we must combat with are utterly implacable:
that they will either kill or be killed. No peace not so much as a truce, to be
made or endeavored with them: Fight and Live, Yield and Dye, may well be every
Christians Motto, for (says the Apostle) if ye live after the flesh ye shall
dye, but if ye through the Spirit do mortify the deeds ^^m. 8. 13.
of the body ye shall live.

Here I will only touch upon a few particulars for the further illustration of
these matters, and this in a brief resolution of the following Queries.

1. Whom we are to understand by the Soldiers that are engaged in these Wars
against these implacable Enemies; and what Captain or General they fight under.
For the Soldiers they are all Believers, such as had been taken Captive, but
are supposed to be rescued by the power of Christ the great Redeemer; and being
thus rescued in way of Gratitude to this blessed Redeemer, together with an Eye
to their own safety, they have devoted themselves to his Service, and under his
Banner stand obliged to oppose the World, Flesh and Devil; depending upon him
for all their success, as also for the obtaining their blessed Reward, as
consequential upon their Conquest. So that these spiritual Soldiers, such as
we can heartily bid God speed, and pray for their good Success are all true
Believers, who stand devoted to Christ the Heb. 2. 10. Col. 1. 21. Acts 5. 3^.
Captain of their Salvation; all others who remain in their unregenerate state,
they are Enemies to Christ and his followers, who have for their General the
Devil, whom they follow and for whom they fight against God, against his
Spirit, nay War against 1 Pet. 2. 11.
their own Soul. Some of these Enemies are more secret, and carry on their
oppositions against God in a more hidden and cunning way; displaying Gods
Colors whilst they are managing the Devils Quarrels. Others are more open and
notorious, that declare their Sin as Sodom and hide it not: That Isa. 3. 9.
set their Mouth against the Heavens; that dare to challenge God to his face.
Of this sort are all the openly profane, Debauched, Atheistical, Idolatrous,
Antichristian Crew. These are the primo geniti diaboli, and may be called the
Devils Janissaries. Of these we may say as Eliphaz does of the wicked, They
stretch out their hand against God, and strengthen Job 15. 25, 26.
themselves against the Almighty, they run upon him even on his neck, upon the
thick bosses of his Bucklers. But as many and as mighty as all these be, yet
sooner or later they shall all be overcome, and shall yield either to the
Scepter of his Grace: O blessed Conquest! or else be broken in pieces by a Rod
of Iron. But we are now speaking of such as fight a good fight; that are come
on to Gods side, and are engaged for God and Christ, against those
principalities and powers, and rulers of the (...) 6. 12.
darkness of this World. You have heard who the Combatants are.

2. In the next place we may enquire when they were first listed, and enrolled
into Christ's Army, and became engaged in this Holy Warfare. Why this was not
from their first entrance into the World; Alas no! we were all at first on the
other side, born Enemies to God, and in condition of Servitude and Bondage to
the Devil: All by Nature in a state of Rebellion against God, and
Self-destroyers; but we become and were made so by Grace. The time of our first
being Listed under Christ's Banner takes its Date from our Conversion. When we
are brought to a hearty and sincere Closure with and Entertainment of Christ as
our Lord and Savior, as offered to us in and by the Gospel; which is that
great instrument by the joyful sound of which Christ by his Ambassadors goes
forth and invites and calls poor Sinners off from the Devils Camp, and to yield
themselves to him: And when these outward Calls are accompanied by the
efficacious workings of Gods Spirit, then Sinners are made willing in the day
of Christ's power. Christ and his Gospel where they come do (...) 10. 3.
not find sinners willing at the first motion to hearken to his Counsel, nor
quit their Arms, nor submit to him, but he makes them willing; and from that
time of their yielding to Christ, they declare War against the World, the Flesh
and the Devil. And these Enemies upon this grow more enraged than before, which
young Converts are not so well aware of many times, drawing very uncomfortable
and unwarrantable Conclusions against themselves, thinking they are now worse
than before, because they find their enemies more busy and enraged than in
time past. But remember this the Devil and our Lust are ordinarily most
destructive where they are lest disturbing. Whilst the strong man armed
keeps his Palace, (...) 1. 21.
his goods are at peace.

3. Enquiry might be made what Enemies the Christian Soldier has to encounter
with? these you know are commonly reduced to three Heads, viz. the Devil, the
World, and the Flesh.

First, The Devil, from whose Tyrannical dominion Believers are enabled to
escape. He is our old Adversary, he is called a murderer from the beginning.
Oh the many ways Joh. 8. 44.
and stratagems by which he carries on his pernicious designs 2 Cor. 2. 1^
against poor Souls! both to retain and hold fast such as he has taken in his
snare, by whom they are carried captive at his 2 Timothy 2. 2^
will; and that which is most sad, by the consent of their own will too; and
also to reduce and bring back again such as have fled to Christ for refuge, to
lay hold upon the hope set before them. Heb. 6. 18.
Against whom Christians are warned to keep their eye upon, 1 Pet. 5. 8, 9, Be
sober, be vigilant; because your adversary the devil, as a roaring lion,
walks about seeking whom he may devour. Whom resist steadfast in the faith.

Secondly, The World; Which not as made by God, but as marred by Sin, is an
inveterate Enemy against the Christian; which therefore we are cautioned
against by no means to give entertainment to in our Affections, Love not the 1 John 2. 15.
world, neither the things that are in the world; if any man love the world,
the love of the father is not in him. This World is a Witch, a Delilah; what
unspeakable detriment have Christians been exposed to, when once by her
Allurements they have been enticed to take a nap and lay their Heads in the Lap
of the Profits, Pleasures or Honors of this World? What advantage has Satan
hereby taken to cut their Locks, and abate their strength which many times has
scarce been recovered to their dying day!

Thirdly, The flesh, which though mentioned in the last place yet is not the
least of those Enemies the Christian has to encounter with, but rather the
worst, and greatest. For what could Satan or the World do without, if it were
not for the Flesh within? By Flesh I mean not the Body, but the remainders of
the corrupt Nature, that inward and unseen depravity which like a Leprosy has
overspread us from head to foot, that body of Sin the blessed Apostle
complained of; which warred against the law of his mind, and brought him into
captivity to the Law of sin which was in his Members. This like a Romans 7. 23,
25.
Traitor in a City or Castle is always ready upon every occasion to open the
gates and let in the Enemies that lie in siege against it.

Fourthly, We might further enquire what those Weapons are, both Offensive and
Defensive, with which Believers must be armed to encounter with these Enemies;
and which upon their first listing themselves they are to put on, and so to put
on, as never to put them off till they have gained a perfect Conquest: To which
I briefly answer, you may find them summed up in one Chapter, where you have
the Christians Armory or Magazine; to which the Soul upon its closure with
Christ, and first Engagement must repair; and with which he must furnish
himself: Never thinking to encounter these Enemies naked with success; nor with
any other Weapons which are not of this make: You have them set down by the
Apostle, Ephesians. 6. from the 11th. to the 18th verse of that Chapter; where we
are exhorted, ver. 11. Put on the whole Armor of God, that ye may be able to
stand against the wiles of the Devil. This Counsel is repeated, ver. 13, the
several pieces of this Spiritual Armor are set down in the following Verses,
viz. 14, 15, 16, 17. The girdle of truth, and the breast plate of
righteousness, the feet shod with the preparation of the Gospel of Peace, the
Shield of Faith, the Helmet of Salvation, the Sword of the Spirit. These things
I cannot now open, only observe the Title that is put upon them all; they are
styled the Armor of God, amongst other reasons for these two to note to us,
that they are all of Divine institution, and of divine constitution. All other
Weapons which are of Humane make and invention, as I might instance in many;
especially such as are framed in Antichrist's Forge; How fond soever some are
of them, will in these Spiritual Encounters be of no use, nor force. It Is not
the besprinkling our selves with Holy Water, or signing our selves with the
sign of the Cross, that will defend us from, or help us against the assaults of
the Devil. These are but wooden Daggers and elder Guns, that will never do
execution.

It may be said of the Devil as to all such Weapons, What is said of the
Leviathan, such Darts are counted as stubble, and 1. 29.
he laughs at the shaking of such Spears.

Fifthly, We should enquire what the cause or controversy is that occasions
these continued Combats betwixt the Believer and these Spiritual Enemies? Why,
it is whether the Christian should remain and persevere in further subjection
to God and Christ, to whom he has devoted himself, and who is his rightful
Lord and Sovereign; and on whom depend all his present comforts and future
hopes: Or whether he should basely and treacherously revolt and return to his
former bondage and slavery to his Temporal and Eternal Ruin. This my Brethren
is the plain case, this is their design they aim at, nothing short of this will
put an end to this Controversy to the contentment of thy Adversaries; and in
this is it thy concern to oppose them to the utmost.

Sixthly, We might yet further enquire, what those Victories are which the
Christian Combatant obtains against these Enemies?

These are of two sorts:

1. Such as are inchoate, particular Conquests, in particular cases, and
particular conflicts with this or that single temptation or corruption: And
these are temporary; upon which the Enemy is put upon retreat, and withdrawing
for a season; though they quickly rally again; and many times make fiercer
onsets than before: As Christians find by frequent experience. Thus he dealt
with our Blessed Savior; in that single combat which he was permitted to
engage in with the Captain of our Salvation as it were hand to hand. It Is said
he was led up of the Spirit into the Wilderness to be Matthew. 4.
tempted of the Devil. After this hold encounter, it is said, verse 11. Then the
Devil leaves him: But how long, not for ever: No the Evangelist Luke tells us,
He departed from him for a season. Though our Savior had the Victory, yet was
Luke 4. 1
he not quite routed, but returned again, though not in the like manner.

2. Therefore there is a Conquest that the Christian shall at length get over
those Enemies, that shall be complete and consummate: But this is not to be
expected till the Christian can say with Paul, The time of my departure is at
hand. This Conquest Paul had now in prospect by an Eye of Faith; then when
Death comes, Christ leads them out of the Field more than Conquerours; where
they shall be out of their reach, they shall sin no more, nor be tempted any
more; but all tears shall be wiped from their Eyes, and Everlasting Joy shall
be upon their Heads, and Sorrow and sighing shall flee away. Thus have I
briefly run over the first Metaphor by which the Christians work is expressed.

Secondly, Another Metaphor by which the same thing is denoted: The Christians
work is compared to the running of a race: I have finished my course, says
Paul. Many a weary step he had taken, so it was and might be accounted
considering the many encumbrances he was laden with, and the many difficulties
as to the Flesh he was exposed to. Otherwise Wisdoms (...) 17.
ways are ways of pleasantness, and all her paths are peace. Many a
Temptation to turn aside, or go back, many a rub and difficulty to get over
Paul had doubtless met with; but now he was come to the last stage, and almost
to the end of that too; he was just ready to receive his Garland. A few steps
more and he should enter upon his Everlasting rest: I have (says he) finished
my course, got to the end of my race.

A Christians Life is often in Scripture compared to the running of a Race, 1
Cor. 9. 24. Know ye not that they which run in a race run all, but one
receives; the prize so run that ye may obtain: And elsewhere the Apostle
speaking to some who had espoused the Faith of the Gospel, and were now in
danger of declining from the Truths they had embraced. He gives them this
admonition: Ye did run well, who did binder you that ye should not obey the
truth: And so in Heb. 12. 1. Let us run with patience the race that is set
before us. If you should ask me wherein the Life of Christianity is like the
running of a Race: I answer briefly in a few particulars, though many others
might be mentioned.

First, In the running of a Race: Care must be taken that the persons that run
start fair, I mean not together; but that they begin at a right place appointed
by him who has the ordering of that affair. Now to accommodate this to a
Christian Race; this must always take its rise from the Souls sincere closing
with Christ by Faith; before a Sinners sound Conversion to God by Christ, he
cannot run right: There are some, I fear too many that observe not this order;
but all on a sudden will jump (as it were) into a profession of Religion, and
appear very forward and zealous; and seem to outstrip a great many sound
Christians: But, alas! For want of setting out right, not laying their building
upon the true basis, viz. Repentance toward God, and Faith in our Lord Jesus
Christ; They soon tire and turn aside; and though they Acts 20. 21.
seem to begin in the Spirit, they take up and end in the flesh; and all their
goodness (like Ephraims) proves like the morning Hos. 6. 4.
dew, and the early cloud that soon passes away. This, this is one of the
great grounds of Apostasy; of which this Age affords too many instances. You
young ones that begin to favor the things of God, remember this; trouble not
your Heads with Controversies and Disputable Points, at least till you have
well studied, and are thoroughly versed in the great and necessary, and with all
plain Doctrines of Faith and Repentance, the two Essentials of sound Conversion.

2. The running of a Race is a regular Motion: It is not a running any where
backward or forward; but a keeping to those Rules and Limits that are
prescribed by him or them that have the ordering of it. Religion is not a wild
disorderly, extravagant, fanciful thing; but a walking by rule, and that by a
right rule that is prescribed by God's word: As many as walk according to this
rule, peace be on them, and mercy, and Gal. 6. 16.
upon the Israel of God. And says David, I will run the ways Psalm. 119. 32.
of thy Commandments, when thou shall enlarge my heart: Some have been and are
yet upon the run, (God stop them) that run from God and Christ, and Salvation,
and run to the Devil, and post to the bottomless pit; as if it were with them,
as with the Swine when possessed by the Devil; who are said to run violently
down a steep place into the Sea, and perish in the Matthew. 8. 32.
waters. The Psalmist tells us, (and I think many in this Nation have given us
sad proof of it:) Their sorrows shall be multiplied Psalm. 16. 4.
that hasten after another God. Blessed be God we have seen the accomplishment
of the former, as well as the latter; these are sad Races: But by what Rules
were they acted? No other, no better than the Lusts, and cursed Imaginations of
their own Hearts: But such as run the Christian Race must observe God's Word
for then Guide: Thus David, Thy word Psalm. 119. 05.
is a light to my feet, and a lamp to my paths. It Is not the decrees of Popes,
nor Canons of Councils, nor sayings of Fathers, but God's Word that in this
Race is to be our Guide. Thou Psalm. 73. 24.
shall guide me with thy counsel, and afterward receive me to glory.

Thirdly, The running of a Race is a progressive motion. It is not the running
in a round, but a going forward, Phil. 3. 13, 14. Brethren I count not my self
to have apprehended; but this one thing I do forgetting those things which are
behind, and reaching forth unto those things that are before; I press toward
the mark, for the prize of the high Calling of God in Christ Jesus. This speaks
the Christians daily endeavor; to grow in Grace, and 2 Pet. 3. 18.
in the knowledge of our Lord and Savior Jesus Christ. There must be a going
from strength to strength, a striving to get more of God, and do more for God.
Here must be no standing still, nor much less any turning aside, or going back.
O Christians! How earnest had we all need be in our pleadings with God, that he
would heal our backslidings, and accomplish that gracious Promise; The
Righteous also shall hold on his Job 17. 9.
way, and he that has clean hands shall be stronger and stronger.

Fourthly, Running of a Race is a painful motion; there is and must be a
putting forth all the strength a Man has. So my Friends the performance of the
Duties of Christianity is no easy thing to Flesh and Blood: No room for
Spiritual sloth, and laziness. The way in Heavens road is up hill, and most
what rough and uneasy way to the Flesh; and such as move in it, must expect to
meet with difficulties; which considering the clogs that hang about us, the Sin
that so easily besets us, will require our utmost strength; and to send up loud
cries to Heaven for daily supplies: As David, Hold up my goings Psalm. 17. 5.
in thy paths, that my footsteps slip not. How miserably are they mistaken,
that conceit it is an easy matter to be a Christian, or to live a Christians
Life.

Fifthly, The running of a Race is adjudged to be a constant, continued, and
persevering motion without stop or stay till we come to the end. So Beloved,
Christianity will find the Christian work every day. Herein do I exercise my
self to have always a Conscience void of Acts 24. 16.
offense toward God, and toward Men. He does not say I have done, or I will
do; no it is a work always a doing. You have work not only for the Lord's day,
when you have more immediately to do with God, but on the week days. Your
Religion is not then to be laid aside; as if all your Devotion was to be left
at Church, and as if you were obliged to serve God only one day in, and the
Devil and the Flesh all the week after. This speaks that it is not enough to be
Religious now and then in a good mood, or for a spurt and away; to take a few
steps where the way is smooth and fair: No there must be a going through thick
and thin: Blessed are they that keep judgment, and he that does righteousness
Psalm. 106. 3.
at all times: He that endures to the end shall be saved. Matthew. 24. 13.


Quest. But here an enquiry may be made: How Paul could say he had finished his
course, before he had finished his days? It Is apparent that his Glass was not
yet run, and so his Work was not yet done, he had a dark and thorny Stage to
pass through yet, in which he had at present taken but a few steps.

Resol. 1. To this I answer, First Negatively, That if you take it in a plain
literal sense, no Christian can be said to have finished his Course till he
have finished his Breath and Life: The whole Day, the Evening, as well as the
Noon and Morning, are appointed all for Work: Indeed when the Night comes, our
working time is over.

Resol. 2. But yet Secondly Affirmatively: A Believer may be said to have
finished his Work; as it is his sincere purpose and firm resolution not to give
over till he has finished it; as God through his Grace is ready to account
that to be done, which the gracious Soul purposes and resolves through Divine
Assistance to do: Thus some resolve the same Question refering to Christ,
saying, I have finished the work which thou gave John 17. 4.
me to do. How could this be, when as yet the bitterest part of that Cup his
Father had given him to drink was yet behind? To resolve this, Augustine puts
the Praeterperfect Tense into the Future Tense. I have finished it, viz. I will
finish it.

But lastly the best resolution of this concerning Christ, and Paul's saying he
had finished his Course; as thereby expressing their readiness as well as
resolvedness to finish and consummate the Work they had gone on in so far: I
have finished my Course; q. d. my time is just now at a period: I am now
entering upon the last Stage a few more steps to take, and all is over: A few
moments will perfect all, he lived in the view of Death which he saw was at the
door, which would put a Finis to all.

Thirdly, I proceed now to the third and last Metaphor; by which a Christians
Life is represented; alluding to the Duty of a faithful Steward, who having
somewhat of weight and worth committed to his Trust, is careful not to lose nor
embezzle it; but preserve it for the use of the Owner without damage or
detriment: Thus says Paul, I have kept the Faith. Here I shall touch only upon
two things.

1. What was this Treasure, this Trust, that is supposed to be committed to
Paul's care? The Faith. 2. How Paul, or any true Christian may be said to keep
this depositum, this Faith? I have kept the Faith.
First, What this Faith is?

Faith is chiefly to be considered under one of these two Heads.

1. Either the Grace of Faith; that Grace whereby through the operation of the
Spirit of God, we come to be united to Christ, and interested in him, and all
the benefits and blessings that he has purchased, called precious Faith, the
Faith (...) Pet. 1. 1. (...). 1. 1.
of God's Elect, as peculiar to God's chosen ones: This is committed to
Christians by way of operation and infusion, and donation: By Grace ye are
saved through Faith, and that not of your selves, it is the gift of God.

2. By Faith we are to understand the Doctrine of Faith; the revelation of the
Divine Will in the Gospel of God's Grace, which was committed to Paul as a
Minister to be by him dispensed and preached to others; as being the power of
God unto salvation: And elsewhere he tells us that Christ has (...)m. 1. 16.
committed unto us the word of Reconciliation: And this is also a trust
committed unto all Christians; to be professed, (...) Cor. 5. 19.
owned, obeyed, believed, against all gainsayers whosoever, whether they be Men
of unsound Minds, or ungodly Livers: Which some professing have erred
concerning the Faith. This is 1 Timothy 6. 21* Jude 3.
that Faith which we are exhorted, earnestly to contend for, which was once
delivered to the Saints.

Secondly, What is meant by his keeping the Faith? To which I answer,

1. If you take it in the former sense, then it imports his constant endeavor
to keep that Grace in its exercise, by a constant cleaving to, and relyance
upon God and Christ for Life and Salvation, drawing continued supplies of his
Grace and Spirit, for the enabling a Christian to do his present work, and to
fit him for his future reward; and this against all the opposition that he may
meet with, from the sly and subtle suggestions and insinuations of the Devil,
who has a special spite at the Christians Faith.

2. But if you take it in the latter sense, then it imports the holding fast
our profession of this both in our principles, and practices, against all
attempts of Seducers and Persecutors, and against all the enticing and alluring
examples of profane and ungodly ones: Such there have been, and never more
than in this loose and ungodly Age in which we live: When Iniquity abounds, and
the Love of many waxes cold: When Matthew. 24. 12.
there are great endeavors to laugh all true Religion, and Godliness in its
power out of countenance, and various stratagems to induce Christians to make
shipwreck of Faith and a good 1 Timothy 1. 19.
Conscience.

Thus have I given you a short account of the first part of my Text, as
expressive of the true Christians work; a work to be done here.

I proceed now very briefly to Paul's prospect what he had in view hereafter,
relating to the Glorious Reward he was upon the matter entering into the
possession of.

Henceforth is laid up for me a Crown of Righteousness: I purpose only to note
a very few things, and shut up the whole with a short Application.

First, Here we have an account of that future felicity, which is reserved for
the Saints; it is a Crown, and a Crown of Righteousness: A Crown, which you
know, is an Ensign of the greatest Honor upon Earth, and an Emblem of the
highest Glory in Heaven. Such a Crown, and such a Kingdom, as infinitely
exceeds all the Crowns and Kingdoms of the World; it is an Incorruptible Crown;
a Crown, which fades not away; (...) 9. 25.
whereas all the Crowns of Kings and Emperors, which are so eagerly contended
for by the Men of this World, are poor, (...) 5. 4.
perishing, corrupting, fading things. It Is a Crown of Life. (...) 1. 12.
What shall I say? It Is not only a Glorious Crown, but a Crown of Glory.

Secondly, It Is a Crown of Righteousness; as peculiarly belonging to those, who
are clothed with the Robe of Christ's Righteousness imputed, and with the fine
Linen of the Righteousness of Christ imparted: And also, as a Righteous, but
yet free Reward, which the Righteous God has promised, and will faithfully
perform.

2. We may observe here the time of Believers entering upon the possession of
this future Glory.

1. In part, as to their Souls: Henceforth; that is immediately upon their
Death and Dissiolution. Blessed are the dead which dye in the Lord, from
henceforth; yea faith the Spirit, (...) 14. 13.
that they may rest from their labors, and their works do follow them: So
Paul; Having a desire to depart, and to be with Christ. (...) 1. 23
In the same moment, wherein they pass from Earth, they go to Heaven; there is
no calling in at Purgatory by the way; no middle state to detain the Souls of
Believers in.

2. Perfectly and completely, with respect to Soul and Body at a certain day;
the day of Judgment, which will be a day of Retribution, which is called by way
of emphasis in the Text, That Day. A remarkable day it will be, when the whole
World shall be determined and sent to their Everlasting abodes, either of
Happiness on the one side, or Misery on the other.

Thirdly, We may observe the manner of the Saints entering upon this Glorious
Possession; not as matter of merit, but by way of free donation; which God the
righteous Judge shall give me,; says Paul here. Eternal Life cost Christ very
dear, (no less than his Lifeblood) but it comes free to us, without price or
purchase on our part. It Is not our deserved Wages, but the gift of God through
Jesus Christ our Lord. (...) 23.


Fourthly, We have here the Extent of this Gift, not only to such as Paul, a
Believer of the highest Fourm, a Star of the first Magnitude in the Firmament
of the Church, (not to me only, etc.) but to every true, though weak Believer;
to all who can approve themselves such as love the Lord Jesus in sincerity, and
look and long for his appearing. It was not the peculiar privilege of this
great Apostle, but a common Salvation, which belongs to all the faithful, from
the greatest to the least of Saints. And thus I have dispatched the Doctrinal
part of this Text, I shall only add a word or two for the practical improvement
of it.

First, If they, and only they, who have good evidence of having done and
dispatched their great Work and Business in this World, can with comfort and
confidence ensure to themselves the expectation of the promised Reward in the
other: Then hence we may infer the madness and folly of a great part of those
that hear me this day: Who have been so often told of this Future State, and
profess to believe it, and by daily renewed instances of Mortality cannot but
be convinced, that they are drawing near to it, and perhaps may be upon the
very brink of it, not knowing what a day or night may bring forth, and yet they
have lived all their days in a total neglect of that work, whose accomplishment
is a necessary praerequisite to this promised Reward: Who are so far from
having conquered their Enemies, and fought the good fight, that they have not
yet really listed themselves under Christ's Banner, who are still Servants of
Sin, and Slaves of the Devil, and Strangers and Enemies to Christ; who are
found fighting indeed, but whom or what do they fight for? They are fighters
against God, resisters of the Spirit, striving against the Counsels of God's
Word, and the Motions of his Grace, and resolved to maintain and defend their
Lusts. Poor, wretched Souls! Can you think to live here always? Or, that your
Houses shall continue for ever? Do you never expect to dye? Or is it
indifferent with you, where Death will set you, in Heaven or in Hell? The Lord
so awaken you, that you may give no sleep to your Eyes, nor rest to your Souls,
till you come in at the sound of the Gospel-Trumpet. You who have not taken one
step in this Christian Race; who are running indeed, but whither (I beseech
you) so fast? You are running from God, with your Faces toward Hell, and your
Backs upon Heaven; and there is no stopping you (as yet) in this cursed Race;
Ministers call after you; God calls, and holds out a Crown to you, invites and
entreats you to consider your ways, and turn your feet unto his Testimonies.
You, who are so far from keeping the Faith, that you are Strangers to any such
Work and Gift; you have none in truth to keep: You may have and make a
profession, but it is so weakly bottomed, so little understood, and you are so
unable to give a reason of it, that you are ready to part with it, when the
next temptation assaults you. The Lord give you to believe, and put the Spirit
of Faith within you, before it be too late to cure your Infidelity, and you
perish from the way.

Secondly, Improve this, Oh you Christians, who are Christians indeed, for your
encouragement in your Work and Way. You; who have entered the Lists, and are
engaged in this Holy War; let what you have heard this day, strengthen you in
your Conflicts. It is true, God has cast your Lot in an evil day, in which all
your Enemies, the World, Flesh and Devil are coming forth full of rage and
fury, and you may expect a terrible shock; but let me beseech you to endure
(...) 2. 3.
hardness, as good Soldiers of Jesus Christ. Still think, that you hear Christ
calling to you, Be of good cheer, I have overcome (...) 33.
the World; I may add, and the God of the World too. You must combat still,
but remember, it is with conquered Enemies. You have indeed rough ways to run
your Race in, but there is a Glorious prize before you; Be not weary of
well-doing, for in due season you shall reap, if you faint not. (...) 9.


There are, it is true, many Spoilers abroad, who would not only rob and deprive
you of your Estates and Lives, but of your Souls and Religion, and tempt you to
serve other Gods, which you have not known; but, bear up Christians against
them; Yet a little while, and he that shall come, will come, and will not
tarry. To conclude, hearken diligently to (...) 37.
what your Lord says, Hold fast that which thou have, that no Revel. 3. 11.
man take thy Crown.

Having thus finished what I intended from the Text it self, I shall now take
leave to begin another Subject; which shall be a just and faithful account of
this precious Saint and Servant of God, lately deceased; Mrs. Elizabeth King,
who having filled up the number of Thirteen Years the last day of the last
Month, was on the Seventeenth day of this, removed by a very Triumphant Death
out of the present World into a better, to the great grief not only of her
Parents (who are most immediately and especially concerned in the loss) but
also of all those who had converst with her, and seen or heard of that Blessed
frame which she was in at her departure hence; I say, to their great grief, tho
mixed with great joy, the pulling down of her Earthly House, being like the
laying of the Foundation of the second Temple, which occasioned both loud
shouting and weeping too. I have a Theme Ezra 3. 12.
before me, which might well employ the Tongue or Pen of the greatest Orator,
enough to strike the Hearers with wonder; but, at what? Not a poor empty
Creature, (which is nothing, or worse than nothing of it self) but the rich and
powerful Grace of God, which has been so conspicuous in so young a Child, as
may well be ushered in with a [Behold], and command both your quickest
attention, and highest admiration. To say nothing of her Ancestors, (the worthy
Grandfathers on both sides, who yet speak, though dead many years since, and
from whose Prayers, while alive, she may be justly supposed to have received
some benefit) nor of her Parentage, nor Education, I shall confine my self to
the recital of some passages, which dropped as Honey from her Lips, upon her
Deathbed; and especially on the day before her translation into Heaven. The
warning which God gave her to get ready for her change, was short, though she
was apprehensive (as she afterward declared) as soon as God laid his Hand upon
her, that the stroke would be mortal. The Messenger which her Heavenly Father
sent (I mean the Distemper, wherewith she was at first seized) had Esau's hand,
and handled her roughly; she was taken on the Lords day at night, or early in
the next morning of that week in which she dyed, with extreme tormenting pains,
and though she wanted no Humane help, it proved all but vain; and under such a
racking exercise (notwithstanding a very diligent application of means) she
continued till the Friday morning following; during which time, though she
could not forbear to groan, she was never heard to grumble; (as was said of her
Great Grandfather, whose name is famous (...) W. Gouge (...) Life.
in the Church of God) she never uttered one mutinous or discontented word, but
showed a mighty subjection of Soul to Gods mighty hand, and opened not her
mouth, so as to charge Him foolishly; she was dumb, because God did it, like
(...) 39. 9. (...) ^3. 7.
David, yea like Christ Himself, the unparalleld example of Divine Patience and
Meekness.

On the Friday morning before mentioned, whether her pains were more mitigated,
or Nature more spent, Grace begun more signally to discover it self: Her
Parents being then present, found her in such Heavenly raptures, and so
refresht with the prelibations and foretasts of that Glory which she was going
to, that it filled them with astonishment; for at that time God began to give a
remarkable answer to their Prayers, which were, that if He did call her hence
by this visitation (though that was earnestly deprecated with submission to His
Sovereign Pleasure) she might leave behind such plain and manifest proofs of
her eternal well-being, as might enable them to stand under that almost
insupportable burden; to these Prayers God was pleased to say, Amen; for though
they had very good and justifiable hopes from those Testimonies, which she had
given them in the time of her former Life, yet now her expressions and
behavior a little before her Death were so much more satisfactory, that they
left no room for the least doubt or suspicion of her Blessedness. Her Mother
putting it to her, whether she remembered any particular time, when God first
wrought upon her, she answered, No, but God had begun to work upon her, almost
as soon as she had a Being, or at least, as soon as she was come to the use of
Reason; only she recollected, that she had some remarkable impressions made by
the Spirit, at the hearing of a Sermon repeated from these words, Now we are
the Sons of God, but it does not yet appear, what we shall 1 John 3. 2.
be; and another time, at the hearing of a Sermon preached upon the Glory of the
Gospel, from that Text, In whom the God of this world has blinded the minds of
them that believe not, 2 Cor. 4. 4.
lest the light of the Glorious Gospel, etc. When I came to her that morning
before she dyed, (being sent for, at her urgent request) she desired me to
Preach her Funeral Sermon, upon the subject which you have heard, readily
repeating both the verses without any haesitation; adding, that she desired it,
not upon her own account, but for the sake of Religion; that the world might be
convinced there was somewhat in that (how much soever despised) which would
bear up the heart in a dying hour. With great gravity she exhorted me to go on
and Preach the Gospel, praying, that my Ministry might not be in vain;
whereupon telling her, that I hoped, it had not been in vain to her, she with
much heartiness replied, No, I bless God it has not. Another Neighboring
Minister, being called in the same morning to her, (at her request) when he
first came, and asked her how she did, she cheerfully answered, very well; how
can I be better? for I am going to my Heavenly Father. He then asking her,
whether she was willing to leave this World, she replied, Yes, most willing,
for why should I desire to live any longer in it? He telling her, that she had
now a great work to do, she answered, Yes, but I bless God, I am prepared for
it, and I fear not Death, for Christ by his Blood has taken out the sting. The
question being proposed to her, whether she would have him to pray with her,
she said, Yes, I would have you to pray, that God would continue to lift up the
light of his countenance upon me to the last, as he does now. And before he
came away from her, she prayed, that the Lord would be with him, and help him
to preach so, as that the World might have no occasion to jeer at Religion. She
was much concerned for the Public, and in her Addresses and Ejaculations to
God forgot not to mention Zion; but prayed for the downfall of those three
Enemies of the Church, the Turk, Antichrist, and Satan. And as to her self, she
prayed sometimes in these words, Lord, chase away the Tempter, and suffer him
not to darken my evidences now: And again she prayed, That when he came to her
as he did to Christ, he might find nothing in her.

When she was speaking of the sensible decays of her Body, and near approaches
to the Grave, she said, I feel my self as it were, like the Sun, going down
into another World. And when some drink was offered her, she cried, I shall
soon have done eating and drinking here, but am going to drink new Wine with
Christ in my Fathers Kingdom. Her want of Sleep being spoken of by a stander
by, she said, In a little while I shall sleep in the Lord, which is better than
any I can take here. When the sharpness and violence of her pains was
mentioned, she said, that indeed she could never have been able to endure them,
if God had not strengthened her, and given in such extraordinary comforts to
her; for she was never so sensible of his love, as when she was in the greatest
misery. And then she added, But alas! what are my pains in comparison of what
my dear Savior underwent, when he sweat drops of Blood for my sins? Some
weeping loud in the room, she begged them to forbear, saying, Why should you cry
for such a lump of dirt? It will do me no good, but make me dye the harder, and
I count it rather an Argument of hatred, than of love to me. When one spoke in
her hearing of the troubles of the times, she said, God is hiding me in the
hollow of his Hand, from the Besom of Destruction, which may be coming.

She very largely expressed her earnestness to be dissolved; at several times,
and more especially, when she found that her Death was deferred longer, than
she had supposed it would be; she cried out, I have tasted so much of the Joys
of Heaven, that I loath the Earth: What should I do in this Dunghill World,
where I hear the Name of my God so often blasphemed? I am weary of it, my Heart
is ready to break, because I may not go home to my Father. Oh! to have such a
sense of the Love of God, and then be put back again! I cannot bear it. I am
sure I shall go to Heaven: I wish that I might go quickly. I shall never enjoy
my self till I am there. One asked her whether if she might recover, she could
be willing to return again into this World; and she answered with some
vehemence, No. Yet notwithstanding all this, she was not irregularly impatient
to be gone, as appeared by that passage, The Lord look upon me, and enable me
to wait his time. She mingled the Praises of God with her Prayers to him, and
was heard sometimes to utter those words, Grace, Grace.

She gave very serious Counsels to those that came to see her, and stood about
her; she spoke to her Brother and Sisters in a way suitable to their Capacities,
and amongst other things, strictly cautioned them against the Sin of Lying, and
advised them to be very dutiful and good Children to their Father and Mother,
and to love as Brethren and Sisters. Taking her leave of one, whom she blessed
God for, as an Instrument of bringing her to the Knowledge of God in her tender
years; She said I am going from you now, but hope to meet you again hereafter
in Heaven. (And to the same purpose she spoke to some others, of whose good
Estate she was persuaded.) To another she said, Be sure above all things to get
an interest in Christ; for this is all which we have to do in this World. She
counseled and entreated all, to walk as becomes the Gospel, that they might
not dishonor God, nor provoke him to take the Gospel from them. Her Mother
asking her, what she had to say to her, she answered, I pray God to support
you, and I hope, he will be your everlasting support. She had always carried
her self so well toward her Parents, that she was able with a good Conscience
to tell her Father in this sickness, that she had never wilfully offended him
in her whole Life. She was very conscientious in observing of the Lords Day;
and those parts of it, which were not taken up in public, or in
Family Worship, she spent in her own private Retirements, the Fruit whereof
abundantly appeared. She had made her Bible her daily delightful Companion for
such a considerable time, and profited so much in it, that she could recite

(...)
