THE DECLARATION OF Coll. Okey.

Left at his dying hour, to the Presbyterian Congregations, at St S^^ulch^es,
Christs-Church, Alderman-Bury, and other parts of the City of London.

AS ALSO, His Desires to the Congregational Churches of Dr. Homes, Mr.
Gr^ffith, Mr. J^ss e, and the rest.

And Likewise, To all other His Maj^stie; Liege People.

LONDON, Printed for Robert Williamson. 1662.

The Declaration of Colonel Okey, Left at his dying hour, to the Presbyterian
Congregations, at St. Sepulchers, Christ-Church, Alderman-Bury etc.
GOds Mercy, is Gods mere Good Will, and ready affection to forgive a penitent
sinner, notwithstanding all his sins, and ill deserts, and is nothing else
but his Essence, which is One, and by which he is wise, just, and merciful
altogether. He then that will be a searcher of his Mercy, shall be overwhelmed
with his Glory: Now all his Mercy proceeds from his free love toward us; so
the duty of people toward their Pastors, is, to subject themselves to them, to
pray for them, to obey them, and to stand by, and for them in times of danger;
for as Colonel Okey declared a little before he came out of the Tower; That
Bread and Cheese with the Gospel was good cheer; so he likewise desired, That
all people might conform themselves to Magistrates and Ministry; and that the
Gospel of our Lord and Savior Jesus Christ might have a free course in these
Nations, and be glorified by the lives of all true Subjects; And that, since it
has pleased the Lord, through a great hand of providence, miraculously to
restore and set upon the Throne, the person of King CHARLES, His sole desire
was, that as His Majesty rules from God, so he might rule for God, and
hereafter gloriously to Reign for ever; desiring that the Nations might make a
right improvement of the Mercy so greatly desired, and walk in all holiness
answerable thereunto. Declaring further, that he humbly craved this as the boon
of a dying man, that as they had received a mercy so exceeding great, so they
would walk worthy of it, in a fruitful improvement, earnestly craving that all
Gentlemen and others, would pray more, and swear less.

And as England has had more honor then any other Nation, so he desired, that
Peace and Plenty might abound, and that every man might study in his ^ce, To
Fear God, and Honor the King, and to walk in some measure answerable to those
mercies they now enjoy, and worthy of the Gospel; that Righteousness and Peace
might flourish in the midst of them. He further declared, That he had nothing
to his Brethren both of the public and private Congrega^io^^, but that they
would wait in their places, and see the salvation of God, rather them deliver
themselves by any indirect means; And that his hearty desire was, that Justice
and Judgment might run through the streets with a mighty stream: And that God
would scatter them that delight in War. Thus having given you a brief Abstract
of his Declaration, it is very suitable to remark his most Christian-like
Prayer at the place of Execution; which was as follows.

Colonel OKEYS Prayer.
MOst Holy, Glorious, and Eternal Lord God, who art the blessed Maker of all
things, who art from everlasting to everlasting, blessed for evermore: Thou art
worthy to be praised from the rising of the Sun to the going down thereof: Thou
art clothed with Honor and Majesty as with a Garment: Thou art the Fountain
of all good the W^ll-spring of Life and Happiness. We bless thy Name that thou
have been pleased ^o ^^^e us this opportunity, once more to poyr out our souls
before thee, before we go hence and be no more (...)* For Christ his sake (thou
that (...) put a (...) our ^^nd^) give us hearts to (...) us to power out our
souls (...) ^nne: Draw ^^gh to us, that we m^ (...) ^e. O Lord, we pray thee
for (...) give us the spirit of Wisdom, Understanding and Knowledge, where by
we may be enabled to come to thee: In the Name of Jesus Christ, we beg a supply
of all our wants, humbly beseeching thee for his sake to show mercy to us: Do
not remember us what we have done against thee: We pray thee for Jesus Christ
his sake blot out our iniquities, let none of our nakedness appear; cover us
with the Robes of Righteousness; speak peace to our souls. O seal to us the
assurance of the pardon of all our sins; O seal to us the assurance that thou
love us, and then it shall go well with us. Power upon us thy holy Spirit,
that he may teach us how to pray acceptably. Let us see our Names written in
the Lambs Book of Life: O wash us in his Blood, which is able to take away all
our sins, of what nature or kind soever. O Lord we beseech thee receive us
into thy everlasting Arms of Mercy. O that thou would let us see by the Eye
of Faith Heaven opened, and the Lord upon His Throne, and Jesus Christ at thy
right hand, and his holy Angels ready to receive our souls. We beseech thee be
with us, it is but a little time that we are to be here O leave us not show us
mercy only in and upon the account of Jesus Christ. With us b^ thine all the
World over, think upon these Nations of England, Scotland, and Ireland, O that
that they may live in thy sight, that England may be a happy, peaceable, and
quiet Nation give the N^tion of England a heart to walk answerable to the
Gospel which they have so long enjoyed, that it may be a Nation fruitful in all
good works, and more zealous then ever it has been yet; remove the judgments
felt prevent the judgments feared. To this end, We beseech thee bless Him
whom thou have set over us, We beg that he may live in thy sight, and Reign
here for thee, and Reign hereafter with thee: O Lord make Him a Friend to thy
Friends, and let Him see that His Interest lies there. Bless the Great
Council of the Land, and do thou Lord guide them and direct them, that they may
do nothing against thy Truth. The Lord bless the faithful Ministers of the
Word, O that thou would be pleased to double thy Holy Spirit upon them, and
let not thy Judgment come upon this Nation, that the Godly faithful Ministers
should be driven or removed out of it: O do not bring a Famine of thy Word,
whatever Judgment thou bring upon this Nation. We humbly beg that Popery
may not return hither again. We likewise beg for thy Names sake, that thou
would look in mercy upon this great City, and as thou have made them famous
for Religion, and owning the Professors thereof. Lord grant that they may not
decline, but increase more and more therein: The Lord give them the blessings
of the Right Hand and of the Left, that they may dwell together in Love, Unity
and Peace. The Lord look upon any that is near and dear to us, our dear
Relations, we leave them with thee, Lord do thou take care of them, and provide
for them, according to that good promise which thou have made.

Now we beseech thee Lord accept of us and our Services, pardon the sins of our
Holy things, our wandering and starting aside from thee: Accept of us, and do us
good, and receive us into the Arms of thy Mercy. This, and what ever else thou
see in thy Wisdom to be good for us, we beg in the Name and for the sake of
Jesus Christ, to whom be Honor and Glory, and Praise, both now and for
evermore.

AMEN.
FINIS.

