ONIROPOLUS, OR, Dreams Interpreter. BEING Several Aphorisms upon the
Physiognomy of DREAMS made into Verse.

Some of which receive a general Interpretation: And others of them have
respect to the Course of the Moon in the Zodiac.

To which is added Several Physiognomal CHARACTERS of Persons of Different
Humors and Inclinations.

After which follows the Praise of ALE.

And lastly, The WHEEL of Fortune, or Pithagoras WHEEL.

LONDON, Printed by Tho. Dawks, 1680.

Dreams Interpreter.

Oniropolus

hold but your peace a little while, be still and I the meaning of your dream
will tell

J dreamed of Joy and mirth.

J dreamed of ugly spiritts.

ffearfull dreams by satyrs represented be. and jocund pleasant dreams by
mercury.
London Printed in The year 1680

F.H. Van Houe. Sculp.


To the READER.
REader, this Imp I send out in this Dress,
Which Palats most will please, as I do guess;
And that the better it may give Content,
In dreaming Verse, I have the same out-sent.
Expect no fine Hyperboles or words,
The subject Matter none such here affords;
Such as it is, You Are welcome to peruse,
If it dislike, yet offer no Abuse;
But whether thou approve of it or no,
It Is no great matter, I care not a Straw.
Vale
Ad Momum.
Carpere vel noli nostra, vel ede tua.
Or Carp not at these lines of mine,
Or cause for to be published thine.
To His Ingenious Friend ON HIS ONIROPOLUS.
THy Miscelanious Pamphlet, my kind Friend,
Which lately thou to me did recommend,
So full of quaint Conceits is stuffed, and wit,
That I can not sufficiently praise it:
Thy Book is small, and so I will be brief,
Of Petty drolling Pamphlets, thine's the Chief.
F.W.
THE TABLE.
1. ON a Peacock. 2. On a Horse. 3. On Nakedness. 4. On Drunkenness. 5. On
Marriages and Weddings. 6. On Mountains and high Places. 7. On Birds. 8. On
Games. 9. On seeing of Hair. 10. On Bees. 11. On the Apparitions of Saints: 12.
On Burials and Funerals. 13. On a Cat. 14. On God. 15. On Christ. 16. On
Angels. 17. On the Face. 18. On the Privities. 19. On biting ones Nails. 20. On
Riding in Coaches. 21. On Places of Execution. 22. On Heaven. 23. On the Sun.
24. On the Moon. 25. On the Stars. 26. On thy Fingers. 27. On thy feet. 28. On
shiting. 29. On Cracking Nuts and roasting Apples, 30. On Evil Spirits and
Apparitions. 31. On the Eclipse of the Sun and Moon. 32. On pissing. 33. On
Apes and Munkies. 34. On Writing Letters. 35 On a Ladder. 36. On Oxen. 37. On
sticking fast in Mire or Briars. 38. On the Church and holy Duties. 39. On
Bells ringing. 40. On a Beard. 41. On a Swan. 42. On Pigeons. 43. On deep Pits
and Wells. 44. On Teeth. 45. On Serpents and Toads. 46. On Graves. 47. On
Pease. 48. On Beans. 49. On being in a fine Hall. 50. On blowing up the fire.
51. On Crows Croaking. 52. On Bleeding. 53. On Drinking. 54. On dandling of
Children. 55. On Dogs or Wolves barking. 56. On a high Way. 57. On Navigation.
58. On a Hare or Heart. 59. On gathering fruit. 60. On a hansom woman. 61. On
looking thy self in a Glass. 62. On flying in the Air. 63. On Soldiers. 64. On
Gifts and Presents. 65. On Running. 66. On Birds singing. 67. On the grave. 68.
On a Bunch of Keys. 69. On loosing a Wedding Ring. 70. On an Old Woman wooing
thee. 71. On Vermin and lice. 72. On Dung and muck. 73. On loosing thy shoos.
74. On Bulls. 75. On Cowcumbers. 76. On Fire. 77. On walking in a Garden. 78.
On Eggs. 79. On a Lion. 80. On fat or lean Cattle. 81. On rare Music. 82. On
Thunder and Lightning. 83. On a Mule carrying Books. 84. On a Candle. 85. On
being in a Tavern. 86. On dying Stuffs. 87. On Eating herbs in a Sallet. 88. On
Knives, Daggers or Swords. 89. On Grasshoppers. 90. On Thieves breaking ones
house. 91. On Iron. 92. On a Woman enjoying a man. 93. On keeping Cattle. 94.
On Gold. 95. On Fouling and fishing. 96. On Oranges. 97. On falling from ones
Seat. 98. On Quails. 99. On Hunting. 100. On Horns. 101. On the Nose. 102. On
the Ears. 103. On a Woman in Labor. 104. On Cutting the Throat. 105. On being
with Child. 106. On a Fox. 107. On going to School. 108. On a Wolf. 109. On
Earthworms. 110. On Frogs. 111. On the Air. 112. On water. 113. On Flowers.
114. On Corn. 115. On Bread. 116. On Broth. 117. On Roast meat. 118. On Cakes,
Tarts and Pies. 119. On Capons or Hens Crowing. 120. On eating Fish. 121. On a
Cypress Tree. 122. On a Laurel Tree. 123. On Masons. 124. On the Breast and
Paps. 125. On sheep and Cows. 126. On turning Spit. 127. On joy and Gladness.
128. On Weeping and Lamentation. 129. On Clothing and Apparel. 130. On Great
Waters and Rivers. 131. On the living Creatures of the Water. 132. On the
Chances and Misfortunes of Men. 133. On Buildings. 134. On the Abuse of
Members. 135. On Singing and Mirth. 136. On the Arival of a Friend. 137. On
Change of Habitation. 138. On the seeing of Fire. 139. On Riding and
Traveling. 140. On Murder and Killing. 141. On dead People. 142. On Bathing in
Water. 143. On Money. 144. On fear of some sight. 145. On fighting and
Quarrels. 146. On robbing a man. 147. Of Diseases and Sickness. 148. On Kisses
and Embraces. 149. On Banquets and Feasts. 150. On Assemblies and great
Meetings.
The Signification of Dreams in the several days of the Moons Age.
DReams in the first day, shall be true. The 2 day, Unprofitable. The 3 day,
Very good. The 4 day, of no Effect. The 5 day, if good Dreams, true, else not.
The 6 day, They shall be suspended. The 7 day, Not to be revealed. The 8 day,
Certain and true. The 9 day, Good and happy next day. The 10 day, Will come to
pass soon after. The 11 day, Of no Effect. The 12 day, Rather good than bad.
The 13 day, True. The 14 day, In suspense. The 15 day, Most true. The 16 day,
Effectual. The 17 day, True after 3 days. The 18 day, Certain. The 19 day, Ill.
The 20 day, True. The 21 day, Vain and unprofitable. The 22 day, True. The 23
day, False. The 24 day, without effect. The 25 day, Unfortunate. The 26 day,
Certain. The 27 day, strong for Dreams. The 28 day, Good to any. The 29 day,
Fortunate and good
ONIROPOLUS. OR, Dreams Interpreter.
BEING The Signification generally of several Representations in Dreams,
without any respect to be had to the Course of the Moon in the Zodiac.
1. On a Peacock.
TO See a Peacock in thy Dream, does show,
Riches and handsome Wife, perhaps a Shrew,
And if a Woman chance to have such dream,
It shows a pretty Husband, but Cot-quean.
2. On a Horse.
To dream an Horse you mount, or, one do see,
Good Omen to the Dreamer it will be.
And if you dream, upon an Horse you ride,
That is not dock'd, but tail has long and side,
Then in your Undertakings you shall have
Many good friends, who will assistance give.
But if you dream another rides your Steed,
Without Consent, a Gallant to your Bed
Your Wife receiv's, and has her credit cracked,
And you perhaps shall take them in the Act.
3. On Nakedness.
Those that do dream that they see naked men,
Let such beware of fear and perils then:
But if a naked woman do appear,
Joy, comfort, and delight, then draws near,
If she be hansom, young, clear-skind withal,
But crook'd and old, ill Luck will then befall.
To dream thy wife lies naked in thy arms,
It shows desceit, take heed therefore of harms,
But if a wedded wife shall such Dream have,
Assistance in affairs she shall receive.
4. On Drunkenness.
To dream of being drunk, the Learned say,
Increase of Wealth, and perfect health always
It shows; but to be Drunken without Wine,
That to the Dreamer is but a bad Sign,
And shows he some Disgrace shall undergo
For some bad Deed, and suffer shall the Law.
Who Dreams he is Drunk with Sack or sweet Wine, then
Such Person wealth and love gets by great men.
But if thou Dreamest, You Are Drunk with water,
It shows Idle Boasting and a Prater.
And if thou think you are Drunken till thou spews
Thy Prince shall seize thy ill-got Goods, it shows.
And who does Dream he at his Heart has pain,
And in his Entrails when he is Drunk, it is plain,
That of his Money he will be Defeated
By his own Servants, and shall be cheated.
5. On Marriages and Weddings.
Dreams of Marriage or Wedding a Woman,
To show the Death of some Friend is common:
And if thou think thou'st had a Marriage new,
And with thy new Wife thou have had to do;
Some Evil Accident, the Learned say,
Will probably befall you the next day.
6. On Mountains and High places.
To dream thou climbs up some high place and there
See great Precipices that makes thee fear:
It shows fear of Justice, or some great man
That Threatens to undo Thee if he can:
And when with pains and toil you climb the Hill,
It shows you pains must take before you will
Those Dignities and wished Honors gain:
Which you pursue and hope for to obtain.
And if from such high place you catch a fall,
And yet thereby you get no hurt at all:
You in your Business shall have some cross,
But shall evade it without any loss.
7. On Birds.
He that does Dream great Flocks of Birds he saw,
Assemblies signifies, and Suits at Law:
And Bats and Owls bad Omens are some say,
And ill does Business succeed that day.
8. On Games.
If at the Cards or Dice you Dream you play,
Craft and Deceit it signifies, most say,
And if at Tennis you do toss a Ball,
Your Wealth with Travel great acquire you shall.
9. On Seeing of Hair.
To Dream of seeing Hair, some say 'twill be
The sight of Men you are not wont to see:
Hair that is white does show then friends they are,
Red, Envious persons, Enemies, black hair.
10. On Bees.
To Dream that Bees do fly about thine ears,
Denotes that many Enemies appears.
But if thou beat them off without a sting,
Then be courageous and fear nothing.
11. On the Apparitions of Saints.
To Dream of Saints is an Auspicious Dream;
Beginnings of good Fortune it does mean.
12. On Burials and Funerals.
To Dream of Funerals of friends does show
Estate or Riches from Friends shall accrue
To thee; or else that thou shall Wed a Wife
With such a Fortune shall make glad thy life.
13. On a Catt.
If any one do Dream he fights a Catt,
The taking of a Thief is meant by that;
But if the Cat do bite or scratch his face,
Then Sickness he shall have, or some disgrace.
14. On God.
To Dream one prays to God, and on him calls,
Good things by such Dreams very often falls.
But him to see, or speak with him is ill,
But to receive pure Gifts from him does well;
And shows great Health to those that shall Dream so,
But impure things, Diseases show, and Woe.
15. On Christ.
To Dream you Christ adore, it does Joy show,
T^^^^, or hear him speak, is good also.
16. On Angels.
To Dream you Angels see, is Happiness,
But thinking you are one, is greater Bliss.
But to speak with them, or on them call,
Does evil show, and no good thing at all:
But if in Secret they seem to Declare
Something unknown to thee that is very rare,
And which thou do not understand or know,
Acquaintance with some King or Prince does show.
17. On the Face.
To see a Meagre pale Face in thy Dream,
Annoyance, Poverty and Dearth does mean:
But if a smiling fresh face thou do see,
It is a sign of Friendship unto thee.
18. On the Privities.
To Dream those parts are Vigorous and well,
Prosperity of Friends it then does tell:
With firm security of thy Estate,
And augmentation of Honor great.
But if thy Privities seem less to grow,
Such Dream does Infamy and Shame then show.
But if bigger, and stronger, they appear,
Male Children thou'l beget; Live long, never fear,
And if that part cut often, do seem to be,
Death of thy self, or Son it shows to thee.
19. On biting ones Nails.
He who does Dream that he does bite his Nails
Wrangling it signifies, and bitter Rails.
20. On Riding in Coaches.
To Dream thou in a Coach do Ride with ease,
And that it does thy Fancy highly please:
Does often smell of Pride, and that thou do
Follow vain Idle things, unto thy Cost.
21. On Places of Execution.
To Dream of heavy dismal places, where
Some ready to be Executed are:
Denotes that some will shortly come to you
And for Relief in their great need will sue.
22. On Heaven.
To Dream you see the Sky serene and clear,
Profit and Gladness shortly will appear
A Cloudy Sky shows sadness, Red Sky Wars,
A Bloody Sky Diseases shows, and Scars:
The falling Sky denotes Guilt, and Crime,
But the ascending Sky, Honor sublime.
Some extraordinary thing is meant,
When as thou think Fire from Heaven is sent,
A King or Prince that often Dreameth so,
Wars in his Country there will be and Woe.
23. On the Sun.
To Dream the Sun you see shining full bright,
A mind well pleased shows, full of Delight.
But if the Sun from Heaven do seem to fall,
Death to some Prince or Emperor it shall
Denote, The troubled Sun to a Prince shows
Some Danger: Sun and Moon conjoined ill News;
if many Suns do seem for to appear,
Denotes a Universal Joy each where:
To see the Sun, Moon, Stars all clear and pure,
Demonstrates good and Health of Body sure,
The Sun and Moon greater than usually,
Increase of Honor it does signify.
24. On the Moon.
To Dream that many Moons at once you see,
Some extraordinary News will be,
Bright Moon Advantage shows, the Bloody loss,
Falling out of Heaven to some a Cross:
As Death of some Princess, Duchess or Queen,
Or some Illustrious Lady will be seen.
If Purple colored you see the Moon,
Increase and Profit then is thereby shown.
25. On the Stars.
To Dream you see the Stars in Order fine:
Great Joy and Gladness hence you may Divine.
But if confused, out of their Stations,
Shows Sickness, Seditions, Perturbations:
Tumults, Assemblies and Wicked Factions,
With Brawlings, Discords and bad Actions.
If at thy Feet, Sun, Moon and Stars do fall,
It shows to Honor mounted be thou shall.
26. On the Fingers.
Who Dreams upon his Fingers he has Gold Rings
Good fortune's signified by such things.
27. On the Feet.
Who Dreams his Feet smell rank and Dirty are,
Let such of Tribulation beware:
And if they seem to be cut off, then know,
That pain to thee and Damage it does show.
28. On Shiting.
To Dream that in the Fields abroad you Shite,
Signifies Joy, Health, Profit and Delight.
29. On Cracking Nuts and Roasting Apples.
To Dream of cracking Nuts by a good fire,
Does show that Idleness is thy desire:
And that thou love well to take thine ease,
Though never so many thou thereby displease.
30. On evil Spirits and Apparitions:
To Dream ill Spirits Letts thy doing good,
Some seemingly Devout is understood
Shall hinder and molest thy good intent;
Some Hypocrite or Priest is sometimes meant:
If hideous Physiognomies thou see,
Things more than Vulgar shall Revealed be.
31. On the Eclipse of Sun and Moon.
To Dream Eclipse thou do see o'th Sun
Or Moon, thy Parents Death ere long will come,
The Sun, the Father signifies, it is said,
And if the Moon, of Mother be afraid.
32. On Pissing.
To Dream that you do Piss against the Wall,
It shows help in your Business have you shall.
33. On Apes and Munkeys.
To Dream of Apes and Monkies signifies
Malicious, strange and Secret Enemies.
34. On Writing Letters.
If Letters to your Friends you Dream you Write,
Or that they Letters unto you Indite:
It Is said most Authors think it always shows
Unto the Dreamer of the same good News.
35. On a Ladder.
To Dream that you a Ladder do ascend,
Such Dream to you does Honor recommend.
But if the Ladder you descend then know
Such Dream does loss and damage to thee show.
36. On Oxen.
If in thy Dream do Oxen fat appear,
It then does signify a fruitful year,
But if thou Oxen poor and lean behold,
Scarcity and Famine it does unfold,
37. On sticking fast in the Mire or Briars.
To dream thou stickest fast in Dirt or Mire,
Or that thou fast art held by thorns or bryer:
To thee it shows Cares and Troubles many,
And that thou hardly shall get out of any.
38. On the Church and holy duty.
To dream o'th Church, and see the Sacrament:
Is a good Dream, and Godliness is meant.
Confused singing that none understand,
Religious Disputes it shows in hand,
To be all Naked in the Church to dream,
Great harm unto the Sanguine it does mean,
The Mysteries of Religion to see
Contemp'd, a bad and evil Dream will be
39. On Bells Ringing.
To Dream that you do hear the Bells to ring,
Unto the Sanguine it good News does bring,
For you to pull or draw a Rope o'th Bell,
And see a spirit hindering it to knell.
If to a Parson, such sights are afforded,
He in his Function shall be disturbed.
40. On a Beard.
To Dream thy Beard's shaved, to the Melancholy
Is good, but the Choleric Folly;
Indifferent to the Phlegmatic we find,
To the sanguine Affliction of Mind:
If a great ugly Beard thou seem to have,
It does show carefullness, and apt to save.
To the Melancholy and Phlegmatic,
Peril and anger: so to the Choleric.
41. On a Swan.
He who does Dream that he does see a Swan,
Joy it does signify unto that man,
With perfect Health and strength, but if it sings;
Death, to the Dreamer it foretells and brings.
42. On Pigeons.
When you do Pigeons see, the sign is good,
Content at home, by such Dream's understood,
And great delight to thee it will afford,
With good success in thy Affairs abroad.
43. On Deep Pits and Wells.
To Dream into a pit, thou see a Friend
To fall, such person then is near his end:
If parent, Uncle, Aunt, or child it be,
Expect the Death of such that falls to see.
44. On Teeth.
To Dream thy Teeth are drawn it then portends,
Unto the sanguine person, Death of Friends.
But to the Phlegmatic a sign it is sure,
That shortly he the Toothache shall endure.
To The Choleric and Melancholy's meant,
That it to them does show indifferent.
To Dream of falling out of Teeth, then know,
The same in all things, as above does show.
45. On Serpents and Toads.
To Dream that Toads and Serpents you destroy,
Unto the sanguine does show Victory,
Over his Foes; but it does often bring
To the Melancholy, the quite contrary thing.
Trouble to the Phlegmatic by it is meant,
The Choleric to kill or mischief's bent:
Dreams of hearing Serpents is very good,
For Victory by such is understood.
But if a Serpent out o'th earth be brought,
Approaching for to harm thee, but does naught,
Some Jezebel does thirst to do thee ill,
But shall be disappointed of her will.
46. On Grapes.
Who Dream ripe Grapes they eat, let such then know,
That cheerfulness and profit it does show.
47. On Pease.
To Dream of eating Pease well boiled be sure,
Success in thy affairs it does procure.
48. On Beans.
Eating of Beans in Dreams, presage always,
Dissension and trouble the learned say.
49. On being in a fine Hall.
To Dream of being in an Hall that is hung,
With Tapestry and Arras all along:
And there to see and speak unto the King,
It is a good Dream, a very excellent thing.
To be in a fair place well furnished,
With pious Images, and thee to lead,
An Angel is there standing in the place:
Denotes pious thoughts and full of grace.
But seeing ugly sights to fright thee thence,
It then betokens Treason to thy Prince.
50. On blowing up the Fire.
To Dream of stirring up and blowing fire,
Denotes the stirring up of wrath and Ire;
And that old quarrels, thou shall fall among,
Which have been dormant and forgotten long.
51. On Crows croaking.
To Dream that Crows and other birds of prey
Are flying, shows ill luck, the most do say:
And if you hear them croak umpleasantly,
Its an ill Omen and bad Dreams they be.
If Crows upon thy Child's head seems to fly,
Such Child then fear will have bad Destiny.
52. On Bleeding.
To Dream of Bleeding at the Nose, some say,
Is loss of Goods and Riches and Decay,
To the Phlegmatic and Melancholy;
To the Chollerick and Sanguine good and Jolly.
53. On Drinking.
To Dream you Drink when you are very dry,
Such Dream does Sickness show assuredly:
If near the break of day such thing betide,
The party Sanguine lying on left side.
54. On Dandling of Children.
To Dream a Child thou dandles on thy Knee,
Something of Pleasure it denotes to thee,
For quietness is thereby understood,
And thou will find all things in a good Mood.
55. On Dogs or Wolves Barking.
To Dream that Dogs do bawl and bark at you,
And that they bite and likewise do pursue:
Shows that thy Enemies shall thee Command,
And over thee shall have prevailing hand:
But if the Dogs thou fight and overcome,
Then shall thy Enemies have the like Doom,
And so of Wolves and other Creatures fell,
If thou such Creatures fight and them repel.
56. On an High way.
To Dream you are in a fair and pleasant way,
Prosperity and Joy does show, most say.
But if the way be crooked, foul and ill,
Crosses and sadness it does then foretell.
57. On Navigation.
To Dream that you are in a Boat or Ship
Upon the Sea, and like to be oreset
Or cast away, such Dream does signify
Loss and Danger to Men at Liberty.
But if a Prisoner such Vision see,
It shows ere long that he shall be set free.
58. On a Hare or Heart.
Running of Hare or Heart in Dreams to see,
Shows great Wealth gained by pains and Subtilty.
59. On gathering of Fruit.
To Dream of gathering Fruit from off the Trees,
Which there in great abundance hangs thou sees,
Of such a Dream thou may be glad and fain,
For it denotes Profit great and Gain:
But if thy Teeth are set on edge by such,
Its a bad Sign, and thou shall gain not much.
60. On an handsome Woman.
To Dream thou makes much of a pretty Maid,
But to come nigh her thou art sore afraid:
Is very good, and does then represent
Most virtuous Actions and a good Intent.
61. On Looking thy self in a Glass.
To Dream within a Glass thou do behold
Thy Face shows great Love of thy self, it is told;
And if thy self thou Trim and do pin there,
It shows thou think that few with thee compare.
62. On Flying in the Air.
To Dream thou flies and from the earth art raised,
According to such height thou shall be praised,
If very high, then much praise thou shall have,
And if but low then less thou shall receive.
63. On Soldiers.
To Dream that Soldiers are seen by you,
Unto the Sanguine often happens true,
But to the Phlegmatic it gives warning,
He may expect disquiet the next morning.
64. On Gifts and Presents.
To dream you give a Ring or some such thing,
Unto the Sanguine often loss does bring:
But to the Chollerick is profit meant,
Phlegmatic and Melancholy indifferent.
But to receive a Gift from King or Prince,
There Is matter of great Joy and Gladness thence.
65. On Running.
Who Dreams he from another runs and flies
For fear, Security it signifies;
And when after your Foe you seem to trot
Then Victory and Gain it does denote.
Peoples Running one against another,
Wrangling and Disorder shows together.
66. On Birds Singing.
When in Your Dream you think you hear Birds sing,
Joy and Delight is showed by such thing.
67. On the Grave.
Who dreams he is dead, and put into his Grave,
It Is said by some, that he Estate shall have,
Greater or lesser as the mould is laid,
In quantity on him, as it is said.
68. On a bunch of keys.
To dream a goodly bunch of keys you have,
And give them unto those that them do crave,
Great good to Captives poor it does imply,
For shortly they shall gain their liberty.
69. On Loosing a Wedding Ring.
To dream thy Wedding ring is lost does show
Thy love unto thy husband's lost I trow;
But if it chance thou find the same again,
It shows some little love thou do retain.
70. On an Old Woman Wooing thee.
To Dream thou sees a Woman Old thee Court,
And that thou do with her join in Consort,
Shows some affair pursued with good luck,
Yet for all that the World at it shall mock.
71. On Vermin and Lice.
To Dream thou Lousy art, and troubled much
With killing and destroying them, To such
That so shall Dream, They not to repine,
Of Money and great Riches its a Sign.
72. On Dung, Ordure or Muck.
To dream of Ordure, stinking Dung or Muck
It Is said by some, it often shows good Luck,
But this I know and speak without a Jest,
Invited thou shall be unto some Feast.
73. On Loosing thy Shoes.
To Dream thy shoes are lost and Feet are bare,
Loss to the Sanguine and Reproaches are.
And more especially if this Dream come
To thee, in the first days of the New Moon.
74. On Bulls.
Who Dreams he by a Bull is hurt or goard,
He shall have harm by some great manor Lord.
75. On Cowcombers.
To dream of Cowcombers it does denote
Unto the Dreamers of the same, vain hope.
76. On Fire.
If in thy Dream a sparkling Fire thou see,
Expect Debates, or some bad News to thee:
Especially when as it smoaketh much,
For Anger and great Brawls proceed from such.
77. On Walking in a Garden.
To Dream of Walking in a Garden fine
Thy Mind to Arrogance does incline.
And if that here and there a Flower thou get,
It shows thou think thy self a dainty bit.
78. On Eggs.
To Dream of Eggs it is a Sign full bad,
And shows that many Quarrels Shall be had
'Twixt thee and others, also it afords
A Sign of many Idle, Foolish Words.
79. On a fierce Lion.
To Dream thou sees a Lion ready stand
To fight with what soever comes in hand.
The Lion which thou sees thus resolute,
Denotes a man that is ready to dispute.
80. On fat or lean Cattle.
To dream of Oxen either Fat or Lean,
The last misfortune shows, the other gain:
Sometimes the fruitfulness of that same year,
Does by the fatted Oxen plain appear,
And by the lean ones, Scarcity also
Of the ensuing year you Judge and know.
81. On Rare Music.
To dream that thou Melodious Music hears,
Which does Harmoniously sound in thine Ears;
It shows some thing Shall thee befall, which thou
Takes great delight in for to hear and know.
82. On Thunder and Lightning.
To Dream of fearful Lightning and Thunder,
Of Jars and Quarrels then think no wonder:
For it a token is of much debate,
Fierce hot contentions and thundering hate.
83. On a Mule carrying Books.
To dream a mule Books on his back does bear,
And those that ask them, mocked thou do hear,
It is a Sign that in the morning next
In thy Devotion thou shall be perplexed.
84. On a Candle.
When Candle, or Torch thou Dreams thou sees
Extinguished or darkened by degrees;
Then Sadness, sickness or Poverty expect;
Thy Dream does signify to that effect.
85. On being in a Tavern.
To Dream that thou in a great Tavern art,
It shows thou shortly to the Church shall start,
And if some pleasant Wine thou drinkest there
It shows delightsom Doctrine thou shall hear,
But if tho'rt Drunk, or drinkest not a drop,
Naught at the Church to please thee thou can hope.
86. On dying Stuffs.
Who dreams all sorts of Stuffs that he does Dye.
Such Dream denotes profit and great Joy.
87. On eating Herbs in a Sallet.
Dreams of eating green Herbs in a Sallet,
Shows Some Novelty's will please thy Pallet,
Which thou in Learning shall then shortly find
Such as before thou never had in thy mind.
88. On Knives, Daggers or Swords.
To Dream of Daggers, Knives or naked Swords,
Does signify some hot contest in Words:
But when the heat is past, then it is plain
All shall be well, and so good friends again.
89. On Grasshoppers.
To dream of Grasshoppers, it does foretell
Of such as round the Country walk and Steal.
90. On Thieves breaking ones House.
To dream that Thieves do break thine House and Steal
Some mischief unto thee it does reveal:
But if they are scared away and nothing find,
Thy Enemies shall not obtain their mind.
Though many ways to hurt thee they have sought,
Yet their designs to nothing shall be brought.
91. On Iron.
Who dreams in Iron he does drive a Trade,
Loss and misfortune shows, as it is said.
92. On a Woman's enjoying a Man.
To dream a Man in Bed thou do Enjoy,
And that he does begin to tick and Toy,
And up he Mounts, whether thou will or no
And so does get into thy Boggle Be:
Whether thou Maid or Widow art that this
Does dreams; Expect thou may shortly to kiss
That sweet beloved person, whom thou can
Better affect than any other Man:
Who kindly shall in all things so comply
Thou can not for thy Life his suit deny.
93. On Gold.
To dream that thou do give away some Gold,
Does some unpleasant News to thee unfold:
But if thou Dream, that Gold thou do receave,
Auspicious Fortune, and good Luck thou'l have.
94. On keeping Cattle.
To Dream of keeping Beasts, to the Rich portends
Disgrace and loss, to the Poor it profit sends.
95. On Fowling and Fishing.
To dream thou with a Gun a Fowling goes,
And with it shoots and kills some Game, it shows
That thou shall by thy Calling reap some gain:
And profit surely by it, shall obtain:
Which will be as the Game which thou destroys:
If many, much: If few, thou less injoys:
The like of Fishing, as is said before,
The quantity shows profit less or more:
For if thy Nett be full and seem to break,
It shows thy profit shall be very great.
96. On Oranges.
Who Dreams he Oranges does see or eat;
Vexation, Wounds and Grief it shows great.
97. On falling from ones Seat.
To Dream thou from thy Seat does fall, and fain
Would Rise to Seat thy self upon 't again,
But cannot raise thy self to get into it,
What Office so ever thour't in, then know it,
Thou from the Exercise thereof shall fall,
And from the same Employment have a Call.
98. On Quails.
To Dream of Quails, does often foretell bad News
At Sea, Quarrels and strifes it also shows.
99. On Hunting.
To Dream thou goes on Hunting in the Fields,
And that the same great Pleasure to thee yields;
Does show thou something hunts, delights thy Mind,
And in pursuit thereof thou Joy do find.
100. On Horns.
Who Dreams Horns upon his Head are placed,
With Rule and Grandeur he shall be graced.
101. On the Nose.
Who Dreams his Scent is lost, and Nose is stopped,
Shall by his Wife deceived be, and fop'd:
For she some Friend, or Gallant will receive,
To her Embraces, and her Husband leave.
102. On the Ears.
If in thy Dream thy Ears appears to be
Like Asses Ears, shows Servitude to thee:
But if thy Ears thou pickest in thy Dream,
Love from thy Servants is meant by the same.
103. On a Woman in Labor.
To Dream a Woman labors in Childbed,
And that she brings a Child forth that is Dead:
Or none at all: and so leaves off again,
After she is suffered Anguish great and pain:
It shows the party labors much, Alas,
For that which she shall never bring to pass:
But if that she bring forth a Child alive.
In her designs perhaps she then may thrive:
But ever it come to pass, she will have great Coyl,
And must effect it with great pains and Toil.
104. On Cutting the Throat.
When thou do Dream thy Throat's cut with a Knife,
Then some will Injure thee, or seek thy Life.
105. On being with Child.
Who Dreams she is delivered of a Child,
And is not bigg, she shall not be beguiled,
For shortly after that, she will Conceive,
And in due course of time a Child shall have.
106. On a Fox.
If with a Fox thou Dreams, thou do Engage,
A Crafty Enemy it does presage.
107. On going to School.
To Dream thou go unto the School anew,
And cannot say thy Lesson right, does show,
That thou have some design then under hand,
Which thou do not yet rightly understand.
108. On a Wolf.
Who Dreams a Wolf him bites, and then he flies,
Shall Wrong receive from cruel Enemies.
109. On Earthworms.
To Dream of Earthworms some say signifies,
Destroying Undermining Enemies.
110. On Froggs.
^f Froggs appear when thou do Dream, then know
Flatterers and Bablers such Dream does show.
111. On the Air.
Dreams of Hail, Rain, Tempests and Thunder know
Losses and Trouble to the Rich does show:
But to the Poorer sort, it is no such thing;
For such Dream unto them, Repose does bring.
112. On water.
Who Dreams he sees a Rivers Water clear,
And calm, good things by such Dream does appear:
But if the same, be troubled very much,
Troubles and Censures bad are meant by such.
113. On Flowers.
He that does Dream Posies and Flowers he smells,
When they in Season are, Pleasure foretells,
With Joy and Consolation: but when,
They Are not in Season, ill Luck it shows then.
114. On Corn.
To Dream great Stacks of Corn you do espy,
Denotes abundance, small Stacks Necessity.
115. On Bread.
When as the Rich does Dream he eats white Bread
Made of good Wheat, Profit falls on his Head:
But to the Poor such Dreams does Testify,
Nothing to him but mere Necessity:
But if the Rich man Dream course Bred he eats
Losses and Crosses the same to him then threats:
But to the Poor such Dreams does clearly show;
Profit and Gain to him thereby will flow.
116. On Broth.
To dream of eating Broth is a good sign;
For Profit and great gain it does Divine.
117. On Roast meat.
Who dreams Roast-meat to eat he does begin,
Good has forsaken, and runs into Sin.
118. On Cakes.
To dream of making Cakes, or Tarts, or Pyes:
Joy, Profit and Delight, it signifies.
119. On Capons or Hens Crowing.
To here Capons, or Hens Crow, in thy dream,
Troubles and Heaviness it does Proclaim.
120. On eating Fish.
Who dreams he eats great Fish let him then know,
Catarhs and Melancholy it does show.
121. On a Cypress tree.
If in thy dream a Cypress Tree appear;
It shows Death, or Affliction draws near.
122. On a Lawrel-tree.
To dream, that thou do see a Laurel tree:
Pleasure it does denote, and Victory.
123. On Masons.
To dream you Build an House, or the Mason play,
Loss, Sickness or Death, it signifies always.
124. On the Breast and Papps.
To dream of Breast and Papps covered with Hair
Gain, and Profit, does thereby appear
To Men: but if a Woman have such Dream,
Loss of her Husband, is meant by the same.
125. On Sheep and Cows.
Those that of she Goats dream, or Sheep, or Cows
It Wealth and Plenty, to the dreamer shows.
126. On turning the Spit.
If those are Rich, do dream of turning Spit,
Then Servitude, to them, is meant by it:
But if the Poorer sort, dream such a thing,
Then Profit unto them, the same does bring.
The signification of the several Representations in Dreams, having diverse
Interpretations, according to the Position of the Moon in the Twelve signs of
the Zodiac.
127. On Joy and Gladness.
To dream of Joy the Moon in Aries, know
It unto thee, does trouble surely show:
Taurus and Cancer, coming of a Friend;
The Moon in Gemini, does Money send:
In Capricorn, or Leo, to appear,
Separation of a Friend, then fear:
Libra shows grief, and in Virgo Gladness;
Scorpio, denotes a Brothers sadness:
In Sagitarius Joy, Aquarius gain:
The Moon in Pisces shows a Dream that is Vain.
128. On Weeping and Lamentation.
To dream of Weeping, the Moon in Aries placed,
Brawls and Contentions, expect thou may,
If in Taurus, the Moon such time you see,
Then thou, in fear, of some dear Friend shall be.
Firm hope of Joy it shows in Gemini;
In Cancer it denotes Infirmity.
The Moon in Leo placed, Honors brings forth,
In Virgo Gladness, and in Libra Mirth:
In Scorpio Concord, or to meet some,
In Sagitary expect Fear to come:
Death of a Friend in Capricorn is shown,
In Aquarius will be shortly known
The Death of some great man; and last of all
The Moon in Pisces, some News hear you shall.
129. On Clothing and Apparel.
To dream of Clothing or Apparel when
The Moon's In Gemini or Aries, then
Nothing it shows; in Pisces the same thing,
In Taurus Joy, and Cancer good does bring.
Hatred in Leo, in Libra Sadness,
In Virgo Contention, and Madness:
In Scorpio it shows Honor clear,
In Sagitarius then Sickness fear.
Ghosts or Strangers does Capricorn impart,
And Aquarius shows grief of Heart.
130. On Great Waters and Rivers.
To Dream of Rivers wide, and Waters high,
The Moon in Aries does signify
Troubles; Taurus and Capricorn you will find
Contentions, and perplexity of Mind;
Gemini; Infirmity; and know
Cancer denotes Extremity and Woe.
The Moon in Leo shows greatness and Power;
And Money in Virgo, happy that hour:
Nothing in Libra it does signify,
Scorpio, Gladness, praise and Jollity:
Death or great pains Aquarius Testifies,
Sagitarius, a vain Dream and Lies:
And when Cynthea Pisces does possess,
Then presently does follow some sickness.
131. On the living Creatures of the Water.
To dream of Waters living Creatures, and
The Moon in Aries, Fear is then at hand:
Leo the like Denotes: Taurus, I know
Brings comfort; Gemini does Money show,
Cancer does signify a troubled mind,
Virgo in loss of Money is unkind.
The Moon in Libra shows death of a Friend,
In Scorpio thy life begins to mend;
In Sagitarius good News thou'l have,
In Capricorn then Trouble you will receive,
Aquarius and Pisces sickness bring,
The Moon in both these signs shows the same thing.
132. On the Chances and Misfortunes of Men.
To dream of Men, and of the Chances all,
Which several ways and times do them befall,
If the Moon in Aries have a place,
It signifies Detraction and Disgrace;
Lying in Taurus; and in Gemini
Honor; Leo does nothing signify:
In Cancer sickness, or else some Disease,
Capricorn grief of mind, all things displease;
In Virgo Famine; Libra testifies
To thee the Death of thy grand Enemies.
The Moon in Scorpio Dissension sends;
And Sagitarius brings to thee new Friends:
Aquarius does lucky Dreams command,
But Pisces shows Necessity at hand.
133. On Buildings.
To dream of Buildings either great or small,
The Moon in Aries, Joy shall befall:
Scorpio the like; but Taurus warns thee
Of Death or stroke, some strong hand shall harm thee
Plague of the Flesh in Gemini you know;
Cancer, Money; Leo does Travel show:
Virgo, good News; in Libra thou will find
Much happiness: Capricorn, Grief of mind.
Aquarius a good Dream does testify:
But Pisces signifies Necessity.
And lastly Sagitarius recommends
And brings to thine Aquaintance some new Friends.
134. On the abuse of Members.
To dream of abused Members, understand,
The Moon in Aries, some good in hand:
Necessity in Taurus; and when placed
In Gemini, then Troubles it does haste:
Cancer and Libra both detraction send:
In Virgo, joyfulness: Leo a Friend.
The Moon in Scorpio, Sickness then draws near.
In Sagitary, Idleness I fear:
Money in Capricorn, and Pisces too,
For both these Signs the self fame thing do show.
135. On Singing and Mirth.
To dream of Mirth and singing when the Moon
In Aries is placed, then News comes soon:
Gemini does better thy Condition;
And Capricorn shows Comforts Fruition;
Taurus a Journey does prognosticate;
Cancer, nothing; Pisces Discord and hate.
In Leo then nothing but Fancy guess:
Virgo great Love: in Libra Trouble is,
Scorpio and Sagitary grief of Mind:
In Aquarius a vain Dream thou'l find.
136. On the Arival of a Friend.
To dream of the Arival of a Friend,
The Moon in Aries, a Gift does send:
Taurus and Gemini does nothing show,
In Cancer great increase of Money know,
Loss of Honor by Leo does appear,
The Moon in Virgo Poverty draws near:
And in Libra, then comes Lamentation,
In Sagitary is Honors station.
Scropio Riches, Capricorn News great:
And Aquarius does great Troubles threat:
And when in Pisces the Moons place is known:
Then judge that weariness by it is shown.
137. On Change of Habitation.
To dream of Change of Place to lead thy Life:
The Moon in Aries denotes strife:
Taurus good to thy self, expect from hence;
Gemini News: Cancer death of a Prince:
Leo, joy of a Ghest does signify:
The Moon in Virgo shows an Enemy:
Libra denotes somewhat is stolen from thee:
In Sagitary will nothing be:
Aquarius great Solace does set forth,
Capricorn Anger, Scorpio great worth:
In Pisces when the Moon has her Carrcer,
Expect some great and strange News for to hear.
138. On the seeing of Fire.
To dream of Fire, if Cynthea see
Aries or Virgo, Troubles will be:
Taurus a Ghest; Gemini Moneys increase;
In Cancer or Scorpio some Disease:
In Leo Combats and Quarrels it shows;
Libra, Sagitary, Capricorn ill News.
Aquarius does Grief of Mind impart,
And Pisces also Sadness shows of Heart.
139. On Riding and Traveling.
To dream of Traveling and Riding when
The Moons in Aries, think of dying then:
Taurus shows Honor, Gemini a Friend;
But nothing in Cancer it does portend:
Virgo a Battle shows; Leo long Life:
Libra, humility; Scorpio strife:
Pisces and Sagitary, slanders give;
Capricorn, Theft; Aquarius Ghests thou wilt have.
140. On Murder and Killing.
To dream of Murdering, Cruel Madness,
The Moon in Aries shows Sadness:
Death of a Friend in Taurus; Gemini
Confession: Cancer Riches does descry:
In Leo Sickness: and in Virgo grief:
In Libra Poverty without Relief:
In Sagitarius Death; in Scorpio then
Expect some punishment follows thy sin:
Capricorn, gladness for some reward:
Dreams in Aquarius nothing afford:
And when the Moon's in Pisces placed, good things;
To those that dream of Murder, it then brings.
141. On dead People.
To dream of some are dead, the Moon then sought
In Aries, shows Riches; Taurus naught:
Gemini bad news: in Libra gladness:
And Cancer shows contentious Madness:
But the Moon in Leo Money declares:
Virgo, a Ghest: Capricorn, Joys prepares:
Scorpio and Pisces show dreams that's vain:
But Sagitary's good News makes thee fain:
Good things to come, Aquarius relates:
And few, I think, there are that such things hates.
142. On bathing in Water.
To dream you in the Water wash or Bath,
The Moon in Aries, Losses thou'l have:
Aquarius the like: Cancer anger great:
Gemini ill Name; Taurus troubles threats:
In Leo Joy: in Virgo grief of mind:
Libra and Sagitary in Riches kind:
In Scorpio Fear: in Capricornus Joy:
Pisces with labor hard will thee annoy.
143. On Money.
To dream of Money, when the Moon you find
In Aries, shows sickness, or grief of Mind:
Taurus a heavy dream: Scorpio, Theft;
Gemini of a Friend thou art bereft:
Cancer, Capricorn and Pisces also,
In all these Signs the Moon a Ghest does show:
In Leo Money, Virgo weariness:
Libra, Death of an Enemy then guess.
In Sagitarius the Dream is vain:
But Joy in Aquarius does remain.
144. On fear of some sight.
To dream you are fearful of some sight you see,
The Moon in Aries, Troubles will be:
Taurus some Battle, Libra's dream is vain,
And Scorpio denotes to you the same.
Leo Sickness, Cancer good Fortune bears;
Aquarius, grief of Mind; Pisces Tears.
Capricorn self-Envy does always bring:
Gemini, bad Conscience, and worse thing:
In Virgo then Money is understood:
And Sagitarius brings News that is good.
145. On fighting and Quarrels.
To dream of Fighting when the Moon does stay
In Aries, shows Infirmity, most say:
And if in Taurus the Moon then tarry,
Victory over an Adversary.
Cancer Advancement; Gemini, good Name,
Leo, Envy: Virgo good News does frame.
Libra an Enemy: if th'Moon possess
Scorpio, then expect some business:
In Sagitary expect this Omen,
Some unlooked for News to hear of Women.
A Messenger in Capricorn is shown:
Aquarius thine Enemies are flown.
And when the Moon in Pisces takes her place,
Then think some joy thou shortly shall embrace.
146. On robbing a man.
To dream a man is robbed by Enemies,
The Moon in Aries disceit implies.
Taurus, Riches, Gemini a good Name:
Virgo Poverty, Sagitary Fame;
Cancer some friends to come; Leo Rewards,
Scorpio Death of Enemies regards:
Poverty in Virgo is there noted:
To Capricorn is some Ghest allotted.
Aquarius Labor great does show and toil,
Pisces departure when thou dreams of dispoil.
147. Of Diseases and Sickness.
To dream of some disease, or sick to be,
The Moon in Aries you nothing see.
Taurus and Capricorn both Joy declare;
Cancer, of loosing Money have a Care.
Aquarius and Leo joy of some Friends:
Virgo, Gladness: Libra comfort sends:
Sagitary, sickness: Scorpio some Sights:
Pisces with good Employment thee delights:
And if in Gemini the Moon appear,
Of some deceit then see thou have a care.
148. On Kisses and Embraces.
To dream of Kisses and Embraces when
The Moon's in Aries, Troubles come then:
Taurus, Detraction, Virgo, Sadness;
Leo, Advancement, and Pisces, Gladness:
Cancer, Misfortune and ill Luck to thee:
Gemini Quarrels, or an Enemy:
Libra, a Ghest; Scorpio Joy of Life:
Sagitary, Labor; Aquarius Strife:
Capricorn bids beware of juggling Friends,
Whose Kisses and Embraces are self ends.
149. On Banquets and Feasts.
To dream of Feasts and Banquets it will be,
In Aries or Pisces, joy unto thee:
The ari^al of a Friend Taurus shows,
Leo, long life, and Virgo brings good news:
It separation brings in Capricorn;
Sickness or Poverty Libra brings on:
Scorpio Money; and Sagitary
Brings many Delights to make thee merry:
Gemini, Gladness when the Moon is there,
And when in Cancer, nothing does appear,
And in Aquarius, it shows the same,
For when the Moon is there the Dream is vain.
150. On Assemblies and great Meetings.
To dream of Meetings great which people use,
The Moon in Aries declares News.
Gemini, Fear, in Taurus Strife and Woe:
Scorpio, Leo, Virgo, ill News show:
Cancer brings Joy, but Libra a disease:
And Sagitary little brings to please:
Aquarius and Pisces dreams are vain:
And Capricorn does also show the same.
The Conclusion.
You Somniators what you here have read,
Think not it always hits the Nail on'th head:
For as an Archer who directs his Sight
Upon the Mark, not always hits the white;
Sometimes in, and short, and wide, and over,
So here, sometimes we hit, and sometimes at Rover,
We also shoot, and far are from the thing
And the True meaning, which the dream does bring.
But then some otherwhiles we nearer shoot,
So that we even hit the very clout;
And meaning of the dream do plainly show,
And guess the very thing it self full true,
Though presently it fall not always out,
Yet it will be full sure without all doubt.
For know sometimes a Week, a Month, a Year
It is, before the Effects of Dreams appear:
Therefore expect not always that thou shall
See presently th'Interpretation fall:
Sooner sometimes, sometimes it will longer be,
Sometimes perhaps The Effects thou'l never see:
For what this little Pamphlet does bring forth,
It Is Linsy Woolsy, Droll with serious Mirth:
And it is come abroad with full Intent,
Only to make Thee mirth and merriment.
Authoris Concilium ad Lectores.
Keep God's Commandments and fear his Name
Vanity of Vanities all else is Vain.
FINIS Somniorum
Hereafter follows a Description of the Constitutions of the Melancholic,
Phlegmatic, Choleric and Sanguine Persons: To which is added some
Physiognomal Characters of Persons of several different Humors and
Inclinations.
Of the Melancholic.
THEY are for the most part black, cold, dry, rough skinned, with thin, harsh
and curled hair, lean in body, stout Eaters, great joints, slow and backward in
their Resolutions, diffident, suspicious, ingenious, and generally malicious:
they are persons of few words, close, hypocritical and conceited; generally
they are Enemies to Drollery, retired persons, lovers of solitude and not very
accostable or familiar; for they affect but few persons, and those but coldly
too, soon moved to anger and passion, though upon very small grounds, most of
them are covetous, by reason of that diffidence and distrust which ever
accompanies them; fearful that their Estate will decay, and so always griping
and miserable; They are enemies as well to those they have offended, as to those
they do offend; great vindicators of themselves; irreconcilable, or at least
you must not trust them over-far, and too much depend upon their
Reconciliation; in a word, they are much given to Extremes, and are either
extraordinary Virtuous or Vicious.

Of the Phlegmatic.
They are naturally moist, white, and soft skinned, and their joints are for the
most part hid; they are timorous, sleep well, their eyes running; they hate
labor and pains, and are often given to Lechery; if they abound not with Phlegm
too much they are indifferently capacitated for Learning; but otherwise they
are of a stupid apprehension, and dull Capacity: their hair and nails increase
and grow much, and their Mouths always water, which if it be white and fluid is
a good sign, but if viscous, the contrary; Thy are seldom thirsty, and so drink
rarely but at meals: their digestive Faculty is but slow, so their Appetite is
small: their eyes are heavy, and urine white, and where their Complexion is
pale without a mixture of red, they are laxative in Body; as for the temper of
the Mind they have much of the dullness and slowness; but neither the spirit nor
Malice of the Melancholic, for they are neither extraodinary inveterate in
their hatred, nor very fervent in their Love: that coldness which freezeth
their heart, makes them more distrustful of themselves than others; they are
irresolute in their Councils, and timorous in the Execution of them: and very
fearful of undertaking and loosing their Designs, and it often happens through
their Ignorance of the means, and misunderstanding of the Thing.

Of the Choleric.
The Persons of this Constitution, are lean, and of a pale yellowish
Complexion, have a bitterness in the Mouth, and roughness in the Throat: they
are often troubled with the Headache, they usually vomit green and yallow stuff,
that is very bitter, they are very thirsty, and spit little: they sleep but
little: their Urine is clear of a fiery-colour, and their Ordure is hard almost
burnt up; as to their mind, they are dexterous in all things, proud, haughty
and desirous that all persons should be subject to their humor; they are
Enemies to the least Disobedience; impatient in the Execution of their
Enterprises, rash in their Counsels, little minding the Advice of others,
unless it be to find a person that is of their own Temper, and undertakes the
performance of their wills; if you seem to bear in mind any offense they have
given you, then they study Revenge, and mortally hate those they have offended;
otherwise though they are injurious, yet they are not very offensive but soon
pacified.

Of the Sanguine.
These persons are generally very strong and courageous, and, when the Blood
abounds, have a Tickling or sharp Itching all over the Body; their Mouth is
full of Bladders, and their Urine is red; as to the qualifications of their
Mind, they are jovial, lovers of Recreations, Enemies to sadness, and vexation,
avoiding disturbing and thorny Business and Contests, desirous of Peace, freely
committing the management of their affairs to others, referring themselves
wholly to them: loving those that discharge them without any occasion of
Complaint; thy are courteous and kind, and loath to injure any person, and if
they are constrained to it, it is then in words rather then otherwise, and they
soon bury in Oblivion the injury done them; They are generally liberal and
free, and take delight to please others.

Of the just man.
His voice is bigg, loud, inflexible, or else mean between the Base and
Trebble; his hair of a dark color, a piercing look, that carries terror in it;
his Aspect neither wild nor humble, but with a certain pensiveness, full of
Reverence and dignity: his Eyes are full, and the Balls thereof proportionably
round, or the Circle that is underneath surrounding the Ball of the Eye, narrow
and black: but the upper part of those Eyes that are full of the Christalline
humor, casts a kind of sparkling Luster, and nothing seems strange or joyful
in them: or their Eyes water with Laughing, their Ey lids looking downwards;
the forehead is long and extended toward both the Temples.

Of the faithful Person:
His Eyes are of a moderate size, drawing toward a dusky or black color; large
and fixed or heavy, and the Ey-brows closing together, with a supercilious and
downlook.

Of the honest man.
He is of a comely Aspect breathing moderately, his eyes hollow and moving like
water in a Vessel, having a sober staid or pleasant look, the Eyes always open,
of a sad Color, and the Circle of them neither too big nor too little, and
full of Christalline humor, closely shutting the Ey-brows, and the forehead
supercilious and depressed, with a big nose well proportioned to the face; or
long extended to the Mouth, or moderately large long and open, his breast large
and shoulders broad; the paps of his Breast of a moderate size.

Of the Prudent Person.
He is stender in Body, his head rather big than little, extended from the fore
part to the hinder, and usually fair haird; his Forehead square and duly
proportioned; his face full and of a moderate size; a smooth Tongue, his voice
neither deep nor small; the upper lip standing out, and his Neck something
leaning to the right side; large chested, and broad shouldered: his eyes large,
high set, casting a luster radient and full of moisture; and his hands and
fingers long, without any moving gesture in his discourse.

Of the good natured Man.
His face is neither too big nor too little, he laughed but seldom, his voice
neither shrill deep nor small; his eyes hollow, fixed of a leaden color, full
and watchful, shining as if moistened with water; his Forehead neither full nor
wrinkled, his Ears of a comely square proportion, and his feet well shaped,
jointed and nervous.

Of the Ingenious.
His head is of a middle size, proportionable to the Neck in bigness, equal and
well shaped, stooping a little in the shoulders, his voice clear between a Base
and Treble; he has a sweet air in his Countenance; his hair is full, and
moderate between thick and thin, his Eyes are full, comely and indifferently
round; his Thighs and skin soft and moist, and not very fleshy, neither too
hairy nor altogether without hair: the Palms of his hands are long, his finger
slenders and sharp at the ends; he is moderate in weeping and laughing, his
countenance is mixed with joy and pleasantness.

Of the Constant.
Their Eyes are dark, moist and truly proportioned, their Ey-brows black and
substantial; and they very seldom are seen to laugh.

Of those that are apt to learn.
Their Ey-brows are thin, clear and large, their Forehead extended at length,
and their hair somewhat near the flaxen color, their Ears sunk into the head:
they have a meagre thin look, and seldom laugh; their neck leaning to the right
side, they are large shouldered, and broad or narrow Chested: they are well
shaped, of a leaden or black color, radient, and either large, fixed, dark and
moist, or steady, little and moist, exactly proportioned; the forehead
extended and smooth, the Ey-lids movable, yet so as if they were steady and
fixed: their belly is well proportioned, and they use the gesture of the hands
in their discourse.

Of the Liberal.
His hair falls upon his Forehead, his Neck is hairy, his Fingers and shoulders
are bowed backwards, and he is long armed.

Of those that have a strong Memory.
All the upper parts of the body are small comely, well shaped, proportionable,
and well fleshed but not fat.

Of the temperate.
His Eyes are large radient and moist, having a black Circle under a red one,
the corners of his eyes are short, and the Ball of the Ey of a mean proportion:
his Neck leans on the right side, his hair is neither light nor thick, the
forehead neither smooth nor wrinkled, his mouth neither wide nor little, and he
draws his breath moderately.

Of the Bashful Person.
He is slow in his Motion and Speech; his voice grave and spirituous, a brisk
not sparkling ey, nor very open nor yet quire closed, which shuts leasurely
very red: the body bowed, the ears red, his Eyes sad colored and moist of a
just proportion.

Of the Courageous.
He is harsh hair'd, has a strait Body, and the Bones Ribs and Extremities of
the Body are strong and big: his forehead high, but neither sharp, smooth nor
rough, but lean and large: his neck is fast, but not full fleshed; he has a
menacing, strong loud voice, a moist eye and look full of terror; he is large
and strong shouldered: his head is somewhat what larger than ordinary, his Nose
suitable to his Forehead; he is wide mouthed and thin lip'd, the upper and
lower lips being both alike: he has long Arms, with big and harsh hands.

Of the sincere man.
His face is of a middle size, his Cheeks are plump, and temples full: his
voice neither deep nor sharp.

Of the Merciful Man.
His eyes are plump, and Ey-brows are directly strait, and he has a long
cloudy brow; is a great lover of Women, and does procreate Children; he has a
very tenacious Memory, is ingenious and witty: and has a comely fair Complexion.

Of the Facetious.
The Figure and Symetry of his Face is exactly proportionable, he is of a
graceful aspect, neither composed nor effeminate; his Eyes are moist and
shining, and slow in their motion, his look is seemingly drowsy; and he has a
broad fleshy and smooth Forehead, or wrinkled a little about the Eyes, and has
a soft voice and pleasant brow.

Of the Heroic Person.
He has large sparkling Eyes under a comely Brow, a sharp look, the Ears deep
pierced and well made, advanced and quick of hearing; his head well
proportioned rather big than little, of an exact roundness, advanced before and
behind; the forehead square, between smooth and wrinkled; his mouth rather
large than little; his voice and mirth moderate, and his speech grave; his lips
soft and colored, his hair inclining to a flaxen color; his Complexion clear
and somewhat ruddy, and his hands always big and of a large size.

Of the bold and hardy.
His Eyes are glittering, of a green or sanguine color, moving to and fro
without stirring the Ey-brows, large and dry, casting a pure shining Luster; he
has long Ey-brows, and Nose extended even to the Mouth; which is wide, and
teeth long thin and sharp: he has an austeer look, and wrinkled Brow, with a
large Breast, wide shoulders, and long Arms that reach down to the Knees.

Of the Mechanic.
Their hands and fingers are long, their Eyes moist, often opening and
shutting: they are somewhat inclining to a flaxen color.

Of the Pensive.
Their Forehead is wrinkled, and they draw their breath softly and unheard, are
wry neck'd and have a slow pace.

Of the unjust Person.
His Eyes are greenish, somewhat dry or reddish, immovable and large, looking
downwards: the inferior Circle of the Apple thereof is green, and the
superior black; those parts are without the Eye, as the Forehead, Cheeks,
Ey-brows and Lids, move often, or are open and smiling, and he looks with a
fixed or menacing Countenance.

Of Murderers.
Their Ey-brows are thick, tufted and joined together, the Circle near the
apple of the Eye, unsettled, dry, very, roling or pale colored.

Of the Idiot.
He has a full plum fleshy face, and thick Lips, speaks not freely, has a
strait neck, and his Body leaning to the left.

Of the Furious.
He has plump Cheeks, but is somewhat long Visag'd, his eyes move but slowly,
he is bottle nosed upwards, has a little head, the fore and hinder part
hollow, the forehead round and high: the paps of his breast are big and fleshy;
the space between his Navel and the lower part of the Breast, longer than that
between the lower part of the Breast and the Throat; his Arms are brawny, and
nails crooked and narrow.

Of Poysoners.
They have dry and goggle Eyes, the Circle of them disproportioned, rolling and
black with pale or bloody specks.

Of those who are of dull Capacity.
Their Head is either too big or too little, their Face broad and Neck soft.

Of the Wicked man.
His Ey-teeth are long advanced forward, and well fastened; he is ready in
discourse, especially if his voice be slender, or he speak through the nose,
and with difficulty; he has an ill Look, and is a little out-mouthed; his Neck
is awry and knobby, he is spindle-shanck'd, and his feet ill made, and hollow
in the soles; his eyes all the length of the Face, especially the Apple or Ball
of the Eye, looking as if they moved jointly, glittering like dry Marble, of a
black color, staring as if they would start out of his head, they close not,
are pale, reddish and dry.

Of those who have weak Memories.
Their upper parts are larger than their lower, as the hands than the Feet
proportionable, etc.

Of the Unfaithful.
His Eyes are hollow, dry and of a dark color, constantly moving and roaling,
as if he were discomposed; his head is very small, and ill proportioned, he
has a weak Back, and rough Forehead, full of wrinkles and small furrows; high
shouldered and hands small and slender.

Of those that have Venomous Eyes.
Their lower Lips are small and swelled toward the Ey-Teeth.

Of the Inconstant.
They have a little forehead, and a very little Nose, long, thin and slender at
the End, they are flat mouthed, their Belly and Breast is hairy, their Eyes are
little, and of a sad color.

Of the Imprudent.
He is either very big, or of a slender Body; Breath's like one that has newly
run a Race; he has a high Forhead, and little eyes, standing outward, sparking
like a Diamond, or else they are of a dark reddish, or sanguine color;
languishing, often opening and closing: his fingers are knotty and ill shaped,
he walks swiftly poising his Body uprightly, has a parched skin and color'd,
which shows him to be of a hot Constitution: he is timorous, and if surprised,
shrinks himself up together.

Of the Foolish.
They have a large broad Forehead, and their Eyes squinting toward the right
side, and the Ball thereof is very small; they have a sad Countenance, and
their upper-lip is thick, hanging over the under-lip, they have a nimble
Tongue, laugh much and have a sharp or piercing voice, they have a long Neck,
and usually bend forwards, either in that or some other part of the Body; their
hands are very much bended backwards, and their shoulders are hairy.

Of the rude and uncivilized Persons.
They have great large heads, are flaxen hair'd, inclining to white, their
foreheads plump, and their Nose ill proportioned to the Face, they are out
mouthed, their Lips thick and round, or the under-lip standing out; their neck
big brawny and hard, and as it were immovable; they have large and harsh hands,
and their Nails overgrown with flesh; their Fingers are long and slender,
shoulders high and their Legs and Heels are large.

Of the Timororus.
They have an ill colored squi^^^g-Ey, they are black or fair Complexioned, a
full face or bony with large Foreheads, thin Lips and little Mouths; a
trembling low Voice, their hair is lank or curled, soft and full, black or
white, and the hinder part of the head hollow: they draw their breath faintly
or slowly, their hands are long and slender, their Breast weak and lean without
hair, their Thighs thin, Neck long, and the Extremities of their Bodies are
feeble, they are soft skinned, and their Body stooping.

Of the Covetous.
His Face, Members and Eyes are little; his Complexion somewhat Ruddy, has a
crook'd Back, and a sharp piercing querulous voice.

Of the Rash.
Their Eyes are shining, yet squinting, closing with a severe Look, their
Ey-brows are hairy, their Ey-lids harsh and thick, or closing directly, moist,
of an exact proportion, and casting a Luster, they have a smooth Forehead,
wide and out Mouth, with short thick fingers

Of the Drunkard.
He has plump Cheeks always rudy, a little Face and yellow Complexion, his
Ey-lids advanced downwards, reddish, moist large or goggle Eyes, as if they
would start out of the head, he draws his breath nimbly and frequently, his
Throat is rough, the Vertebra thereof standing out.

Of the Proud.
His Eybrows are arched and often moving upwards, the Belly big, fleshy and
hanging down, have a slow pace and often stop in the streets of their own
accord, looking about on all sides, and he has dry sad colored Eyes.

Of the Luxurious.
His hair is straight black and thin, or head bald, his Chin plump and full;
and the Circumference of that part which is between the Chin and the Nose is
hollow; he has a wide nose and round near the Forehead, or flat, his Eyes are
radient, or else have a green Circle under a black one; the Ey-lids constantly
moving, and the hair of the same shedding, is of a pale Complexion and hairy,
his beard plays with his nose, the veins of his Arms are visible, his hands
hairy, his Toes closely joined together, and the Nails very round.

Of the Impudent.
His Eyes are fiery red or big, and Ey-lids red and large, his hair red,
Ey-brows long, and Complexion ruddy; the Face long or flat, Copped crowned, and
hook-Nos'd from the Forehead downward; he is loud in his laughter, as if he had
a Cough or difficulty of breathing, he has a fierce bold impudent Look, moves
hastily, is high-shouldr'd, and goes somewhat stooping; the Tincture of his
body is ruddy, of a sanguine color, his breast high chested, and he has thick
Legs.

Of the Liars.
They have a full face, a nose big in the middle, growing narrow at the Top,
smiling about the Mouth, the Ey-brows depressed, and looking as it were by
stealth, and the Eyes lively and smiling; of a quick and shrill speech or
speaking through the Nose; and the body usually crooked.

Of the Infirm.
Their Eybrows are thin, fat, stretched out or immovable; their Neck it
slender, their arms and Elbows small, and their hands small, slender and ill
joynted, the paps of their Breasts small and extenuated, and they stammer or
lisp in their speech.

Of the Voluptuous woman.
She is of a pale or brown Complexion, slender and lean, straight bodied, has
little hard Breasts, her hair is curld and short, her voice shrill and loud,
she is bold of speech, proud and cruel, very officious and loves good Liquor:

Of the Slothful.
He has a large plump face, and great Cheeks, very large Eyes, of a slow
Motion, he has a broad Forehead, and a drowsy look, speaks little and
deliberately, his body is very hairy, and his pace large and slow, or short and
slow; his face is of a honey Color, and the lower part of the Nose big.

Of the Intemperate.
His Eyes are fad color'd, looking upwards when they begin to close, or
pleasant and moist, otherwise big and reddish, he is wide mouthed, soft and
big-belly'd hanging down.

Of the Dissembler.
He has sparkling hollow and little Eyes, his Eybrows bending to the Temples,
he is plump in those parts, that belong to the Face, those that are about the
Eye are wrinkled; he is of a seeming sleepy but pleasant Aspect, has a low
voice, good gate, and is always in Motion, walking sometimes apace and
sometimes softly.

Of the Dull person.
He is Naturally hot, his head bigger than ordinary, the Conveyances through
which the Spirits of the head move to and fro are so narrow, that they are soon
stopped, which makes him sleepy and drowsy; his body is so fat and veins so
narrow, that they are scarce visible.

Of the Flatterer.
His Eyes are different and small, he has a little Face, a serene and extended
Brow, moving his Body to and fro as he walks.

Of the Envious.
Their Eyebrows are down-cast even to the Cheeks, their Face and Cheeks fat,
of a pale Complexion, and the Mouth wide, They have long sharp and white Teeth,
they have hollow Eyes and short Arms, and a delicate sharp voice.

Of the Talkative Person.
His Nose is straight or big in the middle, growing narrow at the Top; he is
long Cheek'd, and of a hony-color'd Complexion; his Chin is long and Throat
rough, his hands slender and bent, and his Fingers small, he is well shaped,
and breaths as if he had run a race.

Of the Irreligious.
Their Temples are hollow, and Ey-brows joined together, and hairy, their Eyes
hollow, little or great and full of Motion, sparkling as if they were angry,
opening themselves very wide, piercing, and swelled round about, they have a
wide Mouth, and long sharp white strong Teeth.

Of the Gamesters.
They have thick strait and black hair, a thick Beard, hairy Temples; and a
plump sparkling and clear Ey, large redish and looking upwards.

The Perilous days of every Month.
In the Change of every Moon are two days which are perilous for many things.

In January 3 or 4. In March 6 or 7. In May 8. or 9. In July 3. or 13. In
September 8. or 13. In November, 5. or 9. In February 5. or 7. In April 5. or
8. In June 5. or 15. In August 8. or 13. In October 5. or 12. In December 3 or
13.
Hereafter follows the Praise of ALE, wherein is Ennumerated several Sorts of
Drinks with a Description of the Humors of most sorts of Drunkards.
BAchus having called a Parliament of late,
For to consult about some things of State,
Nearly concerning the Honor of his Court;
To The Sun, behind The Exchange, they did Resort:
Where being met, and many things that time
Concerning the adulterating Wine,
And other Liquors; Selling of Ale in Mugs,
Silver Tankards, Black-pots, and little Jugs:
Strong beer in Rabbits, and cheating penny Cans,
Three Pipes for two pence; and such like Trepans:
Vintners small Bottles, Silver mouthed black Jacks,
Papers of Sugar, with such like cheating knacks:
And many suchlike things were then debated,
And Bills past, upon the Cases stated:
And all things ready for Adjournment, then
Stood up one of the Northen Country men,
A Boon-fellow, and Lover of strong Ale,
Whose tongue well steeped in Sack begun this Tale,
My Bully Rocks, I Have been expetienc'd long
In most of Liquors which are counted Strong:
Of Claret, White wine and Canary-sack,
Rhenish and Malago, I Have had no lack;
Sider, Perry, Metheglin, and Sherbet,
Coffee and Mead, with Punch and Chocalet:
Rum and Tee, Azora wine, Mederry,
Vin de Paree, Brag, wine with Rosemary:
Stepony, Vsquebath, besides all these,
Aqua Caelestis Cinnamon, Hearts-ease:
Brave Rosa Solis, and other Liquors fine,
Rasberry Wine, Pur-royal, and Shampine:
Malmsey, and Viper-wine, all these I pass:
Fronteniack, with excellent Ipocras:
Mum, Cherry-wine, Langoon; and Lemmonad,
Sherry, and Port a Port, both white and red.
Pomgranate, Myrtle, and Isop-wine I know,
I pres and Orleans, Coos, and eke Anjow,
Burgundian-wine, Coecubum, Sage and Must,
Fennel and Wormwoad-wine have past my Gust,
Hydromel, Mulsum, wine boiled with Southerwood,
Opimium, Smirna, and Biaeon good:
Temetum, Lora and brave Muskadel,
Rumney and Nectar too that does excel:
Scilian, Naples and Lorain wine,
Moravia, Malta and Corsica fine:
Tent, Muskatine, Brandy, and Alicant,
Of all these Liquors I Have had no scant,
And several others; but none do I find,
Like Humming Northern ALE to please my mind,
Oh its pleasant to the Taste, strong and mellow,
He that affects it not, is no boon Fellow.
He that in this drink does let his Senses swim,
There Is neither wind nor storms will pierce on him:
It warms in Winter, in Summer opes the Pores,
'Twil make a sovereign Salve' against cuts and sores:
It ripens Wit, exhilerates the Mind,
Makes friends of foes, and foes of Friends full kind;
Its Physical, for old Men, warms their Blood:
Its Spirits makes the Coward's courage good:
The amorous Lady it will pleasure too,
Make frozen Maids, and Nuns, and Virgins do
The thing you wot; Soldiers and Gown-men,
Rich and poor, old and young, lame and sound men
May such Advantage have by drinking Ale,
As should I tell, you would think 'twere but a Tale;
Mistake me not, Custom, I mean not tho,
of excessive Drinking, as great Ranters do,
for that would turn a great Wit to a Sot,
I mean the merry Quibling over a Pot,
Which makes dull Melancholy spirits be,
For Critics and great Wits, good Company.
Oh the rare Virtues of this Barley Broth;
To rich and poor it is Meat and Drink and Cloth,
The Court here stopped him, and the Prince did say,
Where may we find this Nectar, I thee pray,
The boon good Fellow answered, I can tell,
North-Allerton, in Yorkshire does excel
All England, nay all Europe for strong Ale,
If thither we adjorn, we shall not fail
To taste such humming Stuff, as, I dare say,
Your Highness never tasted to this day.
They hearing this, the House Agreed upon
All for Adjournment to North-Allerton:
Madam Bradley's, was the chief house then named,
Where they must taste this noble drink so famed,
And noised abroad in each place far and near.
Nay, take it Bradly for strong Ale and Beer,
Thou have it loose, there is none can do so well
In brewing Ale, thou do all else excel.
Adjournment day being come, there did appear
A brave full house, Bachus himself was there.
This Nectar was brought in, each had his Cup,
But at the first they did but sipple up
This rare Ambrosia; but finding that.
'Twas grateful to the Taste, and made them chat,
And laugh and talk, O then when all was out,
They called for more, and drunk full Cans about;
But in short space, such strange Effects it wrought
Amongst the Courtiers, as Bachus never thought
Or dreamed upon: his wise men it made Pools,
And made his Counselors to look like Owls.
The simple sort of Fellows it made prate,
And talk of Court Affairs, and things of State:
And those who were dull Fellows when they came,
Were now turned nimble Orators of Fame:
And such of them were thought to be no Wits,
Were Metamorphis'd into excellent Poets:
Those that were same, and came there with a staff,
Threw't quite away, which made the Prince to laugh,
The Cripgles which did Crutches thither bring,
Without them now did hop about and sing:
Some over the Forms and Stools did skip and leap,
Some knac'dtheir fingers, no plain word could speak
Some shak'd their legs and arms with great delight,
Some cursed and swore, and others they did fight;
Some, antic tricks did play like a Babboon,
Some knit their brows, did shake their heads and frown,
Some Maudlin drunken were, and wept full sore,
Others fell fast asleep, begun to snore:
Thousands of Lies and Stories some did tell,
Their tongues went like the Clapper of a Bell,
Others were tongue ti'd, could not speak one word,
And some did cast their reckoning up at Board.
Some sung aloud, and did deaf their Fellows
Making a Noise, worse than Vulcan's Bellows:
Some were for baudy Talk, and some did shout;
Some mist the Cup, and poured the Liquor out:
At every word, some did their Neighbor jump,
And some did often give the Board a thump.
Some were all Kindness, did their Fellows kiss,
Some all bedaub'd their clothes, and mouths did miss:
For Arguments some were, and learned discourses,
Some talked of greyhounds, some of running horses,
Some talked of hounds, and some of Cocks o'th game,
Some naught but hawks, and setting dogs did name:
And some were all for drinking healths about;
Others did rub the Table with their Snout:
Some pissed in the fire, others threw out their snuffs,
And some were mad to be at handy Cuffs.
Some swore that they would have a Serenade,
Others did call their Hostess Whore and Jade:
And round about did throw the cups and glasses,
The drink did fly into their Neighbors Faces:
Some were for Bargains some for Wagers laying:
Others for Cards and Tables cried, for playing:
Some broke the Pipes, and round about them threw,
Some smoakd Tobacco till their nose was blew.
Some in the fire fell and singed their Clothes,
And some fell from their Seat and broke their nose.
Some could not stir a Foot, did sit and glore,
Some sought the house all over for a whore,
Some called for Music, others were for a dance,
And some lay staring, as if in a Trace.
Some called for Victuals, others for a Crust,
Some opened their Buttons, and were like to burst.
Some challenged all the people that were there,
And some with strange invented Oaths did swear.
Some told how many Women they had used:
Others at such Discourse were sore amused.
Some shirk'd their drink, did put away the Cup,
And some took all that came, left not one Sup:
Some whilst they sober were, would nothing pay:
But when once drunk would all the shot defray:
Others whilst sober, were as free as any:
But being drunk, refuse to pay one penny.
Some were for News, and how the State of things
Did stand amongst great Potentates and Kings:
Some all their Friends and Neighbors did backbite:
And some in jearing others took delight:
Some, of their Birth and Riches, made great boast:
And none but they, were fit to rule the roast.
Some filled the room with noise, yet could not speak
One word of English, Latin, French or Greek:
Or any other Language, which one might
Put into Sense, and understand aright.
Some were so holy that they would not hear,
Words either that profane or smutty were.
Some in a Melancholy posture laid?
Others did cry, What is the Reckning paid.
Some burnt their hats, others the windows broke,
Some cried, More liquor, we are like to choke:
Some pissed their Breeches, sirreverence your nose,
Some not only piss' but all be -- their hose:
Lame gouty men did dance about so sprightly,
A boy of fifteen scarce could skip so lightly.
Old Crampy Captains, that scarce a Sword could draw,
Swore now they would keep the King of France in Awe;
And new Commissions get to raise more Men,
For now they Swore, they were grown young again.
Off went their Perriwigs, Coats and Rapers:
Out went the Candles, Noses for Tapers
Served to give Light whilst they did dance around,
Drinking full Healths with Caps upon the ground,
And still as they did dance their round-delayes,
They all did cry, This Drink deserves the Bays
Above all Liquors we have ever tasted,
It Is pity that a drop of it were wasted:
A stranger coming by, did hear the Noise,
He stepped into the House to see the Boys.
Such sights he saw, as he never saw before,
Which made him Laugh until his sides were sore:
His Horse did follow, and saw their quaffing,
He Nee'd aloud, and broke his Girts with laughing,
These Antic sights caused Bachus to Admire,
And then he did begin for to enquire:
What Privileges were bestowed upon
This Famous Ale-Town of North Allerton?
The Answer was, That it was only known,
To have four Fairs in the year, a Burrough-Town,
One Market every week, and that was all:
This moved Bachus presently to call
For a great Jugg, which held above five quarts,
And filling't to the Brim; come here my Hearts,
Said he, we will drink about this merry Health,
To the Honor of the Town, their State and Wealth.
For by the Essence of this Drink, I Swear,
This Town is Famous for strong Ale and Beer,
And for the sake of this good Nappy Ale,
Of my great Favor it shall never fail;
For to promote the quick Return and Trade
For all strong Ale and Beer, that here is made:
So to it they went, and Drunk full Healths about,
Till they drunk Money, Wit, and Senses out.
For whilst one drop of Ale was to be had,
They quaft, and Drunk it round about like mad.
When all was off, then out they pulled the Tapps,
And stuck the Spiddocks, finely in their Hats:
And so Triumphantly away they went,
But they did all agree with one consent,
That 'er 'twas long, again they would surely come,
And taste some more of Allertons brave Hum;
Nay they did Swear to come, they would not fail,
And glut themselves with Madam Bradley's Ale:
It was so pleasant, mellow and fine,
That Bachus swore he would never more drink Wine.
Phythagoras WHEEL; Or, The Wheel of FORTUNE.
A 4 B 6 C 26 D i8 E i2 F 4 G 2i H 28 I ii K i6 L i2 M i9 N ii O 9 P i2 Q 8 R
i2 S 4 T 6 V 9 W i X i3 Y 3 Z 2
7 i3 i0 i6 20 22 30 6 i5 8 26 i9 i2 5 i 9 4 3 ii 2
24 27 i4 23 29 28 25 i8 2i i7




These Questions following may be answered by this Pithagorian WHEEL.
1. IF your Life shall be Fortunate or Unfortunate. 2. Whether you shall gain
by your Trade or loose. 3. If you shall live long, or dye soon. 4. Whether a
Horse shall win his Race or lose it. 5. If the person you Love do Love you
again or no. 6. Whether you shall dye of a long sickness or a short one. 7. If
your journey shall prove good or bad. 8. Whether you shall win your Wager or
lose it. 9. If Love lost shall be gotten again or no. 10. Whether a Woman be a
Maid or no. 11. If you shall obtain your desire or be disappointed. 12. Whether
your Wife be true to your Bed or false. 13. If a Woman shall have Children or
prove Barren. 14. Whether you shall marry or lead a single Life. 15. If you
shall be in favor with great men or no. 16. Whether the Husband shall dye
first or the Wife. 17. If a sick person shall recover or dye. 18. Whether you
shall dye a natural Death or no. 19. If a Greyhound shall win his course or
lose it. 20. Whether a prisoner shall be released or no. 21. If a Suit at Law
shall go for you or against you. 22. Whether you shall dye at home or abroad.
23. If a Woman with Child shall have a Son or a Daughter. 24. Whether you had
better take a voyage or stay in Harbor. 25. If it be good to Wedd a Wife or
not to Wedd. 26. Whether your Son or Daughter shall marry well or ill. 27. If a
ship at Sea shall come safe home or no. 28. Whether there shall be peace or
War. 29. If it shall be a plentiful year or no. 30. Whether you shall gain by a
bargain or lose. 31. If a person absent be living or dead. 32. Whether you
shall get a Debt owing to you or no. 33. If a thing lost, shall be found again
or no. 34. Whether you shall dye Rich or P^or. 35. If you shall be much loved
in the World, or much hated. 36. Whether your Servants are true to you or
false. 37. If a story you have heard be true or false. 38. Whether you shall
have much Health or much sickness. 39. If a marriage intended shall proceed or
no. 40. Whether you shall gain by play, or lose by it. 41. If you shall prove
successful in your undertaking or no. 42. Whether want of Children is the Man's
fault, or the Woman's. 43. If you shall gain by keeping a Commodity, or lose.
44. Whether your Farm shall yield you much increase or little. 45. If your
Sweet-hearts Love be true or seined. 46. Whether you shall gain any thing by
Death or no. 47. If you shall have a good Market for your Commodity, or a bad
one. 48. Whether a Thief shall be taken, or escape. 49. If an Apprentice shall
stay out his time or run away. 50. Whether a Soldier shall be slain in Battle,
or no.
A TABLE OF THE Physiognomal Characters.
OF the Melancholic. 51 Of the Phlegmatic 52 Of the Choleric 53 Of the
Sanguine 54 Of the just man. 55 Of the faithful Person: ib. Of the honest man.
ib. Of the Prudent Person. 56 Of the good natured Man. ib. Of the Ingenious. 57
Of the Constant. ib. Of those that are apt to learn. 58 Of the Liberal. ib. Of
those that have strong Memories. ib. Of the temperate. 59 Of the Bashful
Person. ib. Of the Courageous. ib. Of the sincere man. 60 Of the Merciful Man.
ib. Of the Facetious. ib. Of the Heroic Person. 61 Of the bold and hardy. ib.
Of the Mechanic. 62 Of the Pensive. ib. Of the unjust Person. ib. Of
Murderers. ib. Of the Idiot. 63 Of the Furious. ib. Of Poysoners. ib. Of those
who are of dull Capacity. ib. Of the Wicked man. 64 Of those that have a weak
Memory. ib. Of the Unfaithful. ib. Of those that have venomous Eyes. 65 Of the
Inconstant ib. Of the Imprudent. ib. Of the Foolish. 66 Of the rude and
uncivilized Persons. ib. Of the Timorous. 67 Of the Covetous. ib. Of the Rash.
ib. Of the Drunkand. 68 Of the Proud ib. Of the Luxurious. ib. Of the Impudent.
69 Of the Liars. ib. Of the Infirm. 70 Of the Voluptuous woman. ib. Of the
Slothful. ib. Of the Intemperate. 71 Of the Dissembler. ib. Of the Dull person.
ib. Of the Flatterer. 72 Of the Envious. ib. Of the Talkative Person. ib. Of
the Irreligious. ib. Of the Gamesters. 73
FINIS.

