AMSTERDAM: Toleration, or no Toleration; In a DISCOURSE BETWEEN CONFORMISTS,
NON-CONFORMISTS, PAPISTS, ANABAPTISTS, QUAKERS, etc.


In their own Words, before a Gracious King, about the extent of a Christian
Indulgence to all Dissenters.

By J. V. C. O. A Friend to Men of all Religions.

Romans 4.19. Let us follow the things that make for peace.

LONDON: Printed in the year MDCLXIII.

TO All that are SPIRITED FOR An Universal Accommodation.
THat good people may know what Indulgence they are to look for, here is the
Judgment of the ablest of all Professions, in there own words, concerning as
much Favor as can be allowed men of different Persuasions. Here you see what
wise men have thought about Toleration: here you see what wise men may look
for; and withal, what all Parties will be contented with, in order to that
Peace and Settlement that may bless us and our Posterity.

AMSTERDAM: Toleration, or no Toleration.
King. I Have sent for you, my loving Subjects of all Professions, to bear
witness to the tenderness and compassion I have for all my good People of
different Persuasions, who live soberly and peaceably, according to their
several Apprehensions; and to the care I have taken to compose Differences and
Offenses that I have found in this Kingdom, by Impartiality: or at least to
allay men's Heats and Animosities so far, as that notwithstanding their several
Persuasions, they might cement in a common Peace, so much conducing to the
happiness and welfare of this Nation. Really, the satisfaction of all sober men
in the matter of Religion, has layn so much upon my Spirit, that I have spared
no time, refused no pains to take in the Advice and Apprehensions of the most
knowing in all Ways; whereby a course might have been taken that would oblige
all persons to join in a cheerful Obedience to our Government, and in an
universal Endeavor for common Good. It Is not unknown to the world with what
patience I have heard the sentiments of all Parties since I came to England: I
have offered all that in Reason, Honor and Conscience I can; reserving only
what I cannot consent unto, without an irrepairable injury to my own Soul, the
Church, and my People. And at last I put all difference in Church Affairs and
Religion to the free Consultation of a Convocation legally chosen: the Results
of whose Counsels, as they include the Votes of all, so I hoped they would have
given satisfaction unto all. What would you have me do more then I have done?


Chancellor. Gentlemen, the distempers of Religion which have too much
disturbed the peace of this Kingdom, is a sad Argument indeed: it is a
Consideration that would make every religious heart to bleed, to see Religion,
which should be the strongest Obligation, and cement of Affection and brotherly
Love, Kindness and Compassion, made now by the perverseness of passionate and
froward men, the ground of all Animosity, Hatred and Malice. It was not so of
old, when one of the most ancient Fathers of the Church tells us, That Love and
Charity was so signal and eminent in the Primitive Christians, that it even
drew Admiration and Envy from their greatest Adversaries. Vide (inquiunt) ut
invicem se diligunt. How would they look upon our sharp and virulent
Contentions in the Debates of Christian Religion, and the bloody Wars that have
proceeded from those Contentions, whilst every one pretended to all the marks
which are to attend upon the true Church, except only that which is
inseparable from it, Charity to one another!

Really, this Disquisition has cost the King many a sigh, many a sad hour,
when he has considered the most irrepairable reproach the Protestant Religion
has undergone from the Divisions and Distractions which have been so notorious
in this Kingdom. What pains he has taken to compose them, after several
Discourses with learned and pious Men of several Persuasions, you may see by a
Declaration he has published upon that occasion; by which you see his
willingness to indulge all tender Consciences as far as lies in his power. We
all hope that God will so bless the candor of his Majesty in the condescension
he makes, that all good people will return to that Unity and Unanimity, which
will make both King and People as happy as they can be in this world.


King. That you may see that I am not guided by any single man's counsel,
fidelity and discretion in the management of the great matters of Religion; and
that I comply not in my Government with particular men's passions, humors, and
private opinions, I here meet you, whom I look upon as the most knowing, sober,
and moderate of the several Professions under my Government; by whose
discretion I hope I may be advised so, as that I may be able to give all just
satisfaction to all sober desires, and allay and fix my good People to a due
temperament, to their own just content, and mine.


Politician. May it please your Majesty to reduce the various disagreeing
Parties within this Kingdom, which seem to render it an indigested mass of
people, to such a temperature as may compose all Affairs, both Religious and
Civil, within your Majesty's Dominions. There are but three ways imaginable:
The first way is to raise one Party by the fall and ruin of all other Parties;
which, if possible, cannot be accomplished but by violent ways and means.

The second way, is, to think of such an Accommodation, as by the mutual
yiedling of the several Parties, former differences may be abolished, and all
reconcilable Professors may be reconciled; and such a comprehensive Coalition
of all Interests be endeavored, as may take in, and carry along the whole
stream and strength of the three Kingdoms.

The third way, is, to indulge a Toleration to the weaker side, whose strength
a Charitable Connivence and Christian Indulgence may weaken, when as a tougher
Opposition may fortify it: a severe Imposition putting the despised and
oppressed Party into such Combinations, as may most enable them to get a full
Revenge on those they count their Persecutors; they being commonly assisted and
encouraged with that vulgar pity and compassion which is allowed all that are
said to suffer for their Conscience and Religion. A course very agreeable in my
opinion to that exact Policy which supports the most flourishing Kingdom of
France, etc. and States of Holland, in an admired Grandeur, made up of Peace,
Plenty and Prosperity; which we envy, but cannot attain to.


King. I must needs interrupt you; and though I approve the faithfulness, I
cannot allow the prudence of your advice: for you must all know, that I am
persuaded that in matter of Religion we must follow not so much what is most
prudent, as what is most pious; not only what is expedient, but what is
lawful; not what seems best in reason of State, but what seems best in the
counsel of God: and therefore before you proceed, I must let you know, that you
must not insist on foreign Policies, and Prosperity in this or that way; but
you must faithfully inform me what I may do in Duty and Conscience: which by
Gods assistance I will do, and leave the success to God.


Politician. May it please your Majesty, I presumed not to inform or impose
upon your Majesty; but according to the duty of my place, I humbly offer what I
think may be subservient to your declared Moderation and Condescension, that
the Accommodation begun by your gracious Declaration, may be entire and
perfect, and fully settled to a perpetual unity.


Moderate Men. It is the earnest expectation and hope of the Religious and
Well-affected to Public Peace, that as your gracious Disposition does not
suffer you to cleave to any divided Party of your Subjects, to the
discouragement of others that are alike truly Loyal: so, as a common Father,
you will protect and cherish all those that are found capable and worthy, and
be our great Moderator, by your Authority and Wisdom, to lessen Differences, to
allay Animosities between dissenting Brethren, which already agree in the main
points of Religion.


King. What do you advise me to do?


The Indifferent. Truly in these great varieties of Opinions that trouble the
world, to maintain particular Opinions against others is in the experience of
all Ages but to widen Differences, and to make Divisions more vehement, more
lasting, and more spreading, whiles every one is so addicted to his own way,
that he cannot allow a charitable thought for any Dissenter, nor let fall a
good word for him, nor acknowledge a truth in him. Therefore I have always
thought that the only way of composing the troubles of the world in the
matters of Religion, were to allow every man his liberty to serve God according
to his Light and Conscience; provided he live soberly and peaceably.


B. Sanderson. God forbid that every one should do what is good in his own
eyes. Shall we now cast away the Law of Nature, which in all Ages was allowed
to help us to judge of good and evil? 6 Sermon.
Shall we leave the Law of God, holy, just and good? Shall we reject the Laws
of Order and Government, to which all men submit in Reason, and all Christians
for Conscience sake? Shall we fear neither God nor man, but walk in the ways of
our own hearts, live after our own devices, be our own Law? Shall we live to
our selves? Shall we die to our selves? Shall we, who, in our Religion, profess
to deny our selves and our own ways, own nothing but our selves and our own
ways? Is it in man that walks to direct his steps? Shall every man go his own
way, when all flesh have corrupted their ways?


B. Reynolds. It Is one of our greatest sins to be Self-movers, to be a Rule, to
be a God to our selves. Life Christ, page 425.
It Is one of Gods extremest Judgments to give us over to our selves, and
leave us to follow our own Rules. When he has wooed us by his Spirit, and he
is refused; he teaches us by his Prophets, and they are reviled; governs us by
his Magistrates, and they are disobeyed: when he offers to teach us, and we
stop our ears; to lead us, and we pull away the shoulder; to restrain us, and
we break out: when we nonplus and pose all the methods and ways appointed of
God, and observed by men, to keep us within the bounds of sobriety, piety,
peace and honesty; it is his last Judgment upon us, to let us be a Rule and a
Way unto our selves. My people would not hearken unto my voice, and Israel
would have none of me: so I gave them up to their own hearts lusts, to walk
after their own counsels, Psalm 81.11, 12. Non ex arbitrio Deo serviendum est,
sed Imperio.


B. Gauden, p. 143. I acknowledge and allow that just plea which is made by
learned and godly men for Christians mutual bearing with, and forbearing one
another in cases of private and modest Differences, either in Opinions or
Practices: I would willingly yield to all men, much more to all Christians,
that Liberty, Natural, Civil, and Religious, which may consist with Scripture,
Precept, and Right Reason, with grounds of Morality and Society; which is as
much as I desire to use or enjoy my self in point of private Opinion, and
public Profession. I know Religion is not to be forced, but persuaded, as
matter of choice, not of constraint; whereunto rational men are not to be
compelled, but to be convinced with meekness of wisdom: yet because experience
teaches us, that such is the infirmity and weakness of some people, that they
cannot find out of themselves the truths of God, which are the grounds of true
Religion; such is the laziness and indifference of others, as to neglect all
means that might help them; and such is the pride and peevishness of others,
that they must needs be singular: For these, and other weighty Reasons,
Christian Religion ought not to be left loose, without any limits or restraints
upon their licentiousness, who cannot endure any thing solid, strict, or
settled in Religion, as to themselves or others, whereby they may live in any
godly order upon Principles established by public consent, upon most mature
Deliberation, and impartial advice, in order to Gods glory, and the common good
of humane society. Therefore in all humility I offer that we may have some wise
and grand Establishment, which should be the Rule of the public Doctrine,
Worship and Government. This in all uprightness ought to be set before all
people; and not only propounded and commended to them, but so far commanded
and enjoined by Authority, as none should neglect it, or vary from it, without
giving account: much less should any man publicly scorn or contemn it, or the
Ministers and Dispensers of it, by writing, speech or action, to the scandal of
the whole Church and Nation: whose Constitutions ought to be received with all
godly fear and reverence, entertained with sollicitous diligence, maintained
with honorable munificence; all containing themselves within the bounds of
charitable union, and humble subjection: so as no private fancy upon any
pretense whatsoever be permitted rudely and publicly to oppose the universal
Constitution.


Mr. Baxter and Mr. Brinsley. God forbid that fallen man should be left to
himself. If poor souls be left without control to the error of their own
ways, they are undone for ever. If a bare connivence at these several Opinions
has bred so much misery, what do you think will a Toleration do? a Toleration
of all sorts of Opinions, which is by some, and those more then a good many,
under the abused notion of Liberty of Conscience, pleaded for. For my own part,
should this be once yielded, (which I hope their eyes shall first fail who look
for it) I should look upon it as the Passing Bell to the Churches peace and
glory, if not to the true Religion of God in this Kingdom.


Mr. Vines, p. 76. The chiefest apparent Cause, and most pregnant outward
occasion of our Ecclesiastic mischief and miseries, arise from inordinate
liberty, and immodest freedom; which of later years all sorts of people have
challenged to themselves in matter of Religion, presuming on such a toleration
and indulgence as encourages them to choose and adhere to what Doctrine,
Opinion, Party, Persuasion, Fancy or Faction they list. Are not the errors
which are rife amongst us, either by infecting persons of quality, grown to
that boldness; or by carrying away Barnabas also, grown into that credit; or by
spreading far and wide, grown to that strength, that they seem to endanger our
common Faith, our public Worship, and authorized Ministry; our much expected,
and long promised Reformation?


Assembly-Divines. There is no State in Christendom where there is one only
Religion established, that will admit the public exercise of any other in a
way of separation from it. And the Church of God before Christ granted no
toleration of diverse Religions or Disciplines, and of several Parties, so
contrary to the Communion of Saints. We believe and profess one God, one
Christ, one Lord, one Spirit, one Faith, one Baptism, and one Body.


Mr. Buroughs, p. 62. If every man shall not walk according to his own light,
according to what light shall he walk?


B. Gauden, p. 139. According to the Scripture Light, that has beamed out upon
all Believers, in all Ages of the Church. He may indeed do what he will, but
they that have power over him, must allow him to do nothing against the truth,
but for the truth.


Mr. Caryl, p. 36. It were a mercy if it were possible tender Consciences were
allowed to stand fast in that liberty wherein Christ has made them free.


B. Gauden, p. 142. I do not doubt but the greatest Patrons for the peoples
liberty in matters of Religion, will in time (if they do not already) see how
great a charity it is to put merciful restraints of religious Order and
Government upon them, which are no less necessary then those sharper curbs and
yokes of civil Coercion. No wise Statesman will think it fit in honesty or
safety to permit the common people to do what is good in their own eyes, as if
there were no King or supreme Magistrate in Israel: nor can any good Christian
think it fit, that in Religion every man should be left to profess what he
lists, as if there were no Christ as King and chief Bishop of our souls; as
if he had not left us clear and settled foundations of Faith, Worship, Order and
Discipline, and whatsoever is necessary to make us wise unto salvation, perfect
unto every good work, in wholesome forms of found words. --


B. Hall, p. 28. O do not deceive your selves: the liberty wherein Christ has
made you free, is from sin that beguiled you; from fear, that troubled you;
from an evil Conscience, that disturbed you; from the wrath of God, that was
bent against you; from the rigor of the Moral Law, that oppressed you; from
Satan, that had dominion over you; from the Ceremonial Law, that enthralled
you: and not from subjection to the wholesome Injunctions of lawful Authority;
your obedience to whom, is perfect liberty.


Mr. Manton, p. 137. Vain man would be free and yokeless; neither would he have
his heart subject to God, nor his actions to man's censure.

Some men will not have their consciences stand in the way of their lust, nor
the Magistrate in the way of their sin; but every Christian desires to live
under the Magistrate peaceable and quiet lives, in all godliness and honesty.


King. Indeed, Mr. Caryl, if the divinest liberty be to will what men should,
and to do what they so will according to Reason, Law and Religion; I envy not
my Subjects that liberty, which is all I desire my self; so far am I from all
desire of oppressing theirs.

In point of true conscientious tenderness, challenged with humility and
meekness, not with proud and arrogant activity, which seeks to hatch every egg
of opinion to a faction or schism, I have often declared how little I desire my
Laws should entrench on Gods Sovereignty, who is the only King of all men's
consciences: and yet he has laid such restraints upon men, as commands them to
be subject for conscience sake; giving no man liberty to break the Law
established, further then with meekness and patience they are content to suffer
the penalty annexed, rather then perturb the public peace. Have I any power,
or have I not, to take care of matters of Religion, so that none may presume
under my Government to own any Way different from what I conceive the ancient
Catholic and Apostolic Way? I pray satisfy me in that.


B. Reynolds, p. 18, 16. Not to engage in any controversy; only thus much:
The good Kings of Israel and Judah, before Christ, were commanded of God, and
were ready of themselves, to lay out their interest for the establishment of
the Way of God, and the abolition of all other Ways. The Prophets prophesied,
That good Kings after Christ's coming should be Nursing Fathers and Nursing
Mothers to the Church: every soul is subject to them, as who are over us for
good, Spiritual and Temporal; and we are to pray for them, that we may live
under them peaceable and quiet lives, in all godliness and honesty. God has
given your Majesty power, God has given your Majesty care; a power over his
people, a care of his glory: you must not bear the sword in vain. If you must
punish offenses against men, you must much more punish offenses against God: if
you must take care that your Subjects live well, you must take care that they
be well principled: you must take care that your people be so subject to you,
as you and your people may be subject to God. The King, says St. Augustine,
serves God as a man, and as a King; as a man, by godly life; as a King, by
godly Laws: as Ezekias, by destroying the Groves and Temples of the Idols; and
as Josias, by compelling the people to serve the Lord their God; and doing
other things for the honor of God, which only Kings can do. And we may
observe in the Laws and Histories of the Primitive times, what Socrates said,
That ever since the Emperor turned Christian, the Affairs of the Church
depended upon him: for the Church, as Optatus says, is in the Commonwealth,
not the Commonwealth in the Church. Besides the Primitive Church, the Reformed
Church of Belgia holds, p. 18. That the Magistrate should hold fast the Word of
God, and see that nothing be taught contrary to it. The Helvetian says, this
Office was enjoined the Heathen Magistrate, to take care that the Name of God
be duly honored: how much more does it belong to the Christian Magistrate, as
the true Deputy of God in his Dominion? The Basil-confession has it thus, That
we must in all things submit to God first, and next to the supreme Magistrate.
That the Lord has entrusted you with a care of Religion, is a truth that has
been maintained always by the Protestant against the Papist, who only for a
great while appeared against your just power in that affair.


B. Gauden. Nay, it is your interest to take care of Religion so, for that the
happiness of your Kingdom does depend upon the purity of Religion, and the
peace of the Church; in which they are so bound up, as Jacobs soul was in
Benjamin, that they live and die together: and therefore all wise Governors
have still countenanced the public exercise of that Religion, which they owned
and established as best.


King. How may I exercise this power, to restrain those who maintain some
Opinions contrary to the established way?


B. Gauden. You may restrain all that are heterodox, 1. By Ecclesiastical
Discipline, Admonitions, Reproofs, and Censures: and, 2. where that is
despised, you may restrain them by the power of the Sword in your own hand, as
one that not only regards the civil peace of your subjects, but also that
trust which lies on you to take care of their religious interests, and their
souls welfare, that they may be taught and preserved in the right way of
knowing and serving God.


Libertine. I hope you will not force our consciences.


King. I cannot force your consciences.


Libertine. You do it when you impose upon us such things as we cannot in
conscience admit of.


King. When I impose any thing you cannot submit to, you may choose whether you
obey me in doing it: only if your consciences cannot do it, you are to suffer
for your conscience.


Anabaptist. How can you punish us for our consciences?


King. I punish you not for your consciences, but for what I think in my
conscience is such an error, as I dare not tolerate in my Dominions.


Quaker, p. 38. How will thou answer before the Lord for oppressing his
servants, that hold the Word of Gods patience, under pretense of error? when
thou think thou punishest error and erroneous persons, the truth and
children of God may lie a bleeding.


King. As you, so I, must do my duty according to my conscience: in conscience
I am bound to suppress what I really think is an error; and if I mistake, I
hope it will please God that I have followed my conscience, and that he will
pardon my miscarriage, insomuch as I did it ignorantly: as St. Paul, who says
of himself, I verily thought with my self, that I ought to do many things
contrary to the Name of Jesus: which thing I also did in Jerusalem, and many of
the Saints did I shut up in prison, and I punished them often in every Synagogue
or Assembly; and being exceedingly mad against them, I persecuted them even
unto strange cities.


Sir H. Vane, p. 113. O the Lord Jesus has purchased an universal freedom for
all men to walk according to the light of their own consciences: Who art thou,
O man, that judge another man's servant?


Mr. Finch, p. 14. It is not likely that the Lord Jesus, who came into the
world to bring all men to the pure Religion, and undefiled before God, should
purchase an universal freedom for men to be of what Religion they pleased. It
is not likely that he who prayed that all his Disciples might be one, should
purchase them an universal liberty, to be so many men, so many minds.


Dr. Hammond, p. 317. It Is true, one private man cannot judge another, but a
Magistrate may. All men are Gods servants to be judged by him, and he has
committed all judgment to the Son, who has committed all judgment in any
Nation to those supreme Magistrates whom he has appointed over that Nation;
who are to execute the judgments of righteousness and truth, as those who
judge not for man, but for the Lord.


Papist. How is it possible for you to judge another opinion, seeing you are
not infallible? you are assured no more that it is a truth, then I am.


King. What I venture my salvation upon, I may venture my Government upon: what
I am so far assured of, that I throw mine own soul upon it; I am so far assured
of, as to lay my whole duty upon it. I am not infallible, sure, that I have the
truth; yet I am infallible, sure, that I ought to own that which I apprehend to
be a truth. I judge not your opinion, but mine own, which I think so much a
truth of God, that though you have liberty of conscience to think what you
please of my opinion, yet I must not allow a liberty of practice, to do what
you please against it; as in my Dominions I ought not to suffer you to do any
thing which I think against that God that has restored me to my Dominions.
Certainly all humane judgment is subject unto error; and unless you will take
away all humane judgment out of the world, you must acquiesce in the highest,
whose errors are to be reserved to the judgment of God.


Anabaptist. Are not you worms of the earth as well as we? why should you be
Lords over our Faith?


Chancellor. If you have Faith, have it to your self; we are not Lords over
your Faith, but over our own; we wish you all had the true Faith: but you may
notwithstanding believe what you please, according to the Faith you have; but
you must not practice what you please against the Faith we have, and ought to
maintain.


L.B.C. You are Worms appointed of God to obey, and the Magistrates are Worms
appointed of God to command.


Libertine. Alas, we cannot follow this or that Way of yours if we would, until
the Lord has revealed it unto us.


King. And I cannot allow this or that Way of yours, unless God has revealed
it unto me.


Seeker. Paul, who never judged amiss, had so much meekness in him, as to
conceit if any one in this or that particular thought otherwise then himself,
that God either had or would reveal it to him; and so abstained from censuring;
when as you condemn all that think not as you do.


Mr. Baxter, p. 118. Paul, who wished them to wait until God revealed to them
what they knew not, never allowed them a liberty to practice contrary to what
they knew not.


B. Fern, p. 17. Yes, the Apostle there wishes them to live according to what
they professed in common with others; and if any was otherwise minded, he
should not presently follow his own mind, and walk in his own way, but wait
until the Lord reveals it.


Libertine. By forcing us, you may make us Hypocrites; but not real Converts to
your way.


Secretary, p. 18. Indeed we hope so well of you, that we think you would not
dissemble a Religion for any hardships in the world: and we must assure you,
that we do not use force to convert you to our way, but to clear our selves
from any allowance of your way: we use Reason to convert you, we use Force
only to clear our selves.


The Indifferent. If it be in mine own power to be in the right, you cannot
tell but that I am so; if it be Gods work, you cannot blame me if I am not: his
gifts are free, and dispenses as himself pleases; and my error is my misery,
and not my fault.


L.O.J. p. 16. The Church does not punish you for being in the wrong, which you
cannot (it may be) help, (although I could wish you would heartily endeavor
all the means to come to the right;) but for doing what is contrary to that
which is established as right, which you may help. You may choose whether you
think as we think, and you may choose whether you should do or teach as you do,
what is so scandalous to the Church, and so repugnant to public Authority.


Anabaptist. For you to suppress whatever is done or taught against the
received Way, is to hold the truth in unrighteousness.


B. Gauden. Because it is possible that some truths of Religion may be unseen,
and so omitted by the most public Diligence; and some may afterward be
discovered by private industry and devotion, which ought not to be smothered or
concealed, if they have the Character of Gods Will revealed in his written
Word, whose true meaning is the fixed measure, and unalterable Rule of all true
Religion: to prevent the suppressing or detaining any Truth which may be really
offered unto any Church or Christians beyond what is publicly owned and
established; also to avoid the foolish obtruding whatever Novelty any man's
fancy lists to set up, upon his own private account, contrary to the public
establishment: nothing were more necessary and happy then to have in every
National Church which has agreed with one heart, one mind, one spirit, and
one mouth, to serve the Lord Jesus, according to the pattern of primitive Piety
and Wisdom, persons of eminent Learning, Wisdom and Integrity, publicly
chosen, and appointed, to try and examine all new Opinions publicly
propounded; no man being to print or publish any thing different from the
public establishment of Religion, until he has first humbly propounded to the
Church, or to reverend men appointed by the Church, his Opinion in writing;
together with his Reasons, why he adds or differs from the public profession.
Let the prophets prophecy one by one, and let the others judge. If the Church
allows his Opinion and Reasons propounded, he may then publish his judgment by
preaching, disputing, writing or printing: if it does not, he shall then keep
his Opinion to himself, in the bounds of private conference only for his own
satisfaction, but in no way to publicate it, to the scandal or perturbation of
what is settled in Religion. Here every man may enjoy his ingenuous liberty as
to private dissenting, without any blame or penalty; which he shall incur or
undergo, in case he does so broach any thing without leave, as a rude
Innovator, and proud Disturber.


B. Usher, p. 118. Private and modest dissentings among brethren, safely may,
and charitably ought to be born, with all Christian meekness and wisdom; no
private Christian being forced to any explicit Conformity or Subscription,
under penalty of any mulct or prison, much less with the terror of fire and
faggot, which was the violence of Papal Tyranny: only they should take care
that people be duly taught that Religion which is settled; that none be a
public Preacher that is a declared Dissenter or Upholder of it; that no man
does broach any Novelty without their approbation; that no man oppose, scorn,
or perturb that constitution of Religion which is publicly settled, as supposed
to be the best; that no man abuse the name of Christian liberty to the Publicks
injury, making it a cloak of maliciousness; and that we be not ever learning,
and never coming to the knowledge of saving and necessary truth; that we be not
still tossed to and fro, with every wind of doctrine, and never cast anchor
upon the sure and safe grounds of an wholesome form of sound words.

Poor souls are undone and perish for ever, if they be betrayed to themselves;
if God and good men be not better to them then they desire or design to
themselves, either in things sacred or civil; if there be not in just and
honest ways such holy restraints and wholesome severities laid upon them, as
may keep them within the bounds of sobriety and piety.

The Lord may dispense the beams of his Spirit in the light of truth, as well
as in the heat of love, how, where, and when he will; yea, and often does reveal
his secret and hidden things not to the wise and learned, but to the babes and
foolish: therefore a public liberty at least, and a fair toleration ought to
be granted to any men to opine, to teach, and accordingly to act as they are
inwardly persuaded or moved, without any restraint upon their spirits, or
quenching of the Spirit of God.


B. Gauden: We desire not to quench the work of Gods Spirit in any man, but to
restrain the workings of a man's own errors, according to the will of God; to
which to subject our selves, is our most perfect freedom. Perfect freedom is to
be able without sinful impediments to understand, to speak, and to do such
things as we ought to God or man, in such a way as charity, sobriety, order and
gravity, allow.


Papists. We hope your Majesty, out of the sense of our Loyalty in these
disturbed times, will be pleased to allow us such indulgence, as they may
deserve who dissent from the public Way peaceably and soberly.


King. What you have done, was but your duty: for your Loyalty to me in civil
things, you shall have protection from me in those things too: for an
indulgence to your Religion, I must consult my Divines. What say you, my Lord
of Canterbury?


Archb. Abbot. I fear I have offended by my too long silence. I must needs say,
that your Majesty is undone if you tolerate a Religion so displeasing to God,
so dangerous to all humane states and societies. Now I have delivered mine own
soul, you may do with me what you please.


Papists. Why is it that we are so severely censured?


B. Usher, p. 67. Because your Religion is idolatrous, your Doctrine heretical,
and your Church in respect of both Apostatical. To give you therefore a
toleration, or to consent that you may freely exercise your Religion, and
profess your Faith and Doctrine, is a grievous sin, whereby we are Accessories
to your Delusions, and like to be partakers of your plagues: and therefore we
beseech the zealous God of truth, to make you who are in Authority zealous of
Gods glory, and of the advancement of true Religion; zealous, resolute, and
courageous against all Popery, Superstition and Idolatry.


Papists. We hope you will deal as favorably with us, as you would be dealt
withal in those Countries where our Religion prevails.


Protestants. Our greatest rigours reach not your persecutions in foreign
parts: we would yet be merciful unto you, if we could without being cruel to
our own souls.


Papists. Your favor here to us, may oblige other Princes to oblige your
friends abroad.


Protestants: We must not do evil that good may come; therefore we must
discountenance your errors: you may if you will discountenance our truths.


Papists. It Is true, some practices against the State deserved this severity
formerly; but our peaceable behavior may deserve an indulgence now.


Protestants. Your behavior may deserve an indulgence, but not your
principles: you are so tied to the Supremacy at Rome, that you cannot be true
(if you will be true to your own Profession) to our Government.


Papists. The Hugonots have an indulgence in France.


Protestants. They have no more then they fought for, though they have more
then (as appears by your several attempts to undermine their liberties) you are
willing they should have.


Papists. It were no harm to indulge us: if your Religion were true, your truth
would triumph over our falsehood.


Protestants. No people ever suffered an Enemy to settle in their Country, that
they might triumph over them.


An ill-affected person. They have already what amounts to a toleration.


Protestants. No: the King indeed does not force them to come over to our
Religion, (because he thinks Religion must be persuaded, and not forced) yet he
does not allow the practice of their Religion: he does not compel them to come
to us, and he does not suffer us to be seduced to come over to them.


The Indifferent. Alas, the Popish Religion is so ridiculous, that to tolerate
it publicly were to expose it.


Protestants. Alas, what is ridiculous to the wise, is very pleasing to the
vulgar, who are the most part of mankind; and where they have one Proselyte to
their Devotion, they have ten to their pomp, glory. --


Papists. The more danger of our Priests, the more care should be taken by your
Ministers.


Protestants. But we must not let in the Wolves, that the Shepherd may be
careful.


Papists. May it please your Majesty that we may live peaceably as your other
Subjects, and not be compelled to your profession, though we enjoy not the
liberty of our own?


King. In the multitude of Counselors there is safety. We shall advise with
our Nobility, Clergy and Commons what may be done in your favor: for to deal
truly with you, it is not my intention to exclude you from all share in the
benefit of such an Act as the wisdom of our Parliament shall think fit to
offer unto us for the ease of tender consciences. We intend to abate the
rigor of some Laws, as not being able to endure that any of our Subjects
should be put to death for their opinions in matter of Religion only: and
indeed as we cannot in conscience own or indulge your way, so we shall not
punish your dissent from us any otherwise then with some marks of our
displeasure for not closing with the established Religion.


Papists. So, pray God bless your Majesty.


Ill-affected persons. If Popery be naught, why are Papists suffered? if not,
why are they punished?


Honest Protestants. Though his Majesty suffers Papists as his liege people,
yet he suffers not Popery; and yet he suffers not Papists without some marks of
his displeasure.


Whisperer. Why does the King punish men for what is their conscience?


The Loyal. He punishes them not for their consciences, which he knows not,
but for their outward actions, which he knows: he measures their practice by
the Law, by which he is to judge and govern; he refers their consciences to
God.


Non-conformists. We humbly beseech your most excellent Majesty to allow us to
enjoy our consciences and judgments in serving our God.


State. We could grant your liberty as to your own practice, but we must deny
you the liberty of seducing others. I will not punish you for being misled into
error, but I must restrain you from spreading your errors: I shall wink at
your weakness, but I shall punish wilfulness.


Their followers. May our eyes but see our Teachers, and we enjoy their
faithful Labors.


Chapter Though his Majesty has compassion on this seduced Age, he intends not
that the next Age should be seduced too. Do you think in your Conscience that
his Majesty may suffer that to be taught which he thinks is an error?


E. Man. How shall the poor men live?


L. P. No Church or State must allow maintenance to such persons as oppose the
Order and Government of that Church or State.


P. M. Alas, that such eminent men should be laid aside for indifferent things!


E. B. They are not laid aside for indifferent things, but for that great fault
of disobeying Authority, which enjoins those indifferent things. The things
commanded are indifferent; Obedience to the Command about things indifferent,
is necessary: what clothes I wear, what gestures I use, is indifferent; that I
wear such clothes, and use such gestures as are commanded, is necessary.


Non-conformists. May it please your Majesty that we have liberty to join with
our people in pure Worship and Ordinances, giving good security that we neither
speak nor do any thing publicly against the established order of the Kingdom.


S. O. As for those of you who (living peaceably) cannot conform through
scruple and tenderness of misguided Conscience, care may be taken that they
modestly and without scandal perform their own devotion in their own way.


Anabaptists. We are under a scandal of disobedience to Governors, and
turbulency; but as we resolve in the fear of God to submit to your Government
as far as lawfully we may, so we desire your favor and indulgence.


Conformists and Non-conformists. Your Principles have been so dangerous, your
practice so infamous here and in Germany, (your judgment and practice being so
void of meekness, modesty, charity, humanity and innocence) that your error is
not thought venial, nor your difference tolerable, as arising by degrees to
tumults, seditions, and contempt of all Christian Magistrates and Ministers.


King. Nay, but I hope there are some of my subjects of that Way who have
sincerity to Godward, and charity to those Christians who in this differ from
them: for whom (as long as they behave themselves soberly) I have an equal
kindness with the rest of my subjects, without any respect of persons.


Quakers. O King, live for ever! We do in love advise thee to remove the yoke
from the servants of the Lord, who desire nothing but to walk humbly with him,
and to tremble at his Word.


P. O. If you can agree upon a way to serve God, and offer it to the State, you
may have protection from the King as far as your way is judged agreeable to
truth: as yet the world has not seen what you desire, and so know not what to
grant you.


Seekers. We desire to try all things, and to hold fast that which is good, and
that nothing be imposed upon us.


Orthodox. Nevertheless whereunto we have already attained, let us walk by the
same Rule, let us mind the same things: if in any thing ye be otherwise
minded, God shall reveal even this unto you.


Fifth Monarchy-men. Why do you wait here on men, while you should pray unto
the Lord that he would hasten his Kingdom, that the Saints may inherit the
earth?


Orthodox. We wait upon men whom the Lord has appointed over his Kingdom in
this world; we wait upon the Lord for his Kingdom which is not of this world.

Roaring Boys, Ranters, and Dammers. Here Is such a deal of do, come, let us eat
and drink, for to morrow we shall die: the world has been too long
Priest-ridden.


King. No more of that: I Will assure you that at the next Session of Parliament
we shall provide severe Laws against that licentiousness and impiety, which
since the dissolution of Government we find to our great grief has
overspread the Nation.


Chapter Gentlemen of all Persuasions, I pray hear what indulgence maybe allowed
you.


Secretary, to Papists. What if you of the Catholic Way were discharged of all
penalty for Recusancie to come to our Church, save your incapacity of having
any trust in Church or State? provided that you were severely restrained both
from speaking and publicly practicing your Way.


Papists. We'll all submit. As we do do not desire to be pressed to comply with
your Ways, so we desire not to press you to tolerate our Ways.


P. C. S. to Non-conformists. If his Majesty and his Parliament shall think fit
that you who cannot conform to all things established, shall upon your
peaceable behavior enjoy Ordinances in your own Way, what will you be willing
to do for their satisfaction?


Non-conformists. Any thing that in Reason or Conscience we may do.


Chapter Will you (now you cannot assent or consent to all things in the
Common Prayer) yet use it as far as you can, or come your selves with your
followers to the place where it is used?


Mr. Baxter, Dr. Bates, etc. It Is well known that as we do not absent our
selves, so we are not willing others should absent themselve from Common Prayer.


L. B. L. Will you own the Ordination by Bishops in the way of the Church of
England?


London-Ministers. We have made it appear to the world in our Book called Jus
divinum Ministerii, that the Ordination by Bishops is valid.


Mr. Baxter, p. 4. So eminent in Gods Graces and Gifts were the Bishops, that
their names will be precious whilst Christ has on earth a Reformed Church.

Our Jewel, our Usher, our Davenant, has done so much against the Roman
Usurpers, that they will not be able to claw it off them to the last.

Moreover, who knows not that most of the godly able Ministers of England since
the Reformation, did judge Episcopacie, some of them lawful, and some of them
most fit? and that before the late troubles, etc. the most through the Land did
subscribe and conform to Episcopal Government, as a thing not contrary to the
Word of God? So that it is evident that it is very consistent with a godly Life
to judge Episcopacie lawful and just, or else we should not have had so many
learned and godly men of that mind.


L.B.W. Will you declare it unlawful upon any pretense whatsoever, for any
persons, whether the Parliament or any other, to assist the King, or to
endeavor any Reformation without his consent?


Mr. Jenkins. First, it is a sin against Gods Ordinance, Prove. 8.15. Secondly,
it is a sin against the public welfare: they that are weary of Magistrates, are
weary of all the comforts and blessings of peace. Thirdly, it is a sin against
our own happiness, Eccles 10.8. to resist the lawful Magistrate. Good men will
not be bad Subjects, neither can evil men be good Subjects.


C. S. Will you be contented to teach the people the necessary and undoubted
Verities of Christian Religion? declaring withal unto your people what
influence such Doctrines ought to have upon their Lives and Conversations; and
stirring them up effectually as well by your examples as Doctrines to the
practice of such Religious and Moral Duties, as are the proper Results of the
said Doctrines, as Self-denial, Contempt of the world, Temperance, Justice,
Obedience, etc. with a detestation of whatsoever is contrary to sound Doctrine?


Nonconf. If we may but upon these terms enjoy the liberty of Gods Ordinance,
we shall think our selves obliged to bless God that we have seen your face.


S. D. For your part, all ye the looser part of the people, we desire you may
offer what you agree upon among your selves, which his Majesty will consider
of, in order to a public Peace. In the mean time, you are wished to attend the
public Ordinances of God as far as you can in Conscience, until an expedient
may be sound in due time.


P. C. We shall enjoin that there be nothing taught publicly but the great
Truths, wherein ye all agree; and therefore we pray you attend upon public
Preaching: and though you own not the men, yet own the Word, not as the word
of this or that man, but as it is indeed the Word of God.


Jesse. Some may preach Christ out of envy, and some out of contention; but so
Christ be preached, we shall rejoice, and attend upon it.


Venning. It is to be feared that they who turn their backs upon the Ordinance
of God, may turn their backs upon the God of Ordinances.


Anabaptists, etc. There are so many things in your Ordinances that we cannot
like.


Orthodox. There are many things I dislike in all places, yet I frequent them;
which because they do not concern me, I pass by peaceably, without any further
noise or disquiet. We desire you only to be present at the Ordinances of God,
and to submit to what is of God, and to think as you please of what you see of
man there.


All Moderate Men. We will be contented to attend the Ordinances of God in
obedience to God and men; only we desire not to be urged to approve of what we
cannot allow of.


H. If your practice be sober, your judgments shall be at liberty. -- Have you
faith? i. e. any private Opinion, have it to your self in the sight of God:
only forsake not the assembling of your selves together, as the manner of some
is: but let me see you as ^he Primitive Christians meet with one accord in one
place.


Fan. We desire so to do, but only we avoid mixed Assemblies.


L.B.C. If you will avoid mixed Assemblies, you must avoid all Assemblies in the
world. Indeed, as the Apostle says, we ought as far as it is possible to avoid
all communion with unholy persons; yet not altogether with the unholy in this
world, or with the covetous, or extortioners; for then must we needs go out of
the world.


Fan. The desire of our soul is to walk according to that Rule: wherefore, Come
ye out from among them, and be ye separate, says the Lord, and touch not any
unclean thing, and I will receive you.


L.B.W. What, because you are enjoined to come out from among Heathens, will
you leave us Christians too, who own one God, one Christ, one Faith, one Hope
with you, and look for one common salvation?


K. Are you who go under those several names of separation, as Independents,
Anabaptists, Quakers, etc. agreed upon one common way, which you would have me
countenance, which I may advise upon, and try according to the great Rule of
Scripture, and universal profession?


All. We desire some time to debate our several differences, and to think upon
such happy expedients as may be for general satisfaction.


(...) L. C. Supreme Magistrate is willing that you who are of a loose ways
of Fanulisme, Rantisme, Adamites, Cathoriss, etc. should bring a plat form of
your opinions to the Quakers: whom he impowers to reject what they think fit;
and to offer what they approve of, together with their own way to the fifth
Monarchy men, who have the like liberty to suppress what they think fit, and
to offer what they allow of, together with their own Faith to the moderate
Anabaptists, who has the like power to reform what he thinks amiss, and to
propose what he assent, to the Independent who may rectify what is amiss, and
carry what he allows of with his own judgment to the Presbyterian; who may
bring what he finds agreed upon by others with his own confession of Faith to
Supreme Authority, who may very well take equal liberty to judge of their way
as they have to judge of others.


L. B. Indeed that was Cardinal Richlieus way.


K. In short, before you go, how far will you of the Independent, Anabaptists
way, etc. allow that way we call Presbyterian?


Fan. Not at all, for we look upon it as the great Tyranny that we can be
subject to: their fingers are heavier then the Bishops Loins.


Anabaptist 1. Edw: Gang p: 54.
We hope to see Heaven and Earth on fire before Presbyters be settled.

2 We hope to see Presbyters as much trodden under feet as the Bishops were:
Gans P. 73.

3 The Presbyterian Government is Antichristian, a limb of Antichrist
Tyrannical, Lordly, cruel, a bondage under Taske-masters as the Israelites in
Egypt. ibid 221.


K. Forbear your passion, I hope that upon a mutual correspondence you will
grow to a better temper.


Mr. Sterry. The seed of God in this Nation has had two capital enemies, the
Romish Papacy and the Scots Presbytery.


L. Chapter I pray, do you of the Presbyterian Persuasion satisfy his Majesty how
far the Independents, and those who are called Sectaries may be tolerated.


Sion house Ministers. The toleration of these men has not been established in
any Christian State by the Civil Majestrate, and if one way should be
tolerated, then all ways must be tolerated; and such a toleration is utterly
repugnant, and it consistent with the Solemn League and Covenant for
Reformation.


K. I pray let me hear what my good Subjects of Scotland think of a Toleration.


Mr. Bailey. Liberty of conscience, Disswasive from the Errors of times: Ep: ded:
or toleration of all or any Religion, is so prodigious an impiety, that this
religious Parliament cannot but abhor the very naming of it.


Mr. Ruth. In thee England, in thee London, in thee associated Counties, in
thee Armies, and that after a Solemn Covenant to extirpate Heresies and
Schism, are there found such errors, such opinions, such strange practices,
such liberty.


K. If after you have all met with freedom, offer your several thoughts with
modesty, debate your differences with reason, and manage your controversies
with moderation in the fear of God and love of truth, so as becomes men of
learning, gravity and good conscience, in so grand concernments as import the
peace of the Church, the satisfaction and salvation of Men's souls you should
return condemning each other, and you would not allow them their way, and they
will not allow you yours, what would you have me do, when you condemn the
Independent, Anabaptist, as Sectaries, and they you as Antichristian, what
shall I do but have an eye upon the warrant of holy writ, the primitive
institutions and practices, the universal way of ordering externalls in
Religion: The establishment of particulars here by the consent of the people;
The regular injunction of lawful Authority; and if you in your own consciences
shall not think one another tolerable, And I in my conscience cannot allow you,
I must leave you to the conscience of the whole Kingdom in Parliament, to
whose grand establishment I hope you will submit: In the mean time if you can
agree upon a modest offer for a general accommodation comprehensive of all sober
parties, It shall be very acceptable to Me, and with all advantage offered to
the Parliament.


L. Chapter But if any of you in the mean time by Pride or Faction, Schism or
Ambition, novel fancies, or arrogance, or ignorance, or sedition, or
popularity, or vain glory, or envy, or discontent, or correspondence shall
cause divisions and offenses, contrary to the doctrine we have received,
troubling themselves and others with ungrounded scruples, uncharitable
prejudices, and unquiet singularities: I shall need love him with no other
guilt then the Apostle does, that he is not the servant of Christ, for how can
he who is without peace and love serve that God who is the God of love, whose
Law is love.


L. B. chapter You see his Majesty's gracious inclinations to all lawful
condescension, compliance and forbearance: in the mean time it may be expected
that you prudently suspendent your practices against the established Law, as
wise men that can discern time and judgment: If meat says the Apostle make
my brother offend; I -- I (for I lay no other burden upon you then I would bear
my self: who know and am persuaded in the Lord Jesus that nothing is unclean
in its self) yet I will abstain not only from flesh offered to Idols but from
all flesh; and that not a little while while the world stands, if it prove but
a bare scandal or offense justly or unjustly, not for any by-end, but least my
brother should offend at me; for I would say I will never meet privately, never
forsake the assemblying my self with good men, never refuse innocent things to
offend a whole Church, yea a whole Kingdom. The reconciling of the real
interests of Episcopacy Presbytery and Independency:



Bp. Gauden. In order to that happy accommodation which you are advised to, you
are all to know that how ever in lesser things you differ one from another, yet
you seem to agree as in the Canon of the Scripture, so in the soundness of
Faith the holiness of divine Mysteries, in the celebration of them by such as
are some way ordained for that holy service, also in the participation of them
by such only as are in the judgment of charity worthy or meet to be partakers
of them; all agree in the main Christ in graces, virtues, and morally required
in a good Christian; go along with us in these maine things which are
necessary, rational wise and truly religious, which we aim at design,
endeavor and are principled for; go along with us in sound and diligent
preaching, spiritual and discreet praying, in holy and solemn communions, the
serious dispensation of ministerial power, and useful execution of Church
Discipline, which are the substance of Religion; and for some Ceremonies I
shall entreat you to see how far they are lawful and what you really think not
forbid in the Scripture you would submite in obedience to Authority; and if you
really think between God and your own souls that some circumstances enjoined
are unlawful, as they that use them shall not despise you that cannot use
them, so you that use them nor must judge them that use them, good people let
us meet together in Gods worship, which we all own to some Rites or gestures,
let every one be fully persuaded in his own mind.


FINIS.

