THE OPINIONS OF CERTAIN REVErend and Learned Divines concerning the
Fundamental Points of the true Protestant Religion, and the Right Government
of Reformed Churches. Wherein is declared the plain Pathway to a Godly and
Religious Life.

EPHESIANS. 4. 15. Speak the truth in love. Published by Authority.

Printed for Chapter Downs. 1643.

To The godly and Christian Readers, Grace and Peace.
AS there is nothing more pleasing to God, than to be truly zealous for his
glory, so no way better to attain that zeal, than to read and meditate upon
Gods Commandments; and strive to live in love and charity with all men, which
that you may the better perform, I beseech you peruse these ensuing
Discourses, and the Lord give you understanding in all things.

T. I.

Psalm. 120.
WHen I was in trouble, I called upon the Lord, and he heard me. Deliver my
soul, O Lord, from lying lips: and from a deceitful tongue.

What reward shall be given or done unto thee, thou false tongue? even mighty
and sharp arrows, with hot burning coals.

Woe is me, that I am constrained to dwell with Mesech: and to have mine
habitation among the tents of Kedar.

My soul has long dwelt among them, that be enemies unto peace.

I labor for peace, but when I speak unto them thereof, they make them ready
to battle.

THE OPINION OF THE RIGHT REVEREND FATHER IN GOD JOHN DAV^NANT Bishop of
Sarisbury.
To his learned and worthy friend Mr JOHN DURY.
IT IS well worthy the consideration of all pious Divines, which God speaks by
his Prophet C. 8. V. 19.
Zachary, love the Truth and Peace. With which that of the Apostle also suite's
well, (...), Ephesians. 4. 15.
speak the truth in love. We may not so hotly pursue after Truth, as that in
the mean time we wholly neglect Peace; nor may we desire such a Peace as will
not consist with the Truth. Those Divines therefore who quarrel and contend
so much for the Faith and Religion, they may talk what they list, but he that
love's not both Truth and Peace, love's indeed neither, nor has he any true
affection or desire to either of them, who desire's them not both. For if it be
true which Philosophers tell us, that each natural body does no less desire
it is unity than it is being, I see no reason why the spiritual and mystical
body, the Church Catholic, should not with as great a zeal study to preserve
her unity: seeing if that be once dissolved and lost, she is so far from
being a Church, that she cannot so much as be imagined one. Let us then on
God's name be as earnest and eager in desiring and defending the Truth as the
best, but withal let us not forget that of Saint Paul, that if it be possible,
and as much as in Romans 12. 14.
us lie's, we live peaceably with all men: J say, with all men, in an external
and civil; but with all Christian men, in a spiritual and Ecclesiastical
peace. This is the earnest desire of our Savior Christ, and it is the joint
wish and prayer of his whole Church, that all they who profess themselves
beleivers in Christ, might be united and knit Joh. 17. 21. Act. 4. 32.
together into one body; that they might be all of one heart and of one soul.

This being so, surely those pious and peacemaking Divines are highly to be
commended, who of late have employed themselves and their endeavors about the
reeonciling of the Reformed Churches. For my own part, I would to God I were
able to contribute any thing that might further and promote so good and godly a
work. What I can, I shall willingly at your request (Sir) do it: and shall
impart unto you what my thoughts were, when J lately meditated with my self
hereupon.

In the first place therefore, it would be considered, whether or no it be
possible to establish such an union amongst all the Reformed Churches, so as
that they shall account of one another not as friends only, but as Brethren;
and exhibit mutually each to other the signs, fruits, and effects not only
of an outward and general freindship, but of a more intimate and spiritual
amity and communion. For if this fraternall and spiritual union we so much
desire, cannot be had, we may then desist; things impossible do not bind us
to the having or seeking of them: but if it may possibly be procured, 'twere a
great pity and a shame that so good a work and so well-pleasing to God as
this is, should be either opposed or delayed.

Now when I say, that it would first be considered whether or no this Union we
treat of, be possible; my meaning is, whether or no such an Union may stand
with a diversity of Opinions amongst private Doctors in these several
Churches, touching those much-controverted points which have of a long time (to
the great grief of all good men) much troubled the Germane Churches. For
although it were to be wished, that Divines would fairly and fully agree
amongst themselves about all those Controversies; yet for so many different
minds to concur all in the same Opinion, is (as I conceave) a thing scarce
to be hoped for, much less to be effected in one age. But that these said
Churches, notwithstanding such disputes as hang undecided, may nevertheless
entertain amongst themselves a Christian Charity and correspondence, is
apparent from hence, that as often as Divines of both sides have set themselves
seriously about this work, they still prevailed in it as much as they desired;
and they might no doubt have prevailed further, if they themselves had not
wilfully stood in their own way.

Witness Luther himself and the Helvetians: betwixt whom (though they
differed in their opinions about the presence of Christ's body) a freindly
agreement notwithstanding was made at Marpurge: Luther Ho^p Histor. Sacr. Ann.
15 29.
there professing, that he would not by any means permit the adverse party
that honor, to outstrip him in their desires of amity and peace. Which peace,
after that it had by I know not what mischeivous devices been somewhat
disturbed and diminished, was again renewed and confirmed by them: whereat
Luther himself Idem Ann. 1537*
rejoiced, and upon a strict examination of the Helveticke confession, held it
very requisite that they should lovingly join hearts and hands together. But
here if any one think, that this was no such entire and perfect Union as that
which now I affirm to be possible; I will grant him this: but then I must add
withal, that it was not any impossibility in the thing it self, but rather
the wilful opposition of some amongst them, possessed with some jealousies and
suspicions, which was the cause why that godly and good work was not brought
to full perfection. For as for Bucer Ibid.
and some other eminent Divines of the same opinion with him, they did not only
sue for an absolute and perfect agreement, but besides they offered to make it
appear that it was very fit such an Union should be concluded; neither did
they omit any thing that might make for the furthering of it.

Moreover, that this Union of the Reformed Churches we speak of, is not a
thing impossible, is confirmed further from that agreement amongst the Polonian
Harm. Confess. par. 1. and 2. in Confess. Polon.
Churches, begun of late at Sendomire, and ever since carefully by them kept
and observed: it is true, they could not bury all controversies; but they could
banish all contentions; and establish so perfect a peace, as that they refused
not to admit of each other into their public Congregations, to the preaching
of the word and Administration of the Sacraments. Which holy and brotherly
concord of those Churches, that most wise Prince Lodowick, Electour and Count
Palatine, did not only by his letters to them congratulate, but desired of
Almighty God in his prayers, that the Germane Churches also might be blessed
with it.

What therefore was long since said to that blessed peacemaker King Solomon,
concerning the building of the Temple at Jerusalem, the same say I to all
moderate and peaceable Divines concerning the uniting of the Reformed Churches;
arise, 1. Chron. 22. 16.
ye Worthies, and be doing, and the Lord will be with you. Never despair but
that may be now effected, which all men will grant has been done heretofore.

But least this groundless bugbeare of a fancied impossibility should yet
slacken the endeavors either of Princes, or Divines, or any other pious and
well affected Christians, and deter them from proceeding herein; I will
recount all those lets and hindrances, which render the peace and union of
Churches utterly impossible to be obtained: from whence it will easily appear,
that there is no one of them here, to hinder why the Germane Churches
(notwithstanding some points of difference amongst them) may not setle a firm
peace amongst themselves, and being once settled preserve it inviolable.

Now the first and maine Obstacle that hinders those Churches which agree not
in all points of Religion, from entertaining a Communion amongst themselves, is
the usurping and exercising of a tyrannical power and authority one over
another. For if any one Church will take upon her to domineer and lord it over
the faith of other Churches, so as not to acknowledge any for her brethren, nor
admit of any into her fellowship and Communion, but such only as will be
content to believe and speak just as she will have them, all hope is then
taken away of ever obtaining or preserving any agreement in any differences or
disputes whatsoever. For the sacred Scriptures forbid us thus to enslave our
selves to any humane authority, and our sole Lord and Master Christ Jesus
forbid's us to acknowledge any upon earth for a Lord over our Faith and Mat 23.
Conscience: and that Church which enter's into a Communion with another upon
these terms, does not hereby purchase a Peace, but rather resigne's up her
self to a most unjust slavery. Only the Church of Rome is come to that height
of pride and madness, that she will take upon her to exclude from the
communion of Saints, and damn to the pit of Hell all such Churches as will not
submit their necks to that Antichristian yoke of absolute and blind obedience.
God of his goodness ever keep off this Popish folly and fury from setting foot
in the Protestant Churches: which if it should once take place, that union of
our Churches which we are all bound to pray for, would be no longer either to
be hoped or wished for. But (blessed be God for it) it is well known, there is
not any of the Reformed Churches but do from their souls detest and abhor
all such Antichristian ambition and desire of Soveraignety. And thus have I
removed out of the way the maine Obstacle which usually occasion's a perpetual
division and rent betwixt such Churches as differ in some points, and thereby
make's an union of those Churches to become impossible.

A second let or hinderance which may render the said union of different
Churches (for example, the Saxon and Helvetian Churches) impossible, is the
approbation and practice of Jdolatry in the one, and the utter detestation of
it in the other. That of the Prophet Hosea is well known, though C. 4. v. 5.
Israel play the harlot, yet let not Judah offend: come ye not unto Gilgal,
neither go ye up to Beth-aven. Likewise also that of the Apostle, what
agreement has the Temple of God 2. Cor. 6. 16.
with Idols? And a number of places more to the same purpose. Neither is that
saying of Tertullian touching this matter unworthy our observation, Idolatry
(says he) is become the grand and general sin of whole mankind, the
Epidemicall disease of the whole world. Since therefore God so severely
charge us to keep our selves from Idols and all kind of Idolatry, though
never so speciously colored over, we may well call that morally impossible
which cannot be performed without some stain and tincture of Idolatry, and
without a high and heinous offense against the sacred Majesty of God.

Here then we may behold that grand let, whereby the Reformed Churches (to
their great grief of heart) are forced to shun a Communion with the Church
of Rome. For so far in love is she with her Idols, and so rigorously does
she impose the worshipping of them upon all her children, that no man can be
admitted into her Communion, at least not continue in it, unless he will
become a notorious and downright Idolater. If the case so stood, that the
Germane Churches could not enter into and enjoy a blessed Unity and Peace one
with another, except they must be required and bound either to practice an
Idolatrous worship, or at the least to believe and profess that such practice
is not unlawful, I would not stick to affirm that a Communion which cannot be
had but upon such hard conditions, is indeed impossible to be had: since (as
Lawyers use to speak) we can do only so much, as may lawfully be done by us.

And here we have just cause to bless God, that the Reformed Churches
(although they have not the happiness to agree in all matters of lesser
moment) yet do they all of them by his grace unanimously conspire and join
together against Idolatry; so as not only to condemn, but also to beat down
and abolish it: insomuch that if at this very hour they were all disposed and
desirous to join hands and strike a league of amity and union, it might be
done without any the least danger of Idolatry. Away then with that pretended
impossibility of a Reconciliation, grounded upon the peril of Idolatry: nor
let any such false surmises weaken the heart or hands of any religious
Christian from going on with so good a work.

The third and last Obstacle which does block up the way to an union and
render's it impossible, is the differing of several Churches about some
fundamental point of Faith, necessary to be known and believed by every
christian upon pain and peril of eternal damnation; so as that the one side
does solidly hold and maintain it, the other heretically denie's and oppose's
it. For to be at peace with Heretics who go about to undermine and subvert
the foundation of our Christian faith, what is it else but to revolt from
Christ the rock on which the Church is founded and built? Of this last
Obstacle, because it is of special use and moment, I shall treat somewhat
more at large.

In the first place therefore, I conceive that to be a Fundamental point,
which (by the ordination of God revealing such a truth) is of such necessity
unto salvation to be known and assented unto, as that a bare Ignorance, much
more a wilful Opposition of it carries with it a certain peril of exclusion
from the kingdom of heaven. Divines now-adaies have no Commission to invent or
coin any new Articles of this nature, and obtrude them on Gods Church: that
which was not fundamental in the Apostolical and Primitive times, all our
assertions and altercations and Anathema's will never be able to make it such.

These first and fundamental Trueths, collected out of the whole body of the
Scriptures and put together in the Apostles Creed, make up that Rule of Faith
which S. Austin terme's pusillis magnisque communem, (...) a^ (...).
a common Rule for all men, both great and small: and which is by him accounted
necessary to be believed constantly by all. Concerning the which, that speech
of Hilary Ad Constant. August.
also is much to the same effect; it is our safest and best course to hold fast
that first and onely-Evangelicall Faith, which we made confession of at our
Baptism. And to these fundamental Trueths the Apostle (I believe) had an eye,
when he styled Titus, his own Tit. 1. 3.
son [(...)] after the common Faith. This common Faith laid down in the
Apostles Creed, proposes to all Christians, to be believed by them, the
wonderful Production of all creatures out of nothing, the unsearchable
mystery of the glorious Trinity, the fruit and benefit that redound's to
miserable sinners from the Incarnation, Passion, Resurrection, and
Glorification of Christ; and, what fallows thereupon, the Redemption of
mankind, the Sanctification of the Elect, the Communion of Saints, the
Remission of sins, the Resurrection of men's bodies, and the Glorifying of the
Faithful.

He that beleive's all which we have here comprised in this short Creed, and
endeavour's to lead his life according to the Commandments and Precepts of our
Savior Christ, cannot justly be denied the title of a Christian, nor expelled
the fellowship and communion of any Christian Church whatsoever. On the other
side, He that shall deny or oppose any one of the said Articles, although he
arrogate to himself the name of a Christian, yet is he to be excluded and
banished the society of all orthodoxe and sound Christians.

Besides these, there are (I confess) many other Trueths contained in the
Scriptures, and deducible from thence by good and solid consequence, which are
very profitable to be known, and of singular use to further us in the
knowledge of Divinity: but they are then only (and not otherwise) necessary to
be believed under pain of forfeiture of our salvation or communion with the
Church, when it is clearly evidenced unto us that they are contained in Gods
word, or may necessarily be inferred from it.

In these points therefore, if any particular Church cannot make the Truth
which she her self beleive's, so clear and manifest to other Churches, as
thereby to win them over to the same belief, she must forsake them in their
Errors, but by no means may she (because of such errors) deny them her
charity and Communion. I add further, that if it should happen that two
Churches should vary about some particular place of holy Writ, the one
conceiving that it confirme's a fundamental point of Faith, and the other
thinking that it does not so: yet is not such a difference as this a sufficient
cause why they should fall at odds, and separate one from another; so long as
they agree both of them in the Point it self, and acknowledge it to have
clear and solid foundation in other places of God's word. And last of all this
may be added yet further, that it is not a thing impossible, nor any way
contrary to the duty of good Christians, to entertain a communion with those
Churches which hold such a doctrine as seems to us inconsistent with some
fundamental Truth, so that in the mean while they do expressly believe and
profess that fundamental Truth it self. For it is utterly against all
Charity, yea and Reason too, that a man should be thought (merely for some
consequences, which he neither apprehend's nor grants) to deny and reject a
fundamental point, which yet he strongly beleive's, expressly affirme's, yea
and (if need so required) would not stick to seal the truth of it with his
dearest blood. How much truer and more charitable is that opinion of a grave
and moderate Divine? We must not Bucer.
(says he) so much consider what will follow in the thing it self from every
assertion, as what will follow from it in the apprehension and judgment of
those who maintain any such assertion as seeme's to us repugnant to some
fundamental point of Faith. For as he who assent's to the truth of some
Principle, cannot therefore be said properly to believe and understand
whatsoever and abler Scholar can by consequences infer from that Principle; so
neither can he who maintaine's a false Opinion, justly be thought to hold all
those absurdities which a nimble head easily observe's to adhere unto or follow
upon that erroneous Opinion of his. We may indeed urge and press these
consequences upon our Brethren, to see if happily we can by this means beat
them off their error; but maliciously to fasten them upon them, as though they
were their professed Opinions, this we may not do.

How far this extend's, and of what excellent use it is to the settling of a
brotherly union amongst the Reformed Churches, all wise men and such as
unfainedly desire the peace of Gods Church, will easily perceive. For if it
once be granted, that a Peace and Union is not impossible (that is, not
unlawful) save only with such as actually disbeleive some fundamental point
of Faith, or maintain some such Heresy as strike's at the heart of Religion,
and cut's off the Abettors of it from having any communion with Christ; then
will it follow, that betwixt a sound and a diseased Church, betwixt two
Churches whereof one is more, the other less pure, there may be such a
brotherly communion as we desire among the Germane Churches. Let therefore the
Orthodoxe Churches separate themselves from all such as have played the
Apostates and fallen away from fundamental Faith; but let them not separate
from those which err only in points of lesser moment and such as do not cut
off the maintainers of them from being members of the mystical body of Christ,
the sole author and fountain of our salvation. The Apostle command's us to
receive (not, reject) such as are weak in the Faith: And the same Apostle Romans
14. 1.
tel's us how that we which are strong, Romans 15. 1.
ought to bear the infirmities of the weak, and not to please our selves.
That Church therefore does but too much please and indulge her self, which
despise's other Churches, as unworthy of her fellowship and communion, not for
any Tyranny that they exercise, nor any Idolatry which they approve or
practice, nor any damnable Heresy which they maintain, but merely for some
mistakes or infirmity of their knowledge. This was not the practice of the
Fathers in the Primitive Church: whose care and diligence in procuring and
preserving Peace amongst particular Churches dispersed and scattered over the
whole world, stand's upon record in Ecclesiastical Story and may be observed
Magdeburg.
in each several age of the Church. But of all other, that of Optatus Milevita
nus fit's best to our purpose; that all the Lib. 2. cap. 7.
Churches throughout the whole world were by the help and intercourse of those
letters by them called [Formatae] kept in one Communion and fellowship. Now
those [ Formatae] or Synodicall letters contained nothing at all save only a
bare Confession of the Catholic Faith delivered in their general Creeds, and
breifely explained afterward in opposition to some Heretics, by the
unanimous consent of the Church universal met together in general Counsels
held at Nice, Chalcedon, and other places. As for those infinite other
questions which might be raised and debated amongst private Doctors of each
side, no Church ever required or expected from others an absolute and
universal consent therein. For if such an universal agreement in all points
had been deemed so necessary as that Unity and Peace could not possibly have
been maintained betwixt particular Churches without it, there would then have
been more need of huge and high-swollne Volumes of Controversies, than of such
breife Confessions and Synodicall letters as they made use of for that purpose.

But if we refuse to learn of the ancient Fathers of the Church, yet let us
at length learn thus much from our very adversaries, that it is not a thing
impossible for several Churches to live charitably and peaceably together, and
use the same Service and Sacraments, although they differ one from another
about some Controversies, wherein it is merely in vain ever to look for an
universal agreement. To say nothing of the contentions betwixt the Thomists
and Scotists, neither of those between the Dominicans and Jesuits; there is
one controversy hotly and violently disputed amongst Popish Churches, which,
if taken single and by it self, is of greater moment than all ours put
together; I mean that concerning the Infallible Judge in all matters of Faith:
The Churches of Spain and Italy will have the Pope to be this supreme Judge,
authorized by Christ himself, and so far illuminated and assisted with an
infallible Spirit, as that he cannot possibly err in such Decrees and
Determinations as he give's out with an intention to bind the whole Church:
On the other side, the French Churches deny the Pope any such privilege,
throwing him down from his Chair of Infallibility, and making him liable to
error as well as other men; so far forth that should he refuse to submit to
the authority and judgment of a general Council, either in matters of Faith
or of Practice, they will tell you he is to be esteemed a Schismaticke and a
Heretic, and to be deposed thereupon. Behold here a great difference amongst
them about the very foundation and the maine pillar of the whole Catholic
Faith! And yet notwithstanding this so great a variety of opinions, they still
hold together all of them in one and the same brotherly communion. O for Sion's
sake let it not be told in Gath, nor published in the streets of Ashkelon, that
the Philistines should be better affected and more desirous of Peace and Unity
amongst themselves, than the Israel of God is.

^ast of all, if an union may not consist with a diversity of Opinions in some
controversies of lesser moment, I would gladly that any man would show me but
two Churches in the whole Christian world (except they be such whereof one is
subordinate to the other) which must not necessarily hereupon be divided, and
as it were by a wall of partition separated from each other. Unless therefore
we will grant, that a separation from other Churches is not to be made save
only upon a difference in Fundamentalls, the Communion of the Church Catholic
(aunciently so much famed and talked of) will be found in the end to be nothing
else but an aerie and empty sound or name void of all truth and reality. The
Donatists of old August. de unitate Eccl. c. 1^.
were wont to say, that the Church was perished from off the whole earth save
only from the part of Donatus, in whom alone (they said) it was preserved: and
our adversaries of Rome (herein right Donatists) tell us that the Church
Catholic is of no larger extent than the Roman. As for our selves, it
become's and behove's us to detest this Schismatic and factious humor, and
to foster and cherish a brotherly Communion with all such Christian Churches as
neither Heresy nor Idolatry has cut off from Christ our head, and such as
have not exercised any usurped Tyranny over other Churches.

All that has hitherto been said touching the lets and hindrances which
render a Communion of several Churches impossible, as also touching diversity
of Opinions which may well consist with such a Reconciliation, aims at this,
that if once it were agreed upon amongst Divines that all those controversies
whereabout the Reformed Churches have of a longtime busied and wearied
themselves, are of that nature that a man may safely be of either opinion and
still remain in Christ, holding the substance of saving Faith without
incurring any damnable Heresy; then must we needs grant, that an union and
agreement amongst all Protestant Churches may be made and maintained
notwithstanding all such Controversies, as being indeed not so properly any
differences of our Churches as of our Schools. It is not my purpose to enter
the lists of those Controversies: only I do pray and earnestly entreat those
learned and reverend Divines of Germany, that laying aside all passion and
partiality, they would in the spirit of meekness calmely and heartily
discuss all those several controversies which are agitated amongst them: for
if once we let loose the raines to Passion, Judgment must needs give place.

The maine controversy, and which indeed is the fountain from whence all the
rest in a manner are derived, is that which stands yet undecided concerning the
manner how Christ's body and blood are present in the Eucharist. Touching which
point the learned In Epist. ad Luther.
Bucer, having well waighed the matter, give's in at last this verdict, that
they agreed in the thing it self; all the difference was merely in words and
manner of expression. 'Twas once the speech of Contra Rober. Atringen and
alibi. Hosp: in. Hist. Sacr. page 144 ad An. 153 6.
Luther, if you believe and teach that in the holy Supper the very body and the
very blood of Christ is offered, given, and received, and not the bare signs
of bread and wine, and that such receiving thereof is true and real, not
imaginary only, the strife betwixt us is ended. At that very same time Ibid.
Bucer and his Adherents granted, that the very body and blood of our Lord is
offered, given, and received together with the visible signs of bread and
wine. Iacobus Andreae Coiloq. Momp. page 16.
says, we neither hold with the Capernaites, nor admit of Popish
Transubstantiation, nor maintain we any Physical or local presence and
inclusion of Christ's body and blood in the blessed Sacrament; nor do we by
those words [substa^tially, corporally, orally] understand any thing else but
only a true and real presence and participation of his body and blood in this
Sacrament. Now let us hear the judgment of the Helvetians herein; Although
(...). Ann. 15^^ p. 145.
they deny that there is any Transubstantiation of the Elements, or any local
inclusion of Christ's body in the bread, or any Conjunction of his body and
blood with the outward elements remaining after the Sacrament is ended; yet
they willingly grant that by virtue of a mystical and sacramental union the
bread is Christ's body, and that his body is truly present and received
together with the bread. J do not know what two things can possibly be more
like than is this Opinion of the Helvetians with that of the Lutherans. But if
any man suspect that there may privily lurk a diversity of meanings under
these so-concording expressions, yet are we still to urge, and enquire whether
that diversity be such and so great as to render the Peace and Union of those
Churches utterly impossible, and to give just occasion for a perpetual rent
and division amongst them. I assure my self, learned and judicious Divines
when they are out of the heat of Controversy, and look indifferently into the
matter, will think far otherwise of it.

Now as for those other Controversies, concerning the ubiquity of Christ's
body, the Communication of Properties, and other such like, all springing from
that former touching the Sacrament, he that does seriously ponder with himself
what is granted and what denied of each side, will easily perceive that neither
the one nor the other does so much as call in question, much less oppose or
overthrow any necessary and fundamental point of Faith: since both sides hold
and profess whatsoever the Church Catholic in her Creeds and General
Counsels has declared to be believed in these points; and whatsoever has
been by her in like manner condemned as erroneous, is equally rejected by both.
But yet notwithstanding all this, that we see now and then some men catching at
consequences, and taking advantage from thence to charge Heresy one upon
another, it is a matter that deserve's not so much our wonder as our pity: we
all of us know, it is the common custom of hot and eager disputants, especially
when through long agitation of the matter they are inflamed with choler and
passion: and besides, I have already shown in breife, what we are to think of
such Heresies as are fastened upon men merely for such consequences as they
themselves neither apprehend nor grant. For the present, this alone may suffice
to show the Possibility of a Reconciliation, that there is no one Opinion
expressly maintained by either side, which is directly contrary to the substance
of Faith, or destructive of Salvation [salutis devoratorium] to make use of
Tertullian's expression: nay whatsoever is such, is plainly and expressly
condemned by both.

If of later times any new Differences have been raised amongst those Churches
touching Predestination, Freewill, and the like; these can no way be made a
sufficient ground of Schism and separation betwixt them. For in all these
there is nothing of fundamental and necessary belief save only this, that
the free grace and goodness of God, in the Predestination of miserable men, in
the conversion of sinful men, in the freeing of their captivated wills; in a
word, in the final Perseverance and Salvation of his Elect, be so far forth
acknowledged and extolled, as that whatsoever makes any way for the enstating
of them in grace and glory, and whatsoever is done by them in reference
thereunto, all must be ascribed to the special grace and mercy of Almighty
God: on the contrary, whatsoever concerne's the corruption of man's nature, his
obstinacy in sin, the pravitie and servitude of his corrupt will; in short,
whatsoever praecipitate's and plunge's wretched men into Hell and everlasting
perdition, all this we must thank our selves and our sins for, and by no means
impute any part of it to God. So long as these things stand firm and unshaken
(as without doubt they do) though in the mean time their manner of
apprehensions and expressions, yea though their Opinions be different in other
points which are only superstructions and belong not to the foundation* yet
are not these of such moment as that a perpetual Breach and Division should be
made and continued betwixt whole Churches for such petty matters. If therefore
this were but once agreed upon amongst Divines, that their jarres and
contentions are not, nor ever were about any fundamental points and such as
are of absolute necessity to be known and believed by all that will be saved,
then must it also be granted for a manifest truth, that it is no way impossible
but an agreement and Communion may be established this dangerous Schism
utterly rooted out, and a blessed Peace settled and preserved amongst the German
Churches. And thus having proved that a Reconciliation is possible, it
remaine's that in the next place we consider whether or no Princes, Doctors and
Pastors of Gods Church, and in general all Christians be not bound in duty by
the law of God, every man to endeavor according to his utmost power and
ability that such an union may with all convenient speed be settled and
established amongst the Reformed Churches.

1 And that all men are so bound, seeme's to be intimated by that of S. Paul
which I alleged before; if it be possible, and as much as in you lie's, live
peaceably with all men. If so great care and diligence must be had to maintain
a civil and external peace with all sorts of men, then surely a spiritual
and Ecclesiastical peace amongst Christians is much rather to be sought after
and preserved, where therefore there is no utter impossibility to hinder why
such an Union may not be obtained, such men can in no wise be excused, who
either out of negligence or wilfulness disobey the Commandments of God
herein. Nor can any man justly here pretend that Discords and diversities of
Opinions cannot as yet be composed and settled: for if it be possible that the
Schism it self and the Rent betwixt these Churches may be taken away, (as
without all question it may) I had rather that a mil-stone were Math. 18.
hanged about my neck, and that I were drowned in the depth of the Sea, than
that I should willingly be any hinderance to so good a work, so well-pleasing
to God, and so necessary to the removal of Scandal; nay than that I should
not with my whole mind and might promote and further it.

2 To this may be further added, what must necessarily be confes't by all men,
that a true and right ordered Charity is of as great necessity for the
attaining of Salvation, to all Churches and to every particular member in any
Church, as is the true and entire Profession of sound and saving Faith: our
Lord and Savior Christ Jesus make's this the badge and cognizance whereby to
distinguish and discern betwixt his true Disciples and such as are spurious
and counterfeit; by this shall all Joh. 1335.
men know that ye are my Disciples, if ye love one another. Now I leave it to
every man's conscience to judge, what manner of Charity that is, which see's
and suffer's Christian Churches (without all just cause and necessity) to stand
still at distance and defiance one with another, and perpetually to shun a
Reconciliation and Union. Is it not enough for us to separate from the hay and
stubble, I mean, from the Errors 1. Cor. 3. 12.
of other Churches, but must we by a voluntary separation forsake the Churches
themselves which as yet have not forsaken Christ or his Truth?

3 Further yet, we see how that both Zuinglians and Lutherans (as they are
usually termed) confess that those Churches which hold with either side, do
notwithstanding still remain true Christian Churches, and true members of the
Church Catholic, whereof Christ is the head. The renowned Princes in their
Preface prefixed to the Form of Agreement plainly profess, that it was far
from their thoughts and intentions to condemn such persons as erred Osiand.
Antist. page 75.
through the weakness of their judgment; provided that they did not defame
and blaspheme God's Truth; much less to condemn whole Churches, living
either under the Roman Empire or elsewhere: nay they did not doubt but that
there were many pious and religious men living in those Churches, though they
agreed not with them in all Points of Religion. Moreover, when it was objected
to Lucas Osiander, how that he had sometimes termed Calvinists the Divel's
Martyrs, he forthwith purged himself from that aspersion thus; They that
have heard my Sermons, In Ant^st. page* 91.
will say that they never heard from me any reproachful terms against the
blessed* Martyrs of Christ: yea my own writings published to the world will
witness for me, that J termed those which were massacred in France on S.
Bartholomewe's day, holy Martyrs. This then would be seriously thought upon,
whether or no it will stand with the Policy, Piety, and the duty of Christian
Churches, for every petty error to deny Gal. 2. 9*
the right hand of fellowship and brotherly love to those Churches, who in the
mean time (notwithstanding such errors) may continue Christ's blessed Martyrs
and holy Brethren. They who acknowledge Christ for their elder brother, must of
necessity whether they will or no have all Christ's brethren joined to them in a
most sure and fast knot of consanguinity and communion.

4 Besides, I am very confident that both the Saxon, and Helvetian, and all
other Churches which join with either of those two, will profess that they
desire to have and to retain a brotherly Communion and Peace with this our
Church of England, as also with the Scottish, Jrish, and all other foreign
Churches of the Reformation. And truly we for our parts, although we do not
assent to them in all points of controverted* Divinity, yet do we account of
them as our Brethren in Christ, and do solemnly protest that we entertain a
holy and brotherly Communion with them. And if they be like affected toward
us, with what reason then and equity do the German Churches deprive
themselves of that brotherly Communion one with another, which yet they are not
afraid to entertain with foreign Churches? What therefore Moses said long
since to the two Israelites that were striving together, the same may truly be
said to the Germane Churches quarrelling and contending one with another, but
cannot so truly be disproved; Sirs, ye Act. 7. 16
are brethren, why do ye wrong one to another.

5 Last of all, that which all good men are bound to beg of Almighty God in
their prayers to him, questionless they are bound likewise to employ their
best care and endeavors for the procuring of it. Now who is there that does
not daily solicit God for the flourishing and peaceable estate of his Church?
Who is there that make's it not a part of his daily prayers, that God would be
pleased to remove out of the way whatsoever does disquiet and disturb her
peace, or any way let and hinder her spiritual growth and edification? This
was King David's wish; and it should be the wish of all good Princes, and
Divines, and generally of all Christians. Neither did David wish only the
happiness and prosperity of Gods Church, but he carefully sought to do it
good, and as much Psalm. 122 9.
as in him lay he did procure and effect it. All this was but duty in him to
do, and can it be less then duty in us?

And here I should but trifle away the time, should I go about to play the
Orator and express at large to the Germane Churches, the blessings that
accompany Peace and Unity, and the many miseries and calamities of a
long-continued Schism and Division. That speech of Prudentius is a most
certain truth, -- scissura domestica turbat Rem populi; titubatque foris quod
dissiditiktus: civil and intestine broiles always prove the undoing of a
people; nor do things ever go right abroad, when there is dissension at home.
What may make most for the good and advantage of their Churches, let it be
their care to consider; and resolve this with themselves, that what ever it be,
it is not only to be sought after with their prayers, but with the utmost
diligence and endeavors of every one of them in particular. Neither let any
unexperienced men amongst them think or hope, that they shall ingratiate
themselves with Papists, and so live more peaceably by them and suffer less
harm from them, by refusing to enter into freindship and fellowship with
Calvinists (as they term them.) What is to be hoped for and expected from
them, we may learn from Osiander; Papists (says he) spare neither Lutherans
nor In Antist. page 7 4.
Zuinglians, but condemn both of them to fire and faggot, in all those places
where the Pope (that raging and ravenous beast of Rome) beare's rule and sway:
They that are most in favor with them, can at best but hope for that kindness
from them which Ulysses (in Homer) obtained of Polyphemus,

[(...).] O^. 2.
to be devoured last, after he had looked on and seen all his friends and
companions devoured before him. They will perhaps destroy the Calvinists first,
but the Lutherans must look to follow after them: none are like to escape in
the end, if once the Papists have them at their mercy.

What hitherto has been said, is to show that a Communion and Reconciliation
of the Germane Churches is a thing, not only possible, but in obedience to Gods
commandment a necessary duty. It now remaine's that J proceed to set down the
way and means whereby such a Reconciliation may be compassed, and the rents
and distractions of the said Churches may with most conveniencie and speed be
made up: which I shall do, rather to testify that vehement desire and zeal
which I have to so good a work, than out of any opinion that those famous
Churches (which always have abounded with store of learned and pious Divines)
can any way stand in need of advice herein from me or any other foreign
Divine whatsoever.

Seeing therefore that the forementioned Controversies may be agitated either
betwixt several and distinct Churches, whereof one is no way subordinate to
the other; or else betwixt such particular men as are members of the same
Church, and subjects to one and the same Prince: J will speak first, of diverse
Churches independent one upon another, and afterward of particular men in one
and the same Church, and show how Peace and Unity may be made and preserved
amongst them.

For the first, I conceive there is no readier and better way for reducing of
two different Churches to the same Communion, than is that usual one of
procuring a fair and peaceable Conference amongst Divines of both sides,
authorized and appointed there unto by their Princes. For if any one imagine,
that a Council being once held of all the Reformed Churches, there will out of
hand within the compass of some few months, or years, yea or in one age, an
end be put to all disputes whatsoever, which have of a long time troubled and
busied the Learned, so as that they shall all join and agree in the same
opinion about all such points of controversy; this (with submission to better
judgments) seems to me very unlikely. For so dull and dim-sighted is the eye
of our understanding, that it can hardly pierce into the depth of such subtle
and intricate Questions, no not when it is alone, free and undisturbed in it is
contemplations: but being distracted, by the stirs and tumults of disputation
so far unable are we to penetrate into the quick of them, that many times we
cannot so much as discern and perceive them, no not when we look upon them
with a fixed and steady eye. And (to speak plainly what I conceive in this
matter) the chief use of Counsels, especially of General Counsels, is to
maintain and defend those necessary and plain points of Faith against the
oppositions of Heretics, rather than to discuss or determine nice
controversies of lesser moment and use.

To return then to that fair and freindly Conference, which but now I
commended for the likeliest and fittest means of obtaining an Union: if it
could be undertaken with such an intention, and managed in such sort, as it
ought to be, we have good cause to hope that we shall in a short time see a
blessed Peace and Union established amongst the Germane Churches.

This therefore must carefully be remembered by all such as shall be present and
parties to such a Meeting, that the end why they are called together, is not
that like Adversaries they should strive for the mastery, but rather that they
should like Brethren search out and make use of all lawful and warrantable
means for the settling of Peace and Unity. For if once they fall a crossing
and contending one with another, they will never be able to persuade, much
less to procure any agreement betwixt such Churches as are at ods and
opposition. Let them therefore carefully keep off and forbear to enter the
intricate Labyrinths of ordinary disputes: and let their meeting aim at this
one end, to make it appear to their Churches, how that there is no just cause
why they should any longer stand out and refuse to join hands and be united.
To effect this, let it in the first place be set down how far the Church
Catholic has declared herself in each Controversy, what has been by her
defined and required to be believed generally by all sub Anathemate. For about
points fundamental there may sometimes arise such doubts and disputes as are
no way fundamental: and such, as that the ancient Fathers of the Church, had
they been raised in their times, would never have attempted a decision of them,
to the hazard of breeding or fostering a Schism betwixt several Churches. For
instance, that God is One in Essence, and Three in Persons distinguished one
from another; that the Son is begotten of the Father; that the holy Ghost is
the Spirit of both Father and Son; that these three Persons are coeternall
and coequall; all these are fitly determined, and reckoned in the number of
Fundamentalls: but now if any man should peremptorily affirm and maintain,
that all those Schoole-nicities touching the manner of the Sonne's generation,
and the procession of the holy Ghost, are likewise fundamental and of equal
necessity with the former, and ought to be determined one way; that man should
deserve but little thanks from Christ and his Church, by such his rash and
inconsiderate assertion. So likewise, that our Lord Jesus Christ is both God
and Man; that he has both natures, divine and humane, inseparably united in
one Person; and that we have salvation only by this God incarnate; all this is
fundamental, or rather it is that firm and immovable foundation whereon the
whole Catholic and saving Faith is built: but yet notwithstanding we must not
think, that whatsoever may be questioned and debated about the ineffable manner
of that union betwixt the two natures, or the manner how his body is present in
the blessed Sacrament, as also concerning the Communication of Properties unto
the humane nature by virtue of its union with the Divinity, or touching the
actions and operations of his Humanity depending upon the said Union, we must
not (I say) imagine that all these belong to Fundamental Faith, but rather to
Theological Science, or perhaps not so neither, but only to the vain
curiosity of some particular Divines. Let them therefore make this their first
and maine business, carefully to distinguish betwixt fundamental points and
others that are not so* and let them not think, that whatsoever is appendant
and bordering upon a fundamental point, must therefore forthwith be it self
fundamental.

When this is once done; their next care must be that these fundamentalls be
expressed and published after a breife and perspicuous manner, and propounded
to the public acceptance and approbation of all the Churches. Certa semper
sunt in paucis, says Tertullian; certain and undoubted Trueths are not many,
and they are such as may be delivered in a few words: whatsoever is necessary
for a Christian man's salvation to be known by him; and whatsoever is
conducible to render us holy or eternally happy, it is all of it plain and
obvious. Here Is no use either of subtle and acute distinctions, or of any long
and tedious explications, which are oftimes used not for the building up of
Christians in the fundamental faith, but rather to favor and further the
different opinions of private Doctors. In a word, here is no use of any
Metaphysicall formalities and abstracted notions; which serve only to perplex
and confound the learned, and to deter such as are unlearned from embracing
the Catholic Faith; but do not any way incline the hearts either of one or
other to yield assent and belief to the fundamental points of Faith.

After they have proceeded thus far, having drawn up a breife and plain Form
of all such Points as are by them judged to appertain unto the substance of
that common Faith which is necessary to be known Tit. 1. 3.
and professed by all Churches; and having passed by and left undecided all
such points as are not so generally received and agreed upon; in the next
place, moderate and peaceable Divines should labor to exhort and persuade all
the rest, that they would quietly lay aside all controversies and contentions
about such points as good Christians may safely be ignorant of without hazard
of their salvation; and that they would not quarrel any longer about the^, to
the danger of the Church, the loss of her Peace, and the scandal of Schism
which is thereby like to fall upon her.

Of what good use and necessity this advice is, may be clearly seen from the
rashness of the Church of Rome, and her clean contrary practice herein: who
being not content with those Articles delivered in the Apostles Creed, and
Nicene Creed, will needs obtrude upon the Christian world those other
new-coin'd Articles of the Trent-conventicle, and has thereby ministered
occasion of a perpetual rent and Schism amongst the Churches. How much more
prudently did that blessed Martyr and most learned Father of his Times, S.
Cyprian behave himself? who Epist ad Stephen and ad Iuhaian Praef. ad Co^^il.
Carthag.
professes, that he would not, for difference in opinion, contend or strive
with any man; nor would he break the peace of our Lord with his Brethren, or
cast off any man from his communion, because he was of a different mind from
him. By which his Christian charity and moderation, S. Cyprian (though in an
error) deserved better of the Church than Stephen Bishop of Rome who was in
the right, and did (by his unquiet spirit) as much as in him lay to rend and
tear asunder the Churches. Thus warranted by the example of this blessed
Martyr, and likewise by the judgment of S. Austin V^l. August. de B^p^. lib. 2
cap 4 5.
herein, I need not stick to affirm, that amongst the Doctors and Divines of
Germany those who are in the error and yet are willing and desirous to retain
a brotherly Communion with the rest, are freer and further from Schism in Gods
sight, than they who are in the Truth and withal disdain and deny to
entertain such a Communion with other Churches which seek and sue for it. If
therefore they can but get an universal consent in all Fundamentalls, though
in other things there be some difference amongst private Doctors, yet let them
all join their votes and voices in this prayer to God, nulla salus bello,
pacemte poscimus omnes; no safety can be had or hoped for in war, therefore
give peace in our time o Lord.

But if any here shall demand, what course is to be taken about such
Controversies as cannot be decided and agreed upon, that they may not give any
occasion whereby this Peace and Union of the Churches should be hindered, or
being obtained should afterward be disturbed and lost; I will set down some
few rules, which to me seem worthy the observation and practice of Divines on
both sides.

First, that whatsoever tart and bitter passages have formerly slipped from
Adversaries either by word or writing, amids the heat of disputation, they
should all be pardond on both sides for the public good, and for ever after
buried in silence and oblivion. And if it happen that any of those books and
writings should afterward be reprinted; before they pass the Press, let them
first be purged of all gall and bitterness, which otherwise would but rub up
and renew the old sore of strife and contention amongst brethren.

Secondly, Because no man can with patience hear himself branded with
Heresy, heed must be taken that none be slandered with the name of Nestorian,
Eutychian, or any other condemned Heretic, so long as he does expressly deny
and disclaim the damn*d Opinions of such Heretics: seeing it is utterly
impossible that ever they should continue firm in a brotherly Communion and
concord, who for every petty difference in Opinion cease not by such
reproachful and reviling terms to provoke and exasperate one another. And it
were to be wished further, that those siding names of Lutherans, Zuinglians,
Calvinists, were all laid aside; which are badges rather of Faction than any
fraternall Union, anh such as the ancient Fathers could never approve of.
Epiphanius Epiph. Har 42. and 70.
would not allow Christians to bear any (...), any other name added over and
above to the name of Christian, but rest content with that. Non Petrianos,
N^zian Orat. 30.
non Paulinos vocari nos oportet, sed Christianos: who ought not to be called
either Petrians, or Paulians, but Christians, says Nazianzen. But of all
others Lactantius is the most severe and rigorous herein; Christiani ^^st. ^u^
lib 4 cap. 30.
esse desierunt, qui Christi nomine omisso humana and externa vocabula
induerunt* they have left off to be Christians, who take up foreign titles
and humane appellations instead of the name Christian: though to say the
truth, such names are rather fastened and fathered on particular Churches by
others, than by themselves either desired or owned.

Thirdly, that all profound and controverted Points be let alone and not meddled
with in Sermons preached to the common people, or in any such books as are
published in the Vulgar tongue; let them be accounted rather the exercise and
business of the Schools, than any fit food and nourishment for men's souls.
Such perplexed Disputes may very well be spared in the Pulpit; but Charity,
which usually is impaired by the handling and discussing of them, cannot be
spared or wanting amongst Christians, without the utmost danger and hazard of
their souls. The common people do but play and sport with such Controversies,
they are no whit profited by them; and in the end, not well understanding them,
they give over sporting, and fall a quarrelling and contending about them.

Last of all, if Divines shall hereafter have a mind to disperse or publish
and Discourses about these Points, let them do it according to that grave
advice of Greg. Nazianzen, (...), Orat. 3. de Pa. ^
with reasons, not revilings: let their aims and intentions be, not to
nonplus and baffle, but rather fairly and freindly to inform and reduce
their straying brother into the way of Truth. He that shall after this manner
be brought to see and forsake his Error, will not think himself vanquished,
but instructed; nor will he be abasht and ashamed, like one over matched and
overcome by his Adversary, but rather rejoice as one bettered and benefited by
his brother. He that is a proficient is never ashamed.

Hitherto have I laid down the means and manner how an Union may be settled and
continued betwixt several and independent Churches. But because it may and
often does happen, that there are diverse men, both learned and unlearned,
living in the same Church and within the Dominions of the same Prince, whose
consciences (whether rightly or misinformed) will not suffer them to subscribe
to the common and more generally received Opinion in these Controversies; let
us in the next place enquire, what course is best to be taken concerning such
men.

And here, the Governors of each several Church if they have any regard and
respect to the safety of their weak Brethren, they must see that they do not
intermixe with the public Confessions and Articles of Religion, which they
would have received and assented unto by all such as live under their
Jurisdiction, any curious and unnecessary Controversies, nor any decisions of
nice and subtle Questions; but rather they must take care that such public
Confessions be framed and tempered to the capacity of the common people, so as
they may instruct and edify the ignorant, and promote the salvation of all.
Herein they should do well to consider the wisdom of our Forefathers; whose
ancient Confessions (unless we corrupt and stuff them with new Opinions of
our own, on purpose to disturb the public Peace) no sober and discreet man
will refuse to subscribe unto them. Neither is there any necessity why we
should burden our public Confessions with any such additions of our own; since
God himself has ordained to bring his people to heaven and happiness, not
through the rough and knotty paths of perplexed and intricate Disputes, but by
the smooth and compendious way of Faith and Charity. Why then such strifes and
contentions about words? What make Schoole-nicities amongst Church-Confessions?
the Salvation of Christians is In Orat. unum esse Christ^m
wholly placed in beleiving and serving God, as that great Athanasius sometimes
gravely spoke.

Add to this, that they will have much ado to maintain a firm peace with
other Churches, who cease not to persecute men and expel them their Communion
(as if they were Heretics) only because they maintain that Doctrine which
those other Churches hold and profess: for in so doing, what do they else but
tacitly charge Heresy upon other Churches? whom though in word they acknowledge
for their Brethren, yet they hereby show that in their hearts they much
disapprove and dislike them.

Lastly, unless the public Confessions of Churches be cnofined to such Points
only as are fundamental and generally received by all the Reformed Churches,
this inconvenience must of necessity follow thereupon, that many learned,
pious, and peaceable Ministers shall be driven out and disenabled from
exercising the Ministry in those Churches wherein they live.

But if any man doubt, whether or no such men may lawfully entertain a holy
and spiritual Communion one with another in the same Church, who yet agree not
amongst themselves in all Points of Divinity; this (as I conceive) is a matter
out of all doubt and question. For as touching that blessed Communion which is
betwixt Christians at the receiving of the Lord's Supper, it consist's chiefly
in these particulars, that by the common bond of the blessed Spirit we are all
united to that sole head of the Church Christ Jesus; that by the same Spirit,
and by Faith and Charity we are united amongst our selves and linked together
as it were into one body; that lastly, like men fed at the same table, we are
all of us nourished up unto eternal life with the same quickening food, to wit
the body and blood of Christ: in all these particulars do they profess a
Communion, whosoever approach and are admitted to that holy Table. But now as
we do not by this mutual Communion profess our selves to have attained all
of us either to perfection or to an equal measure of knowledge in Divinity: so
neither do we hereby profess, that there is an absolute and exact agreement
amongst us about all Points of Divinity, or that we are all of us in one and
the same Opinion about all Disputes and Controversies. If no Communion could be
had amongst Christians, but upon such hard terms as these, I believe it would
hardly be found betwixt S. Peter and S. Paul; certain I am the Church of
Corinth must of necessity have fallen in pieces; and in these times of ours
there would not easily be found many Divines of note and eminence, which could
with a safe conscience communicate together at the same holy Sacrament and
Supper of our Lord. It is therefore the duty of all Church Governors (as being
conscious to themselves of the common infirmities of all men, both themselves
and others) to take heed least while they exact of their People a too strict
and punctual Confession of more than what is necessary, they thereby wound and
weaken the sweet Peace and Unity of Christendom, than which nothing more
necessary. So much for Church Governors.

Come we in the next place to such Ministers and other Christians of what state
and condition soever, as desire to continue in the Communion of those Churches
wherein they live, but yet their Consciences will not permit them to allow and
profess all the common and received Opinions of the said Churches. Such men
must see that they show themselves teachable and tractable, and not persist
after a proud and pertinacious manner in defense of those Opinions wherein they
dissent from their Church. Now such a one is to be accounted teachable and
tractable, who lends a willing and attentive ear to the instructions and
information of the Church; who does not dissent from her out of any perverse
and peevish humor, but merely out of the weakness of his judgment, being
not able in such profound Points to discern that Truth which men of greater
learning and more acute wits easily see and perceive. And because it is the
peculiar prerogative of Almighty God to search the hearts, it behooves us
Christians to incline always to the more favorable and more charitable side;
and, where we have not clear and evident reasons for the contrary, we ought to
judge of every man that he denies his assent rather out of conscience than
contumacy and perverseness.

They who thus behave themselves, are not to be excluded and expelled the
Communion of those Churches wherein they live, for petty mistakes and errors
in their Opinions: but yet with this caution and condition, that they take not
upon them to oppose the received Opinion of the Church, or to publish and
spread their own private Opinion amongst the common people. Nor can they justly
dislike of this caution or take it ill, whosoever have a desire to live
peaceably in the Communion of the Church: for admit that the private Opinion of
some Divine or any other Christian, be true; and the public judgment of the
Church, erroneous: yet nevertheless, if the Error be such as does not
prejudice a Christian man's salvation, it is much better that the true Opinion
of any private man whatsoever should quietly lie hid in silence and obscurity,
than that the public authority of the Church should be openly contemned and
trampled on, or that the Church's Peace, by this unnecessary conflict of
jarring Opinions, as by two contrary winds, should be shaken and torn in
pieces. But if any man be persuaded in his conscience, that his private Opinion
wherein he differ's from the Church, is of such moment and importance as that
men cannot be saved without the knowledge of it; such a one, if he cannot
persuade and convince the Rulers and Governors of his Church in this matter,
must either turn aside into some other Church, or else (for the good of men's
souls) patiently submit to such censures as the Church in which he live's
shall inflict upon him.

This is it (most learned Sir) which at your request I thought good to write
and send unto you. If it may stand you or any man else in any steed for the
advancing of the Church's Peace, I have all my wish and aim for which I
penned it. They who are better acquainted with the present state and affairs
of the Germane Churches than I am, will be able (no doubt) to give you fuller
and better advice herein. For my self, it remaine's only that I humbly
beseech Almighty God, that he would move and incline the hearts of Princes,
earnestly to desire this blessed Union of our Churches; that he would enlighten
the understandings of Divines to find out and follow after such means as may
most conduce to the speedy establishing of it; that lastly he would inflame the
hearts of all Christians to embrace this Peace, and bequeath it to all
posterity. The God of Peace grant this for the sake of his dear Son, the
sole Author and procurer of our Peace. To whom with the blessed Spirit be all
honor, glory, and thankesgiving world without end.

AMEN.
THE OPINION OF THE RIGHT REVEREND FATHER IN GOD THOMAS MORTON Bishop of
DVRHAM, Concerning The Peace of the Church.
Worthy SIR,
I CANNOT easily express how much I was joyed with those few leaves which I
lately received from you; as soon as I understood how that there was now at
length some hopes of settling a true and brotherly union betwixt Us and those of
Germany who hold the Augustane Confession. For seeing that the very name of
Peace is sweet and delight some, much more the thing it self; especially if it
be a Peace in Religion, which indeed comprehends in it all kinds of true Peace
and Unity: I cannot choose therefore but congratulate and joy you (Sir) with
that good and truly-Apostolicall office which you now undergo: an Emploiment
which has ever this success, that it never can prove in vain, or be
altogether lost; for it will be sure either to redound to the good of him that
receive's it (if it be embraced,) or else (if rejected) return back again
into his bosom who proffer's it. Notwithstanding, I observe there are two
maine Controversies set down by you, which seem to let and hinder why we
cannot quickly be united and made one Church; the former is touching the
Eucharist; the other, touching that involved and mysterious Point of
Praedestination. For the composing of which two Controversies, that you should
desire my opinion, seeme's truly to me to be a course somewhat preposterous and
out of order: rather we should imitate (as I conceive) those expert
Physicians, who sometimes cure one contrary by another: so likewise we, seeing
that Discords in Opinion have bred disaffection and hatred in men's minds,
'twere necessary we should first endeavor that love and amity may be seated in
the hearts and affections of men, that so we may the more easily allay their
heat in disputation, and reconcile them in their much differing Opinions. To
the promoting of this good work I neither can nor may be wanting. All that I
shall say touching both Controversies, give me leave to glance at in three
words; to wit, that the way and means of establishing an Union, to men of
peaceable minds, is easy; to such as are less moderate, it is possible; to
both, very necessary.

The first THESIS.
That it is easy for peaceable and moderate men to be reconciled.
THis appeare's plainly from that love and freindship which was in times past
betwixt the Professors of both sides, notwithstanding that their differences in
Opinion were then very rife. This is a Point of special moment, and therefore
for proof of it we should not allege the examples of any obscure men, but of
such as were eminent and beyond all exception of both sides. Let them then (if
they please) consult their Luther, Melanchthon, Jacobus Andreae, Brentius:
We Will bring in our Calvin, Bucer, Peter Martyr, and Zanchy: all which sometimes
shined in the Church of Christ like stars of the first magnitude.

First then, there are to be seen in Calvin's works many excellent Elogies of
Luther, even then when Luther did inveigh most bitterly against all our men in
the Point of the Sacrament, and provoked them far to repay him in his own
language. Whose passions, thereby moved and enflamed, Calvin with admirable
prudence Calvi^. Epist. 57. Bulling.
suppressed and kept from breaking out* but I desire (says he) you would
consider, first what a worthy man Luther is, and with what excellent gifts
qualified; with what courage and constancy, with what dexterity, with what
success and efficacy of his Doctrine he has hitherto bent and bestir'd
himself to lay wast the Kingdom of Antichrist, and maintain the Doctrine of
our Salvation: I have many times said, that should he call me Devil, yet
nevertheless I would still have so reverent an esteem of him as to acknowledge
him for a worthy servant of God. Thus Calvin: a saying so full of sweetness
and moderation, as if not a man but humanity it self had spoken it. Not long
after, he made use of the Apostle's argument to contain and keep in our
Divines, least waxing too hot and passionate, they should break out into
revilings: it become's us (says he) so to reprove what we find amiss in him,
as that we remit something out of an honorable respect to his rare endowments:
let not therefore that befall u^, which is denounced by S. Paul, that by biting
and devouring one another we be consumed. Though he have provoked us, yet are
we rather to keep us quiet than to tear the wound wider to the public danger
and damage of God's Church.

But now how did Luther carry himself? was he so far possessed with prejudice
and passion, as to disdain all commerce and society with our men? Nay he
refused not to enter into freindship with Calvin himself, though he knew him
to be a stout Champion of our Sacramentary Cause. Let Calvin himself speak,
if you please, Notwithstanding Luther (says he) Calvin. tract. 2. de^ens. de
Sacra^ C^n^.
in private was so far from accounting me his enemy, that though he well knew
my Opinion, ye refused he not to salute me with reverence by letters writ with
his own hand, (for the dishonesty of Westphalus forces me to speak thus
foolishly, so as to relate it in the very same expression which he himself
used.) Afterward, when the Agreement was half finished at Marpurge, and they
were not yet departed from that meeting, he affirme's that he retained the same
esteem of Occolampadius and Zuinglius as he formerly had done* and he did
there solemnly promise to account and respect them hence forth as Brethren.

Secondly, what an intimate freindship and familiarity there was betwixt
Melanchthon, Jacobus Andreae, Brentius, and our Divines, the mutual
Salutations which passed betwixt them can abundantly witness: Melanchthon
writing to Calvin, begins his Melanchthon Calvino, inter Epistola^ Calvini, 187.
Letter after this manner; Reverend and Christian Brother, I trust we shall
have a time to meet and confer together. And afterward concluding, I beseech
the Son of God, our Lord Jesus Christ, the Guardian and keeper of his Church,
that he would guide and protect Thee and us All. Farewell most dear Brother.
Besides, what was observed concerning Melanchthon and others by our Job.
Sturmius Ep. ^d Prin^. Fredet^i^ter Calvini Ep. 304.
Sturmius, he himself will by no means conceal from us; as though (says he)
Philip Melanchthon did not impart his Opinion (touching the Sacrament) to Peter
Martyr, afterward, to diverse others: with whom he still continued in love and
freindship Further, Jacobus Andreae and Brentius did unanimously adhere to the
Opinion of Luther concerning Calvin. Epist. 240. Jacob. Andreae. and Epist. 32.
Farello.
the Eucharist, of whom notwithstanding Calvin thus speaks; your Letters,
worthy Sir and my much honored Brother (speaking to Jacobus Andreae) were not
a little welcome to me; for as much as I understand by them how that amids these
sad and unhappy contentions, wherein I am most unwillingly engaged, you still
continue like affected toward me as heretofore you have been. Again, this
your moderation of mind I embrace and highly applaud. Farewell worthy Sir, and
my much respected Brother. I wish all happiness to Brentius. God Almighty ever
guide and direct you by his blessed spirit, strengthen and sustain you by his
power, and shower down his blessings in abundance upon you. And again, in
another Letter, Brentius salute's you. Thus were matters carried amongst the^:
and why should not We, putting on bowels of meekness, tread the steps of
these Worthies? Shall they breath out nothing but mildness and sweetness, and
we naught but rage and fury? God forbid. I have done with the first Thesis; I
now proceed to the second.

The second THESIS.
That it is possible for the most hot and rigorous spirits to be reconciled and
agreed.
GIve me leave to make use of that Maxim of Aristotle, so frequently used in
the Schools; but in a sense somewhat different -- Quae convenient in eodem
Tertio, inter se convenient: such two things as agree in any one third, agree
likewise betwixt themselves. In like manner, I conceive that though we differ
much in our Opinions about the Eucharist, yet there are still remaining amongst
us some common Principles and certain notes or notions out of which any one
who is not blinded with prejudice may draw an assertion. One is, the authority
of Scripture, sufficient of it self to challenge a belief: a second is, the
clear light of Antiquity, as clear as the Sun at midday. But this is no
fit place to discourse at large upon these. Three other there are which in no
wise may be passed over, seeing they are such as are more proper and peculiar
to the two adverse parts. I will begin with the first of the^. The Augustane
Confession is by the Divines of Saxony esteemed as an Oracle, of undeniable and
unquestionable authority; now if our men allow and approve of that Confession,
^ do not see what can possibly make more for the obtaining of a
Reconciliation. And for certain Calvin herein agrees with them: I desire
(says he) as C^l^i^* ^pi(...) Mart^^^ ^^^al^^^^o (...)t^s. (...) ^.
much as any man a sincere and true union, so it be such as God has approved
in his word: nor do I reject the Augustane Confession; whereunto I did once
wittingly and willingly subscribe, according to that interpretation which the
Author thereof himself put upon (...).
it. Again, I affirm (says he) that in that Confession, as it was printed
at Ratisbon, there is not so much as one word which is contrary to our Doctrine:
and if there be any ambiguity to be met with in the sense, none is more ^it to
be the Interpreter of it than the Author himself, whose worth will easily
obtain him that honor with all pious and learned men. So He. Neither is he
singular in this: but others there are, though of the same Opinion with him
concerning the Eucharist, who will grant as much. Ep. Sturm^^ ad ^r^d.
Prin^^^t^r Epist. ^al^in. 304.
I am of the number of those (says John Sturmius) who concerning the receiving
of the body and blood of Christ approve of the Augustane Confession. Hierome
Zanchy has a desire to bring in his verdict too, ^^^^h. (...) de C^^^ Domini
con^^ss^^ Magistrate.
I profess (says he) that as often as I had occasion to speak any thing
about this Point, I did always contain my self within the compass of these
three heads* the first whereof is, that in the Lord's Supper not only bread
and wine, but the very body and blood of our Lord is truly offered us by
Christ, and likewise truly received, truly eaten and drunk by us. The
second, but this is done not by the mouth and teeth of our body, but by a true
and an actual faith. The last, that therefore this is done by beleivers only,
and by none others. Now these heads are taken out of God's word nor are they
repugnant to the Augustane Confession. These things being so, those worthy men
have the more reason to be entreated by us, that besides the said Augustane
Confession (which was anciently framed and ordained to be the common rule of
Faith for all Protestants, whereby they might be distinguished from Papists)
they would not obtrude upon us any other private Opinions of their own, to the
hinderance of the public Peace.

A second Principle of the like nature, which even Reason it self does
dictate, is this; that no Antecedent is to be urged and pressed, the necessary
consequent and sequel whereof may not be granted by us. But now it is well
known, that Luther, to remove out of the way the peril of Idolatry, did
abolish all ^^ ^tur(...)xtat ^^ter (...) Epist. ^04. and Epist. 45 ^^^ ^^^
Su^tz^r. ib.
worshipping at the celebration of the Eucharist, which had formerly been
practiced; and for the same end he abolisht the elevation of the host also;
that Calvin. Epist 32. ^ar^^^^.
Brentius likewise did with much earnestness oppose their Breaden God, (for so
he himself terme's it;) lastly, that Melan^^^. Epist. Calvin. ^^^ ^^ter Ep.
187.
Melanchthon did reject their Bread-worship in the Lord's Supper. Those godly
and learned men therefore are to be entreated, that they would well weigh with
themselves whether or no these same abuses which They with so great applause
cried down and abhorred, be not for all that the genuine offspring of that
Vbiquity which at this day is maintained by them.

Thirdly, least any man happily should pretend, that no whit is to be abated of
that bitterness and rigor wherewith at first they exercised the patience of
Occolampadius, and Zuinglius, they are again to be entreated that in their
great wisdoms they would herein take notice of a vast difference Ananias, in
the ninth of the Acts, when first he was warned in a Vision to put his hands
upon Saul, he was somewhat unwilling to do it; J have heard (says he) by many
of this man etc. but afterward, having better understood the counsel and
purpose of God, he gladly embrace's him, saying, Brother Saul the Lord has
sent me unto thee. The very same might have been heretofore observed in the
carriage of Luther himself toward Zuinglius and Oecolampadius; whom at first
he fell upon roughly, when he heard that they held there was nothing in the
Eucharist save only bare signs and figures: but afterward, having further
examined their meaning, he kindly and courteously reached out the right hand of
fellowship unto them. After the very same manner did Calvin likewise stand
affected toward them, as he himself confesses; when at my first entrance
(says he) into the clear Calv. Opusc. Defens. 2* de Sacram. C^nae
sunshine of the Gospel out of Popish darkness, I read in Luther how that
Oecolampadius and Zuinglius would admit of nothing in the Sacraments but bare
and empty figures, this (I confess) so far possessed me with a prejudice
against their writings, that I refrained a long time from reading them. Thus
spoke Calvin at that time of those men, whom notwithstanding he afterward had
in great love and familiarity with him. Why may not then the Saxon Divines be
pleased to show themselves Luthers toward us, so long as they find us not
inferior to Oecolampadius and Zuinglius in this Point?

The third THESIS.
That this friendly Union and Reconcilement we wish for, is very necessary for
all men, whether of a mild or turbulent disposition.
IT is not my purpose to lash out into Common places, wherein much pains might
be spent, and little or no benefit got by it. It behooves me rather to provide me
of such arguments, as may, not coldly beg and entreat, but command, and as it
were violently compel men to live at peace and unity amongst themselves.
Neither are there any (as you well know) fitter for the settling and confirming
of such a Communion, than are those which are drawn from the common joy, or
grief; the common danger, or the common good and advantage of both sides.
There Is not a more evident and infallible sign of a true member of Christ,
than to compassionate or to have a fellow-feeling one of another; which is
seen especially in two things: first, in rejoicing at the hopes of a
Reconciliation; such as was the Psalmist's joy in that divine acclamation of
his at the unity of Brethren, ^ how good and joyful a thing it is! Secondly, a
sorrow of heart at so long and wearisome a dissension; such as the Jews
expressed by their great thoughts of heart for the divisions of Reuben. Schism
growing and getting upon the Church at Corinth, the Apostle exhort's them to
be [(...)] perfectly joined together in the same mind and in the same
judgment: the word is derived from (...), which amongst Physicians signifies
to set right again such members as are out of joint. The same Apostle, that he
might compose and setle the minds of the Philippians, o what a sacred charm
does he make use of! If (says he) there be any consolation in Christ, if any
comfort of love, if any fellowship of the spirit, if any bowels of mercies,
fulfill my joy. But how may they do that? He goes on; that ye be like minded,
having the same love, [(...)] being of one accord, of one mind. I verily
believe, that Eloquence her self, if she had a tongue to speak, she could not
have spoke more emphatically: where each word is a sharp dart, peircing and
wounding our very hearts and souls. I will add only that long chain of
Unities in the same Apostle to the Ephesians; one body, one spirit, one hope,
one calling, one Lord, one Faith, one Baptism, one God and Father of all: all
which make for that one thing which he there aime's at, to wit, that the
Ephesians should endeavor to keep the unity of the spirit in the bond of peace.

As touching the danger, we all of us know that the tyranny of the Romish
Antichrist hang's over our heads: who sweetly sing's to himself that black
and fatal Maxim [divide and impera] set them once at variance, and then you
may quickly master them; or rather, by setting them at variance, you may
confound and tumble them into the pit of hell: for the kingdom being once
divided, Hell it self cannot stand. Let us learn to be wise from the examples
of others: the Guelphi and Gibelli^i [those two implacable and irreconcilable
Factions] did agree together and join their forces, when the common Enemy
came against them* and shall not We rowse our selves up to save and defend our
selves?

As for the gain and advantage I mentiond, can there be any greater gain than
Salvation? and yet even this too, the more common, the greater and better it
is. Let us then (I beseech you for the love of God) set before our eyes the
Greek Church, which now seeme's to sue and woo to us for a brotherly union and
agreement, as appeare's from that Confession of Faith lately This is the Title
of that Confession.
set forth in the name of all the Eastern Churches by the right Reverend
Father Cyrill Patriarch of Constantinople: which agrees exactly with our
Protestant Confessions in every Article set forth and published by him. Me
thinks I see this most ample and far spreading part of the Christian world
ready to fly into our arms and embraces presently upon the first news of our
unity and agreement amongst our selves: which hope of ours should Christ be
pleased to crown with success* this alone would far outvie and surpass in
glory all the triumphs and trophies of all the Emperors in the world. But I
hasten to your other Question.

The other CONTROVERSY.
Concerning that unfathomed mystery of Praedestination upon the foresight of
Faith and Works.
THis is that other Question (as I gather from your Letter) whereon as on a
rock diverse men (otherwise desirous of Peace) have dashed and split themselves.
That therefore men may know, I have not of my own accord sought after and
caught at this opportunity to dispute, but rather am cast upon it against my
will, my proceeding herein shall be not by way of disputation, but (as the
Times rather require) by way of exhortation and advice.

I hope therefore the learned Divines of Saxony will take this my advice in
good part, wherein I earnestly pray and beseech them, first, that they would be
reconciled to their own Luther in this Point, who (as it did well become a
child of Grace) did constantly hold and maintain that the Grace of God is
every way free and gratuitous. Next, that they would not, in the patronizing
and vindicating of Divine Grace, suffer themselves to be outstript by Papists,
nay Jesuits, and the prime Doctors too of that sect, Bellarmine, Tolet,
Pererius, Suarez, Salmeron, Maldonat: who have all of them exploded this
Doctrine of Praedestination upon the foresight of Faith and Works, as pure
Pelagianisme. Last of all, it is some wisdom for a man to profit by his enemy:
there came out a book two years agon, written by Will: de Gibieuffe, G^i^ de
G^(...) li^^^t^^^ D^(...) Crea(...)(...)
of the Oratorian Order, Priest and Doctor of the Sorbon, dedicated to the
present Pope Urban: wherein are inserted the words of Pope Clement the eighth
concerning the Auxilia Gratiae: the sum whereof is this; that this whole
Doctrine ought to be squared and conformed to S. Austin's judgment in the
Point of Grace; that the same S. Austin ought be acknowledged and followed as a
guide and leader, for as much as that good Father seeme's to have omitted
nothing which concerns the said Controversies: and because (says he) many of
our Praedecessours have stood up so stoutly for that Doctrine of S. Austin
concerning Grace as if they desired to have it continued in the Church as her
right of inheritance, it is not meet I should suffer her to be deprived of this
her patrimony. Thus far that Pope: unto whose judgment (J will not say, for
the authority, but the truth of it) I nothing doubt but Calvin himself, were
he now living, would subscribe: And he that shall read Calvin's writings, will
quickly grant, that in these Controversies he had more than an ordinary share
of S. Austin's Legacy.

Thus you see, Sir, how that partly your importunity (who are such an earnest
Factour for Peace) and partly my own zeal in so necessary a Cause, have made
me exceed the accustomed bounds of a Letter* wherein, if you find not much
judgment, yet may you behold my care and desires for Christian Peace. The
author of all true peace, our Lord Jesus Christ, strengthen and enable you by
the power of his holy spirit cheerfully to go thorough with this so weighty
an employment for the public Peace of his Church. Farewell.

THOMAS DURHAM.

Postscript.
That we should thus first seek and sue for brotherly love and unity, is so
far from being any prejudice to our cause, as that it is rather to be counted
an honor to us: in that we herein follow the precept and practice of God
himself; of whom the Evangelist says, 1. Joh. 4. 10. He first loved us.

THE OPINION OF THE RIGHT REVEREND FATHER IN GOD JOSEPH HALL Bishop of EXCETER.
THose Articles of Religion wherein the Divines of both sides do fully agree,
are abundantly sufficient, both for a Christian man's salvation, and likewise
for the establishing of a firm and lasting Peace in the Churches of God. As
for the rest, I would not have them reckoned amongst the Apostle's [(...)]
foolish Questions: doubtless they are such as may perhaps not unfitly be sent
to the Divinity-Schooles, there to be thoroughly discussed: but by no means
ought they to disquiet the Peace either of any Christian soul, or of God's
holy Church. What do we professing Christian Charity and love, if we still
obstinately refuse to indulge our Brethren this little liberty of dissenting
from us in doubtful and difficult Schoole-questions? Seeing we know very well
that our good and gracious Savior passed over with silence and toleration
great and grievous Errors in comparison of these (if it be granted that these
are Errors,) and that too even in such as were of his own household and
retinue.

There are but three things about which the reverend Divines of both sides
profess themselves to differ.
THE first is, whether or no our Lord and Savior Jesus Christ be truly
omniscient, omnipotent, and omnipresent not only according to his Divinity, but
also according to his humane nature, by virtue of the personal Union? That the
Lord Jesus (to wit God and Man) is in both his natures omniscient, omnipotent,
and omnipresent, is confessed on each side: this being granted, the word [
according] is a mere Schoole-nicity. How far the virtue of that
hypostaticall union extend's it self, the holy ghost is silent, and a
Christian may safely be ignorant of it. Let the Doctors, if they list, dispute
and busy their brains as much as they please about this matter: it will be
enough for a Christian, to know that he has a Savior who is both God and
man, to whom all these attributes truly belong and appertain. Nay even
Divines themselves have enough wherein they may rest satisfied, so long as this
be granted on both sides, that even the humane nature considered personally is
omniscient, omnipresent, and omnipotent: which we all of us roundly and
readily profess without any doubt or scruple. O what enemies are we to Peace,
if we will yet needs quarrel amongst our selves ^ In all this, I wish we would
carefully remember that useful distinction of John Gerson, esse quaedam de
necessitate fidei, quadam vero de fidei devotione: that there are some things
essential and necessary to Faith, other some things which she piously and
devoutly beleives, but yet they are not of such necessity as the other: the
former are such as may not so much as be once doubted of, but these latter may
admit of an (...); we may safely either suspend our assent unto them, or
positively dissent from them.

The second Article wherein they differ, is concerning the manner of receiving
Christ in the Eucharist. Both agree, that Christ's body is truly and really
given, taken, and eaten in this Sacrament together with the outward Elements:
All the question is concerning Unworthy receivers. An unworthy Question truly
it is, that the public Peace should any way be disturbed about it. We
willingly grant both of us, that even such as are Unworthy do eat that which
by a sacramental Union is Christ's body; and that therefore they are guilty of
the body and blood of Jesus Christ: What do we now making any more ado about
the manner of their eating, whether it be Orall or not? Let Christians make
this their care, that they themselves may be found worthy Communicants, and let
them not trouble themselves to know how those which are unworthy are partakers
of Christ. How far the virtue of that Sacramental Union extends it self, and
whether the manner of this eating be Orall or Spiritual, let the Schools
dispute it: Christians need not be too curious in enquiring after it; nor is it
fit we should disquiet the Church's Peace, by refusing to indulge mutually
one another a liberty of Opinion in such nice Points.

The third Article is that fatal Point of Praedestination: about which,
Divines of both sides express themselves variously, but yet modestly and
discreetly. In many things, and such as are of most moment, their judgments on
both sides are the same: as, that election is most free, and proceeding from
the mere mercy of God, that God found not any cause or occasion in those whom
he elected, the sight whereof might move him to choose them rather than others:
but that he did from all eternity reprobate and praedestinate to eternal
damnation such as persevere and persist in their sins and infidelity; not by
any rigid and absolute decree, without having any respect or regard to sin, but
out of his most just judgment: so as all the cause and the blame of it ought
to be sought for in the men themselves. In this they are at a stand; that the
foresight of Faith and Perseverance is by the reverend Divines of Saxony placed
before the act of God's Election: so as God did from everlasting foreordaine
such as he foresaw would in time believe, etc. Certainly of all the Questions
about Praedestination, this concerning the order of his Decree is least
material* seeing we know assuredly that the infinite and all-wise disposer of
things performs all this with one single and most simple act. There is nothing
more certain than that God did foresee who would believe, and that he did
praedestinate such as should be saved: let but this then be granted (which they
of Saxony willingly profess) that Faith is the sole gift of God, and that
whatsoever good there is in the Elect, all of it does originally proceed from
the free grace and mere mercy of God, which was bestowed on them in Jesus
Christ from all Eternity; I say, let this be granted, and doubtless there can
be no danger in that Opinion of Praevision or foresight: God from everlasting
foresaw that* which he himself from everlasting decreed to bestow in time
upon such as should believe. All this is sound and safe, nor is there any cause
why any further strife and contention should be made here* about.

In all this, I embrace and applaud this Christian and brotherly moderation and
holy desires of Peace: thus it becomes Christians, thus it becomes Divines. I
am much deceived, if this modest and seasonable appeasing and calming of men's
minds does not promise a firm and perpetual Peace to God's Church. Thou God
of Peace, in thy good time accomplish it: give ear to the prayers of thy
People, and grant that all Christians may be of one heart and one way, till at
length we come, by Thee who art the Way, to Thee who art the Life. Amen,

Amen.
From the Palace at Exceter. Febr. 25. 1634. Which is the humble, daily, and
devout prayer of JOS: EXON:

Afterward the same Mr John Dury sent unto the Ld Bishop of Exceter a Copy of
a certain pious and peaceable Decree, made and published by a general vote at
a public Meeting of the States in Franckfort: requesting his Opinion
concerning the means and manner how this good work might be advanced* where
unto he had returned him this Answer.

TO HIS MOST Faithful, learned, and loving friend Mr JOHN DURY, all happiness.
SIR,
IHave read over, with a great deal of delight, the Transcript you sent me of
that Decree for Peace, which was lately signed by all the Protestant States and
Delegates assembled at Franckfort: than which Decree, nothing (in my Opinion)
could possibly have been devised more full of prudence and religion: nor do I
see (as the case now stand's) what more could be once hoped for; or what could
possibly have been proposed and resolved upon that might more conduce to the
advancement of the public Peace, which all good men so much wish and desire.
Thus it was meet that the holy Citizens of God's Church, that pious Princes and
Peers should thus carefully provide for the Peace and safety of Christendom
And blessed be God, the bestower of every good gift* the Author of Peace, who
did put into their noble hearts those holy desires and purposes: may the same
good God be pleased, at length to finish this his own work so hopefully begun,
and crown it with success. And truly neither our prayers nor our utmost
endeavors shall ever be wanting hereunto* neither know I well upon what hopes
it is, but methinkes my mind does confidently promise and praesage a happy
issue to this holy enterprise. For indeed what a small and slender hedge is it,
which now divide*s and part's us? We do all of us of the Reformation, receive
and approve the same Scriptures, the same Creeds* the same Augustane
Confession: only in one Article the sense is so doubtfully expressed, that the
Author himself did not think it safe to adhere to the letter of it. The
foundation of the Christian Faith is, amongst us all, one and the same, entire
and unshaken; there is not so much as one stone in it, or the least piece of
coement, about which any question either is or can be made* Upon this
Foundation there are built certain Points of Schoole-divinity, about which
alone we so hotly contend: but what are these to a Christian? What are these to
Salvation? In what a safe and quiet state might the affairs of Christendom
have been, if such nice Disputes of curious and over-busie heads had never been
heard of; if learned men could have contented themselves with some general
forms of expressing the Truth, and not presently to have sifted Divinity so
over-nearly as they have done?

But seeing these strifes, which are not only unprofitable, but very hurtful
and prejudicial to both sides, are thus unfortunately raised; what better
advice can be thought upon for the settling and composing of these stirs, than
that the Faith be brought back again to its primitive simplicity and
plainness, by the public authority and joint consent of the Christian
Church? And that in this confused mixture and multiplicity of matters of
belief, the Christian world be taught warily to distinguish betwixt the
genuine and proper Articles of Faith, and the less necessary additions of
Schoole-conclusions: which truly in this very business is a matter of no
great difficulty to perform. This especially is fundamental, Christ is both
God and Man; and so likewise this, Christ, God and Man, is truly omniscient,
omnipotent, omnipresent: now if any shall add further, Jesus Christ, according
to his humane nature, is omniscient, omnipotent, omnipresent; truly that word
[ according] seems to be far off from the Foundation; it is a Scholasticall
notion, and to be turned over to professed Divines; but it is not fit the
Salvation of plain and illiterate Christians should be made to hang and depend
upon such a subtle and nice Point as this is. Can these know, or are they
bound to know, how far the virtue of the hypostaticall Union extend's it
self, or what the bounds are either of those faculties or operations which
flow from that union of the two natures? Certainly if God had intended this
for a necessary Point to be known by all men, he would not so sparingly and
obscurely have revealed unto his Church a mystery so fundamental and
important. I dispute not the truth of the Point, (nor is this pertinent to my
purpose,) only I question whether it be of necessity to be believed. Let us
view a comparison betwixt things humane and divine, although what similitude
can there bee'twixt Earth and Heaven? Man consists of a soul and a body united
one to the other: and yet notwithstanding, each part has its several
properties and actions, which are usually attributed (and that very rightly
too) to the whole; the whole man has the use of sense, does understand, eat,
walk, sleep, dye: thus much even sense and reason does unanswerably evince:
will any man hereupon say, that this also is of equal necessity to be known,
man according to his body has the use of sense and reason; and according to
his soul he does eat, walk, sleep, and dye? Truly the same that Reason is, in
respect of intelligible matters; the same is Faith, in things spiritual and
divine: I am not ignorant, how much they differ in their Subjects; yet
nevertheless the necessity of the things which are either to be known or
believed, is alike different in both. Such Trueths therefore as are certain,
such as are necessarily to be believed, and apparently fundamental, let us all
unanimously embrace and profess them: as for the rest, let Divines (if they
please) busy their heads with them, but let not the plain and common sort of
Christians trouble themselves about them more than needs. But if it may seem
to make any thing for the public Peace, that we come as near as we can one to
another in the forms and manner of expression; let us but say (as Zanch.
Iudici^ de di^^idio C^^^ in fine Miscella^^o^u^^ Quod idem pr^batur a ^uinglio
i^i^e a citate. ^^d. ^tiam F^ild^um nostratem* in lib. de Eccles. and
Appendi^e. ^^d lib. ^ de Eccl^s^^. c. 35. and 42. and App^nd part. ^* respons*
ad secundum capu^ Hi^gonii. ^^^ ^^^a^ citantur P^^. M^^a^ l. Cai^tan (...)
Hier: Zanchy sometimes alleged out of Innocent and the Schoolmen) that even
Christ's humane nature according to its personal essenc^ is omni present, etc.
and I see no reason why both sides may not, nay will not readily consent and
agree to it. Here let us fix; let neither side proceed any further beyond
this, and we are safe.

In the Point of the Sacrament this is certain and fundamental, that the true
and essential body and blood of Christ is truly present, offered, and
received in that holy Supper^ but whether or no it be corporally present in the
Bread and Wine, whether or no (by a supernatural virtue of the conse^rated
Elements) it be orally received and eaten, even by wicked and unworthy
Communicants, this is a matter of Theological Dispute, and such as (in the
judgment of Luther, Melanchthon, Justus Jonas, Ofiander, Brentius, Stephanus
Agricola* yea and of Oecolampadius, Zuinglius, Bu^er, Hedi^) ought not to
infri^ge Christian love and Charity. And upon this promising sign was begun
that famous Agreement at Marpurge, in the year 1529. That likewise is well
worthy to be kept in perpetual memory, which is related concerning the meeting
at Witemberge, in the year 1536, by Ludovicus Rabus Pastor at Vlme, in his
History of Martyrs: with whom agree's John Swiccius, Pastor at Constance (cited
by Hospinian) who was there present at that time; and it is to be seen likewise
in the English writings of Bucer* there were present at that Meeting, of the
one side, Capito, Bucer, Musculus, and the rest of the more eminent Divines out
of the chief Imperial Cities in high Germany; of the other side, Luther,
Philip, Jonas, Pomeranus, Cruciger, with other Doctors and Preachers of
Witemberge: and after some expostulations, and diverse Speeches to and fro,
wherein both sides freely and fairly delivered their Opinions, at length
Luther (stepping a little aside with his Associates, and conferring with them
about it) concluded with these words; If ye believe and teach, that in the
holy Supper the very body and the very blood of Christ is offered, given, and
received, and not the bare ^ignes bread and Wine; and that such giving and
receiving is true and real, not only imaginary, the strife betwixt us is at
an end, and we do acknowledge and receive you as our dear Brethren in the
Lord. All this, Bucer, Capito, and the rest, plainly and freely affirmed:
whereupon they joined hands, and so parted. Indeed the waters were then calm
and quiet, not tossed with any stormy and tempestuous winds; and therefore they
did clearly show and represent the face of Truth. Why do not we in like
manner now at last begin to be wise? And having passed those tempestuous and
troublesome times which afterward followed, why do we not sit down and rest
our selves in this old and safe harbor of Peace and Unity?

Concerning the Point of Praedestination, how does the Church of Christ groan
under the burden of a number of huge and high-swolne Volumes? Yet when we have
done all we can, and wearied our selves and the Christian world with our
wrangling pens, this will still remain to be known and believed by all men,
1* that God from all eternity out of his These heads (...) granted on both
sides in this Conscienc^.
mere good pleasure did immutably elect some unto Salvation. 2. that none were
elected by God, nor shall be saved, who do not believe in Jesus Christ, and
persevere in this Faith. 3. that none can believe in Christ, save only they
whom God is pleased to enable hereunto, and to work it in them by the
effectual grace of his Spirit* 4. that God did not damn, no nor reprobate any
man, but with an eye to sin: so that all the cause and the blame of men's
Damnation, lie's in themselves; but the cause of Election and Salvation is in
the mere grace and mercy of God. Now all this is confeston both sides. ^ know
right well, there are infinite Questions and Controversy a raised about this
Point: Let every man on God's name enjoy his own Opinion; I will not prescribe
to any man. For my self, if any man be desirous to know what my Opinion herein
is, I freely profess my self to adhere to the Articles of the Church of
England, and to the judgment of our English Divines who voted in the Synod at
Dort (wherein my self was presen(...) But what is there in this profound
Point, about which vulgar and illiterate Christians need to trouble themselves,
save only that plain and obvious Truth confessed by all? For the rest, let
Divines dispute them in the Schools; but it were well if they would forbear
to meddle with them in the Pulpit. How are the very same Controversies, and
others of greater weight and moment, still on foot in the Church of Rome, and
yet so warily and wisely do they carry the matter, that the public Peace is
notwithstanding preserved amongst them. Let us learn wisdom from them who
profess naught but enmity toward us. Would but Christian Princes by their
Authority decree, and Divines fairly and moderately contain and keep
themselves within these bounds of Disputation and Controversy (bounds indeed
larg and spacious enough,) we should have a lasting and firm Agreement, the
Church would flourish in Peace and Tranquillity, and lastly Truth would bebome
victorious and triumph over the common Enemy.

That this may be brought to pass (as we all wish and desire it should) the
honorable States and Delegates did very wisely propose and advise that a
public Meeting of peaceable Divines should be summoned and sought for by
Invitatory Letters, that the freindly and laudable Conference, which was begun
at Li^swich, should be reassumed and prosecuted with like modesty as it had
formerly been be gun; that all such Di^ines of note and eminence as cannot be
present at that meeting should send over their Opinions and advice; that all
the Fundamentalls of Religion, necessary for Salvation, should be determined,
and all other Points laid aside, and turned over to the Schools (if need
should require;) that in the mean time men's tongues and pens should be
enjoined moderation or else silence; that lastly public Prayers should be
solemnly made in the Churches of both sides for the success of this good
work. Let but these things be done with an upright heart, in the fear of God,
and we need not doubt of a happy issue: it is God's own Cause, he will not be
wanting to himself.

For you, Mr Dury, who have hitherto with such zeal, such unwearied pains, so
many dangers, so great charges, prosecuted this Design so well pleasing to
God, his Angels, and men; truly you have deserved so well of the whole Church,
as that all good men must acknowledge themselves much indebted to you. Go on
(worthy Sir) with your great undertakeings, and put a period to this good
work: or rather, may the great God of Heaven and Earth do this for you and us
all; and may he still preserve and prosper you in these travailes and labors
of yours. Farewell from

Your loving friend JOS: EXON:

THE OPINION OF THE MOST REVEREND FATHER IN GOD JAMES USHER Lord Archbishop of
ARMAGH and Primate of Ireland, with some other Reverend Bishops in IRELAND.
REverend and much respected Brother in Christ; We had long since by common
consent made ready an Answer to your former Letters which you writ unto us
severally some Months agon: but being desirous to have likewise a general
Subscription to it according to that agreement which should be betwixt
fellowbrethren of the Clergy, we deferred the sending of it somewhat the longer
in hopes of a meeting. You desire us now in your second Letter dated from
London March 20. that we would give you our Opinion concerning the Conference
at Lipswich; the rather, because that Conference is likely to have some effect
and influence upon the business you have in hand. Thus therefore; that meeting
(though it was called for other ends and reasons) yet seeing it was holden with
such good success, and that the chief Divines of both sides had so fair and
freindly a Conference, heard one another with such patience, and parted with
such love and brotherly affection, it is a very good sign that this matter is
from the Lord, and from this good beginning who can choose but hope for a happy
and successful issue?

But yet notwithstanding, they parted differing about three Points: it is well
that they differd but in three; and it is better yet, that even in those three
Points they agreed in most things, and such as are of greatest moment; nor was
their difference so much about the thing it self, as about some Forms of
expression, which for the most part we cannot so easily forget and cast off
after we have been long accustomed to them. For seeing it is confessed on both
sides, that Christ has two natures in one person, so inseparably united that
neither can they be divided, nor are they confounded, but still remain
distinct and several without all mixture or aequality (so much as of their
Properties,) to what end is it to quarrel about improper and figurative
Propositions? so likewise in the Eucharist, seeing they both agree that the
Faithful do eat not only the fruit and benefit, but the very essence ( or
Substance) of Christ's body; and that on God's part the Sacraments are
exhibited entire and perfect, the thing signified together with the sign, what
do they contending about Hypocrites and unbelievers? it is all one as if
Physi^ions should fall a disputing about a dead man, whether or no the Potion
he took has any operation upon him. There remains yet that other much
controverted Question touching Praedestination: and yet even in this too it
would be no hard matter for them to be reconciled, were but spleen and
partiality laid aside, and in the room thereof a reverent and modest fear how
we pry too far into God's secret Counsels, placed and planted: seeing the
best and ablest Divines of both sides acknowledge, that in many Questions about
this Mystery we must be feign to take up St Paul's exclamation, O the depth!
and that it is both lawful and sufficient for them to rest and hold together in
those clear and undoubted Trueths; namely, that the Election of such as shall
be saved, was made in Christ; that the destruction of all such as perish, is
from themselves; that Salvation is from God; that Faith (yea even foreseen
Faith) is not from our selves, it is the gift of God, that we may not boast of
any thing, seeing we have nothing of our own; all must be ascribed to God: as
S. Cyprian of old devoutly and pithily spoke.

Thus you have, both what we hope and conceive of the Conference at Lipswich.
But the most principal and special thing, which should be earnestly pressed and
inculcated, is this; that in Divine matters, espocially in such high and
difficult mysteries as these are, which are rather to be adored than pried
into, we ought to have a certain and set Rule to speak by* as S. Austin
sometimes prudently and piously counseled: and therefore it would be a very
safe and good course for us to refrain from all novell and newfangled
expressions, and to confine the liberty of Prophesying to such Forms and
Phrases as the holy Scriptures do furnish us withal. It remains, that we
earnestly beseech the God of Peace to bruise Satan under our feet, and that
shortly: unto which God we heartily recommend you (Reverend Brother) and rest

May 14. Anno 1634. Your most affectionate friends JAMES ARMAGH. WILLIAM
KILMORE. JOHN ARDAGH.


THE JUDGMENT OF THE same right Reverend Father, the Lord Archbishop of
ARMAGH, delivered in a Sermon of his preached before K. JAMES at Wansted, June
20th. 1624.
IF at this day we should take a survay of the several Professions of
Christianity, that have any large spread in any part of the world (as of the
Religion of the Roman and the Reformed Churches in our Quarters, of the
Egyptians and Aethiopians in the South, of the Grecians and other Christians
in the Eastern parts,) and should put-by the Points wherein they differ one
from another, and gather into one body the rest of the Articles wherein they
do all generally agree; we should find, that in those Propositions which
without all Controversy are universally received in the whole Christian world,
so much truth is contained, as being joined with holy obedience, may be
sufficient to bring a man unto everlasting salvation. Neither have we cause to
G^l 6 1^.
doubt, but that as many as do walk accorto this rule (neither overthrowing
that which they have builded by superinducing any damnable here^ies thereupon,
nor otherwise vitiating their holy Faith with a lewd and wicked conversation)
peace shall be upon them, and mercy, and upon the Israel of God.

THE OPINION OF SOME FAMOUS DIVINES OF the FRENCH Church.
THat which has been the constant and earnest wish of all good men for these
hundred years past, and which by all wise men has been esteemed worthy to be
purchased at any rate and with any pains though never so great; this (we
hear, to the exceeding great joy of our hearts) is at this day endeavored by
some worthy servants of Christ* with singular zeal, and not without good hopes
of a happy success: to wit, that the Protestant Churches which differ one from
another about some Points of Religion, laying aside or at least moderating on
both sides their over-tenacious adhering to their own Opinions, may now at
length be united and made up into one body. We being much joyed with this
welcome news, first of all we render all possible praise and thankesgiving to
almighty God the giver of all good things, that he has been pleased to put
such good thoughts and intentions into the hearts of his servants; and we most
earnestly beseech him, that his blessing may go along with this good design,
and crown it with success: next, we return many thanks to those our reverend
and worthy Brethren and fellow-Ministers, who have put their hands to this
work; and we do highly applaud and admire their faithfulness, zeal,
charity, and singular magnanimity and courage herein. What a brave and noble
spirit does it argue in them, that they could once hope for an Unity and Peace
of our Churches in these desperate and distracted times? Or that they durst
venture upon a matter of such difficulty, which had so often been attempted
heretofore by men of great abilities, but could never be brought to pass? What
the event of this so great and good a design will be, is in the sole power and
pleasure of almighty God: but surely the very endeavoring and intending of so
good a work deserve's no little commendation: for, the bare purpose or having
in one's heart and thoughts matters of great concernment, and such as may make
for the good of Christ's Church, is a great and good work, and never faile's
of its reward from our bountiful God: although there be good cause to hope,
that the pains which learned men take hereabout shall even with men too have
its fruit and effect. For, now that they have spent their spirits and heat of
contention, and wearied themselves with long strife and variance, it is more
than probable that they will now at last entertain those Counsels of Peace
which they have hitherto out of spleen and passion rejected and set light by.
Besides, that most sharp plowshare of God's judgment wherewith for almost
these fourteen years he has furrowed and plowed up the French and German
Churches, has so subdued and broken up men's minds on each side, that never
was there a more fit and seasonable opportunity for sowing and casting in the
seeds of Unity and Peace, than now. We cannot choose therefore but greatly
approve, commend, and admire the purposes and endeavors of those worthy men
who have employed their pains in so necessary a work: but since we understand
how that they are desirous to know more particularly what our Opinion is of
this whole business, let us proceed to set down (as briefly and plainly as we
can) our judgment herein.

Indeed it were much to be wished, that they who profess themselves Christ's
Disciples and followers, would all think and speak alike of matters spiritual
and Divine; perfectly joined together in the same mind and in the same
judgment, (as S. Paul exhorts his Corinthians.) But since there is so much
weakness in man's understanding, and so great difficulty in Points of
Divinity, that this perfect and absolute agreement betwixt pious men is a thing
not to be had or hoped for in this world; in the next place it were to be
wished, that they would agree and be of the same belief about the maine and
principal Heads of Religion: and for other matters which are of less moment
and use, and such as do not any way make either for holiness of life, or
comfort of men's consciences, and consequently do not necessarily pertain to
Christ's kingdom (which consists in those two things) that they would in such
wise believe them, as to bear with others who dissent from them about such
Points. For as we see in civil and saecular matters, the best Statesmen are
not always of the same Opinion concerning the affairs of the Commonwealth; so
likewise in the Church, so long as the sum and substance of Religion is
agreed upon and maintained, no matter though in some other Points the
judgments of the Faithful be various and different. That this is lawful,
both the thing it self loudly proclaims it, and S. Paul confirms it; who
does not (...) 15. 1. (...) 3. 15.
only permit but command us (more than once) to bear with such as differ from
us in their Opinions* and it is the common and general Opinion of all such
Divines as have been of any note and esteem in the Church ever since our
Savior Christ's times down to this present age.

Yet is not this so to be understood, as if all manner of Differences in
Religion were to be tolerated: for even the same Apostle denounces an Anathema
against such as shall preach any other Gospel than that which he had preached;
and the most moderate amongst the Fathers of the Christian Church have always
constantly held, that we are to shun and avoid the company of Heretics. For
there be some Opinions of those men who differ about Religion, which overthrow
the very foundation of our Salvation, and destroy either that Piety or that
Charity which we are commanded by God's word to practice toward God and men:
such are the erroneous Doctrines of Romanists, who will have that religious
worship given to creatures, which God has reserved peculiar to himself; who
make our Faith to rely upon the judgment and authority of men; who several
ways overthrow the Preistly office of Jesus Christ; in a word, who have with
their own inventions so stained and deformed the whole Christian Religion, that
they have left no one part in it sound and untainted. Such likewise are the
Opinions of Socinians, who (to let pass their other Positions) deny our Lord
and Savior Christ Jesus to be truly God: and if once you take away his
Divinity, it will necessarily follow, that either we worship a creature, or
else that we do not worship the son of God; both of which are manifestly
repugnant to those Trueths which are delivered to us in holy Writ as absolutely
necessary to Salvation. We conceive therefore that no Peace in way of Religion
can be had with these men, nor with any others who maintain any Errors of
this nature, till they shall renounce these their private Doctrines. But for
those who hold some erroneous Opinion which yet may consist with Piety, and
Charity, and all Christian duties belonging thereunto, we think (as S. Paul
seeme's to have determined) a Communion may be held with them. We may mildly
admonish such, and when opportunity is offered, discreetly reprove and instruct
them; but to cast them out of the Church, and (for no other cause) to curse and
excommunicate them as men in a desperate and damnable estate, this (in our
opinion) is neither fitting nor lawful to be done.

Now to apply this to the matter in hand* we conceive that to this latter sort
all those Controversies do belong which are agitated amongst Protestant
Divines, touching Christ's presence in the Sacramental ^ignes, touching divine
Praedestination, and some few other Points. For they do agree in all such
Points as conduce either to Piety toward God, or Charity toward men; they
maintain on both sides, that the Scriptures are of divine inspiration, that
they are perfect, perspicuous, and authentical; they detest with one heart and
mouth the Tyranny, and pernicious Doctrines of the Pope, and they equally keep
off from entertaining a Communion with him; they have the same Sacraments; they
worship the same Christ; they profess the same righteousness and holiness in
this life, and they expect the same glory in the life to come: in a word, so
great and so wonderful an agreement is there betwixt them about all saving and
necessary Doctrines, that (did not the history of their affairs, and those
bitter contentions which have hitherto (more is the pity) been fomented
amongst them, witness the contrary) there is no man but would think they had a
meeting at the beginning, and by common counsel and consent agreed upon the
same Confession of Faith. In such a multitude of mysteries, who can choose but
admire that there should not be above one or two Points wherein they did not
fully agree? For even about the Eucharist, which is the maine matter of this
woeful Division, they both of them grant that it is a Sacrament not a
Sacrifice; that it is to be eaten, not worshipped; both the two kinds
instituted by our Savior Christ (to wit, bread and wine) are neither
transubstantiated nor divided one from the other by either side; they both
acknowledge the same use and end of this holy Rite, to wit the commemorating of
Christ's death, and the partaking of his body which was crucified, and of his
blood which was shed for us: There is only one thing about which they
disagree, namely the manner how Christ's body is given to us and received by us
in that Sacrament; the thing is the same on both sides, only the manner of it
is diverse. This Difference, though it be but small, yet is it not (we
confess) altogether of no moment: but that it should be of so great moment, as
that it ought to make a breach of charity and affection amongst Brethren, a
duty so useful and necessary to the Christian world, and so miraculously
wrought amongst them by the hand of Heaven, this we utterly deny. Neither do
We alone deny it: to say nothing of our Brethren in Poland, and almost all the
Germans which hold with us, who (as it is well known to all men) ever did, and
at this day do make the same reckoning and account of that Controversy as we
but now did; to say nothing likewise of those famous Divines of both sides in
Saxony and Brandenburge, who (as we have been informed) were lately of the very
same opinion concerning these Points, when they had fairly discussed them at
Lipswich, whither they were come with their Princes. But one thing there is
which we cannot here omit to mention, a matter perhaps not so well known to
foreign nations, yet such a matter it is as we confidently believe will be
most welcome and acceptable to all good and peaceable men, to wit that the
Reformed Churches here in France (whereof there are good store) have always
been of that same Opinion touching these Controversies, and they have given
testimony of this their Opinion, both heretofore sundry ways, and likewise now
very lately by an express Decree made in a general Synod held here at
Charenton near Paris in the year 1631. For when, upon occasion of a citizen
of Lions (unto whose daughter a certain young German of the Augustane
Confession, as they call it, was a suitor) it was questiond, how we are to
account and esteem of such as are commonly termed Lutherans; all the Brethren
which were there met, out of all the Provinces of France, and sent thither from
their several Churches, did unanimously vote thus; That seeing the Churches of
the Augustane Confession do agree with the other Reformed Churches in all the
Principles and fundamental Points of true Religion, and that in their
Discipline and form of Divine worship there is neither Idolatry nor
Superstition: such of the Faithful of that Confession as shall with the spirit
of Charity and in a truly peaceable way join themselves unto the public
Assemblies of the Churches in this Kingdom, and desire to communicate with
them, may, without the abjuration of their former Opinions which they hold
contrary to the belief of these Churches, be admitted to the holy Table,
contract marriages with the faithful of our Confession, and present themselves
in the quality of Godfathers to the children which shall be baptized; upon
their promise given to the Consistory, that they will never solicit such
children, directly or indirectly, against the Doctrine believed and professed
in our Churches, but shall content themselves with giving them instruction
only in those Points wherein we all agree.

We are not ignorant, how that many objections may be made against this Decree
by such as have a mind to contend and cavil: but such objections they are,
most of them, as have but little strength and validity in them, and such as can
no way stand in comparison with those weighty reasons wherewith the Christian
Faith and Charity do furnish us. It is not our purpose to insist on every
particular; only in general, we think it not amiss to put men in mind of two
things, which if they were observed with that care as it fitting, both sides
perhaps would henceforth judge more mildly and charitably of each other than
hitherto they have done.

First then, special heed would be taken by us, that the assertions and
Opinions of private men, though Doctors, though of never so great esteem and
repute amongst their own men, be not fathered on that whole Church wherein such
men live, as the common and generally received Doctrine of them all. For what
can be imagined more unequal, than that one man's crime, or commendation,
should be imputed to all? and what by him has been spoken well or ill, should
be rewarded or punished in others* who were so far from deserving any such
matter, as that many times such things are fastened on them as they never so
much as once heard of from others, or once thought thereupon themselves. The
general Doctrine of each several Church is laid down and comprised in
public Confessions, several for each side; Their's (namely the Doctrine of
the Lutheran party) in the Augustane Confession (as they term it;) that of the
other side, in many several Confessions, diversely expressed according to the
diversity of Countries and Kingdoms. From these are we to judge and esteem
what is held and maintained by both: seeing they do all profess themselves to
assent and adhere to these, and that they will live and dye in this Faith. But
(for ought I know) neither do they so generally approve the writings of
Brentius or Chemnitius, nor do these so far magni^ie Piscator or Beza, as if
they would that whatsoever is affirmed by those men, should be admitted and
acknowledged as the common and necessary Faith of all Christians. Nay so far
are they both of them from this folly, that they themselves freely reprove and
censure their own men, and mark out many passages in their writings, as
different from the common and received Doctrine of their Church. Whence it
fallows, that the sayings of such men, whosoever they be, are unjustly, and
(to speak the most favorably of it) preposterously fatherd on the whole
Church in which they lived. And yet notwithstanding, what else are all those
Tenants with which Protestant Divines cast one another in the teeth, with which
they up braid one another as if they were the public and general faults of
the two adverse parts, and for which they so labor to draw one another into
envy and contempt? I say, what else are they but the private Positions of some
particular Doctors on both sides, vented many times either in choler and
passion, or out of a vehement zeal to maintain their Cause, when they were
hard pressed and put to it either with the difficulty of the things themselves,
or the subtilty of an acute adversary; and so, spoke rather out of necessity
than judgment and premeditation. For truly so sound and untainted are the
public Confessions of our Churches on each side, that there is very little and
hardly any thing which either of them can find wanting in the other's
Confession. Our Divines in Germany do commend the Augustane Confession; and no
doubt but our Brethren the Lutherans will in like manner approve of ours, for
the far greater part of it, would they but once be pleased to read it over
impartially without passion and prejudice. Certainly neither in that Confession
of theirs shall any man meet with that Vbiquity of Christ's body, which we
condemn in Lutheranisme; nor in this of ours, that Stoicall Fate so much
objected against us.

But a second fault there is, very frequent amongst men of both sides, and
almost hereditary, which ought (as we conceive) with all care and diligence to
be shunned and avoided in this business. namely, that they who maintain any
Position, should not be thought to hold whatsoever seems to us to follow
thereupon by the rules of disputation. For it often falls out, that he who
hold's a Principle from which such a Conclusion is inferred, may
notwithstanding be utterly ignorant of that which is in ferred from his
Principle. For instance, he that first observed the Loadstone to point toward
the North Pole, did not forth with perceive all the several experiments that
have been afterward made from thence for the use and benefit of Navigation:
for Conclusions lie hid and buried in their Principles, nor are they deduced
thence without some pains and study. He therefore who hold's some Principle,
and withal does either not heed and regard it; or else considers it, but with
an Intellect which is either dull or prepossessed with anger or affection or
some other passion, this man, from that Principle of his which he
understand's, does not straightway understand whatsoever may be known and
concluded from it. Thus they who live in the Papacy, having their minds
bewitched (that I may so speak) with the authority of their Leaders, though
they grant with us that the sins of men are most fully expiated by that
sacrifice offered up by Christ on the Cross, yet can they not hence conclude
(although it evidently follow hereupon) that their Sacrifice of the Altar is
vain and superfluous. Now as he who understand's some one Truth, is sometimes
ignorant of other Trueths which are consequent thereupon: so likewise he who
has some erroneous Opinion, must not therefore be thought to hold and
maintain all the absurdities that may be inferred from it: for there is the
same account to be made of consequences either way. Thus Tertullian of old,
and many of the ancient Fathers, taught that the humane soul is derived from
the Father to the Son by way of propagation; but that it is mortal, which
follows upon the former, this they were so far from granting, that they did
always expressly deny it. As therefore we do not say that the Papists do
therefore deny their Sacrifice of the Altar, because they grant (as we do) the
perfection and sufficiency of that Sacrifice which was offered up by Christ on
the cross, though in all good consequence this overthrowes that sacrifice of
theirs: so neither do we think that Tertullian, and others of the same Opinion
touching the original of man's soul, ought to be charged for holding the
Soul to be mortal, because this latter error seeme's to be deducible from
the former.

Now then how extreme faulty in this kind Divines of both sides have been,
who is there that see's not? For we commonly charge our Brethren (the
Lutherans) with Eutychianisme, (though they in the mean time deny and
disclaim it,) because this error, as we think, follows upon their Doctrine
concerning the Lord's supper* they again on the other side, stick not to
charge us with I know not what monstrous Opinions, as if we made God the
author of all sin and wickedness, (assertions which we justly abhor and
tremble at, because they persuade themselves that this may be gathered from our
Doctrine about God's Praedestination and Providence. We will not here dispute
whether these things be rightly inferred yea or no from our several Tenants
and Opinions on both sides: it suffices, that whatsoever they be, whether
justly or unjustly pined upon our Opinions, they are denied by us both: nor can
we ever be induced by any arguments whatsoever, to grant that they are
agreeable and consonant to our Faith. For so long as this is done (as indeed it
is,) it is manifest from what hitherto has been delivered, that neither can
they without injustice and calumniation be charged with Eutychianisme, nor we
with those monstrous and damnable Opinions, although both these errors could
by true and solid consequence be concluded from our several Positions, (which
yet neither side will ever confess for their own part.)

Seeing therefore that all or most of those Doctrines which the one side taxes
in the other as pernicious and such as cannot consist with Salvation, are but
either the private Opinions of some particular men or else but Corollaries and
conclusions violently wrested by force of argument out of their several
Opinions, would but men (as in reason they ought) forbear to father any thing
on either side save only that which their whole Churches expressly own and
profess for their received Opinions, it would be very easy to maintain that
all the Dispute and Controversy which is in agitation betwixt them, is such as
may be tolerated, and that there is not any thing contained in the Faith and
Doctrine of either side which overthrowe's Salvation.

Now were but this once agreed upon and believed on both sides, there would
remain little or no difficulty in this whole business wherein worthy men do
at this present employ themselves, namely of settling Peace and Unity amongst
our Churches. For seeing there are but two ways possible of being reconciled;
either, that one side shall renounce their private Opinions, and come over to
the other, or else, that both sides shall join together, retaining their
several Opinions, and by a mutual condescending shall each of them tolerate
that which they dislike in the other's Doctrine, especially if it be such as
cannot be altered without peril and damage to a whole Church; the former of
these two ways (as we conceive) is not now to be stood upon, whereof trial
has been heretofore made not only without success but with much danger and
harm, as appears sufficiently from those many Disputations and Conferences
which have been held betwixt both sides during this whole Age; whereby hatred
and and enmity has been engendered rather than extinguished, and the number of
Controversies rather increased than diminished. We must therefore betake our
selves to that other way of being reconciled, and in it must we employ all our
pains and cares and studies, as being indeed both the onlyeasie and lawful
way, yea and necessary too in our judgment. And that we may at length attain
unto this, it would not be amiss (as we conceive) to proceed after this manner
and method; first, we must endeavor that a kind of Truce and Cessation from
our st^ifes and contentions may be agreed upon and enjoined the Divines of both
sides, and that they be stirred up and exhorted to take this whole business
into consideration: this being obtained, in the next place special diligence
must be used, that after a meek, freindly, and most persuasive manner it be
made appear to all, that we are not at variance about any fundamental Point
of Christian Religion, or such wherein men may not safely be of either Opinion
without hazarding their salvation: and here men must be very careful that they
refrain from all intricate Questions, and trifling Disputes, (such wherein the
Schoolmen have spent so much pains, mincing and mangling every thing into I
know not how many pieces, and then handling every piece severally,) which serve
for no other end save only to torture and torment men's minds, but no way make
for edification. Would but God be pleased so far to prosper these endeavors
as that thus much may be once brought to pass, we make no doubt but every man
would then readily wish for this much-desired Communion, which none ever
shunned or refused but out of a kind of Religion and Conscience, conceiving it
unlawful to entertain a Communion with any that are not of the same belief
and Opinion with themselves: so soon as men on both sides shall be wrought off
from this superstitious conceit, they will gladly run and rush (as it were)
into one another arms and embraces. For it cannot be imagined that there is
any man, either of the one side or the other, so stupid and void of all reason
and and Religion, but knows how foul and scandalous a thing, how hurtful to
both sides, how dangerous and pernicious to the whole Christian world this
Schism is which has hitherto divided and distracted us; on the other side,
how sweet, how beneficial, both to our selves and all others, Unity and Peace
would be, so it might be had without loss of Faith and Salvation. And truly
the way to setle this Unity (were we but once come to that) is plain and
easy. For seeing we do both of us (by God's grace) equally acknowledge and
believe the Gospel of our Lord Jesus Christ penned by his Disciples; and
seeing we confess, that whatsoever is of necessity for salvation to be
believed or done by us, it is all clearly and plainly laid down in this
Gospel, what hinder's why we may not jointly confirm and ratify those
Articles wherein we both agree? and for those other Points about which we
differ, we may express them in such words and phrases as the sacred
Scriptures afford us, and not suffer our men to enquire any further, or contest
about the^. For if it be true which we both confess, that all those heavenly
mysteries which must necessarily be known by us, are clearly revealed in
God's word, doubtless then we may content our selves with so much as the
Scripture has delivered, and we may safely forgo all other Points wherein the
Scripture is silent. Let therefore all the Heads of matters in Dispute amongst
us be laid down and expressed in a certain and set Form, such as may give
satisfaction to both parties, made up wholly (if it be possible) of
Scripturewords: and let no man require from his Brother any more besides it: if
any man have attained to a further degree of knowledge, let him keep his
knowledge to himself; and let him not despise the weakness and simplicity of
others who have not made so great a progress in knowledge as himself. As for
Rites and Ceremonies wherein the form of divine worship and the Church's
Discipline are contained, we conceive it fit that every Church should be left
to her own judgment and liberty herein, and that no innovation be made about
such matters.

Hereafter, if it shall please God, when time shall have confirmed and
strengthened this Union, there may be compiled, by the joint consent and advice
of all, a common Liturgy; which would be both a token and bond of Peace. For
the present, we shall think our pains well bestowed, if at this first attempt
we can prevail with both sides to tolerate mutually out of Christian Charity
such differences of Opinion as are betwixt us either in Doctrine or Discipline
(which truly are but small, and altogether unworthy to occasion such a Rupture
and Breach betwixt us,) and so at length to acknowledge one another to be (as
indeed we are) Brethren in the Lord.

Thus much we thought good to speak in breife touching this matter, that our
reverend Brethren, who are well affected to the public Peace, may understand
how ready and willing we are to concur with them in this pious and Christian
work. And though our mean abilities and the present state and condition of
our affairs be such, as that we cannot perform such service in it as is meet
and requisite, yet shall our earnest prayers always accompany the labors and
endeavors of those reverend men who are or shall be employed therein: and we
shall account that day most happy, wherein we shall behold Brethren (having
buried all strifes and contentions) join hands and hearts, and dwell together
in the same Jerusalem; by this fast and firm Communion, anticipating (as it
were) and foreacting here upon earth that everlasting Unity and Concord which
we shall hereafter enjoy in Heaven. AMEN.



FINIS.

