The first part of the last WILL and TESTAMENT OF PHILIP Earl of Pembrooke and
Montgomery, Lord of Saint Quintin, etc.

NOW KNIGHT of BERK-SHIRE, Dictated by his own mouth, and took by Mr. Michael
Oldsworth sometime his Lds Secretary, and faithfully engrossed; together with
all his Lds. penitent considerations, (delivered in most patheticall
expressions) upon every particular of his Goods, Catttels, Chattels, moveable
and inmoveable, that are designed in Legacy to sundry particular persons of
most eminent and remarkable quality.

The second part to the same tune, will speedily be exhibited to public view,
as soon as it can be possibly Transcribed; By his Lds most Devoted Honor.

Mercurius Elencticus.

Printed in the Year, 1649.

To the Reader.
Reader,
MY Lord desiring to discover his Charitable and zealous intentions to the
world, (more for president then ostentation) and at his last gasp resolving to
breath forth some pithy sentences, (fit to be committed to posterity instead of
proverbs) that might speak him to eternity, as full of wisdom as worthiness
and honor, I here tender thee (by his Lordships appointment) the First part of
his last Will and Testament; pray make much of this, till the rest is delivered
to thee, under his own Hand and Seal.

In the mean time, weigh but each word with heed,
You Will think his Lordship means to dye indeed;
For by these gifts, I find he trusts to merit
All the heaven that e're's capacity'le inherit;
Nay in pure love, he is resolved to show
The Parliament the way they all must go:
If he live longer, 'twill but vex the Devil
That such a fool should outwork him in evil.
Nay if he lives but to review this Will,
The kindness on it his very heart will kill:
I hope his Elegy and Epitaph
After the second part on's Will, shall make you laugh.
And when we know his qualities, and riches,
I Will gage my braine-pan you will be-pisse your Breeches.
The first part of the last WILL and TESTAMENT OF PHILIP Earl of Pembrook and
Montgomery, etc.
I Philip Herbert of the Tilte-yard, in the County of Saint James's Park,
lying very sick and weak. Here Mr. Oldsworth stopped him,


My Lord quoth he, you should have begun in the Name of God.


Damme you Rogue, why do you Interupt me? is it not too late to begin with him
now? I have not spoke with him never since I used to sing Psalms in the Kings
Chapel, some eight years ago, and do think he has not other things to
think on besides my business, I never meddled with his Will, and why should he
have any hand in mine; Mr. Speaker knows, I have more mind to make him my
Executor (or the Devil take me else) I promised him so when he got me into the
House of Commons; and besides, Mr. Speaker has reason to love me better then
he, because he knows me better; the Parliament would count me a Cockscomb to
forsake them at last cast, and give my Means to one that I shall never see for
ought I know: Mihill I thought the had had more wit then to persuade me to
any thing but what I am bound to by Act of Parliament, and I am sure there is
never a such a word in any of them by my consent, or ever shall be; therefore
pray hold your tongue and let me speak my own purpose, and do you write it
down, right or wrong; when you lie a dying (as I do) if you will teach me to
Write, I Will do your will to your mind.

But yet in perfect health and memory do make and (pox confound these hard
words) prostitute this my last Will and Testament, and hereby do invoke and
make void all other Gifts, (the Devil a one I remember) Grants, Conveyances
(and mine were never cleanly ones, for when I jugled my self out of one House
intoth' the other, all the Town took notice of my shuffling under board) Wills
and Testaments whatsoever.


Oldsw ^^^me^, my Lord, you must say Former Wills.


^emb. Why did I ever lie a dying a^^^e you fool you? will not one Will serve
turn; you wooed have me hanged for making a new Letanie of repealed wills and
Testaments; wooed ye?


Imprimis, I give and bequeath my best pack of dogs --


Oldsw. My Lord, do you remember what to do with your soul and body first?


Pemb. Vengeance dam ye for a confounded Cur, I could find in my heart to dash
a pispot in your ugly face; so ye'd serve me an I were at prayers, but I Will see
ye hanged before I Will try ye: Can I tell who shall have my body or soul either?
Have I been Master of my self e're since I was born? Did not I pawn my soul and
salvation too, long since to the King (though I never hoped to redeem it) when
I was made his turn key? And did not the Parliament get it out on's cluches
into their paws, e're they would make me their Potter to carry Packets of
Propositions to, and again? They may do what they will with it; for my part, I
never made much use on it, because I never knew well what it was: For my body, I
mean to keep it my self as long as I can, I Will give every thing else away to
the Devil himself, rather then part with my Carcass; I Am sure my
Confectionarie's Bill the other day came to 100 l. and I Would fain fatten my
kidneys with those sweet meats before I die, for fear they grow moldy: I have
no mind to feed upon gravel yet; an' my conscience the pigmies do, and that
makes them such dwarfs: I Would rather go to hell, or purgatory, where there is room
enough for a coach and six horses to turn, then be mewed up under ground, where
a man cannot swing and Cat; but prithee hold thy tongue, and let us mind our
business, for I shall not die in quiet, til I see my dogs provided for.

My best pack of dogs to Oliver Cromwell, for he keeps blood hounds so well
fleshed and fierce, they are able to tear out the Devils throat: I wonder what
he feeds with them, now ox livers are so dear.

Item, I bequeath two couple of my best spaniels to my Lord of Denbigh, for
he will stand gazing like a moap'd Buzzard, and gape wide enough for a Hawk to
shit in's mouth, whilst a Partridge is upon replinie: stoo bird, stoo bird, O
it is gallant game; I wonder whether there be any Haws in Hell; an' I thought
there were not, I Would send half a score thither a mewing by Tom my Faulkner
against I come, I shall never endure to be idle there.


Oldsm. You left at There, my Lord.


There rogue, what shall I do without thee there? Thou must needs make me a
speech to carry IN my pocket, I Will con't by the way; they say the Devil's a
good Scholar, he hope Harry Martin to answer the Scots papers, and make the
Declaration of Non-Addresses to His Majesty: They say his Secretary penned
that pithy Oration that Bradshaw made before the sentence: Hanged, I shall
never come off, without thou promptst me, he will dash me out a countenance,
because he speaks Latin; just as he does the poor rogues that cannot read
their neck-verse before my Lord Judge: -- Confound me, if he angers me too
much, I Will swear his house about's ears, if I can but get my Lord Generals
pass to run back again; if he denies that, I Would best take a file of musketeers
we' me, and bring him before the Council of W^^, to answer the contempt: But
come, dispatch Mihil, prithee write on, thou ^rt so tedious, I doubt I shall
not get this Will engrossed time enough to take a Copy out we' me; for I mean
to sue my Executers there for non performance, if I can entertain Mr Chute, or
Mr Whitlock, for my Council, and Sergeant Wild shall have the hearing of the
cause; he will be sure to hang 'um of my conscience, 'un he take 'um tardy there,
because it is a bigger Court of Justice then ours in Westminster Hall.

Item, I give Badger, my best stone horse (plague take him, for he threw me two
damnable squelshes one Saint George's day, I never daw'd it since) to Colonel
Henry Martin; he has horsed me above a 100 coach-mares in's time; he has some
pith in's back still, you may see by his frothing and blundring, when sees a
handsome Beast; he leaps nimbly still, but he comes off basely, because of an old
wrinch he got with straining too hard in jumping upon a great Flanders jade,
too full buttock'd for him, and upon a bankside too.

Item, I give and bequeath my Tenor, my Base, and my Treble, and all my Horns,
to my wel-beloved Son and Heir, Philip Lord Herbert; his Wife can teach him to
wind them, or the pox take her, for the French man has been her Tutor long
enough; I loved the music well, but I could never endure to were 'um, they made
me look so like a sow-gelder.

Item, I give and bequeath my best lacing boots to Mr Speaker (rot on 'um, I
never wore 'um, but men thought I had got the gout for the spavin; they will never
suspect him, because he limps of the toe side like a Craw-fish.

Item, I give and bequeath my rich Sedan -- woons, I Would fain be rid on it,
because they carried the King to trial in it; I never sat in it since, but I
was ready to beshit my self for fear; an' I could but think of any body the
Devil ows a spite to, to betray him for a Traitor, he should have it; 't may be
my Lord Say will thank me for it: Set him down in it, for he loves to take; ease
well.

Item, I give and bequeath my new trusse of points -- heart, the rogues took me
for a morris-dancer in a morning before I was trussed, when they came to cross
capers, and dance attendance before my honorable Worship: I Would best give them
to Mr Seldom to keep's codpice close; he will wear 'um for antic fashion sake;
he shall have Tib, my gray mare too; the Countess of Kent knows he will stride
an old gal'd jade so gently, that she will never wince at it; I could find I my
heart to give him her crupper too, for she casts forward damnably: Set him down
for a mounter.

Item, I give and bequeath my great gaudy Coach (wood't had been burned for me,
when I set foot in it; I Will take my death on it, I thought the Devil had been
in it, and his dam too, when I and my Lady Crompton rid in it last, it rumbled
our rotten bones together like dice in a juggling box; dam 'um 'twas as bad as
are of these confounded Strapadoes; pox on it, an' I had never hunted baudy
houses, I might have rid honestly up Holborn hill without any danger, but it
made me tremble like a rogue as I was, to think on it, how the Traitors that
ride that way are mangled, when they came at Tyburn; and I was never so fraid
but my quarters wooed have been shoke off before I came to Hide Park corner;
I Would best giv't) to my Lord Gray of Groby; for he is fain to make use of a
Hackney still to save charges, when is Lady rides a ranting, let him take it with
a pox to him, for I have enough on it, more then e're I shall well claw of.

Item, I give and bequeath my great gilt Bible; Fool-scratch 'um, the puppies
took me for a Puritan; and -- judge me, may I nere stir if I had not rather
hear Bulstrode Whitlocks Declarations read 100 times, then one of Paul Knels
Sermon of execration against Rebels, because I sumbled over the leaves, as if I
meant to find the Text, though I nere knew a figure from a frying pan; I could
stare Caryl in the face upon a Fast day (like an Owl as I was) til the Gander
was ready to be cackle himself for fear I should put him out on's parrating:
It Is a terrible villain sometimes, for he will make a Church roar of damnation as
bad as a Popes Bull, he will so be labor a poor innocent cushion, as if he meant
to beat the brains out about's ears, as he rears up against the pillar -- yet
sometime he will give's a great deal of comfort, when he has terrified us a
matter of two hours together with a thundering story of Cromwell's plaguey
deliverances, and murdered our memories with his morter-peece of destruction to
Monarchy; then he begins to bleat peaceably toward dinner time; O it is a
cunning colt, he knows how to kick us out of good manners, and make's whihy
again to hear him claw into conceit with our own mischiefs; I had best give him
this Bible, he will preach nothing but Acts of Parliament, and Judge Advocate
Orders out on it, to strengthen the hearts of the courageous Council of War,
that they may confidently condemn the rogues without the least scruple of
scurvy conscience: Set him down for a Book-banger.

Item, I give and bequeath my best Cloak and George; vengeance of all ill
luck: and wear't any longer, the blood thirsty will go nigh to take me for a
Tyrant (as fierce a one as ere stood in Smithfield pens) and fix me for a
blazing star in the fore head of the Firmament for the world to wonder at, how
the Devil I came there against my will; for they knew I nere loved climbing (a
rope fetch me if ere I did, so I did not) if I had, I had nere been chosen
Knight of Barkshire by some twenty of my vainglorious Tenants and Servants,
that thirsted to do their Lord an honor; on my conscience it is dangerous to be
Knighted too by these flashing blades, for fear a man's head should fall into's
codpice; I could nere endure to see a sword drawn, since I was beaten with my
own hilts by a Butchers boy crossing the kennel, because I, like a great Calf,
must needs call him tallowbeard, though his face was as bald as my own pate: an
I though they would not hang thee in it for a counterfeit, thou should have
my Ribbon and George, 'twas my Porters arms, or I had nere been known to sit
at the receipt of custom in the Parliament House, and carry tickets to and fro
between party and party; a louse in the pot, Mihil, is better then no flesh; a
Porters place in the Custom House will be good preferment for an old Parliament
man, in the reign of a new Representative: I always liked the conceit of the
Emblem, more then the honor on it (for that never fitted my humor) it looks
fiercely, but when ye come to touch it, it is as tame as a dotterill: And besides
ye know, when I am on horsback, I oose as little motion as may be; on my
conscience they will go nigh to take it for my Lord Generals picture, if thou
layest it on a bow knot in thy bosom; for he is a man of a meek temper, or else
he would never let Cromwell rule the roast, while he turns the spit, and you know
your Cooks are fiery fellows. I Will give my Cloak to Sir Henry Vane, for 'twill
cover more knavery then foolery; and in this time of turning things arse
upwards, the badges of honor may well become distinguishing Characters of
infamy, the star will illustrate all his contrivances; we had best leave off
for this bout, for too much of one thing is good for nothing; I Am out of
breath now, but I Will fall to it again too morrow, and give um all enough before
I have done with them, that they may pray for me, while I swear um all out of
hell.


FINIS.

