THE PETITION AND DECLARATION OF Sir PHILOM ONEAL KNIGHT, General of Ireland,
to the High Court of Parliament now assembled in England, and the Lords and
Nobility Commanders of the Army of the Catholics of Ireland.

Averred by Tho. Etherington Clerk.

The Names of the Rebels.
Oneal, Ormund, Antrim, Mountgarret, Neterfield, Dillon, etc.
LONDON.

Printed for W. Neal, 1641.

THE PETITION OF THE Rebels of Ireland, to the High Court of Parliament, now
assembled in England.
Declares,
TO this Honorable and High Court that there has been several Petitions
formerly delivered to the Lords of the Council in this Kingdom; wherein our
grievances and oppressions have bin at large ser forth, our great desire
expressed by the same for the Relief of our sufferings, and our humble demands
for tolleration in our Religion and Liberty in the exercise thereof, and the
confirmation of our ancient Laws and Privileges, by former Acts of
Parliaments Enacted and granted to us, in the Reigns of former Kings and queens
of England. But the same Petitions have bin rejected, and no favor showed to
us, but all security that possible could, in execution of the Laws of latter
times made against those of the Roman Catholic Religion; which enforced our
taking up Arms for the defense of the same. There has likewise bin humble
Remonstrances and Declarations, as well presented to your Lordships, as
published publicly in this Kingdom; but the same has bin also disregarded,
and rejected, not so much as obtainiug any answer thereto* as may any way give
us hopes of the future enjoyment of our Religion, Laws, and Liberties; by
which, being brought to despair of any relief of our Grievances, and many
Oppressions wherewith we have hitherto bin overburthened; Yet notwithstanding
our Requests could not be harkned unto, but in both Kingdoms, and by both
Counsels repulsed: that we might clear our selves of obstinate refusal, to use
and lay all lawful and dutiful means, that may be to the King and His
Parliaments, for the obtaining our just desires. Even to the uttermost, we are
again ^^^^^ced in the behalf of our selves, and (...) of the Roman Catholic
Religion, to present this humble Declaration, and Petition, to your Lordships,
and the House of Commons: In which we declare.

1. That whereas they have since the time of their taking up Arms, bin by
diverse false Papers and Pamphlets, declared to have used inhumane and savage
Cruelties, and most bloody Massacres, against the persons of such whom they
have overcome in skirmishes, that have opposed and endeavored to destroy not
only our religion, but lives and fortunes, which by the Laws of God, of Reason,
and Nature, we are bound to maintain and uphold, by which we have bin make
infamous to all men, even in foreign nations, for which we are much grieved?
We therefore to clear our selves of this scandal and defamation, say, and
protest, that since our taking up arms, we have not used any cruelty to the
adverse Party; otherwise then has happened to fall by the sword in the Battle,
of which we have tasted, or if we have taken prisoners, we have preserved and
kept them with respect, as in war used; till we have seen the usage of our men
taken by the other Party, and even as they have bin dealt withal, so have we;
which we conceive to be but just and congruent to the Law of Arms: but for
dismembring, disjoynting, ripping up women with child, and slaying of Infants,
we are innocent, concerning the same as to our selves, and if any of the ruder
sort of soldiers have bin guilty of the same, when we were acquainted
therewith, we severely punished them; as for example; one Drahone for ravishing
a woman with child, and after ripping her up, was contented to be hanged in
chains for his vile fact; which was accordingly performed, and others have bin
punished in the like kind.

2. That by Order from the Parliament all Declarations, Papers, Writings, or
Pamphlets, whereby we are called Rebels, and Traitors to our King and Country,
may be restrained, and called in; and whereby we are scandalized and disgraced,
and maliciously and falsely abused.

3. That our desires are not to withdraw our selves from the subjection of our
lawful King, or to any Laws by his Majesty and Parliament, made for good
Government, that destroys not our Religion, Laws, and Liberties, for the
exercising of the same, according to the Ordinances of the Roman Catholic
Church, but only to vindicate the same, to the loss of our lives and fortunes.

4. That we are ready and willing to submit our selves to His Majesty, upon any
lawful, honorable, and reasonable conditions. But no conditions being
propounded by his Parliament, that may be any ways safe for us to yield unto,
And perceiving the distractions and divisions between the King and His
Parliament; whereby they co^^^^ together not so well as is desired, we are
unresolved what to do in any way of submission, till there be a Concurrence and
Agreement between King and People in the mean time, we must be enforced to do
what we can to preserve our selves and Estates*

5. And lastly, that the Parliament would be pleased to admit and appoint a
meeting between the Lords and Nobility of our Army, and the Lords Commanders on
the English Army; whereat Conditions of Truce, and Cessation of Arms between
both may be offered and concluded for a certain time, which shall be thought
convenient to setle the present and particular div^sions between the King and
His Parliament: and in the mean time, to consider of Articles and Propositions
whereby a final and perpetual pacification may be made and confirmed by the
States of both Kingdoms.

These our desires, and humble Requests, we pray may be taken into the
consideration of the High Court of Parliament with all expedition, and our
answer of the same returned, by which we may know what to trust to,

And we shall pray, etc Oneal, Ormund, Antrim. Mountgarret, Neterfield, Delon,
etc.

FINIS.

