THE RACE SET BEFORE US, Showing the Necessity laid upon Gospel-Believers, to
run with diligence through all Gospel-Duties.

A SERMON Preached in London, May 11. 1665. AT MERCERS-CHAPPEL, Unto that most
Eminent Company, THE Company of the Mercers.

Incipere multorum est, perseverare perpaucorum.

Bernard. By Giles Oldisworth, Master of Arts, and Rector of Burton on the
Hill, in Gloucester-shire.

Oxford, Printed by A: and L: Lichfield, Printers to the University. 1666.

To the Right Reverend Father in God, My singular good Lord, HERBERT, By Divine
Providence, Lord Bishop of HEREFORD.
My Lord,
THE more careless present times are, the more vigilant your Lordship is, to
make and keep people zealous of good works: The same was mine endeavor in this
following argument; which when I pressed, I sought, not applause, but souls:
nor do I now publish it, to have it praised, but practiced.

Mine easy style and familiar method (I hope) none will condemn; since
plainness is the excellency of every race, but much more of this, for this is
spiritual.

The more spiritual our race here set before us is, the less it despaireth of
your good Lordships implored Patronage: In very truth, there is no small
affinity between our Apostles divine precept, and your Lordships Apostolical
pattern; in as much as your Lordship is made unto us a daily example how so to
run that we may obtain.

For instance: Goodly are those heritages, great are those revenues, pleasant
are those mansions, ancient are those honors which the bounty of God has
derived unto your Lordship; but although all these ennoble your quality, they
no whit (1) entangle your goodness: So does your Lordship overruled Temporal
Blessings, that they do only administer unto your Lordships spiritual Dignities
and Duties; in them and by them serveing the Church and the glory of Christ
Jesus; for whose sake your Lordship most professedly advances as well
godliness as excellent gifts, and as well holiness as learning.

This is one principal cause why, with such obsequious confidence, I am bold to
dedicate unto your Lordship not only this mean Sermon, but it is undeserving
Author; who cease not to pray for increase of sanctified blessings, both
upon your Lordship, and upon your Lordships Family: for this becomes; this
delights

From my Study, Nov. 7. 1665. Your good Lordships most obliged Servant, and
most devoted Chaplain, Giles Oldisworth.

Perlegi hanc Concionem cui Titulus (The Race set before us) in qua nihil
reperio, quo minus summa cum utilitate imprimatur

ROB. SAY, S. Th. D. Vice-Can. Oxon.

THE RACE SET BEFORE US, Showing, The Necessity lay d upon Gospel-Believers, to
run with diligence throrow all Gospel-Duties.
1 Cor. 9.24. So run that ye may obtain.


COrinth was a city of Greece; the Grecians were a people hostile and Warlike;
in fight, (...) he made the best Warrior who was, 2 Samuel 2.18.
like Asahel, swiftest of foot; to encourage a swiftness of foot, at set
Places, at set Times, were ordained, were instituted, solemn raceings; crowns
of baies, or some other prizes, were publicly produced; for which run the race
who so would, run swiftest who so could; he, and he only, who was the speediest
runner, wore the baies and won the prize: Unto these solemnities S. Paul here
alludeth,

verse. 24. I appeal from my practices unto your own customs, I report myself
unto your Olympic games, unto your Isthmian races (...). Do ye not see, that
they who are running a race, do indeed run all, but one only receives the
prize? So run that ye may obtain.

ready writer thus appar relleth his Argument with similitudes borrowed from
Isthmian races, Note (I pray you) as well his language as his exhortation; The
sense, the meaning, of his exhortation urges, Know ye not, that many are
called, but few are chosen? So obey the Gospel that ye may, with fear and
trembling, work out your salvation. This (you see) is our Authors sense and
meaning; but, while to express this his meaning, this Master of Eloquence
fetches about forms of speech from Persons running in races, his phrase
imports more than his precept. wherefore

how to win on men's capacities: Perceive. ye not, that there is no better way
to silence gainsayers, than by assaulting them with matters from within their
own knowledge? Oh, convince the disputer of this World by things so evident,
that there-unto he him-self must be forced to allow his assent: Sirs, As people
are not easily estranged from their old acquaintances, so they are soon
reconciled unto what they know; Things already known, (if once they are
mentioned) as they leave a just impression upon the memory, so they set an edg
upon the understanding; A word thus spoken how good is it? 1 Cor. 13.1. If I
want charity I become as sounding brass; Full well raises the Holy Ghost unto
these Corinthians a comparison from brass, since no one City was so famous for
Brass as was this City of Gorinth; Fitly also does he here in my Text speak
unto them of running, since these Corinthians excelled in the races at Isthmus.
(This is, then, the first instruction.) If ye would be able to convince others,
be able to allude unto instances within their own knowledge.

relates unto histories of former times, even unto sports and customs
anciently used amongst the Graecians of old; Observe secondly, how ill-advis'd
all such persons are, who cry down humane learning for either needless, or
worse: True, 2 Timothy 3.15, God's written word is able to make us wise unto
salvation; mean while it seems good unto the same blessed Spirit which
endited it, that humane learning should make us wise in this written word; I
say, If we would find the Holy Scriptures able to make us wise unto salvation;
either we must contemn the good gifts of Gods good Spirit, else we must
acknowledge humane learning to be that which makes us wise in these
Scriptures. But, contra rationem nemo sobrius, as for those of our times who
appear such haters of knowledge, S. Aug: de Trir.
their folly is already manifested unto all men; so manifested that (I trust)
they them-selves shall proceed no farther: Nor will I; Wherefore, in the third
place,

profitable a use of these races whereunto he here refers us, Observe thirdly,
To the pure all things are pure: A holy mind can spiritualize secular
transactions; The whole creation is, or at least ought to be, every whit as
serviceable to the inward, as unto the outward, man; There is a kind of a
religious chimestrie in a devout soul; Genesis 24.63. Send Isaac into the field,
and he will meditate; Once let the Greeks solemnize raceings, and S. Paul will
give them the starting word "So run that ye may obtain.

But (distillatio favi) that which, without any the least straining, most
naturally droppeth from my whole Text, is this twofold Doctrine.

1. Doctrine: The whole duty of Man resembles a race. 2. Doctrine: We should all
of us more earnestly strive to run through our whole duty, then they strive who
run a race.
That the whole duty of Man resembles a race, I shall endeavor to illustrate,
1. From the Holy Ghosts usual way of speaking; and so infinitely wise is the
Holy Ghost, shape his Discourse. 2. From his own descants upon this his own
dialect; and of all Expositors which, either may, or can, be consulted, he is
ever the best Interpreter of himself. 3. From the Spirit and Life of this
metaphorical Precept, " So run that ye may obtain; and when I have represented
this, you will yet more perfectly understand my Text.


viz: from the phrase it self. Ca^tic. 1.4.
That the whole duty of Man resembles a race, will appear, first, from the
Holy Ghosts usual way of speaking; In the Old Testament, Draw me (by thy good
Spirit) we will run after thee (in thy ways;) When thou have enlarged my heart,
Psalm. 119.32.
I will run the way of thy Commandments: In the New Testament, this Penman (to
name none else) can scarcely point at our Gospel-duties and escape this
metaphor: He might have spoken his mind to the Philippians, by saying, Phil.
2.16.
I have not labored in vain; nevertheless, he prefixeth, I have not run in
vain: Gal. 2.2.
To the Galathians he might have said, Lest I should or had failed of my
purpose; but he phraseth it, Lest I should or had run in vain: And instead of
saying, Gal. 5.7.
Ye did sincerely obey the Gospel, he tells them, Ye did run well: Neither
does he vary his language to the Romans, when he avoucheth, Romans 9.16.
It is not of him that wills (not of him that endeavoreth) nor of him that
runs (of him that performs) but of God who shows mercy both unto him
that wills, and unto him that runs too. Sirs, Think not these, or other
like instances, wide and too too general; you will find them all pertinent and
home to our purpose, when at length ye consider how (in all these expressions)
St. Paul ever intimates a race set before us: yea, (as if he there did it once
for all,) Heb. 12.1, he most plainly so expresses himself.

viz. From what the Holy Ghost enlarges upon this phrase.
If the phrase suffice not to evidence, that the whole duty of Man is a race set
before him; yet the Holy ghosts large descants upon this phrase will
sufficiently prove it, Heb. 12.1. where St. Paul advises, Heb. 10.36.
Let us run the race set before us, there see how he descanteth upon this
advice: Like a partner in the betts, he instructs, Let us lay aside every
weight (for Sin is burthensom;) and (since we have need of patience if ever we
will endure to the end) he adds, Let us run with patience; Gal, 6.9.
If we would obtain the prize for which we run, though we be faint, though we
be weary, hold on we must; persist we must, weary of well running we must not
be; therefore he exhorts, Let us run with patience: Again, one running a Race
does cloth himself as little, and load himself as light, as, saving the
Articles, he may; accordingly St. Paul counsels, Let us lay aside every sin,
every weight; Phil. ^. 13.14
And striving, if by any means, he might attain unto the resurrection of the
dead: he affirms, This one thing I do, forgetting those things which are
behind, and reaching forth unto those before, I press toward the mark. Beloved,
so palpably would he have us run over our whole duty, as over a Race set before
us; that he speaks just, (just for all the world) like one in the heat of his
course: Pectora nostra duas non admittentia curass therefore, Ovid.
says he, Hoc ago, This Gospel-conversation I ply, work out my salvation I do,
and for this only I work; forgetting (the mileposts already bypast) the
Graces already attained, and reaching forth unto (that part of the Race yet
before me) the Virtues not yet perfected; I press forward (might and main)
toward the mark for the prize. Brethren, such a continued exercise, such a
life, is, beyond all seruple, a Race; a Race, in every respect.

viz. from the present Text.
This is yet more plain from the spirit and life of this precept " So run that
ye may obtain; the spirit and life of which words, is easy to him that
understands; so easy, that it requires more of your remembrance than of
mine interpretation: all of you will soon conceive their full intent and
purpose, if you call to mind,

1. What race that is which is here set before us,

2. What it is, to run this race,

3. What that is, which is, by running, to be obtained,

4. What it is, so to run that we may obtain.

1. Ye know the race here set before us, is, not simply life, (for, although we
sit still, the days of our pilgrimage still run on;) I say, the race here set
before us is, not simply life, but liveing; not living, but leading a life; it
is our demenour during this life: once for all, 2 Cor. 1.12.
it is our conversation in this world.

2. Our running of this race, is the guiding of our feet, the ordering of our
conversation.

3. That which by running may be obtained, is, Heb. 13.7. Pet. 1.9. Esa. 35.10.
Phil. 3.14. Psalm. 50.23.
The end of our conversation; The end of our faith; it is here v. 25, a crown
incorruptible, Everlasting joy upon our heads; it is, in a word, The prize of
the high calling of God in Christ Jesus.

4. Our running, our so'running, that we may obtain this prize, is, The
ordering of our conversation aright.

Put all this together, and from all this put together, more than manifest it
is, that the duty set before us, is a race required of us; which race so run
that ye may obtain the prize.

Gospel-duties set before us make up a spiritual race, so we must more
earnestly strive to perform every Gospel-duty-th^n they strive who run to win a
prize: a hard saying; never the less, I doubt not to prove the truth of it,
from both text, and context.

viz. from the preceding verses.
Our salvation is 2 Timothy 2.10 in Christ Jesus; but if ever we will obtain the
salvation which is in Christ Jesus, we must more vehemently strive to obey the
whole Gospel, than they strive who run to win a race; This you will soon
discern, 1 Cor. 9.24.
if you first perceive that immediate dependence which this 24th verse has
upon the preceding verses; If ye account so much upon your Christian liberty,
(says St. Paul) consider, Am I not an Apostle v: 1, and therefore One more,
much more, privileged than any private Christian can be? Have not we? v: 4,
have not Barnabas and I, as lawful power to eat and drink things sacrificed to
idols, as have any of you? Has not he? Have not I, v: 5, as much right to lead
about a Wife for mine own enjoyment, as have James and John, yea as Peter
himself has? We labor with our hands for our livelyhoods v: 6; but have not
we a power to forbear working? Verily, as it is, v: 7, unjust that one should
war for another at his own charge; as it is, v: 9, unreasonable to muzzle the
Ox which treads out the Corn; so v: 14, the Lord has ordained that they
(and therefore I) which preach the Gospel should live of the Gospel; yet v: 15,
I have used none of these liberties: In short, my business is, not to please my
self in whatsoever I may, but to edify others wherein soever I can; and this I
do v: 23, that I may, with you, partake, not of destructive liberty, but of a
Gospel-reward.

A tacit Objection. Quest: How falls in this v: 24th? Answ: While our
Author hitherto gave him-self for an example, carnal hearts would quickly
object "What is St. Paul's example unto us? His self-denial is no tie upon other
persons; he, because a grand Apostle, prefers severity of life before,
either freedom, or profit; but, they who abide private Christians, they who
mind not high things, they who affect no such popularity, may even leave St.
Paul to His strictness; while they, for their parts, stand fast in that liberty
wherewith Christ has made them free. tacit objection our v. 24th preventeth;
this sort of gainsayers our Apostle undeceiveth: says he, Never mistake your
selves; this strictness of mine, is no more then what is necessary; Know ye
not, that many profess the Gospel, but few obey it as they ought? So run through
every Gospel-duty, that ye may at last obtain the hope which is set before you:
Ye see now, we can none of us be followers of St. Paul, as he here gives
himself for an example, unless we more earnestly strive to perform our duties,
then they strive who run to win a race. (That, my first proof.)

viz. From the present verse,
But wherefore should we dwell upon the Context, since the Text it self so
plainly confirms this truth? Know ye not, that they which run in a race run
all, but one only receives the prize? Beloved, that race was a vain sport,
that prize a corruptible crown; but the race set before us, is spiritual; and
the crown after which we press, is eternal: Now, if none could receive that
corruptible crown but he, and he only, which out-ran all others, neither can
we receive the high prize of our calling in Christ Jesus, unless we strive more
earnestly to obtain it, then they did strive who ran that race.

these sayings have sunk deep into your ears: For who can call this Precept
unto his remembrance, and not understand for time to come? or, Who can wisely
understand these saving Truths, and neglect to work out that salvation which is
in Christ Jesus? Nevertheless, that each of you may, not only be, but
continue, wise unto salvation; that all of you may, not only run, but so run
that ye may obtain; unto me it will not be grievous, to press forward unto
Application.

Christians, Ought we to perform all Gospelduties with so great a watchfulness?
Must we so run as if we were running a race? yea, and so run this race too, as
they who are running for a prize? Does the Holy Ghost command us to run, and to
run so? Then is this commandment a Reproof unto those inconsiderate, careless,
stupid, Creatures who heed not whether there be any such race set before us, or
no: Alas! although truth be the adequate object of the understanding; yea,
although the more considerable any truth is, the more (in reason) it should
work upon the understanding; yet, by some idle-minded persons, the weightiest
points are lightest set by; Death, Judgment, Hell, Eternity, how
unquestionable (these?) Yet (the Lord forgive us) seldom do we meditate upon
these things. Know we not, that we have every one of us as well a soul to be
saved, as a body? yet (to their shame (...) speak it) some among us more
frequently cleanse from filthiness, the nails of our fingers, or the hair of
our head (I had almost said, the hair of our Pery-wigs) then these precious,
these immortal souls of ours! If with fear and trembling we must strive to
run, and so to run that we may obtain; blame worthy are all such (and such are
most among us) that neither care to obtain, nor strive to run. (That is the
first.)

presumptions Reprobates, who instead of running from the torments of hell unto
the pleasures of heaven, that is, instead of running from a state of nature to
a state of grace, from a heart of unbeleif to a lively faith, from a dunghill
of dead works unto fruits of righteousness, do run from bad to worse: Such
harden themselves in their own natural corruptions! Such give themselves over
unto a perpetual backsliding! whatsoever looks toward godliness and true
holiness, that they despise! wicked miscreants, (but desperately wicked!) Is it
not enough that you neglect to run, unless instead of running forward, ye lie
down in your shame? Can you not be content that ye desert the race, unless you
trample under foot the prize which is set before you? Our gracious and
merciful God desires, that even you would obtain an inheritance with the
Saints in light, and do you take a vain glory in selling your selves unto the
Prince of darkness? O ye fools, when will ye understand?

in Christ Jesus, unless we so run as we ought; inexcusable are multitudes,
who, although they do not deliberately harden themselvess in running contrary
to God, yet (if they do but run at all) heed not whether they so run that they
may obtain. You (lukewarm Professors) will you account that a good fight, which
is only a beating the air? will you esteem that a well running, which is only
a running in vain? He is more then stupid, who slumbereth in the midst of his
race! As good never a whit, as never the better: Know ye not, that they which
run in a race, run all, but one only receives the prize? No affections, no
feet; if ye cut off the feet of your affections, be ye sure, ye shall reap
damage: It is said of Idols, legs have they and walk not; will you be such?
Run not, like them whose feet are out of joint; but so run that ye may obtain:
And, if obtain you would, receive these instructions,

Let every man discharge the duty of his own calling, Cor. 7.24. Our
conversation can never be as becomes the Gospel, except every man, wherein he
is called, therein abide with God Romans 12, He that ministers let him wait on
his ministering; he that teaches, on teaching; and he that rules, let him rule
with diligence: (Bear with me) Of late, there is too great a want of this
diligence in rulers; Profaneness threatens, if not the chief City, yet many
chief places, within this Kingdom! It evil becomes a Christian Magistrate, to
bear the sword of his God in vain.

every one of us mind the present duty: Friends, As every promise to us made,
implies a duty requisite from us, so every place, every moment, requires from
us a present duty too: Mat. 11.25 At that time Jesus answered and said, Object.
No body spoke to him; Answ. Jesus answered the then present opportunity; viz.
Unto every instant of time there is an answer due; I do not answer my duty
now, except I so speak as for edification, and that too, as from the Lord;
neither do ye now answer your duties, except ye now hear as persons desirous
to inform, awaken, and strengthen your souls.

[You of this Eminent Society, you the Honorable Company of Mercers, will
answer Your duties, if you (this day) show your selves faithful stewards of
those blessings in behalf of pious and charitale uses, wherewith the liberal
hand of your God has entrusted you; you will (this day) answer your duties, if
your Feasting this day be among you an occasion, not unto disorder and
gluttony, but unto love unfeigned and unto a rejoicing in the Lord; I trust, you
will (this day) unite your hearts, not only to delight in one another, but to
fear the Lord and his goodness. (Right Worshipful) You are the chief and most
eminent of the chosen Companies of this most famous City, wherefore, if at all
times ye would answer your duties; as your God has placed you the first in
order, so endeavor ye (I beseech you) to lead and go before others in good
examples, and in good works.]

In a word, every one of us then answers present duty, when he considerately
endeavoreth to perform that at every present season wherein he may, at every
present season, best glorify his God: We must do good, and Gal. 6.10 good we
must do as we have opportunity. 1 Samuel 10.7. Do as occasion shall serve; a good
runner minds every step, he will not lose, no not one footing: Whether mud or
sands, whether hills or meadows, limit their banks, toward their Sea rivers
run; they run and run continually; and John 4.14 living Waters are ever
springing upward: We Christians, throughout our Spiritual race, must be like
Soldiers, ever upon duty. (This is my second instruction.)

let us do it heartily, as unto the Lord: Then the diligent hand makes rich,
when it makes Religion its business. Acts 11.23. We must cleave unto the Lord
with a full purpose of heart. Lev. 11.42. Whatsoever multiplieth feet is an
abomination: Why? Answ. It can but creep. It is then a sign that we run well,
when we breath and pant; viz. when we breath after holiness, and when we pant
after God. Lovers have a language of their own; their feet talk, their hands
talk, their eyes talk; so thou, (when bystanders, when worldlings are not aware
of it) have a foot for thy God, a hand for thy God, an eye for thy God. Psalm.
16.8. They that would not greatly fall, do set the Lord always before them; much
more they that would run well. Then we run our best, when the desire of our
soul is toward the name of our God.

Duly frequent Ordinances: It is good being there where Princes scatter gifts:
It is good being there where the power of the Lord is present to heal. Esa:
64.5. Thou meetest them who remember thee in thy ways. Quest. Where are the
ways of God? Answ. Psalm. 77.13 Thy way, O Lord, is in the Sanctuary.
Gospelblessings accompany Gospel Ordinances: Joh: 5.4. While the good Angel
moves the waters of Life, we should not absent our selves from the Pools of
Bethesda. John 13.30 When Judas forsook the disciples of Christ, he left Christ
as well as them; but John 20 28. When Thomas was assembled with the rest of the
Disciples, he was then no longer faithless, but believing. Unto this hour Jesus
Christ teaches daily in the Temple; though not by himself, yet by his chosen
Ministers. That is (then) a fourth Instruction, Let us not forsake the
assembling of our selves together, as the manner of some is.

so run that ye may obtain; In the use of all Gospel Ordinances, wait for the
Spirit accompanying those Ordinances. Jer: 10.23 It is not in Man that walks
(much less in man that runs) to direct his own steps; but Esa: 58.11, The
Lord he shall guide us continually; Psalm. 143.3 Our soul is like a barren and
dry land, it is God that ( Esa: 58.11) makes us like a watered garden. Psalm.
143.10 Lead me, but lead me with thy good spirit; now this spirit is given, Luk
11.13 to them who through very hunger ask for it. If in every exercise of
godliness, we thirst after a communion with our God, a communion we shall
partake; for our God has told us, Esa: 44.3 I will pour water upon him that is
thirsty. Matthew. 7.7 Seek grace, and find grace. Of old time, they who ran
races, did first anoint themselves with oil, and we (in this spiritual race)
should, 1 John 2.27 use the ointment of the Holy Ghost. 1 Samuel 10.9 When Saul
was anointed, God gave Saul another Spirit: (Beloved) as Royal Unction, so Holy
Unction, not only declares a right, but enableth for duty. Cant: 1.4 We will
run after thee, Qu: How so? Answ: v. 3, Thy name is as ointment powered forth:
Once get the Ointment of the Holy One, you will then so run that ye may obtain.

Do all in the name of the Lord Jesus. Among other Excellencies in our English
Liturgy, this is not the least, That almost every Prayer concludes in Jesus
Christ his name: Jesus Christ he is, as well the Omega, as the Alpha; he is the
Amen: Beloved, the graces of Gods spirit are living-waters; but Zech. 13.1
Jesus Christ is that Fountain from which these waters of life are drawn: 1 Pet.
1.11 The Spirit which was in the holy Men of God, was the Spirit of Christ:
Col. 3.3 Our life is hid in God but with Christ. 2 Timothy 2.1, Be strong in
grace. Qu. In what grace? Answ. In that grace which is in Christ Jesus. Micah
5.5 That Man shall be the peace. Qu. What Man? Answ. 1 Timothy 2.5 The Man Christ
Jesus. Ye obtain Salvation, Qu. What salvation? Answ. 2 Timothy 2.10 The salvation
which is in Christ Jesus. Ephesians. 6.10 If ye would be strong to run this race,
be strong in the Lord, and in the power of his might; lean upon him, trust in
him, make him your stay, your strength, and your good speed: Yet this ye cannot
do, until ye first stir up your selves to lay hold on him. I exhort therefore,

Let your loins be girt: Every one of us have, at the best, bin ill-advised; we
have started too late, we have run too slowly, we have fallen too often: Yet,
yet the prize abides before us; as yet the Crown is within veiw; Oh, while we
have yet daylight, let us work-out our salvation, let us not fail of
obtaining, let us lay hold of eternal life, even, of that salvation which is in
Christ Jesus: Let every one of us redeem the time, let us all run, and so run,
as knowing the terrors of the Lord: If we press not forward to apprehend, that
for which also we are apprehend, the terrors of the Lord they set themselves in
array against us: For,

a Duty incumbent upon us, that we run this race: Other races are left unto the
spectators liberty; spare the prize, and spare to run, This not so: This so
run, is, not a permission, but a command. We are brought into this world, not
to be bystanders, not to be gazers or lookers on, (that is the the Angels lot,
that,) but to be runners: We are enjoined, we are commanded to run.

necessity laid upon us: Of them that do run, others if they so run that they
do not obtain, they have their labor for their pains; or, if suffer they do,
yet is it at most but some small loss, some corruptible crown, some little
shame which will soon over: With us not so; To turn back is death, (behind us
is hell;) to stand still is death, (beneath us is hell;) If we will not lay it
to heart to give glory to Gods name, Mal. 2.3. God will even bring a curse upon
us. Heb. 2.3. It is not how shall we obtain, but how shall we escape, if we
neglect so great salvation? It is with us, as 1 Samuel 14.13, it was with
Jonathan (climbing the rock with his hands) if we get not up, we fall and
perish; if we reach not the height of Sion we are cast out into the Valley of
Hinnom. It is with us as with pretenders unto supremacy; if not a Throne, a
Scaffold; if not a Crown, a block; if we obtain not the salvation which is in
Christ Jesus, we shall everlastingly abide under the condemnation of the Devil.

run through all Gospel-duties, then it was to run over the race at Isthmos: 2
Pet. 3.11, What manner of persons ought we to be in all holy conversation and
godliness? So much ado to cleanse from vain thoughts, from evil intaginations,
from all filthiness of the Spirit! To watch against every idle word which we
sure to answer for; to lay aside every sin, to put away the evil of our doings,
to purge our selves from dead works, to put off the old man! For a mind,
naturally alienated from God, to acquaint it self spiritually with God; to
bring every thought into the captivity of Jesus Christ, to be renewed in the
spirit of our mind; to have our speech seasoned with Salt, good for edifying,
and setting forth the praises of our God! To bring forth much fruit, not to
lose our first love, to grow in grace, to be perfect as our heavenly father is
perfect! multu^ fecitque tulitque Horat.
-- sudavit and alsit, who is sufficient for these things? To make what is (for
continuance). a walk, (for swiftness) a race; to walk with God, to follow God
fully, nay to run after him till we overtake him, hic labor, hoc opus est! He
that would at all times deny himself, and at all times exercise himself in
godliness, must strive more vehemently, then they strive who run a race.

the trouble some place wherein we run: Other races are run upon chosen hills,
upon champian plains, upon carpetground; but this is run Gal. 1.4 in this
present evil world: Whether we regard prosperity or adversity, we have little
good turfe here. Every one of us, as well as Magormissabib Ier. 20.3, may be
named Fearround-about: If adversity make the world go heavy with us, we are
then apt to slip and fall like Abraham, who Genesis 20.2 stumbled and equivocated;
like David, who 1 Samuel 21.5 stumbled and lied down-rightly; like Job, Job (3.1)
stumbled and fell a cursing. If prosperity heap worldly blessings, though
blessings they be, they cumber the new man; Hezekiah stuck presently when 2
Chro. 32.25 the world went well with him; when Dives fared deliciously every
day, Luke 16, Dives forgot that there was a hell; In stead of making friends by
it, many stumble at Mammon and Prove. 30.9 deny God; Most, how uncertain soever
riches are, set their hearts more upon wealth, then upon their God who gave it.
In short, dust would to dust; and the more it is watered the more dirt it
makes: Now, to tread well in ill ground, to run among thorns and not tear the
feet; to run ways of holiness in a world of wickedness! In disadvantagions
groung to run at all; yea so to run as to obtain, this is more difficult then
to run a race.

small a pittance of time is here allowed us for the obtaining of this prize:
To one running for a prize, what space of time is allotted? Answ: Not a minut
to spare; Span the length of our days; 60, 70, 80, years are soon passed over;
yea none can assure to himself so many hours of life, no not so many minutes;
and yet, if (during life) obtain we can, well; after death there is no further
running. Look we for, and hasten to the prize, what we are able; if, if we run
not the faster, our grave preventeth us. Sirs, were Methusalem now alive, to
work out his salvation were a project which would cost him every hour of his
long life; As for many of us, we have scarcely found time enough to set our
houses in order, much less our hearts: To perfect holiness, is a task for Paul
the aged; David, as he was full of grace, so was he full of days; but none
among us can boast. himself of to morrow: Up, let us be running, the day is
far spent.

thine insufficiencies, and thou may be a terror to thy self In other
trials, the racers singled out are men naturally agile and active, men breathed
and exercised, men as light of foot as a wild Roe; but, we, like Mephibosheth
are lame of both our feet. Psalm. 19.5. It is for a strong man to run a race;
but, we are weak, our souls are aguish, made up of infirmities: (Impar
congressus!) Our performances are as nothing, if compared with our duties. Look
on the things behind, on that part of our race which we have already run; it
will prove, not hastening toward, but a running from the prize. Alas, our
inability is manifest, even, in our (once) perfection; (I speak as to wise men)
If Adam, when he could stand, fell; how shall we, who are fallen, stand?
Beloved, the more our duties do over match our strength, the greater is the
difficulty to obtain this high prize.

the opposition we meet with; Others, when they are running a race, are secured
from interruptions, 2 Timothy 2.5 If one strive, yet he is not crowned unless he
strive lawfully, viz Run with me (if you will) get before me (if you can) but,
justle me, shove me, bobb me, ye may not; that is not fair; much less to trip
up the heels: Otherwise it is with us in our spiritual race; we Psalm. 17.11 are
compassed in our steps: Satan he ever seeks to foil us; either bruising our
heels, like an old Serpent; else gapeing to devour us, like a roaring Lion. So
spightfull is the Devil unto every Creature of God, that tather then leave his
old wont, he will Mat. 8.32. torment Hoggs; but, of all creatures, he is most
envious at such as are most like to obtain this prize: Now Jerem: 12.5 if thou
have run with footmen, and they have wearyed thee, then how can thou contend
with horses? If without striving thou can not overcome thine own infirmities;
how can thou, without striving vehemently, overcome the power of Satan, that
I may not say, Press forward toward the mark? we must fight (as well as run) if
ever we will obtain.

the excellency of the prize: Exceeding pains, except it be for somewhat
suitable, is but exceeding folly: On the other side, Great rewards deserve
great industry. Josh. 14.9 Says Moses to Joshua, Surely the land whereon thy
feet have trodden, shall be thine inheritance: Qu. Why an inheritance so large?
Answ. Caleb followed God wholly: Christians, if ever ye would obtain the
everlasting inheritance, follow God fully: If others must so run for a crown
corruptible? for a few fadeing bay leaves? Know ye not, that the Crown set
before you, is a Crown incorruptible? This prize is Phil. 3.14 a prize of a
high calling.

the glory of our God: All the former instances are not worthy to be named in
comparison of this. Sirs, were it merely our own damnation that we feared, were
it merely our own salvation that lay at stake, the worst would then light upon
our selves: But 1 Cor. 6.19. We are not our own; neither run we so much for our
selves as for our God. The start is given, and running we are, but God is he
who betteth the greatest stake. If thou art (...), if thou art preserved by
God, this glory be given unto the God of thy salvation; but if Men and Angels
look on, if the envious devil look on, and find in the end, that (after all thy
running) obtain thou could not; then (think with thy self) what will God do
unto his great Name? You, before whom God has set this spiritual race; You,
whom the God of your praise has singled out to run this race, if you (his
chosen ones) obtain not, you will then give occasion to Gods adversary and
yours, to blaspheme the wisdom of that God who appoints you to run, and the
power of that God who did not enable you to obtain.

Brethren, Let not your heart be troubled, neither let it be afraid: Fear has
bondage; watchful I would have you be, but not fearful: Heb. 6.18 The race set
before us, is, if rightly understood, the hope set before us. Wherefore my next
Exhortation is that, rejoicing in full assurance, ye hope unto the end. Stay
not any longer upon mount Ebal, but pass over unto mount Gerizim: Return back
again (I pray you); This once return back again by the self-same way-marks
which I did last erect; and what formerly meditated your terrors, will ever
hereafter become your strong consolations.

Permit that we run over them in order, and (that done) we shall have finished
our course.

duty incumbent upon us to run this race, meanwhile this duty is, not our
terror, but our rejoicing: Of our selves what to do, whether we should or
should not run, we neither know, nor heed; but, since our Maker instructs us,
since the Lawgiver directs, since the Lord himself commands, happy, happy
we! Now know we, that it concerns us to run, and whither to run: Now know we,
what is acceptable to our God, and good for our selves; if Gospel-duties are
the race set before us, the race set before us is the way of our peace. Since
we have a warrant for what we do, we will run this race with cheerfulness, and
with rejoycings; for the wise God, the God of truth, the God of our blessings,
He, He, in free love to our souls, has set before us this race.

necessity laid upon us (that) makes for our comfort too; viz. Periissem, nist
periissem. Foelix necessitas quae cogit ad deum. Hebr. 13 14 If we have here no
abiding city, we seek that to come; If the Law condemns us, it scooleth us to
Christ; In this case, desperation begets courage: Necessity was it which
made Hannibal victorious. The farther we run from death and hell, the nearer we
approach heaven and glory. Be it ( Job 21.6.) be it, that when I remember I am
afraid, yet, Sine periculo friget animus; Blessed is the man that thus fears
always; Parents provide rods for their children, as well as Books. Psalm. 23.4
Thy rod does comfort me; for fear of this it is, that we love our own good the
better. Of that Isthmian race unto which our Apostle here alludeth, One side
was bounded with the River Alpheus, the other with naked swords: Why this?
Answ. That they which run this race might make strait paths to their feet.
Friends, the Lord of hosts would never place hell behind his chosen men of
War, were he not well able to conduct them into Heaven: If the Captain of our
salvation break down the Bridge over which we came hither, while he preventeth
us from turning back, he makes us more then conquerers. (And this is our
second consolation.)

quality and nature of the race it self, (that) may likewise be our
encouragement. The ungodliness which we should renounce, What is it? It is (we
know) mere silthiness, mere drudgery; a good rid of it. Who (in the good name
of our God,) who would be fond of shackles? fond of being a slave? of being a
slave unto the tyrannies of the accursed devil? This sinfulness which corrupt
nature once delighted in, (Oh!) What a deadly trouble it brought with it? There
is no peace to him that delights in wickedness, says my God. Secondly,
Blessed be the God and Father of our Lord Jesus Christ; if we may be but
allowed to hate every false way; to lay aside every sin, and to deny all
ungodliness: yea and blessed be the God and Father of our Lord Jesus Christ,
that we are allowed to exercise our selves unto godliness, and to imitate and
resemble the Image of Gods glorious Holiness. Godliness is great gain, if we
account all. A new life is a new creation, and a new creation is a recreation:
The wit of Man can not contrive a sort of life more desirable then is this
which the Wisdom of the only Wise God has chalked out unto us: For, although
the flesh be indeed infirm, yet it rejoices in hope; and, as for the Spirit,
that is willing and obedient. Verily new obedience is, not only profitable,
but pleasant; if it be a yoke, it is an easy one; and the blessing of the Lord
rests upon it: To seek holiness, is, to exchange curses for blessedness,
death for life, shame for glory, guilt for peace, darkness for light, and
vexation for joy. However, Why, ah why, should Gods Commandments be grievous
unto him, who has a love for his God? As for the wicked, if righteousness be
an abomination unto him, it is because he knows no better: Of it self, ( Esa.
64.5) it is all one to work righteousness, and to rejoice: A godly conversation
is Phil. 3.20 a heavenly conversation! No such liberty, as (is) the Gospel
liberty; and if the Son and Heir of all things makes us free, then are we free
indeed John 3.36. (This is our third comfort.)

the pillar and ground of truth. Be it, that this world is a wilderness, in
this wilderness ( Hos. 2.14) God will allure us: Christ, as he is the way, so
he sets up way-marks; he, Psalm. 5.8, will make his way straight before us.
Rather then we should conform unto the evil of the world wherein we live, this
Apostle (of us Gentiles) calls upon us ( cap. 11.1) Be ye followers of me:
yea Christ himself has given us an example: Wherefore not a man among us, but
may say with David, Psalm. 31.8, Thou have set my feot in a large place, even (
Esa. 18.7) in the place of the name of the Lordof, hosts. Beloved, wheresoever
the glory of Christ his Gospel shines, there, upon all that glory, is a
defense.

Secondly, Go out of the Church into the world; Jesus Christ he has overcome
the world for us.

Thirdly, The more dis-advantageous the ground, the greater praise unto him
that runs well: To be holy in heaven is no thanks to us; to be righteous in
Sodom, to be Saints in Nero's Court, this is praiseworthy. It was 2 Samuel 15.21
the commendation of Ittai that he would accompany his Prince in a strait, he
was resolved to follow David as well in death as in life. To be then on Gods
side when all the world sideth against God, this is Loyalty.

Fourthly, The more wickedness abounds in the world, the more easily may Gods
children learn to detest it; to abstain from sweet wines is no easy matter,
but even he who is given to his appetite, may soon be dissuaded to desist from
quaffing off full draughts of Vinegar does Naturally beget in us a detestation.

Again, If the whole world lies in wickedness, it is now worthy our while to
watch against this enemy; this will be, not a light skirmish, but a pitched
Battle; we have now some hopes of growing victorious; Faith will find some
pleasure, if it may encounter with a world so dangerous as is this wherein we
live.

To conclude this: The more wicked the world is, the more honor have all those
Saints which keep themselves unspotted of it. Phil. 2.15 We then behave our
selves like the sons of God, when in the midst of a crooked and perverss
generation we abide blameless and harmless. Therefore, so far is the world
from making against us, that it makes for us: This is then our fourth comfort.

That the time wherein we run is but short. Although the spirit be willing, (I
wiss) flesh and blood is weak; and although the commandment is good, corrupt
nature fancieth it grievous; allow this; never the less, can we not watch with
Jesus one hour? Cheer up, beleivers, this world shall not last always: Esa. 57
The righteous are taken away from that which is evil. If compared to the
everlastingness of the prize, all that we do, or can suffer, is but for a
moment. Yet a little while, and we shall rest from our labors; yet a little
while, and the race will be ended: Know ye not, that we are (...); Know ye not,
that what race we run (is but stadium) is, at most, but a furlong in lenght?
Sirs, if the race (here set before us) be in length but one furlong, how easily
may we hold out? This is therefore a Fifth Comfort.

our natural insufficiency: And here a threefold Cord strengthens us: For,

First, God accepts the will for the deed: Romans 8.34 Who is he that
condemns? It is Christ who died, and died for us: As Christ the head Esa.
50.8 so every member of Christ may safely say He is nere that justifies me.

Secondly, Psalm. 94.18 When I said my foot slippeth thy mercies O Lord held me
up. Prove. 2.8 The Lord preserves the way of his Saints; He Psalm. 21.3
preventeth thee with his goodness, He Psalm. 58.13 sets thee in the way of his
steps: Prove. 3.23 Thy foot shall not stumble, or, if it does, He Psalm. 19.11
shall bear thee up, He Prove. 3.23 will hold up thy steps in thy ways: nay,
Micah 7.8 When I fall, I shall arise.

Thirdly, Not I, but grace: So long as the child can not go at all, the
nursing-father carries him in his bosom: Of our selves we can do nothing to
any purpose, therefore does Christ strengthen us to do all things that he
expects from us: That God might teach Israel to go, He ( Hos. 11.3.) took
him by the arms: Jesus Christ, he knows that we are altogether unable to
fulfill his good pleasure, wherefore he gives us a helping hand; he performs
our work for us: Christ he knows that we are altogether desicient, that we
are altogether unprofitable; therefore he puts to his own strength, and
reputeth his strength ours: Jesus Christ has stored up grace, yea and the
spirit of grace too, against the times of our need: Now that we are to run this
race, he furnishes us with ointment: The wind which blows where it lists,
lists to set in our backs, and to blow us forward: Holy Angels they are made
our ministering spirits; and the spirit of the Lord he leads, he draws us
on! When the spirit of the Lord came upon Elijah, Elijah ran far. What shall
we more say? Never (never) had the plain-dealing Holy Ghost enjoined them who
obey the Gospel, so to run that they may obtain; if, having run their best,
obtain they may not.

Opposition made against us; and this opposition is our double advantage: For,

First, the that is begotten of God, foreknowing what an adversary he has,
will the more stoutly resist him: 1 Ioh. 5.18 he that is begotten of God
keeps himself so pure, that that wicked one touches him not: prae-monitus
praemunitus.

Next, Esa. 30.10 Say ye to the righteous it shall go well with him: viz. God
will with the temptation find a way for thine escape; He Psalm. 91.3 will
deliver thee from the snare of the fowler; He Prove. 25.15 will pluck thy feet
out of the nett; 2 Cor. 1.10 has delivered, yea and will deliver: Jesus Christ
was heard in what he prayed for, then when Ioh. 17.15 he petitioned, keep them
from evil. Romans 8.31 If God be for us, who can be against us? Psalm. 22.11 If
there be none to help, then will God be for us. Malicious the wicked one is,
but touch thee he shall not; unless then when thou tramplest him under thy
feet. (This is a Seventh Refuge.) We are strong, although not in our selves, in
the Lord; Our power, is His might.

Excellency of the prize, that is (worthily) our next Comfort.

First, It would never anger one to hazard his life for a Diadem of beauty:
mean while, should we never obtain, we are but where we were; Sons of death we
were, and should we fail of our Crown, we should still be but sons of death.
Quae si non potuit, magnis tamen excidit ausis.

Next, Let us strive to obtain, and suppose we could fail, yet, since what we
could, we did, we shall not be beaten with so many stripes as negligent runners
shall; I say, suppose we could not avoid but die we must, yet we shall not die
so great a death.

Thirdly, Were it so that our labor could be in vain in the Lord, yet let none
of us betray our trust: serviamus lieet non liberati; Let us continue honest,
let us continue loyal, although we abide neglected.

But, Fourthly, have a respect, as well unto the assuredness, as unto the
recompense of the reward; our crown is laid up, and it is laid up for us;
great is our reward in Heaven; rich is the prize of our high calling! The lips
of an Angel would want words heavenly enough, and the tongue of an archangel
would stammer, were it now attempting to set forth that everlasting joy, that
eternal weight of glory, which (when we have run, when we have so run as we
ought) we shall all of us most assuredly possess. View the prize, and desist
from running who so can. This transcendent excellency of the prize may very
well pass for an eighth comfort.

The glory of our God.

First, Since the glory of our God is concerned, as well in our running, as in
our obtaining, let none of Gods Elect doubt, but that, as certainly as they
run, so assuredly they shall obtain. Know, it is out of love, out of free love,
that Almighty God appoints us both to obtain, and to run: Nor need I tell
you, that this God of love changes not: Ye all acknowledge, that for whom the
gracious and merciful Lord has a Fatherly love, them (as a Father) he loves
unto the end: Account upon it, that the same God, which for the glory of his
free mercy enjoyneth us to run, will, for the glory of his free goodness,
enable us to obtain. Fear not little flock, it is your Fathers good pleasure to
give you a kingdom: For this very cause he does single you out to run this
race, that he may hereafter glorify himself in exalting you unto an exceeding
and eternal weight of glory. How infinitely infinite is the unsearchable glory
of that great God, who, unto every one that obtains, can bestow so rich a
prize, and can make, whomsoever he pleases, so to run that he shall be sure to
obtain?

Next, As God therefore causes us to obtain the prize, that he may take
delight (by glorifying himself) in advancing us; so his glory will he not give
to another. From what time the old Serpent fooled and foiled Adam, that Serpent
has not ceased to blaspheme and revile our God; as if make us he could, but
preserve us he could not: But let the malice and the subtilty, and the power,
of Satan speak and do, their worst; whomsoever the Lord reserveth to himself,
preserve them he can, exalt them he will: when Satan has laid all the snares
which his revengeful malice can invent, the elect of God shall run, and
(running) shall obtain. True, should not the chosen of the Lord obtain the
prize for which they run, the Devil would then vaunt it indeed; but, assure
your selves, God stands more upon his honor then so. Esa. 43.21 This people
have I formed for my self, they shall show forth my praise: Of every one which
runs his best, God says, For mine own sake, even for mine own sake I will
do it; I have brought him, and he, shall make his way prosperous, Esa. 48.11.
Look back upon the glory of God in that Text; It is not I the omnipotent God
will, but he (he whom I have brought) shall, make his way prosperous. A Giant
can make a child overcome a strong man.

God is interested as deeply as are we: He is not only of our side, but of our
party: Are ye resolved to win the prize, if ye can? Know, it is Gods
determination that ye shall win it, if you will: That Jesus Christ made the
lame to walk, Mat. 15.31. Mark. 7.37. Jer. 33.9.
it was the glory of God the Father; it is likewise the glory of God the
Father, that Jesus Christ enableth lame believers, so to run that they may
obtain.

Revel. 4.11 Saints and Angels cry Thou art worthy O Lord to receive glory,
honor, and power, for thou have created all things, and for thy pleasure they
are, and were, created; they were created at first, and are still created, that
is, preserved. Friends, if the hous-keeper will not give way that any idle
busybodies shall by any means disappoint him of his full retinue, and of his
full number of servants and attendants; then of all those whom the great God
has chosen to fill up the number of his hoavenly Quire, he will loose none: 1
Pet. 1.5.
(None) maugre all that sin or Satan shall or can do.

Only take ye heed that ye exclude not your selves from being Kingly Priests
unto our God: Revel. 1.6.
The Devil, he seeks our pendition; but, as for Jesus Christ, the same mind
is ever in him toward us, Phil. 4.1. Joh. 17.10, 23.
which was once in St. Paul toward the Philipians; we are his dearly beloved,
his longed for, his joy, and his crown: He died for us, he lays up for us. an
eternal weight of glory; Oh let him see of the travail of his soul: It is our
Masters joy, Matt. 25, 21
as well as ours, if we so run that we do obtain. Joh. 14.21.
To him it is, to him it will be, a praise, a delight, Ephesians. 1.6, 12. 1 Pet.
1.7.
a rejoicing, is we day by day so run through every present duty, as in
sincerity we ought.

Let them cease form running, Heb. 11.26.
who forsake their own mercy; but let us (who have an eye to the recompense of
reward), 1 Pet. 1.2.
let us (through sanctification of the spirit to obedience) so run on unto
perfection, 2 These. 2.13, 14.
that we may obtain everlasting joy to our selves; and (what is more
defireable) everlasting glory to our Lord God.

To him, even, to God the Holy Spirit, which works in us to will and to do;
Phil. 2.13.
unto God the Son, who has given us of his Spirit; 1 John 3.24.
unto God the Father, who has given us his Son, Esa. 6.9.
and (with his Son) all things pertaining to life, and godliness; 2 Pet. 1.3.
be, the perfection of the Race set before us, the daily comfort of daily well
running, Romans 8.32.
and the prize which we shall everlastingly obtain, with due humility, and with
unfeigned thankfulness, for ever and ever ascribed; Amen, and Amen.

FINIS.

