Mr. George Oldner's INVENTION TO Preserve SHIPS FROM Foundering, or Sinking,
at Sea, etc. Experimented and Approved, And Now Proposed for the Universal Good
of All Nations concerned in Navigation. As appears by the following PROPOSAL.

LONDON, Printed by F. Collins, in the Old Bailey, School.

And are to be had, gratis, at Mr. George Oldner's in Thames Street near
Triggstairs, and at Mr. Andrew Prime's, (the Patentees) at the Red Bull in
Budgerow; and at Robin's Coffee-house in Exchange-Alley, London.

Shipping Preserved FROM Foundering, or Sinking, at Sea, OR, IN Bays, Harbors,
Rivers, or Creeks, etc.
BY an INVENTION, which has been Experimented and Approved, as appears by the
Certificate inserted in the following Proposal, under the Hands of several
Merchants of Great Note, Worth, and Eminency in the City of London, The
Invention experimented by Persons of Note, and the Advantages thereof.
who are themselves considerable Owners in, and Builders of, many Ships and
Vessels; as also of several Commanders of Ships, being Men of great and long
Experience, Skill, and Judgment in the Nature and Building thereof, for many
Years; to be a real, practicable, and necessary Contrivance, greatly wanted in
all Ages past, and now attained to, by Mr. George Oldner, of London, Merchant:
By which said Invention Shipping, Merchandise, and Men's Lives, will certainly
and effectually be preserved, far better than by any Method that has hitherto
been known, from all Dangers occasioned by such Accidents and Defects as are
particularly, and at large, set forth in the following Proposal, viz.

WHEREAS His Majesty has been graciously pleased to grant his Royal Letters
Patents to George Oldner and Andrew Prime, of London, Merchants; The Preamble
of the Patent obtained.
for the sole Use and Benefit of an Invention or Contrivance applicable to
Shipping of all sorts, already built, or hereafter to be built, as well His
Majesty's Navy Royal as all other Trading Ships and Vessels; The Invention
attained applicable to Ships already built, as hereafter to be built. The
Benefit and Certainty thereof.
which the said George Oldner, by many Years Experience in Shipping, long and
mature Consideration, and large Expense of Time and Money, has now perfectly
attained unto; by the benefit whereof all sorts of Ships and Vessels so
fortified, will with all the Certainty imaginable, be effectually preserved
from Foundering or Sinking at Sea, etc. occasioned,

1st, By Worm-holes, want of good Cawking, The Use of the Invention at large
particularized.
or decay of Cawking, decay of Bolts, Trunnels, or Planks.

Or, the springing or starting of Planks, or the Butts of Planks, or of
Hudd-ends, etc. which frequently happens by Ships laboring in the Sea.

2dly, By any sort of Leaks, Ships preserved from sinking by any sort of Leaks,
etc. and the same discovered and mended, and the Ships stronger.
which would otherwise immediately sink them, notwithstanding the extreme
continual Labor and Help of Men and Pumps, as is now done, though often in vain,
little of either being here required to enable them, at least, to keep the Sea
till they can make some Port or Harbor: Which Leaks, to all Ships and Vessels
so common and fatal, by this Invention will, with but very little Care, common
Skill, and moderate Labor, be effectually prevented, or easily discovered and
mended. The Ships also, by the same, will be more tight and strong, to endure
all Storms or Accidents that they are liable unto.

3dly, By means of this Invention, Ships and Vessels being preserved, Men's
Lives, Goods, etc. preserved from damage by Water, and His Majesty's
Customsencreas'd.
as aforesaid, not only the Lives of the Seamen and Passengers are likewise at
the same time saved, but the Stores, Provisions, Ammunition, Goods and
Merchandise are for the most part secured from Damage, the prevention of which
will greatly augment His Majesty's Customs; which Damages otherwise unavoidably
accrue, by Water entering such Ships or Vessels.

4thly, The many Distempers and Contagions which Seamen and Passengers are
incident to in long and tedious Voyages, and more especially in hot Countries,
The Distempers and Evils occasioned by the Bilge-water, (as is the Opinions of
Naval Surgeons) prevented by the Ships being perfectly freed from the said
Bilge-water.
oftentimes occasioning so great a Sickness and Mortality, that there are
scarcely Hands left to bring home the Ship, by reason of the Putrefaction and
poisonous stench of the Bilge-water, whose subtle and secret Infection is the
prime and general Cause thereof, according to the Opinions and Judgments of
several eminent Naval Chyrurgeons; as appears by a printed Paper lately
produced to the Parliament, though the Men on board may not discern it: Which
common and fatal Evil will by this means be certainly and easily prevented, by
freeing all such Ships and Vessels from the said Bilge-water, and keeping them
perfectly sweet and clean: The Advantages and unspeakable Benefits of which,
further appears in a True Copy of the said printed Paper, which is as
follows, viz.

THESE are to Certify whom it may concern, An exact Copy of the said Surgeons
Certificate.
That we whose Names are underwritten, are very well assured, that the odious
Stench in Ships, arising from the Bilge-water, is not only pernicious and
destructive to the Health of the Men, especially in Hot Countries and long
Voyages, but oftentimes produces Contagious Distempers, to the Ruin of many
Men's Lives on Shipboard. Whereupon, we do verily believe, That an Invention
capable of effectually preventing or purifying the same, will not only be of
Singular Advantage to His Majesty and the Merchants, but an Unspeakable and
Universal Benefit to all concerned in Sea-affairs.

Attested by Us, Naval-Surgeons,
James Wasse, John Kent, Archibald Arthur, Hen. Bachelor, Edward Tanner, Chr.
Robinson, Rich. Griffis, Richard Boar, Alex. Innes, William Douglas, Gerrard
St. Clare, Tho. Vigures, John Gill, James Lauther, Rich. Springall, P. Heart,
Alex. Kilpatrick, W. Angus, Robert Forbes, Si. Ashton, J. Cloak, And. Martin,
Tho. Tuker, Chr. Brown, J. Boinough, Carry Rochester, Will. Lake, Jno Tomkins,
Hugh Munro, Jno Cholmeley.
5thly, By Damage occasioned to Shipping by great Shot, Ships better preserved
from Damages by great Shot or by striking upon Sands, etc.
or by their striking or running upon Shoals or Sands (unless at once broke to
pieces) from which Damages they will be more effectually preserved, than by any
means hitherto known; or, at leastwise, Time may be gained for saving the
Cargo, and the Men's Lives.

6thly, By means of this Invention, Water shipped from aloft, Water entering the
Hold from aloft discharged, and hidden Leaks discovered and mended.
and by that way entering the Hold of the said Ship, will easily and much more
effectually be discharged, than by any means now commonly practiced or known:
And also any sorts of Leaks, which for many Voyages have lain hid and
undiscovered, will readily be found out and mended.

7thly, This Invention is so contrived, The convenience, cheapness, and
durability of the said Invention.
that it will take up but very little room, and require very little Labor, not
at all hindering the sailing, nor Stowage of Goods in Ships or Vessels; not
difficult, and but of small charge to be done; Not interfering with the
Shipwrights, etc. Navigation, etc encouraged to the advantage of all Nations
concerned therein.
is very durable and lasting, no ways interfering with the Shipwrights or
Carpenters, but in many cases facilitating their Work and Business. By means
whereof Trade and Commerce, Travel and Navigation, will greatly be secured,
enlarged, and encouraged, and thereby become an Universal Benefit and Advantage
to all Crowns, Kingdoms, and States concerned in Navigation, and to all
Seafaring Persons and Marine Dealings: The deplorable loss for want of this
Invention in Ages past and present, as to Men, Ships, and Cargo.
For want of which Invention, what Great Designs have miscarried, what Immense
Riches has the Sea swallowed, and how many great and excellent Persons have
deplorably perished? What Numbers of the King's Ships, of the East India,
African, Levant, and other Companies; besides great numbers of other rich
Trading-Ships and Vessels have been lost within these few Years past, together
with the vast number of Men which have miserably lost their Lives in the same,
many of which might certainly have been preserved, had this Invention been then
in practice; several remarkable Instances of which kind might be enumerated,
but such fatal Accidents being but too well known to most People, would here be
too tedious and large to recite.

In consideration whereof, The Motives to the Patentees for putting the same in
practice
the said George Oldner and Andrew Prime, for the more effectual and speedy
putting in practice and carrying on the said Invention, of so extensive and
universal a Good and Benefit to all Mankind, have already begun and made their
Application to, Their Treaty already begun with several Nations.
and Treaty with His present Majesty and the Admiralty; as also to the Court of
France, and States of Holland; which latter have since sent for the said George
Oldner, he offering to go (to receive a Conditional Reward upon his performing
and making good what is here proposed) and return in a Ship thus fortified,
having such a Breach, The States of Holland 's Invitation to the Inventor, and
his Offer to the States.
that Twenty of the best-known Pumps, though managed with as many Hands as can
work them, shall not be able to save the Ship four or five hours together from
sinking; which yet by this Invention shall be done with the use but of two
Pumps, standing in as little room, The performance of the said Invention.
and requiring as little strength, as those now generally used. And the said
George Oldner also offers, as a further confirmation thereof, The Inventor's
further Offer for confirmation.
That a Ship of two or three hundred Tun having great and dangerous Leaks and
Breaches, yet by being thus fortified, may with safety to the Ship, Men, and
Cargo, make a Voyage to and from the East or West Indies, etc. secured from
Damages by such Leaks or Breaches, and the other Accidents, Dangers, and
Defects before mentioned.

And they the said George Oldner and Andrew Prime do also design and resolve,
The Patentees further Design to extend the same to all Nations in Europe.
that the said Invention shall be further extended, by due and proper
management, not only to the Crowns, Kingdoms, and States of Europe
afore-mentioned, but also to Scotland, Ireland, and Spain, and all other parts
of the World interested and concerned in Naval Affairs. And the more to
facilitate, In order to which, the said Invention is divided into 6000 Parts or
Shares.
and the better to enable them to proceed in the Negotiation thereof, with the
greatest Dispatch possible, they the said George Oldner and Andrew Prime, by
the Advice and Entreaty of several Friends, have consented to divide the whole
Concern and Invention into Six thousand parts or Shares, and to dispose thereof
as hereafter is proposed.

And the Nature of the said Invention being such, that it cannot admit of any
public demonstration, Reasons why public demonstration may not be given.
as to the manner how the same is performed, without disclosing the whole
Secret; which though the Letters Patents oblige all the Subjects of England not
to practice nor imitate the same, without License from the Patentees, yet other
Nations may, without the Consent of the said Patentees, to the prejudice both
of the Nation (our Shipping becoming more chargeable than theirs) and of the
Patentees also, by their getting that gratis for which the Patentees and
Proprietors presume and reasonably hope to have a Conditional and Suitable
Reward for so great a Good, as well from Foreign as our Own Government.

All which Reasons and Considerations have obliged the said Patentees, Instead
of an offer of a public Experiment, a Certificate annexed.
instead of an Offer of a Public Experiment to annex the following Certificate
of the great Universal Benefits, Truth, Conveniences, and Practicableness of
the same under the Hands of several Persons of known Worth and Credit, not
doubting but that it, The Credit of the Inventor, and Persons attesting the
certainty of the said Invention, not reasonably to be questioned.
together with the said Persons themselves attesting the same, may suffice to
answer and satisfy all the Scruples, Doubts, and Questions of any Ingenious
Enquirers, whether Subscribers or others. The Persons that have signed the said
Certificate, as well as the Patentees themselves, being Men of known Integrity
and Honesty, as well as Judgment and Skill, in the Affairs of Shipping; and
being for that end, by the Patentees, upon solemn Promises and Obligations of
Secrecy, acquainted with the whole Matter; An Affidavit of one who saw the
Experiment of the said Invention, which is filed in Chancery; as likewise the
attestation of the Builder of the Model.
and having also seen an Experiment of the same, as is herein after-mention'd:
All which, to the same effect, though not altogether in the same form, the
Sollicitor-General reports, That an Affidavit was produced to him by one (who
had deposed before a Master in Chancery, where the same is filed) that he saw
the Experiment made in the like manner: And the same also was seen and attested
by the Builder of the Model, in which the Experiment was made, and likewise
filed in Chancery, as aforesaid.

And they the said Patentees do assure all whom it may concern, Where a Copy of
the Instruction to, and Report of the Solicitor-General, and other Papers of
note, are to be seen, etc.
that the Truth hereof is also further attested, as appears by a Paper
containing a Copy of the Instructions to, and Report of the Sollicitor-General,
upon the reference of the Petition from the Lords Justices in Council, for the
Patent; which, with other Papers of note relating to the same, are to be seen
or perused by any sober Person at Mr. Andrew Prime's, (one of the Patentees) at
the Red Bull in Budge-row, London.

A True Copy of the Certificate, signed by the Persons before mentioned, who
saw an Experiment of the said Invention made, as follows, viz.
THIS is to Certify all whom it may concern, Note, That the said Model was
built by a Scale, every Inch representing a Foot, and the whole representing a
Ship of about 140 Tuns.
That we whose Names are hereunto subscribed, have seen an Experiment of the
Invention of Mr. George Oldner, for the preventing Ships and Vessels from
Foundering or Sinking at Sea, etc. in the Model of a Ship about six foot in
length, upon the River of Thames, where it did float deep laden, and, without
all doubt, would have continued swimming for many Months, notwithstanding two
large Breaches which she had on each side near the Keel: And had not the said
Invention been affixed to the said Model, she must and would unavoidably have
sunk down in a very few minutes space; and was only preserved from sinking by
the said Invention. Which we being fully convinced by the reason of the thing,
and Demonstration given, find it to be a Real and Ingenious Contrivance, and,
we sincerely believe, will answer what is above proposed, and be of great Use,
Benefit, and Advantage to all Nations interested and concerned in Navigation;
and does therefore very worthily deserve all due Encouragement and Esteem.
Witness our Hands, in November, School.

Sir William Ashhurst, Knight, and Alderman, Note, Sir William Ashhurst, not
being well, and the Wind blowing very hard and cold, could not stay to see the
Model laden, as the others than did.
as also Member of Parliament for the City of London. Sir James Collet, Knight,
late Sheriff of the City of London. Sir Thomas Cuddon, Knight, and Chamberlain
of the City of London. Mr. Arthur Shallet, Merchant, Member of Parliament for
Weymouth. Mr. Thomas Lurting, a Virginia Commander, and Surveyor of the
building of many Ships. Mr. William Warren, also late Commander, and Surveyor
of the building of many Ships. Mr. Richard Haynes, Merchant. Mr. Thomas Byfeld,
Merchant. Mr. Richard Oldner, Coal-merchant, who made Affidavit of the said
Experiment, which is filed in Chancery. Mr. John Webb, Shipwright, and Builder
of the said Model, whose Solemn Affirmation of the said Experiment is also
filed in Chancery. Mr. George Oldner, Junior.
Note, That the Hands of many more Persons skilled in Shipping might have been
obtained, had it been thought convenient further to have entrusted the SECRET;
but the Testimonies here given, it is presumed, will be a sufficient
demonstration to the World, that the said Invention is Real, Practicable, and
Necessary; as by the many curious and nice Objections and Queries which were
made by the Persons signing hereto, and which were distinctly and amply
Answered to their entire satisfaction; And the said Mr. Lurting, and Mr.
Warren, being so thoroughly convinced and confirmed in the Certainty of the said
Invention; that they voluntarily offer to go in a Ship of any burden, having
great and dangerous Leaks or Breaches, as aforesaid, (She being provided with
this Invention) to the Streights or West Indies, etc.

Therefore all these Advantages, by means of this Invention, accruing in
general to the Public as well as Private Persons; To obtain Advantages from
all Nations, being too great a Work to the present Proprietors.
and the Work, (to accomplish the same effectually, and to obtain all the
Rewards, Encouragements, and Advantages due from all Nations to so Great and
Certain a Good) being thought too great and too heavy to the said Patentees and
the present Proprietors; and that their being thus advised and persuaded (as
they really are) to offer to dispose of so many Parts or Shares of their said
Invention, To take the Assistance of others, etc. no sinister Ends in them.
as in the following Proposal, (as well to strengthen their Hands with Men as
Money, both being essential to carry on the same with Vigor and Dispatch, as
aforesaid) is hoped cannot be justly termed any Sinister or Self Ends in them,
especially they being Men of known Reputation, Integrity, and Credit, who would
not offer to the World either a slender or fruitless Proposal. The Invention at
first hearing, incredible; when known, astonishing.
Though at the bare hearing of the Nature, Use and Excellency of the said
Invention, it may seem almost incredible for any Person to believe, yet when
seen and understood, is immediately admired and esteemed, even to an
Astonishment and Wonder that the Thought should not have occurred for Ages past.

So then as there need be no further Doubt or Question, but that this
Invention, Real and necessary, therefore will be embraced.
as it is real, will therefore be equally embraced and made use of in the
Shipping of all Nations, so it will also raise large Profits to the Patentees,
Partners, and Subscribers, it being so very beneficial, convenient, and
necessary; which, besides the great Advantages already mentioned, there are
many more which cannot be published at present, As likewise profitable to all
concerned.
without endangering the Secret; but this in short, That Shipping being so
fortified and secured by this Invention, Insurance must consequently be more
reasonable than it now is, and Insurers, Owners, and Merchants still greater
Gainers; which, among the Profits that arise and accrue by means of the great
and general Safety of this Invention, Insurance thereby made easier, and
Insurers, Owners, etc. greater Gainers.
may be deemed a Considerable Article. And as to some further Advantages, which
may reasonably arise to all that shall subscribe or become Partners herein,
take the following Scheme.

A Short View how, and from whence, the said PROFITS and ADVANTAGES may arise,
is as follows, (viz.)
First, Rewards from several Kingdoms and States, etc.
FROM His Majesty of Great Britain, and the other Princes and States, etc. viz.
France, Spain, Portugal, Swedeland, Denmark, the Princes of Italy, the States
of Holland and Venice, Genoua and Hamburgh, etc. It being but reasonable to
hope that a suitable and grateful Reward may justly be expected and obtained,
especially since it is only proposed Conditionally to the said several
Governments; Conditional.
and the Invention, to admiration, being so demonstrably plain and obvious to
all that have seen it, The sevention demonstrable.
and will as certainly be so to all who may hereafter see the same, and beyond
peradventure, The Rewards deemed certain.
will be so effectual in performing, that such Rewards may be therefore justly
deemed nothing less than a Certainty to all concerned therein. Not that the
Patentees will presume to assign or ascertain the Quantum of such Rewards, Though
the quantum is not ascertained, yet is thought may double the present Estimate
of the whole. At 10 l. per Share.
but the Merit of the Contrivance, being such, that it may be modestly thought
and expected the same will not be less, but more than what may double their
present Estimate of the whole at Ten pound per Share.

Secondly, From Subjects of England, etc. by virtue of the Patent, etc.
From all the Subjects of England concerned in Shipping, as the East India,
African, Levant, and other Companies, as also other Merchants and Owners, by
virtue of the Powers and Privileges granted to the Patentees, whereby they may
by Agreement with the said several Companies, Merchants, A Quantum per Ship or
Tun may be well afforded, etc.
and Ship-Owners, etc. have reasonable Recompense annually for directing and
fitting their several Ships and Vessels, according to this proposed Invention,
either by a Quantum per Ship or per Tun, etc. which the Owners of the Ships and
Vessels, as they may better afford, so they will, without all doubt, The Profit
great, the Charge small.
cheerfully and readily pay, the Advantage that accrues hereby being so very
great and manifest, and the Charge thereof but small and inconsiderable.

Or otherwise upon a due Application to the Parliament, Application to the
Parliament
to have the Quantum and Time ascertained and confirmed to the said Patentees
and their Partners.

The Number of Tunnage of Shipping belonging to England, Tunnage of England
500000
according to the Computation of Sir William Petty, printed in his Political
Arithmetic, Anno 1691, amounting to Five hundred Thousand Tuns; which at as
reasonable a rate as the Owners themselves can fairly desire or offer, would
amount to such a sufficient Annual Income as the Patentees and their Partners
can reasonably desire.

Thirdly, Rewards from Scotland, Ireland, etc.
Rewards from the several Merchants and Owners of Shipping in Scotland,
Ireland, New England, New York, Pensilvania, and the other English Plantations,
being as equally to be expected as from any other Kingdoms or States, Another
Patent promised.
from the latter of which a Promise of a Patent, by the Governor, is made to
the present Patentees.

Fourthly, There is also great reason to hope and expect, Rewards from France
and Holland expected by Privi ledges usuallygranted.
that a Consideration may be obtained from France, and the States of the United
Provinces, not only for their Ships of War, but also from their Merchants
Ships, by such Powers and Privileges as are in the like Cases by them granted
according to the Informations given us.

And the like may be fairly expected from the Subjects of other Governments,
whether Crowns or States. As also from other Crowns and States, etc.


The Number of Tunnage of the Dutch Shipping, The Tunnage of Holland 900000.
according to the said Computation of Sir William Petty, amounting to Nine
hundred Thousand Tuns; Of the rest of Europe, 600000.
and the Tunnage of the rest of Europe, according to the aforesaid Computation,
being Six hundred Thousand Tuns.

And moreover, as a further Advantage to the Parties concerned, Twenty per
Cent. A fifth part of the 4000 shares for a Stock.
of the Four thousand Shares, which upon the completing of the Subscriptions
(hereby intended) will be a Stock of Eight thousand Pounds, to be left to the
management of the Committee mentioned in the following Proposals, and will be
to the Advantage and Benefit of all the Proprietors and Subscribers, according
to their several Interests.

The Shares also proposed at 10 l. per Share, The Shares now bona fide valued
at 20 l. per share, but proposed at 10 l. purposely to encourage Subscribers.
which are by all, or at least most that in any measure understand the Nature
of the Invention, now really and bona fide valued at 20 l. per Share, and is
not doubted but will be so, at least, upon the final closing of the Books:
Which Advantage is designedly and purposely left an Encouragement to all that
shall become Subscribers.

So that the summary View of Profits and Advantages here given, The Profits and
Encouragements certain.
and the Patentees and Proprietors having already begun to make Treaties, as is
before hinted, and there being such an evident Demonstration of the certainty
of the Invention performing what is here proposed, as appears by the Model and
Certificate, and that the Profits will thereby certainly accrue, is thought
satisfactory enough to remove all Doubts and Questions, whether the same will
answer, as is by them set forth and expected, and be a sufficient Encouragement
to all Persons that shall become Subscribers or Partners herein.

Upon the whole matter it may appear, by the Instances and Testimonies
aforesaid, that the said Invention is Real and Practicable, The Encouragement
of the Parliament, and all wise and honest Men, justly expected.
the Use great, and of universal Good and Necessity; the Profits certain, both
to the Public, as well as to all that are or shall be concerned therein; the
Patentees honest, and sincere in their Proposal; a Conditional Reward from all
Governments and States, etc. the Encouragement of the Parliament, as aforesaid;
and lastly, the unanimous Concurrence of almost all Wise and Honest Men, but
justly and deservedly to be expected, in order to put the same into practice
with all the speed and good management imaginable: And for that end a Sum of
Money being needful to be raised, it is by the said Patentees Proposed as
follows.

THE PROPOSALS For Taking Subscriptions to this Invention, VIZ.
I. THE Whole, The whole divided into 6000 Shares, as enrolled in Chancery.
according to the Settlement between the Patentees and present Proprietors, as
enrolled in Chancery, is divided into Six thousand Parts or Shares, which are
to be disposed of in manner following.

II. That Five thousand Eight hundred of the said Six thousand Shares shall be
disposed of by Subscription, at 10 l. per Share, Whereof 5800 to be disposed of
by Subscriptions at 10 l. per Share, and 200 in Trust, as aftermention'd
and the remaining Two hundred Shares shall be subscribed by the two Patentees,
or either of them, without paying down any Money; and to be vested in the said
Patentees, in Trust, for the Uses and Purposes herein after-mention'd and
expressed.

III. That the Patentees and present Proprietors, or their Assigns, shall have
free Liberty to subscribe any number of the said Five thousand Eight hundred
Shares, The present Proprietors have liberty to subscribe 1800 Shares for their
own use, with equal Advantages, paying down no Money, and esteem 10 l. per
share not near the real value.
not exceeding Eighteen hundred in the whole, for the proper use of the said
Patentees and Proprietors, without paying down any Money, and thereby be as
equally entitled to them with all the Benefits and Advantages in this
Invention, as if they had actually paid down Money for the same, all of them
being resolved to subscribe, at least, each his Quota of the said Eighteen
hundred Shares, and most of them many more, (as not esteeming 10 l. per share
near the real Value thereof) And therefore do hereby promise and declare, that
they also will retain their several Quota's of no lesser a number than Twelve
hundred Shares in the whole; and will not sell nor dispose of any thereof,
until the First Day of January 1699, unless by Advice and Consent of the
majority of the Committee hereafter to be chosen.

IV. That the Two hundred Shares vested in the Patentees in Trust, as
abovesaid, be disposed of and applied to the Uses following, (viz.) One hundred
Shares thereof to the sole use, benefit, and advantage of Greenwich Hospital,
100 Shares, (1000 l. value) for Greenwich Hospital.
which at the completing the Subscriptions will be equivalent, at least, to
One thousand Pounds in Money. One hundred other Shares of the said Two hundred,
be invested in the said Mr. George Oldner sen. Mr. Richard Oldner sen. Mr.
Andrew Prime, Mr. John Knight, 100 more shares in Trust (1000 l. in value) for
the use of the Company of Watermen, etc.
and Mr. George Oldner jun. their Executors, Administrators, or Assigns, (as
Trustees) to be applied only for the sole use and benefit of the Company of
Watermen, for and toward the Education of the Children of the Freemen of the
said Company, in English, Writing, and Accounts, as also such parts of the
Mathematics as are or shall be necessary to Navigation; which also, at the
completing of the said Subscriptions, will be equivalent, at least, to One
thousand Pounds in Money.

V. That the Books for taking Subscriptions will be laid open on Monday the 9th
of January next, When, how long and where the Books are to be opened for taking
Subscriptions, etc.
at Robin's Coffee-house in Exchange-Alley, London, from Ten to Two, and from
Four to Six a clock, and will be continued open until Saturday the 14th Ditto
inclusive, unless the whole Six thousand shares be sooner subscribed; but if
any Shares, at the closing of the Books, should be left unsubscrib'd, then the
Books shall be opened again on Monday the 6th of February following, for
completing the said Subscriptions.

VI. N="1"That Dispatch being of the highest consequence at this Juncture, to
the service of this great Undertaking, in reference to the Applications already
made, A fourth part of all Money subscribed to be paid down, with 5 s. per
share discount to such as pay the whole within 4 days after subscribing.
and further to be made to the Governments both at home and abroad, and
particularly to the Parliament here; all Subscribers are to pay down to the
Patentees, or their Cashier, one Fourth part at the time of Subscribing, and
the remaining three Fourths at three several equal Payments, at every Fourteen
Days after Subscription, allowing Five shillings per share discount to such as
shall pay down the whole at the time of subscribing, or within Four Days after.

And, That for all and every the several Payments made of all Money so
subscribed, Receipts signed by the Patentees, or their Cashier, shall be given:
And when the whole Payments are made, Receipts to be given by the Patentees,
etc. for Money received, and an Instrument upon payment of the whole.
the said Receipts shall be delivered back, and an Instrument under the Hands
of the said Patentees shall be duly executed according to Law, and usual Custom
in like Cases, entituling such persons to as many Shares as they have
subscribed and paid in their Money for.

VII. That Twenty pound per Cent. of all Money so subscribed, and paid in, for
the said Four thousand Shares only, be reserved, 20 per Cent. to be reserved a
Stock to be managed by the Committee, which upon completing the Subscription,
will be 8000 l.
and accounted a Stock to negotiate and carry on all the necessary Affairs
relating to this Invention; which said Stock to be under the care of the
Committee hereafter to be chosen, who are to appropriate and dispose of the
same when and after such manner as they shall think most reasonable and
convenient, for promoting the general Profit and Success of this Undertaking.

VIII. That within One Month after the Books are finally closed, A Committee to
be chosen by a general Meeting, within a month after the final closing the
Books, of whom Seven to be a Quorum.
of which public Notice shall be given by the Patentees; a Committee not
exceeding Twelve in number, the two Patentees included, shall be nominated and
elected by the Majority of the Proprietors and Subscribers to that end
assembled, at a General Meeting: And, That a Quorum of the said Committee shall
consist of any Seven or more of them, which said Committee shall have power to
manage and transact the whole Concern.

IX. That none be qualified to be of the Committee, Committeemen to hold Ten
Shares; or forfeit their Office.
unless he hold at least Ten Shares, in his own Name and Right: And if any
Member of the said Committee shall at any time part with so many Shares, as not
to retain such his Quota, he shall ipso facto forfeit his Office.

X. The two Patentees to be Committee Men whilst each holds 50 shares. All
Proprietors etc. to have one Vote, none to have more than one Vote.
That the two Patentees retaining Fifty Shares each in his own Name and Right,
part of their Quota's of the Twelve hundred Shares, as in the 3d Article, shall
always be of the said Committee.

XI. That every Proprietor and Subscriber shall have One Vote, and none to have
more than one Vote, in the Election of the said Committee, which shall be
Chosen on the Second Thursday in January Yearly, after the First Election.

XII. That the said Committee shall meet as often, An Allowance to be made to
the Committee by a general Meeting.
and at such Time and Place as they shall appoint when elected; And that such
Allowance out of the Joint Stock, as shall be made and agreed on by the General
Meeting, be equally divided, and paid to such of the said Committee as shall
attend accordingly.

XIII. The Books made up once a Year, or oftener, for Dividends.
That the Books shall be made up at least once in every Year, or oftener, if
occasion require; And, that Dividends be made within one Month following,
proportionable to each person's number of Shares; And, No Transferrs to be
made, but in the Transfer Book.
that no Transferrs of any Parts or Shares be made, saving in the Book for that
purpose to be provided, and kept by the said Committee or their Secretary, etc.

XIV. That at the Request of any Twelve, or more, Twelve or more may summon a
general Meeting.
of the Parties concerned, whether of the Proprietors, Subscribers, or both, a
General Meeting of all the said Parties concerned shall be called and appointed
by the said Committee, within Ten Days next after such Demand made, The Demand
to be left in Writing.
and left by them in Writing under their Hands with the said Committee, or
their Secretary, for the final determination of all Matters which shall be laid
before them.

XV. That all General Meetings may adjourn to such time or times, place or
places, The general Meeting may adjourn.
within the Cities of London or Westminster, as they, or the majority of them,
shall see meet: And, that all future Vacancies in the Committee be filled up by
a New Election, at a General Meeting of the Proprietors and Subscribers, with
Persons qualified to be elected, in manner as aforesaid.

XVI. That the Proprietors and Subscribers, Who may Elect.
at a General Meeting, may Annually, or oftener, as occasion requires, Three
Auditors to examine the Accounts, for a general satisfaction, etc. and make
them such an Allowance out of the joint Stock as they think fit, etc.
Choose and Appoint Three from among themselves to be Auditors, at all
seasonable Hours to inspect, examine, and make report of all the Accounts,
Books, and Transactions of the said Committee, as often as they shall see
cause, for the full Satisfaction of All that are or shall be concerned; and
that the said Auditors, while such, shall receive such Reasonable Allowance out
of the Joint Stock aforesaid, as shall be appointed by the majority of the
Proprietors and Subscribers at a General Meeting.

XVII. The Orders of the Committee binding on all.
That all Orders of the said Committee shall be binding upon all the Parties
concerned, subject nevertheless at all Times, and in all Cases, Matters, and
Things, to the Sense, Judgment, But subject to the General (...) in all (...).
Final End, Determination, and Decision of a General (...) of the Proprietors
and Subscribers, or the majority of them.

XVIII. That all Votes be made per Balott.

Note, That so soon as the Subscriptions are completed, and the Affairs
thereof settled at Home, etc. that then some fit and proper Persons of the
Committee shall be appointed, and left in Trust with the SECRET, by the said
George Oldner, he intending to go as soon as required by the said Committee, to
the (...), and States of Holland, etc. in order to (...) and Completing his
Treaties there; it (...) necessary to the Advantage of this great (...), that
the same should be done with all the wise and prudent Dispatch possible.

FINIS.

