THE FATHER OF THE FAITHFUL TEMPTED

As was more concisely showed August 31. 1674, At a SOLEMN FUNERAL in the
CHVRCH, AT WOTTON under EDGE in the County of Gloucester.

S. Aug. Tota vita humana est tentatio. By GILES OLDISWORTH. A. M. and Rector
of Burton on the Hill in the same County.

OXFORD. Printed by HENRY HALL. 1676.

Imprimatur,

HEN: CLERK Vice Cancel. OXON.
Jan. 30. 1676.
To the Lady Crofts, the virtuous Consort of my very good Lord, Herbert, by
Divine Providence, Lord Bishop of Hereford.
Lancelot Oldisworth of Halifax in Yorkshire, Knight. took to wife Bridget,
daughter of William Ramsey of the same County, Esquire. Their son was Maurice.

Maurice Oldisworth, Husband of VVinifred daughter to Steven, the brother of
Walter Stapleton, L. Bp. of Excester, had issue Lancelot.

Lancelot Oldisworth married Alice, daughter of Thomas Fry of Devon-shire,
Gent. he begat Maurice.

Maurice Oldisworth took to wife Gennet, daughter of John Philpot L. Mayor of
London. His son was Lancelot.

Lancelot Oldisworth was Husband to Margaret, daughter of Andrew Foord of
Cornwall, Esquire. He begat William.

William Oldisworth married the daughter of Nicholas Read of Devon-shire, Esquire.
By whom he had Maurice.

Maurice Oldisworth his wife was Jane, daughter and Heiress unto John Sydenham
of Somersetshire Esquire. Their son was Thomas.

Thomas Oldisworth married a daughter of Morgan of Pennicoyd Castle in
Monmouth-shire, by whom he was Father of Nicholas.

Nicholas Oldisworth having married Marjorie, daughter of Davis of the city of
Glouc. had by her Edward.

Edward Oldisworth was in Q. Mary's days a Colonel in Flanders: In Q.
Elizabeth's days he married Tace, daughter to Arthur Porter of Newark in the
County of Glouc. Esquire Their son was Arnold.

Arnold Oldisworth, Clerk of the Hanniper, married Lucie, daughter and
Co-heiress of Francis Baxtu, Treasurer to Mary Quen of Scotland. By Lucie he
had Edward.

Edward Oldisworth of Bradley in the Parish of Wotten under Edge in the County
of Glouc. Esquire married Elizabeth, the eldest daughter of George Masters of
Ciren-Cester in the County before said, Esquire. Their only son was Robert:

Robert Oldisworth of the said Bradley in the said Parish of Wotton under
Edge, Esquire took to wife Elizabeth, daughter of William Clotterbook of
Kingsstanely in the County of Glouc. Gent. and had issue William.

William Oldisworth (the only child that ever the said Robert Oldisworth, or
Elizabeth his wife, had) was buried Aug. 31. 1674 both before he was married,
and before he was full 21 years old.

Good Madam,
The more inferior this slender Stemm is unto the generous Croft of Crofts
Castle; the more numerous those weeping eyes were, which I then beheld when the
last Branch of this Stock was untimely cut off; And (above all this) the more
narrowly I search into the multitude of sorrows which I am apt to imagine
Abraham, the Friend of God, wrestled with; The greater Impression abides
engraven upon my heart, while (with true joy and much pleasure) I frequently
ruminate how tender a mercy the Preserver of men daily vouchsafes both unto my
Lord Bishop of Hereford, and unto your Ladyship, in continuing the Life, and in
prospering the days of Sr Herbert Crofts, your Isaac. To bury that Heir which
is an only Son, to mourn for such an only Son, as is an only child, is (I see)
A two-edged Woe! Nevertheless, by Faith the Father of the Faithful duelled, the
Father of the Faithful vanquished, even this Trial.

Madam, If either my conjectures concerning Abraham his temptations, or any
Descant of mine upon his exemplarie faith, can assist your Ladyships growing in
grace and in the knowledge of our Lord and Savior JESUS CHRIST; I shall
willingly sacrifice this Sermon to censure; yea, I shall bless God for granting
the request of

Your Good Ladyships humbly devoted GILES OLDISWORTH.

To the Virtuous Mrs. BRDGET THORP, VVidow.
BRing her forth that she may be burnt: When What paper I now expose, Genesis
38.24.
I two years since rashly condemned unto the Press, such another unjust Judge,
sa Judah was, was I. Dear Cousin, I will not say that a Gift in your Bosom did
corrupt my Judgment, Sept. 2. 1674.
for then your Purse would pay for it.

The truth is, to have me at that time pass that sentence, you were not; to
have me now execute that sentence, you are, the importunate widow

Let me cease to honor such as are Widows indeed, if I do not from my heart
reverence and highly esteem you, for You glorify God: Whom I should
dishonor, should I conceal that it is for His sake, and only for His sake,
that you require this Sermon from

Your most obliged Servant, and ever thankful Kins-man GILES OLDISWORTH.

Genesis XXII.
(a) 1. ANd it came to pass after these things, that God did tempt Abraham,
and said unto him, Abraham: And he said, Behold here I am.

(b) 2 And he said, Take now thy Son, thine only Son Isaac, whom thou love,
and get thee into the land of Moriah; and offer him there for a burnt offering
upon one of the Mountains which I will tell thee of.

(c) 3 And Abraham rose up early in the Morning, and sadled his Ass, and took
two of his young men with him, and Isaac his Son; and clave the wood for the
burnt offering, and rose up, and went unto the place of which God had told him.

(d) 4 Then on the third day Abraham lifted up his eyes, and saw the place
afarr off.

(e) 5 And Abraham said unto his young men, Abide you here with the Ass; and I
and the lad will go yonder and worship, and come again to you.

(f) 6 And Abraham took the wood of the burnt offering, and laid it upon Isaac
his Son, and he took the fire in his hand, and a Knife; and they went both of
them together.

(g) 7 And Isaac spoke unto Abraham his father, and said, My father; and he
said, Here am I, my Son. And he said, Behold the fire and the wood; but where
is the lamb for a burnt-offering.

(h) 8 And Abraham said, My Son, God will provide himself a lamb for a burnt
offering: So they went both of them together.

(i) 9 And they came to the place which God had told him of, and Abraham built
an altar there, and laid the wood in order; and bound Isaac his Son, and laid
him on the altar upon the wood.

(k) 10 And Abraham stretched forth his hand, and took the Knife to slay his
Son.

(l) 11 And the Angel of the Lord called unto him, out of Heaven, and said,
Abraham, Abraham, And he said, Here am I.

(m) 12 And he said, Lay not thy hand upon the lad, neither do thou any thing
unto him: for now I know that thou fear God, seeing thou have not withheld
thy Son, thine only Son, from me.

(n) 13 And Abraham lifted up his eyes, and looked, and behold, behind him a
Ram caught in a thicket by his horns: And Abraham went, and took the Ram, and
offered him up for a burnt offering, in the stead of his Son.

(o) 14 And Abraham called the name of that place Jehovah-jireth: as it is said
to this day, In the Mount of the Lord it shall be seen.

THE FATHER OF THE FAITHFUL TEMPTED.
Hebr. XI.XVII. By faith Abraham, when he was tempted, offered up Isaac.


AT what time this Epistle was written unto these Hebrew Converts, these Hebrew
Converts did (as at this instant many of us do) endure Hebr 10.32.
a great fight of afflictions? So great a Fight of afflictions they now
endured, that, as all of us, so most of them had confessedly 36:
need of patience: Such need of patience they now had, that the Author of this
Epistle, whosoever he was, opportunely 35.
presses them in the same words where with I beseech you "Cast not away your
Confidence. And, that cast away their confidence they might not, with the cords
of a man, even with a threefold cord, he endeavors to wind up their hearts
unto a steadfastness of Faith. For.

First, from Habak. 2.4. he brings to their remembrance, how (they were not
now to learn) that 38.
the just should live by faith.

Next he defines what faith is: says he 17.1.
Faith is the substance (the confident expectation) of things hoped For: The
things which are not seen are eternal, and Faith is the evidence (the
conviction) of things not seen.

Thirdly, to declare what faith can do, he in this XI. CAP. repeateth what
faith has done. Says he.

V. 4. By faith Abel offered a more costly Sacrifice then Cains was.

V. 5. By faith Enoch so pleased God, that God took him from Earth to Heaven.

V. 7. Then when the whole world despised the fore-warnings of God, By faith
Noah was so moved with fear of the Flood to come, that (for himself, and for
his family) he prepared an Ark of refuge.

It was through a Faith in the truth of Gods promises, that Abraham, when he
was thereunto called, v. 8. forsook his own Country, v. 9. sojourned in a
strange Land; and here v. 17. offered up Isaac.

Hebr. 11.17. By faith Abraham, when he was tempted, offered up Isaac.

THis useful Observation immediately releiveth us with three seasonable
comforts,

The one, Abraham was tempted. The other, When Abraham was tempted he offered
up Isaac. A third, When Abraham offered up Isaac, he offered up Isaac by Faith.


Of the last of these first.
BY faith -- By the use and benefit which he made of his faith; By the good
fight of faith which He fought.

Abraham fighting every affliction which did assault him, and overcoming every
affliction which he fought.

Offered up Isaac -- had (although with much conflict) the patience and the
power to offer up Isaac (1) upon the Altar.

Dub: Since it is said (m) Now Know I that thou feared God, It should seem
Abraham did offer up Isaac, not by faith, but through fear.

Solut: You find no repugnance between the fear there applauded, and the faith
here extolled: For example, Heb. 11.7.
By faith Noah moved with fear -- As a prudent fear was the effect of that, so
a filial fear was the fruit of this Patriarks faith. 17.
By a faith moving him to fear Abraham offered up Isaac.

Abraham offered up Isaac.
DUB: Since (n) the life of a Ram was Sacrificed. and (m) the life of Isaac was
preserved, Can it hold true that Abraham offered up Isaac?

Answ: It holds true in every respect.

1 Solut: Beyond the scope of this Text

Abraham offered up Isaac representatively: (ye Know) as in Sacraments so in
Sacrifices the sign signifying betokens the matter signified. When in the
stead of his Son Isaac he slew that Ram, Abraham did representatively offer up
the life of Isaac in the life of that Ram.

2 S^lut: Within this Text.

1. These words he [ offered up Isaac,] are not so much an express
affirmation, as a Select expression: To show how uncouth a Duty this Patriarch
now underwent, it is here specified that what Duty he now underwent [was to
offer up Isaac.]

2. In our Authors his large acceptance Abraham did offer him up. Our Author
here prosecuteth, not the Death of Isaac, but the life of Faith: Now, as in
round numbers, so in running styles, it abundantly suffices, if what is
cursorily affirmed be true in the main.

3. Our ready writer forgets not unto whom he Dedicateth this Epistle. Unto
these Hebrews Moses was read every Sabbath Day: Tell these Hebrews, out of the
Book of Moses, that Isaac was offered up; and, out of the Book of Moses these
Hebrews will tell you your own limited sense and meaning. With 2 Samuel 21.19.
compare 1 Chronicles. 20.5.

3. Solut: Moses shows how Abraham offered up Isaac.

1. Inceptively: For instance: Gen: 22. He v. 3. arose and went unto the place
of which God had told him; And yet v. 4. two days after he saw that place
afarr off: How this? Answ: He was v 3. beginning to go to that place. Genesis 37.
Reuben v. 21. delivered Joseph out of his brethrens hands; nevertheless, v.
24. his brethren did cast him into a pit, and did v. 28. sell him into Egypt.
Quest. How then was Joseph delivered? Answ: Reuben v. 21. began to deliver, and
although the person of Joseph was not, the life of Joseph was, through Reubens
care delivered. Thus Abraham, he arose to offer up Isaac: Whereupon although
the life of Isaac was not, the person of Isaac was offered up upon the altar.
And that too.

2. Actually: The offering up of Isaac was, not a three hours, but a three
days business: in all which space, the Obedience of this Patriarch ceased
not, until his Duty first ceased: For he slew his Son. --

3. Intentionally: As when this Son was first promised, Abraham had a purpose,
a full purpose of heart, to give this his Son his Name at his birth, and to
circumcise him at eight days old: so now that the same Son is demanded, his
true intention is to sacrifice him (d) at the third day. And he did so.

4. Interpretatively: When Jephthah caused his dear child Judge. 11. to v. 39.
vow the vow of a Nazarite (he did v. 31. compared with v. 36, 37.) he did
interpretatively offer up that daughter of his for a burnt-offering unto the
Lord: So here, Abraham his oblation receives a value, not from the execution
of his hands, for (m) his hands were tied up, but from the resolution of his
mind, for (k) his mind was sincere; even so much that the searcher of hearts
made this construction of his sincerity (m) Thou have not withheld thy Son
from me.

It follows, If withold him the Patriarch did not, some temptations or
other lay upon the Patriareh to withold him. And what sort of temptations
this might be comes next to be dis-cussed.

Abraham was tempted.
AMong the Heathens classical Poets have from hence raised fictions treading
close upon the heels of truth it self; Among the Jews noted Rabbis have
upon this stage introduced the tempter, Satan; and Him too in a visible shape;
among us Christians this one History has tasked, if not over-tasked, the
elegant quills, the curious fancies, the working imaginations, yea and the
profoundest Judgments too, not only of humane writers, but even of professed
Divines; Among the inspired penmen of sacred Wit, S. James expostulateth "
When he offered Isaac his Son upon the altar was not Abraham justified by
works? Answ: Verily he was, and by such as equalled his first works and more!
To forsake his native soil, his own Kindred and his Fathers house that he might
wander hither and thither whither he himself neither did nor might foreknow,
these were great self denials (these!) Yet of these the phrase is Heb. 11.8.
when he was called, so Genesis 1^.1.
The Lord had said unto him, But now that he is to slay his Son, the word in my
Text is (not When he was called but) When he was tried, so (a) not God did say
to Abraham, but God did tempt Abraham.

Wherefore, of these remarkes, of these asterismes, which so many sorts of
writers have hereunto affixed, of those Annotations which the Holy Ghost
himself has so graciously contributed, let every one of us reap some profit,
some seasonable advantage, some Spiritual benefit, for our present consolation.
If Moses Exodus 3.3.
turned aside to see that burning bush, let us with Him (a) contemplate (the
greater miracle of the two) this (c) thicket of thorns, this fierce law (b)
which (e) troubling the Patriarch on (h) every side, within (i) his bowels,
within (i) his heart (k) kindles, though not a consuming, yet a melting fire.
For.

In GENESIS XXII.
Abraham was Tempted.
Verse 1. By all circumstances, v. 2. In very deed, And in truth from v. 2.
unto v. eleventh.

In the manner v. 1. recorded, In the matter v. 2. joined, In the Duty from v.
2 unto v. 11 performed.

In such points as v. 1. sharpened his trial, In a trial v. 2 made up of
afflictions, From v. 2. to v. 11. in afflictions big with temptation.

Oh, my brethren, Why say we that our wound is incurable, and that never was
sorrow like unto our sorrow? Whereas

In v. 1. of Genesis 22. Abraham was tempted.
1* After these things. Qu; After what things?

1. Answ: After he was aged almost an hundred and thirty years: Alas, he has
more need to keep his bed, then (c) to rise before the day dawn: His shriveled
Limbs require succor, rest and retiredness, rather then terror, toil and
travail: O forsake him not in his old Age: Spare him a little before he goes
hence.

2. Answ: After fresh prosperities: What he had heard in Vr of the Chaldees,
that he had found true in Canaan: Unto Him the land of promise was a land of
performances: For his sake God had reproved Kings, had put to flight the Army
of aliens, had preserved Lot, and blessed Isaac: He was rich in cattle and in
men; And (what sweetened his wealth) he abounded in honor, for he was, and was
esteemed, a Prince; a mighty Prince: and (that which sweetened both was) he
enjoyed both his wealth and his honor in quietness and in assurance. The
Philistines, in whose borders he now quartered, had sought and ratified a
confederacy with Him and His: What Well they had violently taken away was
(upon his first complaint) restored: Out of it now sprang not waters of stife,
but the issues of peace: In all that he did, in all that he had, he was
blessed; so blessed, that for the public worship of his God, he had planted a
Grove, In this Grove his God Alsufficient he now adored as his Everlasting God:
And, as if this God of his praise had therefore lifted him up that he might
cast him down, it (a) came to pass, suddenly as a whirle wind it came to
pass, that (a) after these things God did tempt, God did try, God did afflict
Abraham: He looked for good, but behold evil!

3. Answ: After new hopes: It was not now, Lord God, What will thou give me,
seeing I go childlesse? Neither was it O that Ismael might live before thee?
God had said Sarah shall bear a Son, A Son she bare him at the set time of
which God had spoken; A Son she bare unto him in his old Age! God had said Thou
shall call his name Isaac: Out of duty, rather out of pure joy, Isaac he is
called: that God may delight to bless the babe, the babe is upon the eight day
circumcised. The child grows, the child is weaned; Abraham makes a feast,
a great feast. By the care of his Mother, by the wisdom of his Father, yea by
authority had from God himself, the Youth, before he is of full age, is made
and declared heir, Sole heir. And now upon whom are the eyes of the whole
hous-hold of faith, but upon Isaac? In whom shall all Nations be blessed? In
whom shall be the seed of Abraham be called, but in Isaac? Above twenty five
years had the life of this Patriarch bin bound up in the life of this lad. And
it came to pass after these things -- What? Answ: Abraham rueth the day of the
year, and the hour of the day wherein Isaac was born. To conclude.

4. Answ: After that he was known of God: He that inhabiteth the highest
heavens had wonderfully condescended to an acquaintance with this Patriarch: He
had entered into a covenant, into a familiarity, into a friendship with this
Father of the Faithful. Bow the Heavens, O Lord, and come down, Of late the
Lord did not stay for any such invitation from his friend Abraham: It was at
Abraham his Dwellings that the Lord God did marsquerade in the likeness of
men, made himself no stranger, washed his feet, rested in the cool of the
arbor, eat well, and drank well: Abraham was the only favorite whom the Lord
God in his way toward sodom had made his companion: So very a friend was
Abraham, that from Abraham God would not hide the thing which he was there
doing: And after these things for a gracious Lord and Master to try
conclusions upon his poor Servant -- this is harsh! Love unfaind, filial fear
and cordial friendship would be, not tried; but trusted: Peter will be
greived, if Jesus shall a third time ask Love thou me? To question the
obedience of this Patriarch is, not to try, but to break, his heart.

2. Abraham was tempted in the revelation (a) made, made unto Him, unto Him in
the night, in the night by God, by God speaking, by God saying Abraham.

1. Be it that the death of Isaac is predestined, the more will the mercy
(that I may not say the glory) of the most high God show it self in, not
manifesting, but concealing, this future evil.

2. If, contrary unto the accustomed mercies of the wise God toward the
inquisitive sons of un-advised man, Gods predestination concerning Isaac be
revealed, Tell it not in Beersheba, for (should the Patriarch know) it would
bring down his gray hairs with sorrow to the grave.

3. If to the unhappy ears of the surprised old Father it must come (Prepare
him a little:) Give him his full sleep, a full meal, and due store of wine:
Place in a readiness about him Lovers and Friends, if not to share and divide,
yet to bewail and bemoan his Woe. Then (but not until then) give unto him some
easy hint, some wary fore notice of what will seem sad news at the best.

4. If this be, not to tempt, but to indulge; if no company, nor Comforters,
may be admitted; Solitary and forlorn as he is, let him (by himself alone)
recieve the intelligence. but let him receive it with a still voice, let him
not receive it over hastily: To bolt upon one over suddenly, startleth even
then when one brings a blessing, how much more when one comes not to
befriend, but to afflict.

5. If suddenly and unexspectedly the news must affright, if in an hour that
he is not aware of the aged and trembling parent must hear the tidings of his
dear-sons fate, Mention it unto him in the day time, there is in Day light some
light of comfort; Mention it not in the night season, in all Darkness there is
Dread. If heretofore there fell upon this faithful Patriarch such a horror at
the going down of the Sun, a greater horror will seize him now in the night,
in the dark night, in the dead time of the dark night.

6. If, to add to the discomfort, there must be a dreadful horror upon his
mind then when he hears his Isaac's doom, send, I pray thee, by the man whom
thou will send; by some Cushi, or by some Amalekite, for How dismal are the
Feet of him that brings bad errands? If Ahimaaz be a good man, King David
will from Ahimaaz exspect good tidings: Such is their Clemency, It is by their
inferior Judges that Princes condemn; their own lips speak not, except
pardons. If therefore any Enemies Abraham has, let one of them be unto him the
black messenger of his Isaac's death; but let not the Lord speak unto his
servant, lest he dye.

In the last place, As the Destiny of Isaac was brought unto Abraham in the
horror of Darkness, and, that too, not by some Enemy or stranger, neither by
some neighbor or friend, no not by some Man of God, no nor yet by some Angel
of the Lord, but by the dreadful JEHOVAH himself: So

1. God who at Sundry times spoke in diverse manners, spoke in this third age
of the World neither by Vrim, nor by Thummim; but either in Dreams, or in
Visions: Oh, not in a Dream, lest that fear, not in a Vision, lest that
terrify, the Patriarch: such a Dream, such a Vision as this, will make his
whole head sick, and his whole heart faint.

2. Let not the good old man epsy an estranged look from his hitherto benign
Lord, rather let him not see the face of God at all; for Who can see the face
of God, and live?

3. Suppose that the Lord do indeed un-cloth himself of his majesty and
terror, Suppose he speak face to face with Abraham, as a man speaks with his
friend; Nevertheless, as the case now stands, he in so doing, Will not (as
his manner was) confirm and comfort this Holy Father, but he will (as his
manner is not) deter and dismay Him, For

4. Call thy Daughter Jo-ruhamah, and thy Son Lo-ammi: Call Na-ommi, not Naomi,
but Marah: If a signet on the Lords right hand Jeconiah may not be, deal
squarely with him, name him, not Jeconiah, but Coniah: And if (a) God come, not
to bless, but to tempt, if he come to un-Abraham the Patriarch, say (a) not
Abraham, but Abram.

5. I have called thee by thy name, thou art mine. The favouritie, as ever,
awaketh, starteth up, and with joy, answers unto his name, but (b) Hope
disappointed makes his heart sick. For.

In v. 2. of Genesis 22. Abraham was tempted.
1. IN the (b) Surprise of which he (a) never dreamed. He (a) thought to hear
not the dire will, but the good pleasure, of his bountiful Lord; He (a)
expects not a burden, but a blessing; not a strict charge but enlarged
promises; not a billing command, but loving kindnesses better then life. Me
thinks I see, me thinks I hear, the overjoyed heart of this surprised
Favorite (b) interrupting his God.

Take now -- O blessed possessour of heaven and of earth, Thou art always like
thy self, Thou art always giving!

Take now thy son -- Which of the two sons whom the Lord has graciously given
unto me? Him by the Bondwoman? or Him by the Freewoman?

Thine only Isaac -- The apple of mine eye, and of thine eye also, O my God.

Whom thou love -- And, O most high God, whom Thou love.

And get thee unto the land of Moriah -- For there the Lord will command his
blessings.

And there for a burnt offering offer -- Most probably hitherto this Favorite
fed his hopes. But when it (b) added -- for a burnt offering offer Him -- then
was Abraham tempted!

1 What had He sinned? that among all the inhabitants of Gods earth He alone
should be singled out for such a prodigy as this? Had he trespassed against a
Neighbors Wife, reason good then that he should give his first born for his
transgression, the fruit of his body for the sin of his soul: But ( blessed be
his God) He had wrought no such folly (he!) Admit he had, Here after the son
of David's adultery shall dye a natural death; and shall the Son of Abraham's
integrity be haled, like a beast unto the slaughter?

2. Offer him up there -- To whom? Satan? He was a murderer from the beginning:
As for the God of all flesh His Delight is, not to destroy, but to preserve,
the work of his own hands.

3. Of man shall man's blood be required: Does God trapan Abraham? If when He
show his brother a mark was set upon Cain, should Abraham slay his son, would
his God hold him guiltless?

4. Take now thy Son -- For what, for a burnt offering?

1. Behold for a burnt offering some Lamb or Kid is proper: such a firstling
the righteous Abel offered up, and with that sacrifice the Lord was then well
pleased: Does he now forget to be gracious? And has he shut up the bowels of
his compassions? The tender mercies of the wicked are cruel; Are the tender
mercies of JEHOVAH so too? Lo, the blood of bullocks or of he goats, of
Lambs, or of Kids, he does not now require; the blood of which the preserver of
men is now pleased to drink, is man's blood!

2. As man's blood, so not the blood of some murderer, rebel, or oppressor, not
the blood of some Cain, Lamech, or Nimrod; but of one harmless and blameless,
of one innocent and just. It was but in v. 32. of Genesis 18. that the Lord
inclined to spare a wicked City for righteous persons sakes. Is he now for
spareing the ungodly, and for condemning the righteous?

3. Power out thy wrath upon the Heathen which have not known thee: as for
Isaac, he is no idolatrous Chaldean, no profane Canaanite, no un-circumcised
sinner of the Gentiles; but a person circumcised and religious, One who anon
asks (g) Where is the lamb for a burnt offering?

4. He was, as of the same holy profession with this Father of the Faithful,
so no stranger, foriener, or proselite, but a native, and this native a
domestic, and this domestic a favorite: Hereafter David may spare
Mehpibosheth, but no such liberty may Abraham now use.

5. The person demanded for a sacrifice is, as a domestic favorite, so no
kindred afar off, no nor yet some one or other of Lots incestuous offspring, no
nor any Daughter, or Son of any concubine (for as yet concubine Abraham had
none) neither yet the Son of his hand-maiden Hagur, but the Son of Sarah his
Wife.

6. If the better Jonathan deserves, the more hatred he finds, Thou shall
surely die will Saul say to Jonathan: But unto His Father, Isaac was a Son as
dear, as deserving.

Again, Absalom, he was a Son dearly beloved of his Father yet was not he the
heir of his Fathers throne, the heir of David was Solomon. but, unto Abraham,
Isaac, is, as a dear Son, so an only heir; and this only heir is born unto
his parents in their old Age, given beyond hopes, given by promise, by the
promise of the same Jehovah who now says (b) offer him up for a burnt
offering: What was, if this was not, to tempt Abraham?

2. Abraham was tempted as in a commandment thus grevious, so in the manner
how his God wordeth his Commandment. Ye know, bitter pills would be gilded to
the eye, and loathsome potions would be sugared to the taste: Burdensome taxes are
levied by acceptable Names, and severe Edicts need a gratifying language. Is
it not a little one? said Lot of Zoar; and, of what he would have the seller
part with "It is naught, it is naught, will the buyer say. That pain is almost
past which is not fore thought of; therefore to him that is afflicted this
pity should be showed, that where every word wounds there few words would be
used: words not aggravating but extenuating, miseries: Whereas that form of
speech which God (b) uses unto his Patriarch is (if ye review it) unto his
head a maul, in his side arrows, and in his Heart a Sword.

Take now -- No leisure to deliberate? No time to prepare?

Take now thy Son -- Ever the nearer the relation, the more cutting the
severitie.

Thine only Son -- Oh stabbing! For pure pity that word only would have bin
omitted.

Thine only Isaac -- What, by Name too?

Thine only Isaac whom thou Love -- No more (except ye would break Abraham's
heart) no more. If ye would not enrage do not awaken, his greedy sorrows. Do
not first draw out the bowels of his affections unto a full length, and
afterward twist and torture them. The fathers memory is fresh enough of it
self, do not vex it as a thing that is raw.

Offer up thy Son -- thine only Isaac -- thine only Isaac whom thou love?
-- Certainly, if fainting did not, astonishment did, render the Patriarch quite
speechless: and as certainly, the same vehemence of anguish which
un-tongue-tied the Son of Cresus when (dumb as he was) he found words to
preserve his condemned Father, might make this Patriarch, while he now seems
speechless, argue the cause of his demanded Isaac. 1. Did I not say unto thee
Do not thou deceive me? Was not my request, O that Ismael might live in thy
presence? 2. Has God said, and shall not He do it? Has He spoken, and will
not He make it good? Is he a man that his purpose should change? Or the Son of
Man that he should lie? 3. Has He sworn and would he repent? Where is the
truth of his free and frequent promises? of his voluntary and solemn covenant?
In whom shall all Nations be blessed, if Isaac must die? 4. Account that God is
able to raise him up from the Dead, yet what profit is there in his blood?
Shall the Dust praise thee, O Lord? Shall it declare thy truth? 5. If the Lord
will have sacrifice rather then mercy, shall not the judge of all the Earth do
right? He who forbeareth the guilty, will He slay the innocent? 6. All Souls
are thine: even the Souls of the righteous as well as the Souls of the
unrighteous: yet, lo, Can the blood of Isaac speak better things then the
blood of Abel did? As Abel was, shall Isaac likewise be, a type, a figure, of
good things to come? Or. 7. If the Lord (for the Lord is a God that weighs
actions) if the Lord (according unto the Counsel of his good pleasure) be
indeed working some great mystery of godliness, Since Samson will not refuse
to interpret His riddle to his Delilah, yea since the Lord concealed not what
flames of vengance he was bringing upon Sodom, will he now hide from Abraham
the thing which he is now doing? Answ: He (a) will: and because he (m) will,

3. Answ. Abraham was tempted, as (b) in the manner how, so (b) in the place
where this burden was laid upon him. For Quest: whence did he (c) arise, but
from thence where he rested all the last night? Where did he lodge all the last
night, but in Beersheba at his own home? Within his own home Where, except in
the tent of Sarah his Wife? Answ: If there, Trouble him not, the door is now
shut, and the wife of his bosom is with him in bed. True, were he now (while
this agony is upon him) as far absent from His dwelling place, as David and
David's cavalires will then be distanced from their un-concerned families, when
they shall (hereafter) lament over Ziklag; Were He now (as they will be) left
alone in fields wide and open, he might now (like them) by himself alone
securely lift up his voice in weeping until he has no more power to weep.
But being now surprised within his own doors, even in the tent, that I may not
say in the bosom, of his Wife, Sarah; Start out of his sleep he (a) does: but
should one sigh, one sob, one groan, escape his strangled thoughts, Imagine ye
the result. His Wife, she would cling about his elbow "A bloody Husband unto
Me thou art; Isaac would hide himself among the stuff; Domestic Servants
would mutiny " Shall Isaac die who is the Heir of promise? Isaac shall not
die. In short, His own trained bands would arise in arms against Abraham, as
against a Fanatic! To conclude, either his Obedience toward his God he must
frustrate (and frustrate his Obedience toward his God, he will not:) else,
being in bitterness for his only Son, for his only Son he dares not weep; no
not for his only Isaac. Upon Benjamins neck Joseph shall please himself in
weeping; the bowels of Abraham yern, upon Isaac's neck he may not weep.

4. Abraham was tempted in the No time (b) given. The daughter of Jephthah, so
God will order it, shall go childless among Women; a joyful mother of children,
a happy mother in Israel, she shall not be: nevertheless, this indulgence her
tender father may grant, he may safely give unto her f^ll two months space, and
therein to bewail and celebrate her Virgin life, before she be finally
consecrated a Nunn, a Vestal, a Votarie to her God. But, as for the Father of
Isaac, He must seize, he must apprehend, he must take his Isaac not two months
hence but presently. Where it is said unto him (b) Take thy son, there it is
said unto him (b) Take thy son now.

5. Whither must he take Him?

1. Answ: Not unto the tent of his abode, for there he might have rushed upon,
have gulped down, and irrevocably have executed the unnatural Duty, ere ever
his more considerate heart had given place unto the recoilings of his fatherly
compassions, Loving-Kindnesses, and affections.

2. Answ. Neither might (that) neighboring grove be the shadow of his sons
death: for there he might have called in aid. But:

3. Answ. He was to take his son unto a place (d) afarr off, which place, mount
Moriah by name, was above forty miles distant from Beersheba, which forty miles
were; in this winterly season, unto the feeble Knees, and languishing Spirits,
of heavy hearted Abraham, little less (d) then three days journey: During a
great part of which three days, to speak, was to betray his grief; to be
silent, was to breed suspicion; to stand still, was disobedience; to return
back, was rebellion; and to go forward, was death!

4 Answ: Get thee into the land of Moriah unto one of the mountains which (b) I
will tell thee of; How shall he get thither? The same Vision which (a)
disturbed his first nights rest, will these next two nights hold his eyes
wakeing; or if slumber he does, his very shuntings will affright him; How can a
dejected, crasie, aged, person travail, if he wants both sleep and
sustenance? He can eat no food, except bread of affliction; and he more
heartily feeds upon his griefs, then upon that. I dare not say he mingleth
his drink with tears, for these he suppresseth; In the stead of weeping
openly, he bleedeth inwardly* and no marveil, seeing every step between
Beer-sheba and mount Moriah presses so heavily upon his drooping Spirits
Father said the (g) secure lad, Where is a Lamb for the burnt offering? Nigh at
hand (thought the Father) but he durst not say so. He was glad to pluck up his
Spirits, when with a sorrowful heart (I wisse) he happily replied (h) God will
provide himself a lamb, my son. Hungry and thirsty his soul fainting in him,
upon naked mountains in bleak weather slowly and mournfully he laggeth on, glad
if he might be privileged to sprinkle the ground with tears, and his head
with Ashes, but he may not thus mitigate his afflictions: When, after many, and
many a wearisom step, he long at the last (d) saw the place afarr off, much
more when he (i) came quite to it, then, more then ever, he fixed his farewell
eye upon his now short-lived Isaac; And the more he now fixed his eye upon his
Isaac, the more did his eye now affect his heart: But more (by many degrees
more) was his sad and mournful heart pitifully greived then when he (k)
stretched forth his hand, and took the Knife! For

6 Abraham was tempted as in the place appropriated to this sacrifice, so in
the sacrifice to be offered up. The sacrifice to be offered up was (b) a burnt
offering: and this (ye know) required (f) as well fire, as a Knife. This burnt
offering was (k) first to be slain, and then (i) to be consumed with fire. I
say again.

Isaac was (1) as first to be bound, and then to be laid over the altar upon
the wood, so first to be slain with a Knife, and then to be burnt. A cruelty
it will be to cut the throat of Isaac; but the inhumanitie cease not here:
for, when his throat is cut, then must his body, his whole body, be burned,
wholly burned, to ashes, Sirs, if this be that death which Isaac is to suffer,
say I, Let me not see the death of the Lad. But (to make the catastrophe yet,
more tragical!) His Father must see it: And yet is this sigh, this prodigious
Sight but the least of his trialls. For

7. Abraham was tempted as in the sacrifice (b) assigned, so in the sacrificer
(b) ordained. Isaac the Son, He is to be the sacrifice; Abraham the father, He
is to be the sacrificer! 1. If Isaac must indeed be offered up for a burnt
offering, let some un-concerned stranger, or other, be hired to be the
sacrificing Priest. 2. If by a strange hand the Son of Abraham may not die,
Order some mean out Servant to give the deaths wound. 3. If no inferior
Servant may, let Eleazar the Steward, undergo this servitude. 4. If Eleazar
may not, O let Ishmael be forced upon the Duty. 5, Let any hand whatsoever,
rather then the hand of Abraham himself, bind and slay the Son of Abraham. But

Who may say unto God, What do thou? Abraham must (b) apprehend, Abraham
must (c) conduct, Abraham must (f) burden, Abraham must (i) bind, Abraham can
not (k) refuse to slay, Abraham can not, refuse to burn to ashes, his Son, his
only Son, his only Isaac, his only Isaac whom he loves! Even so much that

From v. 2. unto v. 11. of Genesis 22. Abraham was tempted.
IN the multitude of thoughts within Him, 1. While he 1. arises so early 2.
Sadleth the Ass, 3. cleaves the Wood, 4. calls aside two and but two young
men, and 5. with them draws his Isaac out of doors. 2. While he (c)
consulteth have and privacie; for why else did he himself both Saddle the
Ass, and cleave the Wood? 3. While indisposed and enfeebled as he was) he (c)
began and continued his Winterly (that I may not say his fatal) journey. 4.
When by some undoubted signal, I mean, by some cloud testifying Gods presence,
or rather by some pillar of fire; or rather by some new appearing Starr he was
(c) told of, and therefore (d) saw, the place afar off. 5. While for reasons
but too two well know unto himself, he left his two young men (e) behind him,
6. All the while that his Son was (f) carrying the Wood, and that he himself
was (f) carrying the Fire and the Knife. 7. While he (i) 1. built the altar, 2.
upon it laid the Wood in order, 3. bound his Son, 4 laid his Son over the
altar upon the Wood, 5. When he took the Knife; and 6. Sretched forth his hand,
his trembling hand, to slay his Isaac, his only Isaac: In all which
trans-actions, unto the unwillingly-willing Father of Isaac, every new
occurrence could be no less then a new conflict!

2. Abraham was tempted as well in Deed as in Thought: He was afflicted, if it
were possible, more in the evils which ominously attended these Occurrences,
then in these Occurrences which confusedly perplexed his Obedience.

1. Abraham was (comparatively) a feeble person, a person aged an hundred
twenty five years, Isaac was a sturdie lad, a lad aged about twenty five
years. Isaac was (f) better able to carry all the Wood requisite for a burnt
offering, then his Father was to bring with him the Fire and the Knife. How
therefore could the Patriarch singly by himself alone over power, bind, and
slay the robustious youth Isaac? Should the boy find his own strength, should
he deem his case desperate, turn again, snatch the Knife out of his Parents
hand, and (of the two evils) choose rather to Kill, then to be Killed, Which way
could the heartlesse, wearish old man be enabled to help himself? Alas, alas,
for his young and strong Son Isaac, Abraham (the aged) is no match; (no match
at all!)

2. On the other side, Grant that Isaac will not resist unto blood; Let him
beyond all expectation most humbly suffer both his hands and his feet to be
tied and bound; Imagine him so made up of selfe-denials, that he becomes
obedient even unto the death. If what life the Father, the weak Father, can
not take from the Son; that life the son, the obedient son, most cheerfully
lays down, Surely, Sirs, the Scene is now changed, the unexspected
submissiveness of the child charmeth and tieth up the hands and intention of
the Father: Had the boy bin stout hearted, he might by resisting and struggling
have warmed a constancy in the resolution of the parent; but, seeing the meek
child does more quietly then any Lamb give up his throat unto his Fathers
Knife, Slay him that can for Abraham: If cause so requires, Abraham can die in
the stead of his child, but slay him he cannot. How shall I give thee up,
Isaac? How shall I offer thee up, my Son? My bowels are turned within me, and
my repentings are Kindled together. O that I might dye for thee, my son, my son.

3. Let Father and Son too religiously determine that Jehovah shall fulfill
his whole pleasure upon them both. Let the burnt offering by God required be
both by the sacrificer and by the sacrificed a freewill offering: Let Isaac be
slain, and, being slain, let him be burnt to ashes. An Hour hence, when the
beat of zeal is insensibly cooled, and when Fatherly affections do as
insensibly Kindle, View then the Patriarch weeping for his only Isaac, because
he is not.

4. Let him wipe all tears from his eyes, and let him wipe them all away by
Faith; the blood upon his hands he cannot so soon wash off: Lo, a little
distance hence two young men (e) wait as well the Sons as the Fathers return.
Let Abraham see to it; Should their blood arise at blood-guiltiness, Should
they in a fury avenge upon their old Master the death of their young Master,
the aged father, I wisse, is but one against two; Escape for his life he cannot.

5. Suppose that these two young men will keep counsel, if they can; yet will
not Sarah be so said: As for Ishmael, he will suspect His turn to be the next
Hardly will any Subject deem himself safe within the jurisdiction of such a
Prince, as has by virtue of his arbitrarie power, in a merciless frenzy,
sacrificed even his own child.

6. Give Abraham his life for a prey: yet, if the foundations be cast down,
what can the righteous do? In Abraham his seed, which seed is Christ, shall all
the world be blessed; Although Isaac remains childless, in Isaac shall
Abraham his seed be called: Sacrifice Him, and out of whose loins shall come
the appointed Savior of all mankind? Verily the Faith of Abraham, the hope of
Gods elect, the Expectation of the Gentiles, are all three of them in vain, if
for a burnt offering Isaac be offered up childless.

7. Account that God is able to raise him from the dead. Let this Father of the
Faithful believe, hope, and rest assured that, out of the dead ashes of his
Son, not another, but the self same Isaac whom he offered up, shall be raised
unto life upon earth; Grant all this, and more; Nevertheless, except his own
family, and with them his other relations, believe the certainty of this as
truly as He himself believes it, Into what a strait is Abraham now brought?
yea.

8. Let sound believers, and with them all other well-wishers make the best
interpretation which they rationally can make of this Patriarch his Obedience;
yet for an un-provoked Father (under a pretense of Religion!) to embrue his own
hands in the blood of his own child, is a Fact so inhumane, so barbarous, and
(in this age of the world) so unheard of, that the bruit of it will spread far
and near; It will unavoidably open the mouths of evil surmisers to speak all
manner of Falsehoods against Him both at home and abroad.

1. It will hence forward be charged against Him how. 1. It was for no goodness
that of old he fled his Country, and has ever since bin shifting places from
one people to another Kingdom like a mere fugitive and vagabond. Neither 2. had
he (as fifty years since he did) so carelessly forsaken his own kindred and his
Fathers house, if he had not then bin, as he now is, devoid even of natural
affections: 3. Hagar had a taste of his kindness when he turned her packing out
of doors: 4 It did not over much consist with a conjugal love, while his wife
Sarah continued alive to take Hagar into his bed: and 5. there was in him as
little honesty as good nature, when (to humor his morose wife) He, contrary to
the law of nations, disinherited his first born son, Ishmael. In brief, the
Wisdom, the sobriety, the gravity, the integrity etc. of Abraham his whole life
past will (by this one dead fly in his Ointment) be for ever hereafter utterly
discredited, to say no Worse. He who most justly valued his good name above
spoils by him taken in war, must now live to be a scorn, and a derision, and
a monster amonst Men. Wherefore, if Jonah will rather fly from the presence of
the Lord then adventure to be reputed a false Prophet, Consider (I pray you)
how un-supportable a temptation will then crush this reverend and venerable
Patriarch when He (hitherto a mighty Prince) shall be had in no reputation,
rather when he shall be an abject and offscouring among men, even the gazing
stock and Spectacle of the World. Might Abraham be suffered to cut as well his
own throat, as the throat of Isaac, might he give his body to be burnt upon his
sons, and with his sons ashes intermix his own, this would not be unto him so
great a death, as that Contempt will be which the death of his Isaac will every
where bring upon Him: That mark which was set upon Cain will not equal the
brand which shall be fixed upon Abraham.

2. Great was this trial, but greater is that which attends it; seeing what
reproaches soever asperse Him, sully the undefiled worship of his God: Look how
much you disavow Him, and so much you disesteem his exemplary godliness;
Blemish his good name, and ye blast his holy profession. Every slander against
himself does, thorough His side, wound that Religion which He defends. For
example, His former zeal will be, by the blood of his Son, discouloured, as if
it had bin dissimulation, hypocrisy, or what not? By the ashes of his Isaac
his late Devotions will seem palefaced, they will appear like so much
singularity, humor, or affectation. Yea the purity of that true Religion
which He countenanceth, will now be censured a worship of his own invention!
Alas, that every altar by Him erected in a thankful remembrance of that God
whom He serves, should henceforward be looked upon, not as the perpetual
monuments of the only true God, but as certain arguments of this Patriarch his
ostentation and madness. Woe will it be with the Hous-hold of faith, when the
life of this parent and the Death of this Child, shall be taken up for a
scoff, a taunt, for a reproach, and byword, for a ridicule and a proverb,
amongst all the insulting adversaries of Godliness.

Review a little how powerfully this last trial tempts Abraham to desist from
offering up his Isaac. viz. To sacrifice his just and most deserved Dignity
and Esteem in the fate of his Son, to let his own Name perish with his childs
Life, by this one stroke to make himself of no reputation, the Patriarch (in
duty toward his God) refuses not; could it stand with the reputation of Divine
Worship: But, so it is that, if the one suffers, the other suffers also.
The pure, the Holy, the unspotted Worship of the most High God Will (by this
one sacrifice once offered up) be even unto persons honest, sober, and quiet an
offense and scandal. The scandal that will be given, the Prejudice that will
be taken against the Holy Worship of the glorious Lord God, this (this) is that
which casts down the heart of this Patriarch, while in the hand of this
Patriarch the slaughter-Knife is lifted up.

There yet remains one trial unspoken of, the which in humane probability
will bring upon the Father of the Faithful a greater temptation unto
disobedience, then this and some former circumstances could do, were all of
them blended together into one complicated evil The remaining trial is this.

The obloquies of them who will revile Him, and his religion, will fall not so
maliciously upon Himself, as upon the God whom He serves. It is against His
will that his Isaac is slain, and therefore the world will cease to asperse Him
as if He delighted in cruelties; neither is it of his own head that he
begins this sacrifice, so that he shall not long be branded with an act of
will worship: The burnt-offering which he brings he offers up, not of
choice, but in Duty: and the truth hereof will in due time come to light. But
herein (as I conceive) herein is the consternation of Abraham his Spirit: So
long as the commandment of his God might abide concealed, so long there was
not given unto the enemies of the Lord so great an occasion to Blaspheme. On
the other side, to the deep anguish of his Soul, the Patriarch calls to mind
that so soon as ever it shall be understood that the Lord had said unto him
Offer up thy Son, forthwith all people will open their mouths against that
Jehovah who laid upon the Father of Isaac a command so unmerciful, so ungodly,
so pernicious.

Behold, all other conflicts are now over: and all things are now ready: The
alter is built, the Wood is orderly laid upon the altar; By his own Father,
Isaac is bound; and is (for the ease of his Father) by his own self placed
over the altar upon the Wood: At the Fathers feet, and in the Fathers bosom,
the fire kindles: His Arm is stretched forth, and in his hand, the Knife; but
the suspense is -- If unto the God of Abraham the Son of Abraham must be
offered up, What will the God of Abraham do unto his great Name? Answ: Who so
(will atheists say.)

Who so would be bound by covenant -- to Live and Die a stranger amongst his
Enemies, Who so, in Obedience unto his God, would shift in tents from region to
region not having upon earth any City, or dwelling place to abide in: He who
would be ever separated from all his Kins-folke and Relations; He who would
Worship a strange God, a God whom the eye of man never yet beheld, a God
invisible, a God of the Hebrews (if any such a handful of people there be;) a
newfound God, a God unknown unto the most prosperous Kingdoms, and unto the
most spreading Dominions of the World: Such a one as would ridiculously and
obscenely mangle, and curtail the foreskin of his flesh; He that can call it a
point of high devotion to be the prodigious executiner of his dearest child;
Let him forsake the Gods of the Philistines and of the Egyptians, let him
renounce the Gods of the Chaldeans and of the Canaanites, and let him cleave
unto the God of Abraham.

So then: If unto his offering up his Isaac unto his Jehovah, we add his not
withholding his Jehovah from the contempt of blasphemers; If unto the
self-denials on which of necessity he was to force His whole man, we annexe the
evil consequences which his self denials most ominously presaged; It is as
clear as His obedience: that, when Abraham offered up his Isaac, Abraham was
tempted.

OBJECTION.
Better it had bin, had neither God tempted Abraham, nor Abraham obeyed his
God; for hereby an Entrance was afterward ministered first unto the Heathens,
next unto the Kingdom of Israel, and then unto the Kingdom of Judah; to offer
up both Sons and Daughters first unto Devils, next unto insensible Creatures,
and soon after (to make the affront complete) unto God Himself.

REPLY.
It is yet to be proved, that if God had never thus tempted Abraham, then folk
would never have offered up their Sons, and their Daughters in Sacrifice: Or
suppose they would not etc. O man who art thou that disputest against God?
Seeing, as the Extent of Gods Commandments is exceeding broad, so the Designs
of them are exceeding deep. From the beginning of the world was, is, and will
be foreknown unto God what success so ever did, does, or will, attend every
man's obedience unto every of His precepts. By ways unto us unsearchable he is
ever fulfilling his hidden pleasure, ever fetching about his hidden Glory; as
for us, Who has known the mind of the Lord? Or Who has bin His Counselor?
Leave unto the infinitely wise God things secret; Our concern is in things
revealed.

1. It may be the Lord has said unto Shimei, curse David: It may be the just
God had said unto Satan, Let the brats of Adam see what a Sottish, Apish, and
Idolatrous, heart they cherish in their graceless bosoms. For Satan, that
wicked one, cease not to work evil out of good: but then (our refuge is) God
most Holy works our good out of his evil: the poison of this subtle old
Serpent is made treacle for the medicinal benefit of Gods elect. Wherefore.

2. Bless thou that God who has not given thee over unto such abominable
practices, unto such hellish delusions; As God has not sorted thy days unto
the time of that ignorance, so he has in this Gospel-age called thee into his
marveilous light. He has showed thee O man what is good.

3. Let the Idolatries objected convince Magistrates how fearful a Judgment it
is unto a Kingdom, when the rulers thereof bear the Sword in vain. We see,
Leave a people unto the suggestions of Satan, that is, Leave a people unto what
is good in their own Eyes, and they will commit wickednesses destructive unto
the very being and existing of mankind: Yea they will think that they do God
good Service, when they are a smoke in his nostrils.

4 It was but once only that Abraham was tempted to offer up his Isaac upon the
Altar: if it be true, that one single pattern had so Malignant an influence
upon several nations and ages; then let every one of us abstain from all
appearance of evil. A little Leaven Leaveneth the whole Lump; and evil
examples, as well as evil words, corrupt good manners.

5. Let the trial wherewith Abraham was tempted, stop the mouth (if the mouth
can be stopped) of all those seditious Separatists among us, who (at this day)
cruelly, disdainfully, and despitefully speak against the righteous; more
especially if (at this day) they submit themselves unto every ordinance of Man
for the Lords sake. Some Protestants, and among them some Conformists, and
among them some Gospel Ministers, be the endeavor of their hearts and lives
never so sincere, yet if evil befall, Against them forthwith the tongues and
quils of these Sectaries are their own! Who is Lord over them? Forsooth they
deem it a fair advantage unto their Sect and Party, if they can Libellously
and scoffingly report of Abraham that he spared no pains to have butchered his
Isaac: Whereas it is not unknown unto all the Churches that this present Text,
yea and a great part of this present Chapter inspireth not the diminution, but
the praise of Abraham for conforming His private will unto the revealed will of
God most Holy.

But these latter Replies anticipate mine intended method; in as much as, the
three Useful observations explained from the last to the first, I would
orderly apply from the first to the last. For

if Abraham was tempted,
1. LET the innumerable afflictions which this faithful Patriarch suffered,
for ever hereafter un deceive those ignorant worldlings who think hardly of all
such professors as endure tribulation. When Christ's Disciples saw a man blind
from his birth they quickly asked " Who sinned, this man, or his Father? When,
by clinging upon St. Paul's hand, a viper seemed to threaten Death unto that
Apostle, the Barbarians at Melita rashly concluded "This man was some murderer.
Usually the like opinion possesses the men of this world: If they see one
fallen into infamy, poverty, or some other distress, they begin to conceive
hard thoughts against such a Christian. But a believers comfort is that Gods
thoughts are not as Man's thoughts; With the most, he that is low in this world
is low in man's eye; but in Gods Eye he is not. Abraham had the honor (the
peculiar honor) to be styled the Friend of God, yet do ye find him tossed from
place to place, a long while child-lesse thwarted by the Wife of his bosom; and
through her means deprived of the first body that had made him a Father, to
wit, of Hagar; and of the first Son that ever he delighted in, to wit, of
Ishmael; as for Isaac, in Him he was to sacrifice at once the dearest love, the
greatest joy, and the chiefest hopes, which the whole world could yield him:
Wherefore if this Friend of God was thus humbled let no worldling surmise evil
of Gods favorites for any miseries which befalls them in this life, much less
for any miseries which in this life they draw upon themselves by persevering in
their Duties. Behold we account them happy that endure.

2. O consider this ye that forget God. Are any of you so prosperous that pride
encompasseth you as a chain, and sets your mouth against the Heavens? You
who speak thus boldly, and are thus corrupt this Hictorie, and other Histories
like this, read ye. The righteous Abel was murdered by his own brothers; the
righteous Lot lost all his wealth; upright Job, who more miserable? you beheld
the Innocent Isaac narrowly escaping a most untimely Death; And your ears have
heard, and the ears of this assembly have heard with what reiterated
conflicts the faithful Abraham was tempted; If here upon earth the troubles of
the righteous are so many and so searching, can you here upon earth hope to
escape Gods judgments? (Be not merciful, O Lord, unto them that sin of
malicious wickedness*) I appeal unto that Flood which in the days of Noah
drowned a whole world of transgressors, I appeal unto that fire from Heaven,
which in the days of this Patriarch Abraham, made Sodom and Gomorrah the
pictures of Hell; (Within our own age and Island) I appeal unto late civil
Wars, unto latter pestilences, and unto devouring fires hardly yet quenched:
(Within your own bosoms,) I appeal unto your self-condemning consciences, that
if the Righteous are scarcely preserved in this Word, in this world it shall go
ill with the wicked. If favorites are thus afflicted here, shall Enemies
continue here unpunished? God shall wound the head of his enemies, and the
hayrie scalp of such a One as goes on still in his trespasses.

3. Let Abraham his temptations speak peace unto many Sons of Abraham, who (as
if they were neither Sanctified, nor Adopted, nor Elected) are prone, alas, to
disquiet their Souls in the day of trial. Some Christians, although they
believe that sufficient for the day is every days trouble, although they
grant, that man born in Sin is born to see sorrowful days; although they read
that God does not willingly afflict, yea although they foreknow that whom the
Lord Loves, them he chasten th; yet, when the fiery trial tempts, they
think that strange.

1 I beseech such dejected Spirits to ponder well that he is the Penman of this
Epistle, who was (p) in bonds; and that these Hebrews were then sincere
converts, when they were H br. 10 34.
spoiled of their goods, and were, by reproache, 33.
made a gazing-stock! In this cap. XI. It was not before, but after, that they
believed, that they v. 38. wandered into deserts, Mountains, dens, and caves.
Or that they* v. 37. were destitute, afflicted, tormented, stoned, tempted,
slain with the sword, and (some of them) sawn asunder; that they v. 36. had a
greater trial then any of these, even the trial of cruel mockings, of scoffs
which fetched blood like a Sword in the bones! Within my Text, Isaac (a type of
the suffering Jesus) saw Death, although he felt it not. And Abraham, the
Father of the Faithful, was more tempted, then Isaac himself was! Unto you I
apply this, O ye of little faith: If, as unto these Saints (whose Names are
here written in this book of Martyrs) it was, so, unto you it is, Phil. 1.29.
given to believe; Is it a marvel unto You, if, as it likewise was unto them,
so it is unto You, given to suffer? It is your comfort, that ye are Sons and
not Bastards? And would ye be treated like Bastards, and not like Sons? If ye
would,

2. Since (at this instant) your chastisement seems, not joyous, but
grievous; Bless ye your God, for that your afflictions equal not Abraham's.
They Zech. 12.10.
shall mourn as for an only Son, To part with a child, and He a child growing
tall, as well in expectation, as in stature: One who might hereafter have bin
the staff of our old age, and was, for the present, the Desire of our eyes: to
lose the enjoyment of a Son and Heir, then when that only Son began to rejoice
only in the Lord; this is (indeed) no ordinary trial: Yet (Give God the
Glory) as smart as our present chastisement is, it is not so grievous as the
temptation of Abraham was. Who have bin unto God the truer friends, We or the
Patriarch? Whose temptations have bin the greater, the Patriarchs, or Ours?
Weigh we, in the same balance, the burden, the number, the sharpness, of
Abraham his trialls with our own; we shall then feel our own to be, as the
Apostle justly esteems them, light afflictions.

3. Since he was a Friend of God who was thus tempted, Bless thou thy God so
often as he bestows upon thee the favor of a correction: They who were
forty years humbled in the wilderness, were not Moabites, or Amonites, but
the chosen people of God: and, when upon their back the plowers plowed long
furrows, it was that out of that heart which was once fallow ground, they might
bring forth a plentiful harvect. It is not the chaff, but the wheat, which men
take pains to winnow, and the better the wheat, the more thoroughly it is
sifted. We give no such diligence to melt lead or tinn, as is used in
refineing, either Silver or Gold; and, of Gold the larger the Wedge or ingott,
the more fiery the trial. It is the Vine branch that bears Fruit, which the
Husbandman pruneth; and, the choicer the grape, the more industrious is the
Hus-bandman. When the Lord makes up his jewels, he first fileth, and then
polisheth, them; and, the dearer his children are unto Him, the stricter is
their education: Cast Daniel into a furnace of fire, and you make him the
companion of an Angel; While God gives unto you a privilege to endure
temptations, he gives unto you a fellow-ship in the sufferings of Christ. But
then

4. See that ye lose not the benefit of your temptations. (If thou will thank
thy God for giving thee warning:) while the warning is hott, let not the season
of grace cool. Thy bitter herbs are physical, use them before they be
withered: God intends our spiritual health, as ever we would receive no hurt
by this physic, let our endeavors second His intentions. There are Psalms of
Degrees, yea and crosses of Degrees too; if we be not wanting unto our selves,
we may by these, as upon the rounds of Jacobs ladder climb the Heavens: It
was, by a whirlwind, that Elijah was taken up. If thou art smitten to the
ground and astonished, as He ( Act. IX.) was; tremble as He did, and with Him,
say, Lord, What will thou have me to do? That our Sorrow may be turned into
Joy, let the temptation wherein we are fallen have its perfect work. God tried
graceless Saul, and God tempted Faithful Abraham; when Saul was tried, Saul
spared Agag: but when Abraham was tempted,

Abraham offered up Isaac.
BE afraid therefore ye sinners who trample under foot the Blood of Jesus, and
be ye horribly afraid ye Atheists who crucify unto your selves the Lord of
Glory. I p. 45. line. 24.
was saying, If Faithful Abraham was tempted and afflicted, persons that are
ungodly could not in this life expect to continue un-afflicted long: Let me
now, add.

1. If the iniquity of your heels do not overtake you, and compass you about
before ye Die; If there be no Death in your hands; If you come not into
troubles like other men; it is, that your prosperity may destroy you: If the
patience of the all-seeing God suffer you to fill up the measure of your
offenses, it is, that ye may not be able to abide the day of his coming. If He
that comes to judge terribly the earth, lets you alone to feed the evil
imaginations of your heart in quiet; it is, that (like the Dear in your Parks
of pleasure, and like the Oxon in your pasture-ground) ye may be fatted against
the day of slaughter. One especial reason why whole burnt offerings were at
the first instituted, was, to signify unto us, that Hebr. 12.29.
our God is a consuming fire. viz. every man that is not seasoned with the
Salt of grace, shall Mark. 9.49.
be salted with the fire of Tophet. Such as are sanctified by the fire of the
Holy Ghost, shall (like Isaac) be unto God Romans 15.16.
an acceptable burnt offering; Such as do not by faith purify their heart and
their whole man, from dead works, to serve the living God, shall be not like
Isaac, but like that Ram which (in the stead of Isaac) Abraham offered up, they
shall be Psalm 37.20.
as the fatt of Lambs, they shall everlastingly consume; into smoke shall they
consume away for ever Nevertheless,

2. How desperately wicked soever thou have bin in times past, for the time to
come here is opened unto thee a door of hope: for 1. He who spared Isaac, and
accepted the Ram, testifies even unto thee that His Delight is, not in
sacrifices, but in mercies 2. When this only son was offered upon the Altar, he
was then a type of that son of God who is made a Propitiation for thy Sins: 3.
Although Isaac was bound, His God released him; and, although thou art tied and
bound in the cords of thy Sins, the same God would release even thee. 4. After
Isaac was released, the Lord blessed Isaac; would thou rise and walk, God
has for thee, store of blessings; O taste and see that the LORD is good. But
5. What sort of Darling is this Dalilah which thou preferrest before the
possessiour of heaven and of earth? Answ. A seeming, and but a seeming,
pleasure of Sin; In this age, there is in some Sins no sort of Delight, except
they be infamous as well as Wicked: There is no pleasure in diceing, except the
Patrimony be staked, as well as the Guiney: Apples of Sodom are no raritie at
most Banquets: The apparel of some men were not in fashion, were it not of more
value then a years revenue will pay for: Neither are they welcome at a feast,
except they be so drunk that they need a withdrawing room. The covetousness of
some Misers is so idolatrous, that they set their hearts more upon their
riches, then upon that God which gives them a Power to get wealth: and such is
the Luxury of others, as if riches could not make unto themselves wings, were
there no Feathers to be found in their caps. Tell me now, in cool blood:
Head-aking drunkenness, unclean lusts, (Lusts which make thy bones rotten, as
well as thy communication;) unthriftie riots, wearisom idleness, wide-mouthed
Oaths, ungodly jestings, unblessed vanities, (Vanities linked together by that
Prince of Darkness who with them chaineth thee unto his bottomless Pit:) Are
these the Isaacs which thou art fond of? Would thou rather eternally
Sacrifice thy self a burnt offering in hell torments, then Sacrificce these
needless evils? For shame mortify thou those follies which, if thou die not
unto them, will be unto thee death eternal. Would thou break off that yoke,
cleave that wood, which has hitherto prepared fuel for hell fire, would
thou make Jesus Christ thine altar, and upon that altar sacrifice thine Isaac,
even thy whole man; would thou Crucify thy lusts, study self denial, and
place thine endeavors upon exercising thy self unto Godliness, thy Delights
upon the pleasantness of new obedience, and thine affections upon things
Spiritual and heavenly; He that can abundantly pardon, and is mighty to save,
would say unto thy soul, as he said unto Abraham, now Know I that thou fear
God.

2. Whereas it is feared that this people of England has a revolting and a
rebellious heart, our backslidings will quickly cease, if we take out that
pattern which is here given unto us by this Father of many nations. Blessed be
our God, we have a gracious King; we have excellent Laws; we have Judges which
do, at every Assize, give a charge that these Laws be duly executed; unto these
Judges, we have subordinate Magistrates; subordinate unto these, Magistrates,
we have sworn Officers; subordinate unto these, House Keepers; and unto these,
their Children and Servants. It was, when Eli hon^ his Sons more then God, that
matters went amiss with Him and His people: but, when Phinehas stood up and
executed Judgment, then was the Plague stayed. If Parents and Masters offer up
their Isaacs, their Children and Servants, to be duly Catechized; so duly
Catechized, that the fear of the Lord is unto them their treasure; this will
lay so good a foundation of a prosperous government, that Wisdom and Knowledge
will be the Stabilitie of our times. Parents and Masters will constrain their
Familes to submit unto their own happiness, that is, to learn Catechismes, to
frequent the public worship of the God and Father of our Lord Jesus Christ,
and to sanctify God in their hearts; when, at every Session and Visitation,
sworn officers offer up their Isaac, as well as their presentiments; that is,
when they so deny themselves that they present all such as will not deny
ungodliness; and when they suffer not Congregations to crumble into Meetings,
or rather, into no Meetings, And this Sworn Officers will be glad to do, when
they are made to fear an Oath. And, an Oath they will fear, when at, Sessions
and at Visitations, our Rulers rule with diligence, and offer up their Isaacs.
And this they will do, when (making Religion their business) they prefer the
favor of God, before the favor of man. Ye therefore, beloved, seeing ye know
these things before, beware lest any of you being led away with the error of
the wicked, fall from your own Stedfastness Who knows whether he is not born
in this Kingdom for such a time (...)? God will do so to him and more also, who
when he is there unto called, does not offer up his Isaac.

3. Let the self denials of Abraham shame every one among us into a greater
Watchfulness etc. He, at the (b) first intimation, arose (c) early, went on
diligently, persevered (d) constantly to observe, against his own will, the
will of his God; choosing rather to be an unnatural parent, then an undutiful
servant: Whereas some of us have delaied, from year to year, before we would
yield to take up our daily cross: precept upon precept, line upon line we have
received, but what answer have we returned unto him that has written unto us
the honorable things of His law, Statutes, which if a man would do, he might
even live in them? Thou who conformest thy self unto the licentiousness of an
evil world, Did this Patriarch, at one private Item, surrender his only Son,
and will not all the public Commandments which thy God has in
loving-kindnes, laid upon thee, prevail with thy lips, to bite in a vain oath,
with thine appetite, to forbear an un healthy sin, with thy memory to
treasure up Heavenly Knowledge, or, with thine understanding, to perform Duties
profitable, comely and of good report? The more easy that yoke is which Christ
lays upon us, the more careful should we be to follow the example of this
Father of Isaac; otherwise, the burnt offering which he withheld not, will, at
the last day, be offered in judgment against us. Be not deceived, God is not
mocked: as a man sacrifices, so is he accepted.

4 Since Abraham offered up his Isaac, learn thou of him to hold every
blessing which thou receivest from God, with a mind prepared to resign it to
God. Jehovah, he is the Lord possessour as of Heaven, so of Earth; and
whatsoever mercy thou receivest from him, that thou receivest but during his
will and pleasure: What thou obtainest by prayer is but borrowed, and to grudge
when thou art to pay what was but borrowed, is flatt dishonestie: What thou
enjoyest from God is neither deserved, nor purchased, but by the providence,
and goodness, and loving kindness of thy liberal Master, it is entrusted with
thee for thy comfort and conveniences, but for His uses, service, and honor;
It is favor enough for thee, that God has owned and entertained thee as His
steward, Wherefore (when at any time thy God calls from thee some child, or
some other comfort) of his own thou give him, murmr not, repine not, be
not, in any wise, be not thou discontented Profess thou a Good is the word of
the Lord; Assent thou, the will of the Lord be done; Say thou, He is the Lord,
whatsoever he pleases, that let Him do; As well when he takes, as when he
gives, bless thou the Name of the Lord. It is very observable that (twenty
six years since) when there was but one night between Sodom and destruction,
the Father of Isaac then used earnest prayers and arguments to save, if it were
possible, that wicked City from perishing: for the Men of Sodom he mediated
seven times in a breath, for his blameless and dearest Son, he intercedeth
not: Qu: Why this? Answ: Holy Abraham loved one righteous Isaac more then all
the sinners of Sodom, but (so it was) God had revealed concerning Sodom only a
conditional pleasure, saying " I will go down and see; Concerning Isaac he had
revealed his absolute pleasure, saying, Take now: Wherefore so absolute is the
Patriarch his resignation, that notwithstanding his God had yielded unto him
seven times together in all that he had spoken in the behalf of Sodom; he does
not at all open his lips unto God in behalf of his Isaac, Go thou, and do
likewise: When God says Offer up, withold not thou. Being called unto
self-denials, Let Duty teach thee not to argue, but to submitt; not to dispute
but to obey; not to request, but to resign. Let thy meek, thine humble, thy
modest, thought be "I am dumb; I open not my mouth, because thou do it. Nay

5. Since thou owe not only whatsoever is in thy custody but even thy self
also unto Him that is Lord of all, Araunah like, meet thou thy King in His
Desires. Make friends of unrighteous Mammon: What thou may not detain, that
give, and give chearefully, unto Him who loves a cheerful Giver What thy God
calls for, that present, dedicate and consecrate, first love thy Relations as
dearly as Abraham loved Isaac, and then esteem Father, Mother, Wife, Children,
and (with them) whatsoever else is precious, esteem all of them together, too
small, too mean, a present, to testify the readiness of thy devotion or the
sincerity of thy gratitude, unto the Father and Giver of thy Lord Jesus
Christ: especially seeing so many as he loves, them he chastneth, and so many
as he chastneth them he chastneth for the spiritual and eternal good of
themselves, or of others, or of both: whether

1. For the benefit of others. Account upon it that wherein the God of all
comfort does comfort us in all our tribulation, therein he prepares and
bespeaketh us to comfort them who are in any trouble by the comfort wherewith
we ourselves are comforted of God. Are the consolations of God small with thee?
(I hope not) Or

2. By casting down thine old and outward man, thy God preventeth thy new,
thine inward, man from falling. Jesurum, when he waxed fatt, Kicked; and
Solomon, when he was full, denied God: So is it with thee, and with other
Saints: Alas, the more holy men's lives are, the more advantage Satan seeks to
get over them; that old Serpent well knowing, (by his own woeful experience,)
that there is no pride like unto Spiritual pride: Wherefore that even the Fall
of his children may bruise this Serpents head, when the right hand of God
exalts them, most usually his left hand does humble them; It is indeed unto
their humiliation (but it is, so unto their humiliation, that it conduces unto
their honor) that God does so often place them in the forlorn hope: When no
man upon earth was so upright as Job, then was the roaring Lion let lose
against him; After Hezekiah had pleaded sincerity, God gave him a taste of his
unprosperous vain gloriousness; David was confessedly a man after Gods own
heart, and as confessedly Adultery, Murder, and Pride it self, brought him
very Low. Jacob prevailed when he wrastled with God, but God sent him halting
away: Who more stout hearted then Peter, and who more cowheartedly denied his
Jesus? Satan had not bin permitted to buffet Paul, had not Paul bin exalted by
abundant Revelations. Moses was a meek man, but he spoke so unadvisedly with
his lips, that there was for him no Entrance into Canaan: Abraham so excelled
in Faith that he was exemplarily and eminently the Father of the Faithful, but
where was the Faith of Abraham, when (more then once) he dissembled that Sarah
was only his Sister? And as (that he who thinks he stands may take heed
lest he fall) the wisest of men was made a mere fool by the Vilest of Women; so
(that we may not be ignorant of the devices of Satan) Christ himself when he
was first baptized, next endued with the Spirit, and then declared, mightily
declared, to be the Son of God, was afterward led into the Wilderness; and, in
the Wilderness, forty days together, tempted of the Devil.

3. To rouse a Soul from drowsiness, to pursue some unrepented Crime, to
dislodge some bosom Sin, etc. It was when Saul failed of his expectation, that
Jonathan was questioned for eating honey: and when Israel was repelled, then
was the Sacrilege of Acham discoved. Before he was troubled, David himself
went wrong; and, until he was cast into a troubled Sea, Jonah fled from the
presence of the Lord. Many times there is in our calamities a Spirit of
discerning; while, like that Angel which met Baalam, they give us to understand
our present misadventures. Search me, O Lord, and know my heart, try me and
know my thoughts, See if there be in me any way of pain: A daily prayer (this)
and this prayer almost every day, before we call God answers.

4. To satisfy our selves, or others, of the truth, or grows of our Graces;
it is the furnace that as well approves as tries Silver; The same trial which
inviteth worldlings to esteem Preachers no better then earthen Pitchers; the
self same trial occasioneth every one that appears before God, to look upon
those Preachers, as upon the precious Sons of Zion, and to value those precious
Sons of Zion comparable unto fine gold: the which the more it is tried, the
better it is refined; and the more it is refined, the brighter it shines: The
sufferings, which all these holy Martyrs in this whole context endured, were,
not only the trials, but the vindications; not only the vindications, but the
approbations; not only the approbations, but the publications, and
recommendations of their Faith: Such was their Faith, that, to their praise be
it spoken, their names are Registered by the Holy Ghost himself. That poor widow
was made rich by the applauses of Christ Jesus, when he vouchsafed to attribute
a greater munificence unto her small mite, then unto the largest gifts that
were cast unto the Treasury. The like was the success of that true hearted
Mary, unto whom the same blessed Jesus gave this felicity, that where soever
His Holy Gospel shall be preached, there her Name shall be as ointment powered
forth: In every deed neither the deare-heartedness of that penitent, nor the
plain dealing of Jeremiah, nor the meekness of Moses, nor the Spirit of
Elijah, had ever bin one half so famous as they now are, had not malicious
tongues given occasion to have the excellency of their graces brought to the
test. Said that envious Eliab unto his brother David, I know the pride and the
naughtiness of thy heart; but where was David his pride, when he refused the
costly armor of King Saul, and contented himself, with a sling and a stone?
Or, where was the naughtiness of his heart, when in love toward his nation, and
in Zeal toward his God, he staked his own life against the life of Goliath?
Again, as trials are often times inflicted to show what some chosen Saints can
bear, so

5. Afflictions abide most of us, because most of us, remain hitherto un-able
to bear an un-afflicted life; Except we hear the rod, and Him who has
appointed it, many of us will not be ruled: Even so much that the Heir, so long
as he is a child, is under Tutors and Governors. Let Absalom return unto his
private house, for at Court he will ruin himself, and that, without remedy.
Should we Britains forget what we have seen and felt here in England, they at
Munster will tell us that a sword is un-safe in Anabaptists hands. Some in this
Parish who now receive Alms, would attempt insolent practices, were they Lords
of the Manor. A Novice is so apt to be puffed up with pride, that he is no fit
person to be a Bishop; neither is honor seemly for a fool. Even the Israel of
God, before he could (with a due moderation, and with a requisite sobriety) be
prepared to inherit the promised rest, was forty years long humbled in the
Wilderness. But I hope better things of you (my brethren:) I trust that the God
of all grace, after ye have suffered a little while, will make you meet to be
partakers of the inheritance of the Saints in light.

6. Many times (whilst we seem distressed) Out of our distresses (as out of
the Sepulcher of Lazarous) God is fetching about some honor unto Himself: In
which case What he does, that thou know not now, but hereafter thou shall
know. Verily those waters wherewith Christ washes the unclean feet of our vile
affections, are (like water at Infant Baptism) no less future, then present,
healings. The Lord made Naaman leprous that he might wash in Jordan, and that
(by washing in Jordan) he might cleanse, rather his Soul, then his body. Into
that river the axe head fell, but, lo, iron shall swimm. If the poor beggar
was born blind, it was that the Son of a God might work a miracle upon his
eyes. Jonah was not cast away, John 9.3.
when into the Sea he was cast; for him the Lord provided a Whale, and in (the
Whale) a Noah's ark* Joseph's brethren thought evil against him, but God meant it
for good: He was a lost man, that he might save much people alive; Into Egypt
he was sold, that of Egypt he might dispose. Let his mother hide Moses in the
flags, and the Kings daughter shall give him a Princely education: Give him a
Princely education, he will be learned in all the learning of the Egyptians; so
learned, that he will overmatch Pharaoh, and shall (with a high hand) bring
Gods first born out of bondage. The captivity of Daniel, how did it conduce
both unto his own advancement, and unto the glory of his God?

To conclude this point: With his only son the father of Isaac must part; but
What shall be seen in the mount of the Lord, Who can tell? Who knows whether
there may not out of the Dust of this Grave arise, as well matter of rejoicing,
as causes of sorrow; as well the life of grace, as dry bones? With God it is
not impossible, but that (while I preach and you hear) the Obsequies now
celebrated may be, unto some souls among us, life from the dead. Said I not
unto thee John 11.40.
that thou should see the glory of God, if thou would believe? Sure I am,
as seeing is 44.21.6. 1 John 3.2.
the present, the John 7.17.12.46. Phil: 3.15. 1 John 5.13, 20.
future, the 3.2. 1 Cor: 2 9. Hebr. 11.1.
eternal, recompense of believing; so believing is Prove: 1 23. ^sa: 55.3.
the reward of hearing. Romans 10.17. Gal. 3.2.
By hearing comes Faith: And (take this for the main, the chief, and the last,
Consolation in my Text) wheresoever this grace of faith comes, there it
overcomes. This was the victory which overcame this Patriarchs trials, even,
his Faith,

By faith Abraham offered up Isaac.
AND By faith we find Romans 15.13. Act. 16.34.
a joy in believing: that therefore (in this Bethanie) in this House of
mourning, Our mourning may be turned into joy, the Lord vouchsafe unto us an
effectual, a practical, a sanctified, remembrance of these five Considerations.
1. The like Duties which Abraham was to perform, we are, 2. If we would perform
them aright, we must follow His example. 3. We may follow his example, if, as
He did, we can believe: 4. To obtain alike precious faith with Him, we have
greater Helps then ever he had. 5. Having obtained like precious faith with
him; as he did, so we may, of this divine grace make heavenly Uses.

First I appeal unto that pride of life which renders our costly garments so
full of levitie, our buildings so full of ostentation, our tables so full of
excess, and our purses so empty of coin: I appeal unto that liberty (which no
man gives, but every of us takes) to do what is good in our own eyes; that we
have the like prosperity to struggle with, as had this Patriarch: Neither is
our adversity much un-like, or behind, his: witness the dead body of this
Isaac whom we are now offering up. Beside, I have told you at large, that our
frail life is a continual warfare: We are (ye know) opposed by a world of
Wickedness. Through the lusts that are within us, the whole world becomes
comes a snare unto our flesh, Our flesh warreth against our soul, and both
against Gods Spirit. Add to these the malice, the devices, the powers, the
un-weariness, of evil Spirits innumerable, and invisible: How to endure these
temptations, how to fulfill those Duties, which so much resemble the trials, the
Duties, of Abraham; it is high time that we learn, and learn from Abraham. For

2. Return unto Genesis XXII. when his Isaac is demanded, how does the good old
Father demean himself? Does he counterfeit a slumber? Does he pretend that, if
called he was, he knew it not; that if to his name he (a) answered, he only
spoke in his sleep? Does he impute the Dream of his head unto some melancholy
blood depressing his heart? Does he construe that vision of the night to be
either some flashie imagination, or else one of Satan's delusions? Noe. The
voice was Jehovahs voice, and (for the voice of Jehovah) he owneth it:
Subterfuges he seeks none; Stagger he does not; His God would have no
pleasure in him, should he draw back; He remembers Lots wife. Hoping to bow
the Lords will (as an Unbeliever wresteth the Scriptures) unto his own bent,
Balaam consulted the Lord a third and fourth time, but in Gods first revelation
this Holy Father acquiesceth: as cheerfully staying himself upon the Lord while
his Son is now demanded, as upon the Lord he then Stayed himself, when the same
Son was first promised. Did he consult flesh and blood; unseen to others, he
could let fall half a word which would soon make Servants interpose, Sarah
contradict and Isaac slipp aside; but to prevaricate he abhors, as he
abhors hypocrisy, Such is the sincerity of his Obedience, that, until the
hour of Sacrifice, none are of his counsel; Such his prudence, that at the hour
of Sacrifice (if we may believe Josephus) he persuades even Isaac himself to
be of his confederacy: He was armed against every temptation with self denial,
against every exigencie with wisdom, and against every natural inclination with
grace; Without any reluctancie, repineing, or remisness, he (c) arises, and
arises early; Hundred of Servants he has, yet (c) waits not for the
attendance of any; but does probably with his own hands get the fire and the
Knife in a readiness; neither disdaineth he (c) to Saddle the ass, yea or to
be (c) his own wood cleaver. Had this Knife, this fire, this Wood, bin provided
for some solemn Festival; Were his Heir now newly anointed with oil, and anon,
like Judge. 5.10. Zech. 9.9. John 12.15.
after-Princes, to ride that Sadled ass in State; Were he him-self now to set
a crown of pure gold upon his Isaac's head, and (that done) to espouse unto
this Son some Atossa, some Quen of Shebah, yea or Rebekah her self; what could
he have done more? nay Genesis 26.67.
he had not done so much: This pattern may every one of us take out, this
example may we imitate. With humility, self denial, and submission; with
patience, preudnce and stedfastness with a preparedness, readiness, and
cheerfulness of mind may we offer up our Isaacs, if, with Abraham, we Sacrifice
them unto the Lord, and Sacrifice them unto the Lord both in Faith and by Faith.

3 Take heed therefore, brethren, lest there be in any of you Hebr. 3.12.
an evil heart of unbelief in departing from the living God: For 1. although
when we should offer up our Isaacs by Faith, we have a God to draw near unto,
although this God be a living God; yet man's heart naturally revolteth from this
living God: and is therefore a heart Pro: 10.20.
little worth, an Genesis 6.5.
evil heart, a heart Jerem. 17.9.
desperately wicked. 2. Unbelief is an idleness of mind as neglected, as
hereditarie; a lethargy contracted Psalm. 51.5.
from our mothers womb, a Deuteronomy 32.20. Esa: 48.8. Pro: 22.15.
frowardness which our Nurses cherish in our childhood, a Defect which in our
minority few tutors eye, an evil which in our full age no magistrates punish;
a guilt, an oversight, a Ephesians. 5.8. 1 John 5.6. John 12.35.
darkness, which man 1.5.3.19, 20. Genesis 3.8.
loves! Of wordly wants, we are (all of us) very sensible; but of a want of
Faith few (very few) complain: and yet ( mercy, mercy, O our God!)

1. Except ye believe Esa. 7.9. Col. 2.7. Hebr. 13.9. James 1.8.
surely ye shall not be established. For 2. although the wages of every sin is
death, whatsoever is not of Faith, is Sin. 3. If God be against us, who can be
for us? but so long as unbelief hardneth our heart against God, God is against
us. 4. Upon him that believes not the wrath of God abides, and (should he
cast upon us the fierceness of his wrath) who can stand before everlasting
burnings? 5. For that wretch who forgets so blessed a Creator, for that
servant who controlleth so wise a Lord, for that Subject who provokes so
gracious a Sovereign, for that person who believes not a God so infinitely
true etc. No Tophet is hell enough, no Hell has torments enough, no torments
are too durable, too everlasting, too eternal. Wherefore 6. We must even with
fear and trembling workout our Salvation, but (without Faith no Salvation is
hoped for) by Faith ye are saved. 7. Whereas to glorify Him of whom, by whom,
and for whom, are all things, is the whole Duty of man; without Faith there is
no right understanding of this Duty. So that 8. Whereas Luke 21.34, 36. Matt:
24.42, 44 25.13. 2 Timothy 4.5. 1 Pet. 4.7. Revel. 3.3.
peculiar unto every hour of our lives, is the Duty of that hour; without Faith
we order not our Conversation aright, no not for the space of one moment; At
this instant the truth now uttered profits not, if it be not mixed and
received with Faith. Add 9. Whereas it is the whole happiness of man to find
favor in the sight of the Lord (always to find favor in the sight of the
Lord;) without Faith it is impossible to please God.

Lastly, Let the dead bury their dead. No marveil if without Faith no favor is
obtained from the Lord; since without Faith we seek not, nay we desire not, to
please Him, if Psalm* 10.4.14.2. Romans 3 11.
please him we could. Alas, there is in us (I tremble to speak it) there is in
us an 8.7.5.10. Coloss. 1.21.
enmity against the great and terrible God! The mind and Conscience of every
unbeliever is Tit. 1.15. Psalm. 51.1, 2, 3, 4.
defiled; his heart is (like himself) corrupt and abominable. How can it be
otherwise, seeing he is Jude. 11.
twice dead; dead in sin; dead in guilt? Alive unto sin, he is, but dead unto
righteousness! All his works are Hebr. 6.1.9 14.
dead works; therefore dead works, because he himself continues Tit. 1.16.
unto every good work reprobate.

For as in Heaven unbelief did put Lucifer quite out of the right use of his
knowledge, love, joy, etc. then when (unto himself and his combining angels) he
Esa. 14.14.
said I will be like unto the most High: and as in Paradise unbelief did put
Adam quite beside the right use of his Hebr 5.14. Eccles. 9.3. Deuteronomy: 28.28.
senses, etc. Then when he also Gen 3.5.
said unto himself I will be as God: So unto the Worlds end the folly and
madness of unbelief does and will 1 Cor. 2.14. John 3 6. Gal: 5.17.
distract every unbeliever (so long and so far as he abides in unbelief) from
the right and Spiritual use both of his Soul and of his body: Without Faith man
is unto things heavenly, just as a mad man is unto things earthly and sensual:
rash, fearless, fool hardy. He says as well in his actions as in his heart
Psalm. 14 1.
There is no God, for he does not Phil. 2.21.
what God pleases, but what he 1 Pet. 4 1.
lusts: He says of God Psalm. 50.21.
that he is such a one as himself, one that regards 73.11.94.7, 8.
not iniquity, one that does Esa. 41.23.
neither good (to reward); nor evil (to avenge:) He will be Psalm. 10.3.
his own chuser, and consequently) Romans 14.7.8, 9.
his own God: Says he Pro 30.9. Exodus 5.2.
who is the Lord that I should obey him and deliver up mine Isaac? If I cannot
draw near unto God, unless I offer up my son, that I may not part with my Son,
I will depart from my God.

Sirs, to give sight to this blind man by expelling this darkness from his
unbelieving bosom; to force him to stand in awe, by tying him up from any more
hardening his heart; to Matt. 12.29. 2 Cor. 13.3. Ephesians: 1.19.
overruled so 1 Cor: 2.14.3 18, 19.
foolish and so Esa. 1.3, 18. Jerem. 8.6.17.9. Esa. 32.4. Act. 19 36.
rash an Job. 9.4. Prove: 8.36.
enemy of Jerem. 5.2. Psalm. 14.1.
God; to 2 Cor. 10.5.
disarm him of those Act. 26.18. Jerem. 4.14. John 5.44. Act. 5.3. Romans 1.21,
24, 26.28. 2 Cor: 4.4. 1 John 3.8.
fiery darts wherewith he Prove: 12.26. and 13.15. Eccle. 9.18. Phil: 3.18, 19.
mischeiveth Prove: 13.5. Jerem. 7.19. Romans 1.18. Jude 15.
himself and Matt. 16.6, 12. John 15.19. 1 Cor. 5.6. and 15.33. 2 Timothy 3.13. 1
Pet 4.4. 1 John 3.12, 13. J^shu: 22.20.
others; to Luke 14. from v. ^6. unto v. 34. Exodus 4.21. with 8.15. and 9.35.
and 11.9. and 14.17, 18. Deuteronomy. 2 30. and 29.4. Joshu. 11.30. 1 Samuel 2.25, 30. 1
King 12.15. 2 Chronicles. 25.16. Matt. 13.15. John 8.47. and 12.40.
convince him that there is 2 Chronicles 25.18, 19. Esa. ^7.4. and 36.8. Luke 14.31.
Act. 9 5. Psalm. 68.21.
no fighting against the Lord of hosts; to Hos: 13.9. E^a. 1.16, 17, 18.
reduce him unto a Esa 2.11. Je^em. 8 6. Luke 1.74, 79.
right use of Hebr. 5.24. Psalm 50.23.
his Senses and of Romans 14.7, 8, 9. 2 Cor. 1.10. Gal. 2.20.
Himself; to Prove. 1 23. Jerem. 13 27. John 8.43, 47.
persuade him to James 4.7, 8.
Submit Psalm. 73.28. Esa. 66.2.
draw near and 2 Cor. 5.18, 19, 20.
reconcile his 1 Chronicles. 28.9.
heart unto his Jerem. 10.7.
God: to Exodus 23.21. Eccles. 6.10. Deuteronomy. 28.40. and 29.19, 20. Esa. 1.24. and
63.4. Hebr. 12.29.
winn him to Mark 10.30.31.
not withold but to Psalm. 25.1. Romans 12.1.
offer up Psalm. 84.11.
unto the Lord his 116.13, 16.
Isaac 110.3.
willingly 2 Cor. 8.10. 1 Chronicles. 29.17.
cheerfully and Romans 12.1. 1 Timothy 2.3. Hebr. 12.28.
acceptably: to Psalm 51.10. Gal. 6.15. Ephesians. 2.10. Deuteronomy. 29.4. with 30.6.
work so Jerem. 30.21.
great, so Matt. 3.3. Romans 12.2. Phil. 2.13.
heavenly a change of mind as this, One thing is 2 Cor. 5.17, 18.
necessary; viz the Luke 10.42. Hebr. 10.38. Tit. 1.1.
Faith of Gods elect. For as Romans 9.16, 17, 18, 20, 21. and 11.7, 22.
reprobation pre-supposeth an 11.5, 6, 28.
election, and as 1 John 4.1.
truth precedeth error, so (if rightly considered) there was a Eccles. 7.29.
Jude 6. Romans 1.28.
belief before there was 2 Thessalonians. 2.10.11.
unbelief: Wherefore prove your own selves 2 Cor. 13.5.
examine your selves whether ye be in the Faith, or whether ye be 2 Timothy 3.8.
concerning the Faith reprobates. Know

Hos. 2.14. Mal. 3.10. and 4.6. Act. 13.38.
4. Or ever he ordained any worlds, the one, the true, the good, JEHOVAH,
(seeing he inhabiteth both etrnitie and immensitie!) was the same divine
existence, self-existence, self-subsisting exstence, that now is. He could
before all predestination, as well as now say I AM: I (ever Number. 23.9.
alone) am peace; I (a Father ever begetting, a Son ever begotten, a Holy Ghost
ever proceeding) am (not confusion but) Order: I am life, light, purity,
holiness etc. 2 As he could ever say I AM, he could also ever say I AM WHAT I
AM; when Pilate would not alter his writing, said he, WHAT I have written, I
have written; So (before all Worlds) could God say I am, and am well pleased in
What I am: As I do not, so I would not, cease to be life, light, purity,
holiness etc. 3 End-less is that delight which I take in what by nature I ever
was, ever shall he, and now am. My blessedness, my glory, my rejoicing is
neither of, nor from, others, but from and in My self; I am full and abound: No
flesh, no Saints, no Worlds do I need, for I, the three divine persons, am unto
Our self a THEATER. So that 4 It is in mine election whether I will, or will
not, determine to be a Creator; if to be a Creator I do determine, Good I am,
and all my works shall call me good. Good I do, and good I will do unto all such
as abide in my goodness.

2 He spoke, It was: Brethren, (well may we believe in God!) Jehovah, to
confirm his promise to this Patriarch by an oath, because he could swear by no
greater, swear by Himself: So to create a world of blessings, because a better
pattern he could not take, he took a pattern from Himself: God is one, such is
the Universe: God is perfect, immense, eternal; The World is round, wide,
lasting. In God is peace and order. From the least atom to the highest Angel is
found order and harmony. God self subsisteth; even in senseless elements is
implanted a principle of self preservation: God is blessed, In every creature
having life is imprinted a desire not only of being, but of wel-being God
changes not; The wel-being of all his works is placed in a not changing that
Law of nature whereunto they were ordained. Which law gives unto every flesh
its own seed: unto every seed its own body; unto every body, its own Soul;
unto every Soul its own felicity. God is a free agent; As sensible creatures
have a free choice to like, or dislike, what unto their senses seems
pleasing, or displeasing: so reasonable creatures should also have a free will
to choose, or refuse whatsoever to their best understanding seems truly good,
or truly evil. In attracting sustenance, or in propagating their kind, to
confine brutes to be as insensible as trees are, or men to be as irrational as
brutes are, were to reject the wisdom of God. Even so to limit man to be
sensual, but not virtuous; to be virtuous but not holy; to mind things
Earthly, but not things Heavenly; to stay himself upon the creature, but not
upon the Creator; to love the World, but not the Lord God; were to require him
to be, concerning the faith of Gods elect, reprobate. For the Law whereunto God
elected men and Angels was, He that lifts up his Soul is not upright: (and if
not upright, a lost Angel, a dead man:) but the just shall live by faith.

3. To you who bewail your unbelief I speak it. Until God appeared unto him in
Mesopotamia, Abraham (that father of the faithful!) never had those prepared
helps, those effective means, of obtaining this precious grace, this faith of
Gods elect, which the veriest reprobate of you all at this time possesses. He
was bred up among aliens and strangers to grace, The Knowledge of the Lord
covers our Island as the waters cover the Sea: He was, ye were not, the
unclean Children of unbeleeving Parents; He could not say Thou have loosed my
bands, for I am the Son of thy handmaid; but Ye were by prayer and by baptism
consecrated to your God in your infancy; and were from your infancy nurtured
up in good knowledge. 2. He was (like S. Paul) in journeyings often; Abiding
city he had none; but was ever unsettled: As for you, ye in sure dwellings, and
in quiet resting places have retiredness and leisure to devote your selves to
prayer, meditation etc. 3. Eight or nine times did Jehovah converse with Him,
with you he converseth eighty times nine times. Twice or thrice was the Gospel
preached unto Him (and that too) very darkly; To you it shines as clearly,
and, in a sort, as frequently, as daylight. What a small pittance of saving
knowledge could he glean from the traditions of his forefathers in comparison
of what may be learned by you; by you who may all know the Lord from the least
to the greatest, by you who are in Gods Scriptures all taught of God? 4. Christ
is the vision, the visage, of the father of mercies; the Gospel is the image,
the face, of Christ; Of this Gospel, of this face of Christ, more is manifested
unto you, then ever was revealed unto Abraham.

4. As zeal without knowledge is the mother of persecution, idolatry,
superstition, enthusiasm, schism, heresy, sedition, rebellion, etc. So
knowledge without zeal begets atheism, profaness, hypocricie, pride. etc.
But that which makes man's knowledge of God to be man's salvation, is the spirit
of faith sanctifying unto him what he knows For. 1. By faith we understand --
one office of faith is to enlighten the understanding. 2. By faith Moses
refused, choosing rather -- viz As faith discerns what is good so faith
embraces, what good it discerns. 3. A third effect of faith is to purify
the heart. 4. By faith they subdued and obtained -- When faith has so
instructed the heart, that it no longer believes a lie; and has so corrected
the mind, that it holds not the truth in unrighteousness; When a Knowledge of
the truth, of the whole truth, (yea and of nothing but the truth) freeth the
head from error; and when a love of that truth freeth the heart from
disobedience; when we like to retain God in our Knowledge; then do we apprehend
that for which also we are apprehended of Christ Jesus: When ye seek not your
own wills, but your Gods will; when ye with meekeness, and with earnestness,
search, and wait, and watch, and try, whether by his word of life God will
make your heart, as Abraham's was, faithful; then ye sow to the spirit; And as
what was born of your flesh, was flesh; so what is born of Gods spirit, is
spirit: For such as wait upon God in His ways, them God meets; and whom God
meets, in them, by his spirit of adoption, he forms the quickening spirit of
Christ Jesus. Brethren, Hereby may ye know whether ye have, with faithful
Abraham, believed unto righteousness: If unto righteousness ye have believed,
then have ye passed from the death of unbelief wherein ye were born, to the
Life of faith whereunto ye were baptized.

5. To whom God gives a power, to them he also vouchsafes a habit, of
believing: Having therefore obtained like precious faith with Him, imitate ye
the Patriarch in my Text. of this good and perfect gift which comes down from
above May ye ( ever make ye) seasonable, and sanctified, Uses.

1. That in you the righteousness of God may be revealed from faith to faith,
add to your faith Knowledge. For this end, let the word of Christ dwell in you
richly, and in all wisdom: There can not in Heaven be a higher object of
Knowledge then the God of Heaven, neither, can there be upon earth any
Knowledge of the God of Heaven equal to what we learn in Holy writ. No truth is
worthy to be compared unto Scripture truths; neither is any Scripture-truth
comparable to Gospel revelations: Gospel revelations are mysteries, great
mysteries! Mysteries which immediately concern a reconciliation between God
provoked, and man offending! Lay up therefore in your heart, as Manna in a
golden pott; store up in your memory, as Oracles in the Ark of God; the
Gospel-treasures of spiritual truth, and wisdom: The best object of man's best
understanding is that truth which is in Jesus.

2. That that spirit of truth which is the spirit of Christ may free you as
well from the error of your way, as from erring thoughts; that ye may be
renewed, as well in practice, as in Knowledge; that ye may be, as well
un-corrupted in your mind, as un-deceived in your judgment; Receive, with every
truth, a love of that truth; that a love of every revealed truth ye may
receive, purify ye your heart by faith; that by faith ye may purify your
heart, seeing there is no example, threat, promise, or rhetoric, like unto
Scripture examples, threats, promises, and rhetoric, Let these, let all these,
have a due force and a full power over your sincerest affections: so consult
Holy writ as who are therein consulting even God Himself; So obey Holy Writ, as
the Word of a God, as the word of a God speaking to you; as the voice of the
gracious Jehovah so speaking with you, as he some times spoke with his friend
Abraham, even face to face: Oh Sirs, as the best object of your best
understanding, so the most delightful object of your purest affections, is the
good nature of Emannuel, Jehovah, Jesus. Therefore.

3. Whereas, from Abraham's self denials, I pressed a self-denial upon all such
masters, parents, concerned officers, and Magistrates as may, and should
befriend Souls under their tuition; (Old things are passed away:) I now urge
the example, not of Abraham representing, but of the true father of many
nations by Abraham represented: The father of all men, when there was no Arm to
help, spared not his own Son, but delivered him up for us all! And shall
worldly favor, or neighbourly kindness prevent you from imitating the merciful
example, of a compassionate God? If the Love of God, if the example of God,
finds faith in your hearts, O ye Rulers, neither let Souls stupidly ignorant
escape untaught and unchatechised; neither tolerate ye those unlawful meetings
which wrest Holy Scriptures to the hazard of themselves, and of this Kingdom.
1. (Witness our late civil Wars,) As evil words corrupt good manners, so a
little leaven leaveneth the whole lump: A cancer in the mouth is a pernicious
disease: even so much that Christ hates that we should suffer among us the
doctrine either of the Pharisees, or of the Nicolitans. 2. When the Son of man
took a far journey, he gave authority to his Servants: If Lawgivers, Laws,
and Judges protect men's cattle, lands, and limbs, from violence; much more let
them guard men's memories, affections, understandings and consciences from the
subtlety and power of seducers, and of Satan. 3. Seditious conventicles rebel
against man, profane atheists rebel against God, but the Holy conformist
rebelleth against neither; yea he is therefore loyal to his Sovereign, because
he is obedient to his God. 4. Is not the body more then raiment? and is not the
Soul more then the Body? What shall his dread Majesty's native Subjects give in
exchange for their Souls? 5. It is the people laden with iniquity that is the
people of Gods wrath, but a righteous people is a prosperous people: then shall
his Majesty's Subjects flourish, when their Souls prosper. 6. While upon Lords
days and other days set a part for religious assemblies and duties, some
gadd about to change their way, and others sit idle at home, God loses the
glory of his full and public congregations, worship, and Ordinances. During
the tyranny of Oliver the Rebel, orthodox Ministers were sequestered from their
parochial congregations, Under the Clemency of King Charles the Second let not
parochial congregations be sequestered from their orthodox Ministers. In short,
so many as despise him shall be lightly esteemed, but such as honor God, them
God will honor.

4. Whereas I convinced you, that the burden, sharpness, and number, of our
trials; are light afflictions in comparison of the temptations of Abraham;
behold a greater then Abraham is here. Consider Him that endured such
contradiction of sinners, Consider Jesus by Isaac tipified, and you will learn
of him to possess your Souls in patience: Faith instructs us how to take
pleasure in afflictions, and to taste a joy even in tribulations, Remove your
eyes from the dead body of our departed friend unto the body of Christ
crucified, you will then, in lieu of mourning for an only Son, even aspire a
fellowship in Christ's sufferings.

5. Behold I show you a mystery. The same faith which teaches us to seek
righteousness not by works, but by grace; does also stir us up to live just
toward our neighbor, our selves, and our God. When by faith Abraham offered up
his Isaac, he lived just to his Son, true to himself, upright toward his God.
1. Upright toward Jehovah, for Jehovah had a greater right in Isaac, then the
Father of Isaac ever, either had, or could have* 2. True to Himself, for had
he lifted up his Soul, he had ceased to be upright. 3. Just to his Son, for it
was the Duty of Isaac not only to live, but to die, unto the Lord; Blessed is
that man which endures temptation; Would ye endure to the end? Would ye have
present victory over your present conflict? Fight the good fight of faith: Who
so would be justified, must be justified not by works, but by faith; and he
that would order his conversation aright, must use his knowledge aright; he
must make the best use which he can, not only of his reason, but of his faith.

6. Faith fixes one eye upon the Duty set before us, and the other eye upon
the promise annexed to that Duty; Faith verily believes that there is a reward
for the righteous: In the mount of the Lord was Jehovah seen. By laying that
Body, which his father could not lift, over the altar upon the Wood, Isaac his
mouth was filled with laughter: 1. He saw and heard an Angel sent from Heaven
to find a way for his escape; 2. He did not die, but live; 3. He lived, and
lived a type, a figure, a pledge of Christ's and in Christ, of our resurrection
and Life: By not withholding his Son, Abraham received praise from his God,
yea and, with praises, blessings; Abraham saw Christ's day and was glad: From
the faith both of Abraham and of Isaac Jehovah Himself received present yea and
in all ages future Glory; They who know His name will trust in it And yet show
I unto you more excellent things then these. For

7. The same faith which enureth us to be ever at once just to our neighbor,
our selves, and our God, works upon our good nature; it works in us a
disposition to be (like Christ) harmeless and blameless: 2. An emulation to put
on the Lord' Jesus: To them that believe it is meat and drink to study
Christ, to learn Christ, and to live Christ: yea 3. Faith heightneth us to
imitate (with Jesus Christ,) the God and father of our Lord Jesus Christ; it
cherishes in us a filial delight of being followers of his Father, and of our
Father, as dear Children: Abba Father, thou art long-suffering, patient, good,
merciful, righteous, liberal, pure, holy, loving etc. Oh make us, make us (like
thy self,) long-suffering. etc. 4. By faith we rest assured that our
forerunner has, in Heaven, prepared mansions and princely Lodgings for us who
believe in Him.

To conclude, by faith we reckon our selves therefore coheires with Christ,
because, as he is by Nature, so we are by a spirit of adoption, privileged to
be the Sons of God; all things are ours, because we are Christ's, and Christ, is
Gods; Gods in whom God is well pleased, God is the Lord not of the dead, but of
the living; and therefore the Dust shall give up her dead: True, the Soul of
our dear friend is separated from his body; nevertheless, by faith we eye our
Mediator as bone of his bone and flesh of his flesh: Faith gives us to
understand; that, since Christ and we are one body, together with his dead body
shall our dead bodies arise; and shall therefore arise as his dead body did
arise, partly because they that are joined unto the Lord, are one spirit; and
partly because (witness Enoch, Elias, and the blessed Jesus) there is one flesh
of man, another flesh of beasts. The flesh of beasts, like their mortal Souls,
perishes for ever; The flesh of man, the dead body of our dear friend, like
leaf, Gold, naturally ascends unto the same fingers, unto the same Creator,
who curiously wrought it upon earth, that he might exalt it unto glory in
Heaven: To which Heaven and glory he bring us by his spirit, and by his Son; To
whom, with Himself, the Father of all things, be dominion and salvation ever
ascribed, Amen.

FINIS.
Psalm. 116.10. I believed, therefore have I spoken.

