THE GROVE, OR, Love's Paradise.

AN OPERA, Represented at the Theater Royal in Drury Lane.

-- Aut famam sequere, aut Sibi Convenientia finge.

Hor. Art. Poet. By Mr Oldmixon.

LONDON, Printed for Richard Parker at the Unicorn under the Piazza of the
Royal Exchange in Cornhil. 1700.

TO Mr. Freeman.
AT last, SIR, Fortune has put it in my power to pay you some acknowledgement
for the many obligations you have laid on me; and I shall have the less reason
to complain of her, if you receive this Present with as much pleasure as I give
it; of which I should not despair, had I taken any other method in send ng it
to you. But what might have been welcome from a Friend, will not, I fear, be so
agreeable from an Author. Tho your inclination for the Drama, your acquaintance
with the Art, and the encouragement you have given those who devote themselves
to it, are sufficient to warrant this Liberty in me, was I not otherwise secure
in your Friendship. I can never believe you will condemn in public, what you
approve in private, and the Protection of one who knows how to defend what he
thinks deserves it, is certainly more valuable than the greatest Name or the
highest Quality. I had rather have the world convinced, that their favor to
this Play is reasonable, than by taking sanctuary in the Degree or Interest of
my Patron, forbid 'em the free use of their Understanding, and arbitrarily
exact a Judgment from 'em, which in any other presence they would recant or
disown.

The Poets have generally been careful not to Dedicate their Poems to those who
knew their true value: This would not at all have answered their design. They
chose out some persons who wanted very thing more than Money, and they have
seldom miscarried in what they aim at most. Flattery is always sold to these to
the best advantage; and since it costs 'em nothing but a few Pieces, which they
could not tell how better to dispose of, the Trade has considerably advanced;
and those who deal in it, have commonly found their account by it. Fame is not
the Mistress they Court: To talk of a future Reputation when a present Supply
is to be raised, would to them seem Silly and Extravagant. Indeed I think they
are very much to be excused; for a man must have little Stomach to hear of an
Immortal Name, when his own puts him in mind of Mortality.

This has fixed a scandal on these Addresses, but like other good things, they
ought not to suffer because they are abused; and while we are in a Humor of
Reformation, 'twould be well if some amendment was begun in this too. That
Authors would make choice of Gentlemen, where they may be as liberal as they
please of their Panegyric, and yet preserve their Sincerity. Perhaps it is
difficult to find many such Subjects, but that there are such, you are yourself
an undeniable instance. You have given us a fair proof, that Business, Letters,
Pleasure and Virtue, are not incompatible; and that Wit, Judgment, and Good
Manners, are not confined to the narrow limits of Convent Garden. If to be Idle
is to be Useless, if Detraction is a Vice, Affectation Folly, and Pride a
defect of the Soul, how many Wits and fine Gentlemen will at once lose their
Characters? You have on the contrary, preferred Care and Industry to Riot and
Profusion, tho you might with others have pleaded the excuse of an ample
Fortune. Your Wit does not support itself by Satyr, nor your Judgment by
Malice, neither does your good Humor lose you any thing in the esteem of all
that know you; tho Spleen and ill Nature are grown so fashionable, that in some
places you will be thought ridiculous, if you are not troublesome. But I forget
this Epistle is to go farther than your own Family, and to bring you into
others, who may not be so fond of this Theme as I am; for there is nothing so
tedious to Mankind in general, as an Encomium, where they are not rhemselves
concerned, let it be never so Just and Impartial.

I am, Sir, Your obliged humble Servant, J. Oldmixon.

THE PREFACE.
I Never knew a Book get much by a Preface, nor a Play by this means advance in
the Opinion of the world, unless it had triumphed on the Stage. I think,
however, we ought to acknowledge the favors of such as have used us well, and
to inform the rest; it is possible they may be mistaken.

As far as this is my case, I believe the first considered a Man was
accountable for no failings but his own, and if there was any thing amiss which
was not the Author's, they were so just, as to distinguish between that part of
the Drama which belonged to him, and that which depended on others. As for the
Persons who were not so generous as these, nor in any respect so considerable,
who thought the Catastrophe was not enough prepared, and that the discovery in
the last Act was huddled and in confusion, they will now see if what he had
writ had been spoken, every thing would have appeared clear and natural, which,
to shorten the Entertainment, had been before broken and disordered.

I might in the next place acquaint the Critics, that this Play is neither
Translation nor Paraphrase; that the Story is entirely now; that 'twas at first
intended for a Pastoral, tho in the three last Acts, the Dignity of the
Characters raised it into the form of a Tragedy, and with these reflections
insinuate, as is usual, many things to my advantage.

But men are heard with impatience in their own Cause, and I shall prevail more
by the Judgment and Candor of the Reader, than a vain account of my own
performance.

As to what relates to the composition, no man ever consulted the meaning of
Words more than Mr Parcel has done, and he has succeeded too well with the
Public, to want the applause of his Author.

Dramatis Personae.
MEN. ARcadius, Emperor of Greece, Mr Mills. Eudosius, Prince of Thrace, living
in Italy, disguised under the name of Amintor, Mr Powel. Adrastus, his Brother,
Mr Tomms. Parmenio, the Emperor's Favorite, Mr Cibber. Nicias, Captain of his
Guards, Mr Thomas. Alcander, Servant to Eudosius, Sileno, a Shepherd.
WOMEN. Aurelia, Daughter to the Emperor, Mrs Rogers. Phylante, her Confident,
Mrs Temple. Sylvia, a Roman Lady, Mrs Oldfield.
Officers, Guards, Shepherds and Shepherdesses. SCENE. A Province of Italy,
near the Gulf of Venice.

PROLOGUE.
PLays would no more without a Prologue pass,
Than City Dinner would without a Grace;
Like theirs too some have been so long and dull,
Before you taste, your Stomachs have been full.
Our Author's, to engage you for his treat,
Like hungry Chaplains, shall be short and sweet.
The Wits, he knows, are easy in their fare,
They make the Stage their pleasure, not their care
The Critics only like Informers sit,
To witness if we pass unlawful Wit.
Besides, the Poets have this hardship in it,
Each tries the Metal by his private Mint.
They talk of Rules, and those that break 'em scorn,
Yet none more forward when it serves their turn.
Good Sense and Nature every where should reign,
Where these are wanting they but talk in vain.
The precepts of their Art with heat they praise,
But draw the vile examples from their Plays.
Hard fate! if we must all their paths pursue,
Or win their favor by offending you:
To you bright Circle he commends his Cause,
They must to him, who to the world give Laws.
If Foreign Theaters, with mighty cost,
Of wondrous Scenes and Decorations boast;
Of opening Heavens, and Visions in the air,
They never could show so many wonders there.
Nor by the help of Magic or Machine,
Produce such Beauties, or so fair a Scene.
Tho awful terror in your eyes appears,
He less your Cruelty than Justice fears.
Yet by your sentence since he lives or dies,
He Will fall with Pleasure, or with Glory rise.
ACT I.
Scene an open Valley, whose Prospect is confined by a Mountain on one side,
and Woods on the other, and the Sea at a distance forward. Aurelia, Sylvia,
Phylante walking. Aur. Waked by the early Mattins of the Lark
We leave our Down, and in this Sunny Vale
Suck the fresh breezes which embalm the air.

Sylv. Thus in the tedious absence of your Lord,
We by variety of Sports contrive
To pass those hateful minutes with delight,
Which else would lag like years of want and pain.

Aur. Oh! it is an age, it is ages since my eyes
Fed last on his, and to my Soul conveyed
Unutterable pleasure.

Syl. Scarce the Sun
Has thrice in yonder Ocean sunk his beams
Since you beheld him, and may yet e're noon
Again behold, and have him in your arms.

Phyl. See there -- descending from the hill I spy
A man, that toward you seems to bend his course,
So swiftly now he crosses over the Plain,
It Is sure the Messenger of welcome news.

Aur. Oh! nothing can be welcome but my Lord.

Phyl. I see him, it is Alcander.

Aur. Ha! alone.
Where Is my Amintor? Tell me, Phylante,
Has not Arcadius loaded him with Chains,
And sentenced him to Torture and to Death?

Sylv. For what are you thus anxious of his Life?
How wild are all these fears.
You from Amintor's merit may expect
Arcadius has been lavish of his Grace,
And with Imperial honors crowned your Love.

Aur. It Is not for us to think of Honors here,
For what we never see, we never desire.
My Soul, contented with our humble state,
Leaves to the Great the glories of a Court;
And in possession of these Shades and Love,
Unenvy'ng and unenvied, taste delights,
Which for Elysium I would scarce resign.
But oh! If I, amidst of all this joy,
Should have Amintor ravished from my arms,
And see him perish by unnatural rage;
This Vale will then be worse than Libian Wilds,
All will be desert here, and all accursed,
Forsook by every thing but by despair
I then shall wander in a maze of woe,
Till death too late o'retakes me.

Sylv. What can this mean? This unexpected change,
Gives me just reason to believe you have fears,
Which you in vain endeavor to conceal;
For I will know 'em, I that am your Friend,
A name which claims the privilege of trust,
Will know your worst of Fate, as I till now
Have been the partner of your hours of bliss.

Enter Alcander. Alc. Madam, my Lord.

Aur. Speak. Lives he? Is he free?

Alc. He Lives, is free, and over this Realm of Peace,
Created by the Emp'ror, Sovereign Prince,
As this informs you further. Giving a Letter.

Aur. Yes it is his.
Look in my eyes, and you will perceive it is his.
Why do I tremble? Is it fear or joy?
Whom should I fear? There Is nothing sure in this:
There Is nothing which my Lord can send to me,
But what is dear as Life, and soft as Love.
Reads. Impatient of thy absence, I commit
In thee, the Treasure of my heart to Heaven.
Our Embassy with rapture was received:
Our Flocks and Herds, the ric^es of the Plain,
Preferred to heaps of Gold, and homage Crowns.
I am declared a Prince, and thou shall reign
If we survive the danger of this day.
The Emp'ror from our Foes or Fame has heard
So much of our blessed Mansion, and of thee,
He beg d to be my Guest, and with his Court,
Intends to visit our retreat e're even.
I fly to thy relief, I can -- no more.

Sylv. Why weep you, when your fortune is advanced
Above what you expected or desired,
The Empire of our hearts you had before,
But what was Friendship then is duty now,
Nor shall our Friendship make our duty less.

Aur. Arcadius.

Sylv. What of him? I know you think
This place not worthy of the Lord of Greece,
Tho it is not for magnificence or show,
Or to see splendours equal with his own,
That he descends to be your guest,
It Is to behold the sweetness of this Vale,
To hear the Music of our Forest Quires,
And weary d with perpetual Pomp, to see
How Solitude and Innocence can charm,
For you perhaps, this journey is designed.
Your Beauty --

Aur. Hold -- I must not hear thee on,
Thou little know of whom, or what thou talk:
Ungratefully thy Friendship I Have abused,
And kept the mystery of my fate concealed,
Which now alas, necessity reveals.
Come, gentle Sylvia, take me to thy heart,
Support me with thy Counsel, lest I sink
Beneath the burden of my shame and fears:
Arcadius Is my Father

Sylv. When you first came a stranger to these Woods,
I ever thought you of divine descent,
And as I thought you then adore you now. kneels.

Aur. Oh rise my Friend, I will not see thee thus.
Say -- does the Sun that glids this morning Sky
Shine on a Creature so forlorn as me,
Who can defend me from a Fathers frown,
A Father and an Emperor disobeyed?
Forgive me, that I dare not tell thee more,
Thou soon wilt guess, that Love was all my Crime.

Sylv. And Love, which was your crime is your defense.
Your story at your leisure I shall know.
But it is no more than I have often read
Of Princesses, who scorned the Beds of Kings,
When merit had before engaged their hearts.
Your Father by his favor has approved
The choice you made, and all things will be well.

Aur. Alcander execute your Lords commands.
You Sylvia see that all things be prepared
Fit to receive the Master of the World,
While I with Reason and with Love consult
How best I may approach my Fathers wrath,
How move his pity best, or daunt his rage. Ex. Syl. Alc.
Oh my Phylante, how shall we escape
This Dreadful enterview, or rather meet
The Storm which threatens to o'rewhelm us both.

Phy. You Have little cause to fear, for you are blessed
In the fruition of your wishes, I
Have much more reason to deplore my fate,
An Exile from my Parents and my hopes,
Yet in your Friendship I enjoy 'em all.

Aur. Oh how could we foresee that we should here,
In this vile corner of the World, where none
Scarce hear of Greece or of my Fathers name,
How could we think that here we should have met
The ruin, which we strove so much to shun?

Phy. Heaven always will protect the Innocent.

Aur. Who can be Innocent that disobeys
A Fathers pleasure, and a Sovereign's Will?

Phy. Your Father would have left you to your choice,
The Empress forced him to oppose your Vows,
And in her Brothers favor wrong your Love.

Aur. Wronged it indeed, for from our Infant years
Amintor still was promised to my Arms
But when Pulcheria died was named no more

Phyl. You were designed the Prince of Thrace's Bride.

Aur. And who is Amintor, but the Prince of Thrace.
Adrastus who possesses now his realm,
Whom thou and every one, that knows him loves,
Was Privy to our flight, and the design
Eudosius formed to save me for himself.

Phyl. It Is said that Prince was in Arabia slain.

Aur. 'Twas said so then, the better to conceal
The Plot Adrastus had in Greece contrived,
When he in Royal Embassy was sent
To fetch me for his Brother, as before
The Emperor and Eudosius had agreed.
But all those Treaties with my Mother died,
And the new Empress a new Match resolved.
How on this news Eudosius was enraged,
How from his Court disguised he came to ours,
What means he used to see me, and how soon
My Soul consented to be ruled by him.
I only for his Fame adored before;
This for some hour of leisure I reserve,
The rest is known to thee.

Phy. I liked implicitly the man you loved.
Nor asked with whom we fled, but always thought
His actions showed him of the race of Kings.
Who now can say that Love forgets his Slaves?
Love that has led you through such vast designs;
And when the world to find their Princess rose,
That kept you from the search of Nations free,
That watched you on the Waves, and to this shore
Of safety guided you, and blessed your flight.

Aur. Love on his part has every thing performed,
But what have I, Phylante! done on mine,
Rebellious and a Fugitive, can I
Look on my Father and not sink with shame?

Phy. For what? He bid you love, and you obeyed.
It Is true, he bid you after this to change,
But that was neither in his power nor yours;
You fled. From whom? Placidia, one who sought
Your ruin, and can hurt you now no more.
Her pride and spite are buried in her Grave;
The Emp'ror will behold you as his Child,
And freed from prejudice you will then appear
A Heavenly Treasure, which he once had lost,
And now with rapture and amazement finds.

Aur. Thy words are ecstasy, thy very looks
Declare thy Prophecy Divine;
And I already feel my transports grow,
Arcadius will forgive me, I no more
Shall clasp Eudosius with reluctant arms.
For when my heart with tenderness dissolved,
Has given itself to pleasure, say ye Groves,
Ye Fountain, Hill and Dale, that know my Griefs,
Has not my disobedience checked my joy, Enter Sylvia.
And drawn, when we have for solitude retired,
A thousand racking questions from my Lord,
Which he no more shall ask, nor I provoke?

Sylv. Reason prevails and you're your self again,
And this prophetic Peace declares you safe?
You in the Grove of pleasure, there are met
Sileno, Daphne, and the Nymphs whose sports
Are used to entertain your hour of mirth,
Who waiting your approach, prepare their Songs.

Aur. This sure's no hour of Mirth, no time for sports
Yet Sylvia, I Will endeavor to be calm,
I Will set the fairest prospect to my View,
And sooth my hopes with Visions of success.
Come, my Phylante, since from every Grove
The cheerful Birds salute us with their Songs,
Join thou thy better harmony with theirs,
And lay the rising Tempest in my Soul;
Thy Voice is still the refuge of my care,
Despair herself would listen to the Charm,
And when thou entertainst her lose her sting:
Thrace, by the Magic of thy notes has heard
More wonders, than her ancient fables boast.

SONG.
I.
IN Vain you tell me Love is sweet,
And boast of his delights,
I hear you talk of nothing yet,
But restless days and nights,
For when you have your wish enjoyed,
You find the bliss so small,
You either think your Lover cloyed,
Or that you have not him all.
II.
Strange Magic when we see before
So many Fools undone
We long to make the number more,
And on their Perils run.
Tho thousands should our hopes reprove,
Who have their falsehood known,
In this we'll trust, so weak is Love,
No knowledge but our own.
Aur. The Thracian Prince may make the Fable true,
And what you mean of others you may feel.

Phy. Young Daphne and Sileno, and the Youth
Who to divert you, form a rural Quire
With their diviner Lays, shall cure you griefs,
And health to your distempered mind restore.
You then whose Angel voices and whose looks
To ravish every sense,
In heavenly consort join
Attend!
And what I taught you for your Lords return,
To pleasure his beloved and yours perform.

The Front Scene opens and discovers a Circle of Seven Pillars adorned with
Garlands of Flowers. The Shepherds and Shepherdesses dancing witkin it, to the
Tune of the Chorus, which they sing as they Dance. Chorus. Come all away,
Come and Sing and Dance and Play
It Is the Shepherds holiday.

1 Shepherd. Leave the Mountain, Vale, and Home,
To the Grove of Pleasure come:
Never fear your Flocks will stray,
Pan protects 'em while we play.

Shepherdess. Happy Mansions, pleasant Shades,
Seats of Innocence and Ease;
Gentle Shepherds, Tender Maids,
Sweet Abodes of Smiling Peace,
Every Grace and Joy possessing,
Welcome him that gives the Blessing.

Shepherds Amintor's Watchful Care maintains
These Quiet Fields from harms,
His wisdom awes the rougher Swains,
The Mild his Goodness charms.
When Pan the Grecian Shepherds swayed
He never was more adored,
They out of Fear their God obeyed,
We out of Love, our Lord.

Shepherdess. When Venus, decked with Heavenly Charms,
Once wooed a Mortal to her Arms,
All but the cruel stupid Boy
Beheld her with transporting Joy;
The Flocks and Herds refused to graze,
And Men and Beasts could only gaze.
Aurelia's Beauties thus appear,
Thus shining, thus transporting here.

Shepherd. For him we Flowery Chaplets bring,
The fairest praduct of the Spring.

Shepherdess. For her we Crowns of Roses weave,
Which both with cheerful Looks receive,
And with as cheerful Hearts we g've,
Thus Loving and Beloved we live.

Chorus. Thus Loving and Beloved we Live.

Aur. Oh force of Music and Caelestial Song,
Which from profoundest misery can raise
A Soul to ecstasy, and taste of Heaven
To you Phylante! I commit the charge
Of this great Festival, and from your care
Expect what nature, and what art can do. A March afar off.
The foremost of the Grecian Court arrive,
I see the Glorious Troop descend the Mount,
And love informs me, that my Lord is there,
To him I Will fly, and know what fate decrees;
From him the sharpest Message will be sweet,
Whose Voice is kinder to my Ear than sighs
Of wandering Rivers, or of evening Winds. Ex. Aur. Syl.

Phyl. Unhappy Princess! by ill fate persu'd
To these almost the limits of the World,
Oh fatal passion! Thus while I lament
Thy lost condition, I forget my own,
And Friendship always is too strong for Love,
For now that every hour I hope to see
What next to thee is dearest to my heart,
Thy danger sets before my eyes a gloom,
Which hides the gaudy Vision from my view,
And makes it doubtful to me, if I ought
To mourn for thee, or to rejoice for him.
Sileno meet me at the Bowers of bliss,
There all shall have the Parts to each assigned,
What best my thoughts can thus employed invent;
For something noble we must now prepare,
Something te ravish an Imperial Ear,
Tho from you only I expect success,
Whose Beauties equal with your Voices please. Ex. omnes.

ACT II.
Scene a Fountain with Bowers of Myrtle around it, a Shepherdess lying in one
that fronts the Stage sings. SONG.
TO Hill and Dale I tell my Care,
To Rocks and Streams how I despair;
To faithless Winds my fortune mourn,
The Winds in sighs my plaint return;
The Streams in murmurs, Hill and Dale,
And hollow Rocks my fate bewail
In Echoes kindly they resound
My moan, and seem to feel my wound:
He only that should hear is deaf,
He only that can give relief,
Despises me, and mocks my grief.
Phylante, Sileno, Shepherds and Shepherdesses come to her as the Song begins.
Phyl. What hapless Virgin haunts these lonely Bowers,
Who with these mournful sighs disturbs our Plays?
Myrtilla? then it is but affected grief,
Such beauty never had reason to despair.
Come, you to other notes must tune your voice,
To sing of Gods, and win immortal praise.
Sileno, since you challenge us to try
Whose Lays have greater influence on the Soul,
Whether the Trumpets lofty sounds prevail,
Less than the dying whispers of your Flutes.
Exert your utmost skill, for we accept
Your offer, and your Valley shall resound
With Music, such as Echo never can learn.

Sileno. We boast no skill, but from our artless Songs
Expect success, which Nature never fails.
When Birds untaught in Woods and Forests sing,
Their notes seem wild, and not so just as ours,
There Is something in 'em yet which charms our ears
More than the finest graces of your art:
Why may not our Voices, uninflam'd like theirs,
Give the same Pleasure, tho they seem as wild.

Amintor ( or Eudosius) and Aurelia. Phyl. Amintor and Aurelia! Let Us retire,
And in the thickest of this beauteous shade
Attend their leisure to approve our mirth,
There meditate the business of the day,
And the rewards which we expect from Fame.

Aur. I have thee, my Eudosius, I have all
That Heaven can give me of my hearts desire:
I have thee, but how long shall I enjoy
The mighty blessing? this is all my fear,
And this the source of these untimely tears.
My Father --

Eud. It Is not in the power of Man
Nor Gods to part what Love so firmly joins;
Nor have we lived for many rolling years
In sweet fruition of our wish, and past
Through dangers eminent on both the Mains,
To fall at last by him that gave thee life.

Aur. He Will look on me perhrps as on a Child,
The pangs of Nature may oppose his rage,
I in the combat of his soul be safe,
But how will you escape his dire revenge.
He Will view thee as the robber of his house,
That stole his dearest treasure thence, and lives
Unlicens'd in possession of those joys,
Which he and only he had right to give.

Eud. That right by solemn Oaths he gave to me,
Himself first tempted me to soar so high,
To gaze upon thy Beauties with desire,
And when he would have flung me from the Heaven
To which his promise had advanced my hopes,
Oh was it possible for me to leave
Such Sweetness, such Divinity as thine:
And yield thee to the bosom of thy Foe?
What Danger could have driven me to this,
For whom had I to please but thee?
Oh! were his power omnipotent as Jove's,
His will as s^^^ed, and his wrath as fierce,
And I be^d he thus profusely kind,
What fear could interdict me thy embrace?
What duty check ^y transport, or defend
My arms, this circle of incessant joy?

Aur. To have thee thus, Eudosius, tho I saw
My Father darting from his awful brow
His keenest arrows, yet my soul secure
In ecstasy, would brave 'em all for thee.

Eud. Away with sorrow, Fate already shows
A boundless store of happiness reserved
To recompense the troubles we have past.

Aur. What made Arcadius visit our retreat?
What made this shower of favor fall on thee?

Eud. When, chosen by these Provinces, I went
To pay the homage which our Lord requires,
Our Presents, Flocks and Herds, and crowns of Flowers,
Were to the wealth of Italy preferred.
He asked me, whence this plenty, and these Youth?
Who ruled for him, the Region whence they came?
And ravished with their Elegance and Looks,
Declared this morn Amintor for their Lord,
As they with tears of earnestness implored.
Of you, Sir, smiling from the Throne on me,
He said, we have heard such wonders, we resolve
To see the Paradise which you possess,
And be our self a witness of your sports.

Aur. Adrastus -- what of him?

Eud. My care of thee
Prevented me from being further known:
For tho I died to take him to my heart,
I durst not let our Friendship then appear,
Lest e're we were prepared to meet his frown,
Arcadius had been jealous of our loves,
And we unheard had fallen before his wrath,
Which now we may defeat, or else avoid. Trumpets are heard.

Aur. Hark, others of the Royal Train arrive,
The Trumpet echoes in this Vale of Peace,
A noise more dreadful than the din of War. Enter Edrastus.

Eud. Sink on my breast, and lose thy terrors there.
Oh, my Aurelia! if thou yet have life,
Look on a sight which will enchant thy Soul.
My Brother! why do thou behold me thus?
Why cruelly detain thee from my arms?
What message have thou brought, are we proscribed?
Is Death presented us by thee, my friend?
I cannot argue with thee, nor endure
This distance. Oh Adrastus!

Adra. Amazement! My Eudosius strikes me dumb;
My Prince, my Brother, and my dearest Friend,
To see thee, and embrace thee thus alive,
Is more than weak humanity can bear.
Forgive me, Madam, Nature flows so high
That I had almost lost my duty here. Kneels.

Aur. Oh rise, Adrastus, we are not now in Greece;
This posture suits not with our humble state.

Adra. A thousand questions I have next to ask
Of my own Love, a thousand then of yours.

Aur. Phylante's busied with her Rural friends,
And in our Groves instructing 'em to sing,
But she shall leave her talk to welcome you. Ex. Aurel.

Eud. That sigh which from thy bosom broke its way,
Discovers thou have Secrets in thy heart
Which shake thy inmost Soul. Oh speak, my Friend!
Thou think perhaps, that in these lowly weeds,
This pomp of ease, I dare not look on Fate,
Nor hear the name of danger, or of death.

Adr. Oh my Eudosius, it is not this which swells
That storm which rages in my breast: I know
You ever were insensible of fear:
Nor is there cause of dread in our approach.
The Emp'ror often has mourned your loss, and cursed
His fond compliance with Placidia's will.

Eud. Why those unmanly drops than in thy eyes?
Can I have joys in which thou will not share?
Can I have pleasures which are none to thee?

Adr. Yes! you have pleasures that my Nature loathes;
To meet you thus a stranger to the world,
Decked like a Virgin for the Bridal morn,
To find you thus in wanton Exile live,
Involved in fatal Luxury and Peace.
Your childish train like Cupids in our plays,
Your house the Image of the Paphian Court,
Breathing rich odours to debauch your sense,
And use you to forget your thirst of Fame.
Is this d' think delightful to a Friend,
Who once beheld you in the dusty Field,
Pierce through the thickest of the Foes of Greece?

Eud. Did thou not see the vision, that even now
With dazzling luster filled this place, which Earth
Cannot equal, nor the spangled worlds above?
Did thou not see her, shed her beams on me,
Her sweetest Influence, and wou'd'st thou leave
Such happiness, for Empire or for Fame?

Ard. When Love opposes Glory, tho it is worse
Than death to quit such fullness of delight:
Yet Fame, Ambition, and your peoples wants,
Should rouse you from this Lethargy of ease,
And snatch you from the Sirens fatal charm.

Eud. To thee this life, which now thou would condemn,
To thee I owe this exile and this ease.
Thy Counsels first inspired me to resign
My States to thee, and in some distant Realm,
Secure my Princess from a Foes embrace.
By thee my people of my death were told,
The faith they owed to me they have sworn to thee,
Nor let thy jealousy disturb thy reign,
It Is that or Envy urges this reproach.

Adr. By Heaven you wrong me, I despise your Throne.
The Honor of our House, which I prefer
To Life, or Sovereign Dignity's concerned;
And not to speak was to betray my friend.
But it is too late, I see you stand unmoved,
You're deaf to every sound but sighs of Love:
Forgive me, it is too bold a truth, I Have done.

Eud. Oh my Adrastus, why do thou attempt
To vex my tortured mind beyond its force?
Do thou not think the trouble of this day,
Aurelia's danger, and thy Brother's care,
Sufficient to suppress me? Thou shall see,
Insulted by the Waves of adverse Fate,
The Billows all shall break away in foam,
And beat on me as on a shore of Flint;
But when a future Calm serenes our Sky,
When we have sported on a Sea of Joy,
And Peace is to this Land of Love restored,
I Will raise a Nation here, whose name shall live,
When Greece shall be no more. Enter Aur. and Phyl.

Adr. There spoke the Genius of our Godlike Line.
But oh! how vain my Reasons had appeared,
Had these been here, before whose conquering Eyes
The wisest and the bravest fall.
And Love is Truth and Fame. Kneels to Phyl.

Phyl. Welcome, my Lord, to this blessed Realm and me.
To see you here, and not to wish you well,
Had I never known your merit, had been base,
But to the Brother of a friend I owe --

Adr. Oh say not to the Brother of a Friend;
You owe to me, your Lover and your Slave,
All that to years of Constancy is due.
Oh my Phylante!

Phyl. Nay, my Lord, forbear;
What for the trial of my Friendship's done
Is what again I Would for Aurelia do;
Our Souls were one before I heard your name,
And when I saw to what she was exposed,
Had I abandoned her to Wilds and Seas,
To wander over the pathless world alone,
Say -- would you then have thought me worth your heart*

Aur. Too long you waste your Minutes in dispute.
Enter Sileno, Shepherds and Shepherdesses. Behold, my Lord, the Natives of
this place,
With what surprise they view your Princely mien.
The pride of Courts by them unseen till now.
Oh happy Ignorance; that never felt
The sting of wild Ambition, which will often,
Even in these humble Mansions vex my Soul.

Enter Sylv. and Messenger. Mess. The Emp'ror with his Train are on their way,
And at the Palace now will soon arrive.

Sylv. We are all ready to receive the Court,
With splendor equal to their mighty name.

Phyl. Advance Sileno, let the sports begin,
We'll have no time to think of future ills.
The Fury Terror, by our Lays disarmed,
Shall cease to sting, and fly the Magic sound.
For should your Music be preferred to ours,
The sighs of Lover to the voice of War:
Or be the Conquest, Shepherds, yours or mine,
VVe're sure to triumph over our Judges both.

After a Symphony of Hautboys and Flutes, Sileno sings. Ye Birds, who in our
Forests sing,
Ye Winds, that wanton with our Trees,
Ye Streams, that murmur to forsake your Spring,
Be silent, ye outrageous Seas,
Attend the Rural Song:
It Is Love's the theme, Love all our Lays employs,
Parent of Heavenly Verse, and heavenly Joys;
With numbers soft as their Desires,
With Words and Notes which speak their Fires,
He warms the Tuneful Throng.

Then the Trumpets play, and the Kettle-Drums. That over, A Lady sings. Cease
your Amorous Pipes and Flutes,
The Trumpet for the Prize disputes;
The Swains must listen to a loftier sound,
You only flatter their despair,
The Trumpet drives away their Care,
And makes 'em languish for a nobler wound.

Sileno. Hark! what frightful notes I hear,
Which Echo is tormented to reply;
The trembling Sheep and Shepherds fly;
The Plain and Mountain struck with deadly fear;
This Clangor sure was made for Death;
Our Pipes and Flutes have no such fatal breath.
They ease our Pains, they sooth our Care;
These sounds would drive us to Despair;
Forbear the dreadful notes, forbear.

Flutes and Hautboys again. Shepherd. See, the trembling Sheep revive,
The Shepherds seem again to live.

Shepherdss. These gentle murmurs suit our Shades,
And best our Passions move;
With pity they inspire our Maids,
And teach our Youth to Love.

Chorus. These gentle, etc.

Hautboys and Flutes again. Aur. You both have happily performed your part,
By one transported, by another charmed,
You both excelled by turns. a March is heard.

Eud. Again the noble Clangor rends our Caves,
And tells us our Imperial Guest is nigh,
This the important hour on which depends
Our lasting Peace, and this begins with smiles.
Oh may't not prove, as we have sometimes seen,
A stormy noon succeed a cheerful morn?
But why should we the worst of fortune fear,
Love was our crime, and Love is master here.

Ex. Omnes. End of the Second Act.
ACT III.
Scene a Hall of the Palace, Representing the Court of Pan. After the Song of
Fame is over, Pan rises (while the Music plays) in a Wood, being several rows
of Trees illuminated. All the Actors on the Stage, A Warlike Tune. Fame. Through
wondering Worlds I Caesar 's worth proclaim,
The Nations tremble at his mighty name:
My hundred Tongues his matchless deeds declare,
In Peace his Wisdom, or his Force in War.
Himself at rest, my Labors never cease
To spread his Virtues, or in War or Peace.

Pan. What voice is this, to me unknown,
What noise, which in the Elysian Shades
Disturbs my quiet Reign?
If God or Goddess, hence be gone,
Nor vex our Youth, nor fright our Maids,
But leave to me the Plain;
I know thee by thy hundred Tongues,
Thy hundred Ears, and thousand Eyes,
To Court go sing thy flattering Songs,
Among the Great disperse thy Lies,
Nor raise Confusion in our peaceful Land.
And you, who reign with Pan below,
Ascend; and ye who rove in Wilds,
Or press the Vine, or watch in Fields,
Who use the Crook, or bend the Bow,
Appear at my Command.

Satyr, Shepherds, Shepherdesses, Bacchanalian, Hunters, Huntresses. Hunters
and Huntresses. We come from the Mountain, and hunting the Fox.

Shepherds and Shepherdesses. And we from the Valley, and keeping our Flocks.

Satyr. I come from the Forest, and plucking up Trees.

Bacchanalian. And I from the Wine Press, and sucking fat Lees.

Chorus. At Pan s great Command we leave Working and Play,
(...) call, which with Joy we obey.

Ceres ascends. Ceres. Where Is my Pan, my Lord, my Love,
Why flies he from the Sacred Grove,
Why flies he from his Ceres arms,
For mortal Beauty, leave immortal Charms?

Pan. One of the Gods, who rule on Earth,
Descends to visit now the Plain;
For him we bring forth all our mirth;
For him too summon you your Train.
Our Presence shall their Rural Triumphs grace,
And with celestial luster fill the place.

Ceres. Ye Men and Maids, who cut the Ear,
Or bind the bounteous Sheave,
Who reap the Golden Meads appear,
A while your Labor leave.

Binders and Reapers. Reap. Ous work at an end, we'll awhile go to play,
To Binding and Reaping a much better way.
This Harvest thus in, for the next we will Plow,
And if we expect a new Crop we must Sow.

Bind. Not so hasty, you're too warm;
Thus all Renters for a year,
When they mean to leave a Farm,
Care not what they wear or tear.
Come -- Man, since you are so stout,
Take a Lease on it, and be merry,
There Is no fear you will wear it out,
When you are obliged to tarry.

Reap. Oh talk not of Leases, I hate 'em, my Honey,
Your Copy Lands are for men who have Money.
When I rent at my will, I can do as I please;
And had much rather Hold by another man's Lease.

Bind. You and I shall never deal,
Put an end then to the strife,
Give me both your Hand and Seal,
And the Soil is yours for Life.

Reap. By my troth it is too hard, as the Taxes go now,
When my Landlord paid all, we more freely could sow;
But since I have tried it, and know how 'twill bear,
It Is a bargain between us.

Bind. For Life.

Reap. For a Year.

For two Voices. Pan and Ceres. Plenty, mirth and gay delights,
Pleasant days, and blissful nights;
All the sweets of Love and Peace,
Numerous Flocks and large Increase,
Ever bless you, Joy attend ye,
Pan and Ceres still befriend ye,
While they descend Fame appears. The Trumpet sounds.

Fame. Away with all these fatal Charms,
Away with these deluding Sounds,
The notes that rouse the fearful Camp to Arms,
That from the Coward drive his false alarms,
And make him dauntless look on death and wounds.
Fame to these Woods again restores,
And with the Emp'rors potent name torments the laboring Shores.

While the Music is performing, Arcadius seems to talk very earnestly with
Parmenio and Nicias. Eud. Observe, Adrastus, how Arcadius stands,
Unmoved by Harmony, or Artful show:
Even I who trembling on the brink of fate,
Behold the horrid Precipice, am charmed.
What cares are his superior then to mine?

Par. The Emp'ror, wearied with the days fatigue,
Wills, that all leave him but the Prince of Thrace.

Ex. Om. but Arc. Ad. Par. and Nic. Arc. That I have cause to think I am
betrayed,
This wealth, with which our own can scarce compare
These Towers, these rich Alcoves, these Gilded Roofs,
And all this bright magnificence declare.
Is this the dwelling of a private Swain?
This the retreat of discontent and love?
The Mines of Asia, and the Ethiop Sands;
Scarce in the course of ten abundant years,
Produce more Treasures than my Eyes behold.
I see you know the Master of this place,
Already grown his confident and friend.
You have your secrets and your private talk,
While I with Fairy Dance and Song amused,
Play with my danger, as the Pilot steers
Toward the sweet Voice which tempts him to the Rock.

Adr. Yourself, my Lord, discovered first his worth,
You, who so soon advanced him to a Throne,
Might well expect the admiring world would gaze
With more than common pleasure on the man,
Whom, from profoundest solitude, you chose
To wear a Scepter, and to sit with Kings.

Arc. This solitude so gloriously adorned,
These Riches hidden in a Diamond Cave,
Might tempt a Hermits Faith, and make him view
The Empire of the world with lustful Eyes,
Nor dropped they like you gay Machines from Heaven,
Nor is it painted Wealth, but Massy Gold.
Have you not heard him boast his high descent.
What Princess, careless of her Nuptial Vow,
Has bred this Issue of polluted Love,
To nourish Treason here, and prove at last
Her injured Monarch's ruin, and his shame?

Adr. This of a Prince? and underneath his Roof?

Arc. You're touched, Sir, and would tell me this is base
Ingrate, Inhospitable, and unjust,
Your Eyes convict you, and your glowing Cheeks
Burn with projected Mischiefs.
But Princes must not trifle with their Fate,
From whence this Rural prodigy? What Realm
Could spare the Treasure that supports this Cost?

Adr. He told you whence himself,
From this blessed Land where Peace and Safety dwell,
Where no projected mischiefs e're were formed.
No Princess, careless of her Nuptial Vow,
E're thought to wrong her Monarch, or profane
This Vale of innocence with lawless love.

Arc. The secret which you dare not trust with me,
Is brooding mischiefs of the blackest form.
Prince! you're my Prisoner till the truth is known.

Adr. Is this the safety of an Emp'rors Faith?
But that the Crown which glitters on your brow
Commands submission, and forbids my arm
The vengeance to a Sovereigns honor due,
These chains should never else affront your name,
My self would else be Guardian of your Oath,
And force you to be just.

Arc. Guards! till you hear from us observe the Prince;
To all but those whom we allow, defend
Admittance near him, it is our life's concern. Ex. Nic. with Adr.
Next him, by whom I reign, I know no power
Superior to my own. No Judge, who durst
Declare against my pleasure that is wrong,
Which the Imperial word pronounces right.
I for this deed can answer to my self,
The world must then be satisfied.

Par. It Is evident, the Treason's grown mature.
What Interest has Adrastus in this man?
This rising Comet, whose portentous look
To Nations threatens ruin.
Is this the Mansion of a Village, Lord?
The Roman Chiefs, in their triumphal pride,
Were never more illustrious in their sports,
Than those even now with wonder I behold.
The Prince, by nature, turbulent and proud,
Brooks not the narrow limits of his Thrace;
With envy he beheld Byzantium's wealth,
When for his Brother, with opprobrious terms,
He would have forced your Daughter from your arms.

Arc. Oh! thou have roused a fury in my breast,
Which stings me worse than Scorpions fiery tongues.
Why did thou name my Daughter? she was once
The blessing of my Youth,
The glory of my Court,
The fairest product of Pulcheria's Love:
But now a wanderer in some barren Clime;
Driven by my cruelty to spend her Spring,
With a vile ravisher in want and pain.

Par. It Is time, my Lord, to think of this no more,
What we cannot help we must with patience bear,
And when you're thus by threatening dangers pressed,
Look forwards to prevent the future ills.

Arc. What wou'd'st thou that we do? I yet can see
No ills, but such as from suspicion rise.
Perhaps as Idle as Adrastus threats.

Par. In Rome, 'twas whispered that Byzantium's Streets
With Thracian Captains swarmed, and Thracian arms,
Your self has heard the Rumors which have spread.
Of Armies on the Borders to revenge
An injured Brother, true -- the rumors died,
But still the Injury, as they tell you, lives.

Arc. Again, thy just reproaches rack my Soul;
To what wou'd'st thou persuade me?

Par. To be safe.
The business of my days, my nightly care
Is to preserve you from the strokes,
Of such as dare not meet you in the Field.

Arc. What plots have thou discovered?

Par. None, my Lord?
However, I thought it strange to see the Prince
Abandon Thrace, and hear Amintor's name
So often chanted in your ears with praise:
Nor were his Friends contented till their prayers
Extorted from your bounty what it is plain,
They meant to take without your gift, a Crown.
Why, when this Journey was at first proposed,
Were there such reasons given you to adjourn
The visit, or dissuade you from't? And when
He saw you would not listen to him. Why
Must he be foremost, was he not afraid,
His friends might be surpised, or unprepared.
It may be only Fancy, but if e're
My Loyalty foresaw a black design,
And was of service to your Empire, now
This very hour, the wit of Hell's at work,
And you're the destined Victim.

Arc. Heaven! he shakes
With honest fears, do with me what thou will,
We'll to the City, arm the Roman bands,
And storm the Palace in the face of noon.

Adr. No, it is not worth your care, command your Guard^
To seize on every Post which may oppose
Assistance from the Province. This at first
They must with utmost secrecy perform;
While I by promised Tortures and Rewards,
Discover from Amintor's Slaves, how long
Their Lord has known the Prince of Thrace, and whence
Their Master, and this Mass of Riches came.

Arc. Be careful of my name, nor let the world
Re-enter Nic. Report my Host insulted by his Guest,
On groundless Tales, and visionary Fears.
I Will give directions to my Guards: The rest
Is left to thee. Be wise. Ex. Alc.

Par. Be so your self, fond Emp'ror!
Was not your Reason clouded by your fears,
The Tyrant passion of your Soul, you soon
Would see through all my airy Plots; and Truth
And Innocence would shine like perfect day.
Well, Nicias! thou, I know art pleased to see
The hour, for which we often have wished to find.
The Lord of Greece from Foreign Counsels free,
Consents to hear his Friends, and own their Love:
How suits Confinement with Adrastus, say?
Does he not rage, and like a Forest Boar
Entangled in the Snare, by raging close
The toil the faster on him.

Nic. Yes!
A while; his wild resentment threatened War.
And with injurious words, denounced to Greece
Eternal Enmity: But most to you.
The Emp'ror and the Empire's ruin. This
He often repeated in outrageous Phrase,
And darted from his Eyes avengeful fires.

Par. I laugh to hear him talk of War in Chains.
His Fury's impotent, his Sword is mine,
He lives, but till my Love has full revenge,
And reached Phylante's Image in his heart.
Oh! thou remembrest when the cruel Maid,
Deaf to my sighs, and heedless of my tears,
Profusely on him lavisht guilty smiles,
And spurned me from her feet with utmost scorn.
The cursed remembrance of that shameful hour,
Is fatal to my Foe -- He dies.
Nor can Arcadius save him, it is too late;
Tho as he is will not, he should this minute change,
His breach of Treaty's never to be composed,
But to be safe, the Prince of Thrace must dye,

Nic. Or Greece must perish by intestine broils,
Brothers by Brothers fall, and Friends by Friends,
Which to prevent --

Par. Ay Nicias, that is my task.
To hinder this the Thracian Prince must bleed,
The Emp'ror seize his State.

Nic. For what?

Par. That Is left
To me, and if my Vengeance proves so weak,
It cannot find reasons for his death, it is just
My wrongs unpunisht should be still my shame.
I know thee, faithful Nicias, that with thee,
My most important secrets are secure.
Amintor, or whatever else he is styled,
When his Friends safety calls, perhaps may arm
The Province h'as obtained, but what he meant
Of service to the Prince shall prove his doom.
The Roman Guards at several Posts are placed,
To quell the Village Tumults in their rise.
Thy charge, of highest moment, is within:
Let none without the Imperial Signet see
Adrastus, 'twill enrage him yet the more,
And that the more increase the Emp'rors fears,
On which my hopes depend. Enter Eud. and Alca.

N c. My Lord, our Host.

Par. Retire, expect anon
Instructions further from me.
My business now is not with him, but yet
It Is criminal to love the man I hate. Ex. Par. and Nic.

Eud. Confined, without my knowledge, in my house,
Against the faith of Nations and of Leagues;
From thee who never did deceive me. This
Would scarce be credible, but that the looks
Of him, who there avoided us, declare
The guilt of wicked Counsels, and confirm Enter Aurelia.
Thy just report, and make our danger sure.
Oh my Aurelia!

Aur. Tell me why that sigh?
Is it for me thy nature's on the rack?
For me, that these Convulsions shake thy Soul.
Oh let me share the anguish of thy mind
Say -- We must dye -- Alas! I know we must,
And in my Crime rejoice, my Love of thee.
Fate in thy Brother has begun her spoils,
Our Lot I know is next.

Eud. Oh cease thy tears.
And if it is in thy heart to love me less,
In pity to us both attempt it now:
For while I see thee thus endearing kind,
I grow a Coward, and could wish to live.
Think of the Glories thou have left, the worlds
That would have kneeled before thee but for me.
Think of the heats that often have parcht thy limbs,
The tedious nights which we have lived in Snow,
The Tempests which have tossed thee on the Main,
The hateful Exile thou have since endured,
The terrors that assault thee. Think on this,
And then behold me as the cause of all.

Aur. Oh! I for ever could behold thee thus.
For ever feast my longing eyes on thine.
Thee, the last object that shall bless their Rays,
And give my parting Soul a taste of heaven;
For heaven, they tell us, is but perfect Love,
And mine is perfection when I look on thee.

Eud. Why, when my care presaged this dreadful hou^
Why did my Brother bring us hopes of peace,
Or that thy Father would forgive our flight,
When thou the darling of his age were it found?
Oh thou art found to him, but lost to me.
The fatal secret's known, my Friend in Chains,
This, this, Aurelia, racks me worse than Wheels:
I Have lived a Slave too long, a worthless Slave,
I Have seen my Brother injured to my face,
And Patient of his bonds expect my own.
Would I in Thrace have suffered this from Kings?
My house by Foreign powers profaned.
Has he then mocked me with a Sovereigns name,
The word that said it was the voice of Heaven
Pronounced by him, and here it is mine to Reign?
Oh, had the Arabian Host beheld me thus,
Thus passive in my wrongs, they never had fled
From Thracian Arms, nor shunned the Victors Sword.

Aur. Cease the remembrance of that glorious day,
Talk not of War, your business is with Love.

Eud. My business is with Death?

Aur. Oh! speak, my Lord,
You think too much on things which long are past,
I Will to my Father, tell him of our Loves.

Eud. And beg him, would thou not to let us live,
By Heaven, I scorn to owe my Life to one,
Who cannot defend his own,
I Will give my Brother liberty or dye,
Nor would I yield to live till he is free?
Alcander to Dametas -- Let him know
Our danger, it is enough, and tell his Friends
That if we want their aid, they be prepared Ex. Alc.
Come, my Aurelia! See, my Fury's over,
And I am gentle now as Lovers dreams.

Aur. With you indeed it is but a dream to love,
Which waking, you forget, or blush to own.
Off -- Off -- I dare not gaze, for never man
Could look so much like truth, and be so false.

Eud. Oh why this language, to my ear unknown;
By thee too left, I Am wretched then indeed.
Come -- While this minute is our own, and whose
The next shall be, or where we next shall meet,
Is only known to Fate. While this is ours,
Come -- Let us spend it like the rest in love.

Aur. That word from thee's like sounds of empty air.
Love always best is in obedience seen.
Had I been dear to thee, thou never had thought
Of War, nor mentioned it against my Will,
And who is this Foe with whom thou wou'd'st contend
The Father of thy Wife,
Thy Emp'ror and thy Guest.
From thee by Guards and Troops of Slaves secured,
And what wou'd'st thou oppose to this, a band
Of Village Heroes armed with Crooks and Staves.
Were thou in Thrace, thy Armies on their march
Led on by thee and Greece, the destined Prize.
Do think thy Feudatory Realm, a Match
For the great Empire of the world.
Had I been dear to thee, as thou have sworn,
Thou wou'd'st not to offend me act like one
Whom Reason has forsook.

Eud. Was I in Thrace, my Armies on their march,
And the great Empire of the world the Prize,
Thus governed, I should think of Philip's Son,
Who with a chosen few subdued the East,
And made the proud Euphrates flow with Blood.
But in this peaceful Region, where I see
A Prize much fairer than the subject World,
What would I not?

Aur. Thy Eyes speak what thou wou'd'st, and they are truth,
They force belief beyond a thousand Oaths.
We wander in the dark, misled by fear;
For was the secret known, thy self would first
My Fathers Vengeance feel, if Vengeance still
Is in his breast reserved; of him informed.
For what Adrastus suffers, you may then;
Or arm, or sue for Peace, as we resolve.

Eud. We all dispute in vain with what we love.
I Will to Arcadius, show him how this deed
Will ever be injurious to his Fame.
Thou to Phylante, and forget thy griefs,
To lessen hers, who now abounds in woe.
These dangers cannot long our Loves molest,
For death or pardon soon must bring us rest. Ex. Omnes.

End of the Third Act.
ACT IV.
Scene an Apartment before that where Adrastus is confined. Aurelia, Phylante,
Sileno, Myrtilla, etc. Aur. WHere will your sorrow lead you? Can your tears
Over doors of Brass prevail, or Marble Walls,
Or Savage man, less flexible than these?

Phy. It Is yet imperfect night, and all is hushed,
As if her time was spent, and day was nigh.
What means this early quiet, when our shades,
Converted to a Court, should ring with noise,
Which waits on Princes, and proclaims their state?
The hours that labor with our Fate are vexed
To bring the dreadful issue forth, and lag
Behind their course. Forgive me, I am rude,
My senses wandering make me hear your words,
As things which came not from a Friend like you.

Aur. To speak you comfort, is I know in vain,
All Counsel in excess of trouble's lost.
But what can you propose by coming here;
It Is death for these to let you see the Prince:
Or was it not, while you believe him safe,
A minutes absence you may well endure.

Phyl. An age for you I suffered with content,
An age of absence for my friend; but then
I thought him safe, and would not wish for more.
My eyes have seen him since, the pleasure's new,
And I again must see him, or I dye.

Aur. You will, on us the impending storm will fall,
With us the Emp'rors wrath will end, with us
His bounds and your despair will be no more.

Phyl. For you my heart weeps blood as well as him.
My Pity thus divided, scarce can tell
Where first she should her mournful office pay.
She Is used to visit you, the stranger claims
His debt, and with a voice which will be heard.

Aur. You Have reason, was it in your power to act,
The Guards removed, the rest you might overcome.

Soft music begins here, and continues till the other is performed. Phyl. And
these we'll conquer with the rest, if it is
In Numbers, or in Notes to win on man.
We'll move their hearts to listen to our prayer,
And when they are most defenseless tempt their faith.

Aur. On Souls disposed to yield you may succeed,
But few will venture where the crime is death.
This sooner will betray 'em from their trust,
My Fathers Signet which I brought from Greece,
That served us in our flight, if prayers should sail,
Produce it at the Emp'rors dread command.
Be speedy in your Enterprise, and learn
From whence this violence arose, and how
We may, if possible, prevent its growth.

Phy. It Is fatal to expose this Signet here,
Put still more fatal to remain in doubt.
I Will try by softer means to make my way,
This the last method I Will attempt to use.

Aur. I see it is time to leave you, and to heaven
Will lift my vows, to prosper your design Ex. Aur.

Phyl. Ye fair companions of my better days!
Come, minister your aid in my distress,
And with your tuneful airs compose my mind.

She lies on a Couch, Music plays louder, Scene opens and discovers Nicias and
Guards waiting on Adrastus Shepherdess. UNderneath a Gloomy Shade,
By an ancient Poplar made,
While the Zephyrs round her play,
Clotis thus complaining lay,
Where shall I Philander find?
Echo answered her, Behind.
Thrice she turned and saw 'twas false,
Cursing Echoes lying tales,
Thus she mourned again, and said,
Where is my Philander fled?
From his Flocks, his Friends and Me;
When shall I my Lover see,
Whither turn to find him out?
Echo answered her, About.

Shepherd. By Echo thus mocked, on a Bank she reclines,
Resolved never to trust her complaint to the winds,
Till Cupid, who pitied her Sorrow and Tears,
On the wings of a Dove to assist her appears.

Cupid is seen the Air. Cupid. Love descends at your complaint,
He who knows what most you want.
Bids you to the Cave repair,
Where you used to vent your care,
You shall find your Lover there.
Bound by mighty Pan he lies,
Piercing with his grief the Skies.
There with your Companions go,
Try what Virgin Songs will do.
The force of Youth and Beauty try,
And Pan will yield as well as I.

Shepherd. We'll go the Cave where the Shepherd in Chains
Lies wrongfully punished for Crimes he abhors;
With our Lays we'll endeavor to lessen his pains,
And please him with singing the name he adores.
It Is Cloris, who loves him, the Cloris he loves,
Who must use all her art to obtain him relief;
But she will use it in vain, for her Harmony moves
Rocks only and Trees, and the Tyrant's still deaf.

Shepherdess. Happy, ever happy we,
Could we see Philander free.
Love, the best and sweetest Care,
Is our only Torment here

The Ghost of Orpheus arises. Ghost of Orpheus. In vain, fair Nymph, with your
Celestial art,
You strive to move a Mortal's heart.
Even I, whose Music hushed the roar of Hell,
And made her Fiends forget their Pains,
When not one hideous groan, nor yell,
Was heard throughout the Stygian Plains,
Whose voice to things insensible was known,
And dancing Woods confessed its wondrous power;
I never could humane rage repel,
But by the Monsters fury fell,
Which often does her first begot, and darling Sons devour.
Cease your Heavenly notes a while,
You will soon your Lover see,
Keep your Songs till fate shall smile.
Fate has told you this by me.

Chorus. Haste, ye happy minutes, haste,
To Cloris her Lover restore;
And grant us, ye Gods, when this danger is past,
That Pan may torment us no more.

Nic. It Is all Enchantment, every thing I see,
And hear, and meet transports me, or I dream,
Or I have seen that Angel form before;
A fairer sure I never saw, nor heard
Such sounds in Greece, where first the Lyre was strung.

Phy. You seem surpised.

Nic. And who without surprise
Can hear such harmony, or look on you.
I thought in woods to meet with none but Nymphs
Of humble make, and here I find a choire
Of Beauties, who may well adorn a Court.

Phy. This language in a Soldier we excuse,
Their words, like their profession, should be rough,
And when you speak us fair, we women think
It Is meant to do us wrong.

Nic. To such as you,
It Is equally impossible to speak
In harsher phrase, or mean to do you wrong.

Phy. If by your talk I might your temper guess,
I rather should believe you would help our Sex,
That begged a service of you, tho it looked
Like danger, than dismiss 'em with reproach.

Nic. For you, whatever you ask, by heaven! it is done,
My Master's honor, and his life secured.

Phy. My business is within.

Nic. Ha! I Am betrayed.
Madam, my Oath's still unprofan'd and you --

Phy. Denied -- what less could I expect from man,
Than with one breath to swear, and be forsworn.

Nic. My Masters honor, and his life secured,
I swear again, whatever you ask, it is done.

Phy. How if I saw the Prince, would that concern
Your Masters honor or his safety?

Nic. Both.
His honor in my breach of his Command,
His safety in my serving of his Foe. Shows the Signet.

Phy. This then is his command.

Nic. Which I obey.

Phy. I tried your Loyalty, and found you true.
The Royal word that ordered this, forbids
Such liberty to all but me. Be just. Enter Parm.

Par. Is that the apartment of the Thracian Prince?

Nic. Yes.

Par. Or my Eyes deceive me, or I saw
A woman enter there.

Nic. You did, my Lord.

Par. By whose command?

Nic. The Emp'rors, she produced
His Signet.

Par. It Is impossible!
But now
We parted, and since last I saw thee, none
Have been allowed to see him but my self.
Confusion! he has cheated me, or thou
Art by some idle tale abused, I Will know
The meaning of this Riddle, and by whom
Thy truth has been debauched. Would Enter, and is stopped.

Nic. My Lord forbear.
To you this liberty I must defend.
The Imperial License reaches only her.

Par. Oh Insolence! art thou too of their plots?
Let me no more be called the Emp'rors friend
If I forget this Injury.

Nic. Yourself
Permitted only such to pass as brought.
My Masters Signet; she was first, and I
Have sworn to see the Emp'rors word obeyed.
If prayers or charms that would have melted Rocks,
Could have seduced me from my trust. To these
I sooner had submitted than to threats.
She tempted every sense to try my Faith,
My Ears with Music, that might match the Spheres,
My Eyes with smiles that would have won on Priests,
And forced a Hermit to forget his Vow.

Par. From whnce these racking thoughts? it cannot be
I tremble yet, as if my fears were true;
Amidst their sports a Virgin I beheld,
Who seemed the Goddess of their mirth, and such
Was she, her Beauty and her Art conspired
Alike, to triumph over Mankind.
Had thou never seen this Lady? I grow mad.
It Is all Extravagance.

Nic. My Lord, I gazed
So much, and with such pleasure, I began
To think I might have seen her often in Greece.

Par. Where?

Nic. In Byzantium.
With the Princess.

Parm. Ha!
If thou could, unconcerned, imagine this,
Tho reason is against me, what I feel
Confirms my jealousies, and thy report.
Six years the Princess has been lost, and Fame
Not once has named the place to which she sled.
Martian, the Captain of Arcadius Guards,
Conveyed her; him I still remember well.
True -- These are wanderers, but they rose from Flocks
And Herds to govern men -- Besides, I never
Have met Amintor till I came to Rome.
Why, when the Emp'ror of the East descends
To grace this Mansion with his presence, why
Must she be sick at this unlucky hour?
Who owns it, and of whom we heard such talk.
Sure, any one but he I serve, had guest
E're now. What Treasure could support this cost,
It Is plain, this Lady Nicias is the same,
For whom the Prince of Thrace remains in bonds,
And in eternal bonds must soon be laid.

Nic. My Lord, you have raised suspicions in my breast,
Which make me wonder we could err so long.

Phyl. crosses the Stage as from Adrastus. Par. Then I will see. Distraction! I
am fixed,
My Limbs forsake me; what is this but Love?
And who is she that awes me thus unseen?
Phylante! coming from my Rivals arms:
Ye Furies, can I fancy this and live?
Time flies on nimble Wings, and I must haste,
Thou know of what importance it is to me
And thee, whose Fortune wholly lives on mine,
That since we have Adrastus in our power,
We never may be in his -- And if at last
Arcadius knows the secret we suspect,
Let this secure us both, and all the spoils Gives a Dagger.
Of Thrace in equal portions shall be ours.
The Emp'ror shall believe he gave the blow
Himself, and freed from him, suppose the worst,
The Princess with her pardon will be pleased.

Nic. All but my being, to your gift Low,
Convinced, that if Adrastus scapes us now,
Not only you, my Lord, but I must fall,
Which best instructs me what to do. Ent. Emp. and Train.

Parm. Enough --
The Emp'ror; we from him must keep our doubts,
For he with rapture would receive the news,
And we should act in vain.

Arc. What further is discovered, is our Host
In league for our destruction with the Prince,
Or holds he guilty Commerce with our Foes?

Par. You best can tell what Commerce, Sir, he holds
Your tidings are of later date than mine.

Arc. You speak in fables, has your Wisdom found
New plots, or are you weary of the old.

Parm. Whom you approve, my Lord, at least in me
'Twere folly to condemn. Perhaps my zeal
Already has transported me too far?

Arc. Our danger is your sport; what means this change?
Have you betrayed me to commit a deed,
Outrageous to the sanctity of Crowns.
And would you when you see your weakness, throw
The shame on us. No more, I am not now
Disposed to play with what concerns our life
Or honor.

Par. We have reason to believe.
You think, my Lord, that you are safe in both.
The Lady, who this minute left the Prince,
Whose word could pass where mine was hear! like wind,
She doubtless has convinced you you are safe.

Arc. What Lady? Still you keep me on the Rack?
Who Is this that has usurpt such mighty power?

Par. The power was yours, your Signet licensed all.

Arc. My Signet? see it is here -- Nor have I seen
A humane Face but these since thine.

Par. Your Guards
Will tell you what has past of late. I saw
A Woman enter, and the Signet shown.

Nic. and Guard s. My Lord, 'twas yours, your Signet.

Arc. Treason all.
I Will have you to the Wheel, your Tongues will then
Speak Truth.

Par. My Lord, their truth deserves reward,
And those the torture who abused your name.

Arc. Excuse me, by thy Friendship it is I live
They could not steel it from me.

Par. Not so soon*
This mischief must be old, and formed in Greece.
The Signet wrought by yours to be produced
On all extremities, their Plots should want.
I would have entered, and have seen by whom
This trick was managed, but your Guards were told,
The Imperial Warrant reached to none but her.

Arc. All falsehood; Nicias, keep your charge secure,
When safety is restored us with the day,
We'll leave this place of horror, and inflict
Those pains at leisure, which their crimes require.
The Roman Senate shall the Traitors Judge. Enter Eud.
Well, Sir, you seem to have affairs of haste,
Which claim immediate Audience: so have we.
Who Is this with out our leave, presumes to wear
The Seal of Empire, which alone is ours,
And in our name to visit him, whom these
In strict Confinement hold?

Eud. My Lord,
Deceit's a stranger to this place, but where
Our business calls us, we would think at least
This house was free, the rest I owe to you.
In peace I kept my Flocks before, and beg
That I again may hold my Crook in peace.
For if my hands a Sovereigns Scepter weild,
My hear will long to have a Sovereigns Right.

Arc. Princes you are, yet all depend on us,
As we on Heaven depend, nor dare you claim
A Sovereigns power, where we are pleased to reign.

Eud. Happy ye Swains! who on the Mountain live,
Lords of your homely Cells, your Cells are yours,
And none disputes your right to govern there.
Oh had you left me to my self, this Vale,
The purchase of my labor, had been still
The bounds of my Ambition; but my Ear
Charmed with a Princes name, has taught my Soul
To think indeed that I am here to reign.

Arc. We are not now to ask you whence this wealth,
The Fleeces must be fine which yield such Gold,
Not that of Colchos was a richer prize.
A Guest should only wonder, and as yours,
All curious inquisition we forbear;
And while you're flusht with infant Grandeur, leave
Such questions to some other place, and hour,
Tho you, who can protest against our sway,
And in our presence tell us what we ought.
Possessed of these, and visions of your right,
May once grow dangerous, Sir, you rise too fast.
This we can pardon, but provokt again,
You may be sent to murmur with your Friend.

Eud. He is my Friend, which soon th'astonisht world
Shall see: nor would he thus have used a wretch
Who su'd for Justice. I could tell what name
The men of ancient Greece had given to Kings,
Who to their Subjects wrongs would thus reply.
Go on -- and listen to your Minions Tales.
However, remember you too late shall know,
Whom you have wronged, and curse their poisonous tongues

Arc. This Minute then we'll know. Guards!

Enter Alcan. Eud. Off ye Slaves!
For by the Majesty that awes my arm,
He dies that in my house insults me first.

Arc. The Shepherd rages, leave him, he will grow cool,
Rome is a milder air, and good to cure
Distempers, which like his have seized the blood.

Ex. Arc. and Train, Eud. Must we like Captives then be led to Rome?
VVait on his Chariot-wheels in chains, like those
His Sword has conquered in the Field.
This morning Sun beheld me on a Throne,
And often his beams reflected on my Brows,
Have borrowed luster from the Crown I wore.
And must I like a purchased Slave, be linkt
With him, whom Nature and Desert have made
My Friend, who suffers all, and dies for me?
Must this inevitably be, and I
Submit with patience? Cursed be him who wears
The marks of Bondage when he might be free.
Alcander, are our Friends prepared?

Alc. They are.
All arming for your rescue, but in vain,
The Roman Guard of every Pass possessed,
Opposes all assistance from without,
A while to enter 'twas denied to me;
Had Not their Captain known me well, I scarce
My self had been allowed to bring this news.

Eud. Who now will doubt to what this treatment tends,
We have been flattered with fallacious smiles,
Till things were ready for our solemn fall.
Why asks he not for her, whose crime his wrath
Once swore he neither would forgive in her,
Nor in her memory; does his heart relent,
And are we only destined to Revenge.
So well I love Aurelia, I would yield
My self a Sacrifice for her with joy.
Adrastus -- Why must he be punished first?
It Is doubtful all but this -- My friend's in Bonds,
And calls aloud for Liberty on me.
Oh had he known I tamely could behold
My Brother bound and murdered, how my ear
This morn had suffered with his just reproach.
One way is left us still, if that should fail,
We'll charge the Roman Guard, and dye like men,
Tho Conquest often has waited on Despair.
Alcander -- let Dametas with his Band
Be ready, and assoon's the alarm is heard
Attack their Troop without, while I within
Through all that dare oppose us force my way:
The rest we'll leave to fate. However it ends,
It Is brave to fall like Princes, and like Friends.

End of the Fourth Act.
ACT V:
The Palace. Scene an Apartment near the Emperor's. Parmenio solus. Par. OH
Guilt! Oh cursed Remorse, the bane of rest,
Which swims above my fairest hopes by day,
And with black Visions haunts my dreams by night.
But what is guilt, or what remorse to me?
The Cowards terror, and the Preachers hell.
Words made to frighten fools, who dread the wheel:
Conscience never meddles with successful crimes.
The Conq'ror over a thousand Murders sleeps,
The Miser steals with pleasure to his wealth,
Torn from the poor, and smiles with inward joy
While he who wants those riches, views his sins
With partial Eyes, and fancies then he feels
The Fury's whip, when hunger only stings. Enter an Officer:

Offi. Our Master's danger will excuse my haste,
The Province is in arms, the foremost Guards
Discover by the light of flaming Spears,
Ten thousand men in martial order move,
And toward the Palace seem to bend their course.

Par. I thank thee fate, this minute then is mine,
It smiles propitious on my great designs.
Their folly will dispose the world to think
My Counsels just, and Heaven rewards my zeal.
What strength can you oppose to theirs?

Offi. At most
Five hundred; but of these, the better half
Are Friends and Neighbors, and require to know
For whom they fight, and talk but ill of you.

Par. No more -- You speak as if you liked their talk.
Your Master soon will have it in his power
To punish such as question his commands Enter Eud.
There are whose ears would burn at such reports,
This Soldier here shall teach 'em to obey,
Correct their doubts, and lead 'em to the Foe.

Nic. The Prince of Thrace, my Lord, demands to see
The Emp'ror, and has something to impart
Of high concern.

Par. No, Nicias, it is in vain,
The Emperor sleeps, and must not be disturbed.
Had he confessed when favor took his part,
His and his Friends dishonor had been saved.
Amyntor's Subjects are, it seems, in arms,
The Roman Guard in mutiny, and thou
Can only bring 'em to obedience Both.
Go Leave the Thracian Prince to me.

Nic. Knows not the Emp'ror of this strange revolt?

Par. Scarce if he did, would he believe it true,
His mercy finds excuses for his Foes.
Often, in his changing humor, he resolved,
To free Adrastus, and perhaps my self
Had for my care been sent to wear his bonds.
Oh horror! that such goodness should be wronged,
By those his bounty had so lately raised.
That in these shades, where virtue seems to dwell,
The Vice of Fiends, Ingratitude, should reign.
Go, Nicias, and be early in the War,
Nor stay their Charge, the Rebels may disperse.
And then we lose our moment of revenge.
Fall on the rout, the victory's secure,
Scarce worthy of thy Sword; but know that much
Depends on this, and great is thy reward.

Nic. I fly where most my Masters safety calls,
And by the Empires Guardian Angel swear,
The Traitors shall not escape, tho near the Throne.

Ex. Nic. and Officer. Par. I like not that, this man was always brave,
But honest always, and has known too much.
No matter -- He Is removed, and now if Hell
To glorious mischief ever was a Friend,
Too morrow's Sun shall see me first in power,
And first in bliss of all the race of man. Enter Eud.
What brings Amintor here? my Genius starts,
Whene're we meet, his presence bodes me ill.

Eud. I Have business with the Emp'ror.

Par. You're too late.

Eud. It Is of importance to his Life and Fame.

Par. To you, we know his Life and Fame are dear,
You might have told him when you saw him last.

Eud. It Was with a person I despise, and thought
Unworthy of the secret.

Par. Him you mean
Has Slaves, who scorn a Traitors odious name,
And of your secrets is too well informed.

Eud. Ha! Have a care how thou insultst me here.
Thou know thy Fate is in the Secret lodged.
Be wise. My patience will not suffer long.
Tempt me no more. Behold me yet at large,
Lord of this place, and Sovereign here.

Par. You talk indeed as if the World was yours:
But men are ever fond of what is new.
A Scepter looks but awkard in your hands,
So lately sullied with a Crook. This House
Is yours, and this discourse becomes it well.

Eud. I have no leisure to dispute, I came
To see Arcadius.

Par. I never asked for what.
You might have spared this visit; it is a time
For rest.

Eud. I shall not see him?

Par. No. Hoa, Guards. Enter Guards.
Through these and me you first shall force your way.

Eud. By heaven thou durst not trust his ears with truth!

Par. I durst not trust him with the man whose Slaves,
A numerous Host, declare against his life.

Eud. Those Slaves shall quickly tear him from thy arms:
Of thee the mischiefs of this hour are born,
And thou severely shall account for all. Enter Alcander.

Par. Convince the Senate whence these mischiefs rose.
Hence! to your post, and watch with double care. To the Guards
Nor fear their numbers in so just a cause.
Nations and Kings will in our quarrel rise,
They Have nothing to assist 'em but Despair. Exit with Guards.

Eud. That portion e're the morning shall be thine:
Hell never received a blacker Soul, nor Earth
A more malicious Villain ever bred.
Night wastes apace, and e're the day returns,
There must be mighty changes in our Fates,
For he or I no more shall see it dawn.
What of Dametas, speaks Parmenio true?

Ale. I left him in the Vale, ten thousand strong,
Lycon attends you in the Citron Grove,
With fifty chosen youth: The foe without
Forget, or never knew that pass; within
But five are posted at the Gate, and those
We soon shall master, and with Lycon join.

Eud. Thy nows transports me, haste, secure the Guards,
Be careful of their Lives, receive our Friends,
Bar all the Palace Gates, and leave at each
Sufficient strength, with charge to suffer none
To enter or to pass, let Lycon know
I wait his entrance in the Inner Court. Ex. Alcander.
I Will meet the Emp'ror like an Emp'rors Son;
Nor on his Pity, or his Daughters Tears,
Depend for pardon when I most am wronged.
Oh, my Adrastus, thou shall see I still
Am worthy of the Heroes of our race.
I fly to bring thee Freedom.
Ha, my Wife! Enter Aur. Phyl. Sylvia.

Aur. Am I unwelcome to my Lord? Not thus
He would have met me when our Loves were young.
Why sits such thoughtful sorrow on thy brow?
My eyes were wont to kindle joy in thine.
Am I the cause of these distracting cares?
Am I more happy that my heart can find
Relief in Love, and only think of thee?
Have you not seen my Father?

Eud. No, nor you.
Nor must I see him, till Parmenio's pleased.
So far I pressed it, that the Guards were called
To stop my passage -- Where are now your hopes?
The Traitor proudly told me 'twas too late,
And bad me prove my innocence in Rome.
Dametas with an Army is at hand,
I will be heard, and will have Justice done.

Aur. Dametas is at hand, you will be heard,
This style with thirty Legions would agree,
We dream of dangers which our fears create;
And reason yielding to those fears, the ills
At last prove real that our fancies formed

Eud. Blame not a passion, which I learnt with love,
Fear was till then a stranger to my Soul.
I thought of losing you, and then I feared.
It Was then I trembled first, forgot my Sex,
And felt a woman's softness in my heart.

Aur. Oh would that softness argue with me now,
For ever you must lose me, if you go.
Against you Greece will send forth all her powers,
And Rome, her Sister, turn her force on you.
Where will your Army sly for refuge then?
Their Flocks and Herds, their Virgins and their Wives,
Their Woods, their Groves, will be the Soldiers spoil,
And this fair Land of pleasure then lie waste,
While I abandoned to my Father's rage,
Exposed to Death, or what is worse, am left,
By all unpitied, and by all forsook.

Eud. Say, would you have me led in chains to Rome,
Shown for a Monster to the gaping crowd,
And with my Brother, on a Scaffold fall
The Victim of a jealous Minions lust?
The Emp'ror leaves us with the Rising day,
My Foe is conscious of his guilt, and far
Will keep me from his Master's Ear, till Rome
Has seen my shame, and we can never be friends.
Oh no, Aurelia, things must never be thus,
Adrastus must be safe,
Arcadius undeceived.
His honor's equally concerned with mine,
Both by a perjured Villain are abused,
And by this Sword we will have justice both.
Farewell -- To please thee would be ruin,
But not to please thee I must hear no more.

Aur. Stay, my Eudosius, stay, he is gone, he is gone
To certain Death, nor gave a parting kiss,
Nor close embrace, but tore him from my arms,
My longing arms, that never must clasp him more.
What, am I grown a burden to his Heart,
Have I for this endured a Parents curse?
For this the Kingdoms of the world refused,
For this to Menial Offices complied,
And been as much his Servant as his Wife.
Oh man, oh false ungrateful man! Oh thou
Of all thy Sex most false, and most ingrate,
Where have thou left me? but no matter where,
Since to be left for ever is a fate,
No circumstance of Woe can render worse.
My Father soon will seek me in his wrath,
And when his hard reproaches wound my ear,
Had thou been near me to relieve my shame,
And in thy bosom hide me from his frown,
His awful Brow had shot its darts in vain.
But now, thus destitute of help from thee,
My crimes appear so black, my Judge so fierce,
I dye with terror, e're my doom is read.

Phy. When by our griefs, our reason is oppressed,
How weak are all our arguments, how vain,
Has he not suffered equally with you,
And I who have no interest but yours,
Have not I had my share, and yet even now,
When most I suffer, I repent it least:
Was nothing to his Brothers Injuries due,
Must poor Adrastus still remain in chains,
Or for his freedom wait his Rivals Nod?

Aur. Too morrow I had past through Swords and Spears,
Through pointed Deaths, and at my Fathers feet
Implored his pity, clung about his knees,
And of my Mothers beauteous Image full,
Hung on his neck, and bathed it with my tears,
Till to our wish I had inclined his Soul.
But oh my Husbands useless Fury adds
New Fuel to his Flame, when Peace was nigh.

Phy. Cease, cease, these mournings, all things will be well.
The War is with Parmenio, not his Lord.
The Emp'ror will himself applaud his Son,
And when he sees his Favorite's cursed designs,
Throw him with horror from his arms.

Par. (within) Oh my Philante!

Phy. Heard you not a voice?

Aur. I did, it named you, and the sound came thence.

Phy. Th'apartment where Adrastus is confined.
Sure 'twas his Genius, or my own, that called,
To warn me of our danger. Oh my heart!
Why sinks it in my breast, why shake my limbs?
Why these ill Bodings, if my Prince is safe?
Oh no, I see the bloody hand advanced,
The Dagger lifted high, his heart its aim.
Stop, stop, inhuman Butcher, strike it here,
The wound is mine, my Breast shall be his Shield.

Sylv. How well we counsel others, and how ill,
When our greifs disturb us, act our selves?

Aur. Where e're we turn, we meet with new distress.
New Scenes of woe, new Images of death.
Fly, Sylvia, from this most unhappy wretch,
This outcast, this forsaken woman, fly,
My Friendship ruins what it holds most dear.

Syl. Madam, Retire, you're here too much exposd:
Roused by the noise and perils of the night,
The Emp'ror armed with Thunder will appear,
And if he sees you in the first alarm,
How fatal may the meeting be to both.

Aur. Yes! here this Jove, this Thund'rer I Will expect,
I Will stand between my Lord and him, and bear
The dreadful weight of his resentment here.
On me the Tempest first shall break, on me
The edge of his insufferable rage
Shall fall, till thus it strikes me to the Earth. falls.
Thus low I Will bless him with my latest sighs,
And pray that his revenge may end with me. Enter Emp. and Nic.

Sylv. Oh save us, ye immortal powers, he comes.

Arc. Is he not dead?

Nic. No.

Arc. Bring him forth.

Nic. My Lord!
The poison's in his brain, his Fancies rove
On things extravagant, the Fever past,
He may e're death be sensible and calm.
What dropped from him before was only this,
Parmenio left the Cristal Bowl with him,
Commanding when you called to give it you.

Arc. Parmenio?

Nic. Yes, Parmenio.

Arc. Have a care,
To name him thus is death,

Nic. I Will mark the man.
Then call him what you please, my Lord, 'twas he
That from a Soldier raised me to command:
To this high post, and placed me near the Throne.
'Twas he, that from as vile Conditions rose,
By Caesar's favor next to Caesar's rank.
'Twas he that counseled you to break the league,
And seize Adrastus in profoundest peace.
'Twas he that charged me when the truth was known,
To fix this Dagger in his Rival's heart,
Then swear to you he gave the blow himself.
'Twas he that bid me lead your Guards, and waste
This Land with unexpected War. 'Twas he
That left you to the service of his Slaves:
For I in disobedience to his will,
Unknown to him within the Palace stayed,
To watch your sleep, which else had been your last.
When Hell and darkness tempted him abroad,
To execute the Treasons he had formed.
'Twas he, that when Amintor would have shown,
How foul, how false, the charge against him was,
Withstood his entrance, and by open force
Compelled the Prince by force to make his way.
But oh! Great Emp'ror, what need I more,
'Twas he by whom that highborn Princess dies,
In whose fresh youth divine Pulcheria lives.

Sylv. Help! help! the Princess faints.

Arc. Oh Heaven! oh Joy! Swoons
It Is she, I know it is she, I feel her here,
Nature speaks loud, and points me to my Child.
Oh Daughter! oh Aurelia! oh my Tongue
Is lost with rapture, but with this, and this, Embrace.
Once more I Will give thee life -- she lives, she lives,
Thus looked Pulcheria when she looked her last,
That dying glance restores her to my Heart,
Which weakened with excess of joy, grows sick. Faints.

Nic. My Lord, my Emp'ror!

Aur. Where am I? Is not this the Land of Peace,
Where all things are forgiven, all are blessed,
Did not my Father call me Child?

Syl. He did.
Behold him in your arms with transport lost.

Aur. Oh Father, Father.

Arc. Art thou then awake?

Aur. Forgive my heart, it is yet so busy, Sir,
My sins are banished thence, and I can spare
No time to beg your pardon.

Arc. Name no more
What I should ask, for all that is past was mine;
I speak not of thy Husband, he is my friend,
A thousand things to my remembrance bring
Both him and thee: The Signet, this retreat,
The flying rumors that Eudosius lived,
His Brothers Friendship, and the Princes Love.
Confirm these wonders.
Go Nicias, go my Soldier, seek my Son,
Go tell him how my arms are filled, and say
While they want him I think 'em empty still. Ex. Nic.
Oh had we met before! But then, my Child.
The great discovery we have made to night
Had still been distant, and Parmenio loved.
I bred and nursed a Serpent in my breast,
Whose venomed sting against my life was aimed.

Aur. We knew you would not always hate us, Sir;
Nor drive your Children from you, and e're morn
Had told the secret with a kind surprise,
Had not his jealousy contrived these ills,
And filled this house with sorrow and despair. Enter Officer.

Offic. My Lord, I waited on Parmenio's Slave,
Caught his last words, and thus he dying said,
My Master put the Potion in the Cup,
I, curious of its richness, tasted, drank,
Fell down, when Nicias entering broke the Bowl.

Arc. See that he scapes not: Bear him to the Rack.
I could almost forgive him his offense Ex. Offic.
To me: But what he meant my Children rhrows
Him far from mercy.
A Shout. Enter Eudosius, throws down his Sword, and kneels at the Emperors
feet. Oh my Son.

Eud. My Emp'ror, my Father, can you hear
That word from me, and still preserve your smile?

Arc. Oh talk of nothing but of bliss to come,
Let dark oblivion bury what is past,
And perfect as our blessing be our joy,
The world has named your Virtues with applause,
More to your merit than your birth you owe.
Take, take your Wife, and be for ever blessed.

Eud. Oh my Aurelia! have we lived to see
This hour, and must we live another still.
Forgive me, Sir, all Ecstasy is rude;
It Is new, we never could thus embrace before,
Nor hope a blessing on the Nuptial Bed.

Nic. within. Bear down the Doors, the Pillars and the Walls,

Aur. Oh it is Phylante's voice. A Woman shrieks.

Arc. The kind companion of your youth.

Aur. It Is here is,
The Traitor loves her, and I dread his lust. Shriek.

Within. Help, help, the Prince, Phylante.

Eud. Ha, I Am winged
To rescue thee, and pray it be'nt too late.

Arc. How near destruction have I blindly walked. Exit.

Aur. Phylante, oh my Sister.

Eud. within. Seize on the Traitor, and unbind the Prince,
Throw wide the doors, and let the Fiend be seen.

Scene opens, Adrastus appears (unbinding) Phlyante in disorder, Parmenio (held
by Soldiers) disfigured as by a woman, Nicias, Officer and all come forward.
Eud. My Brother!

Adr. My Deliverer!

Phyl. My Preserver!

Eud. See,
Your Duty to the Emp'ror first.

Arc. Come to my arms, if you can think that one
Who much has wronged you, can deserve your love,
And thou, my other Daughter, welcome here.
To Torture with that Villain, Whips and Death,
Slow lazy Deaths, away -- Guards carry off Par.

Phyl. Words are not black enough to paint his Crimes.
When in this place we parted last, I went To Aur*
And found, alas! the Voice I heard was his.
He seized me, caught me to his arms, and said,
He knew me when I visited the Prince.
He told me if I Would yield to be his Wife,
The morn should find me Mistress of the world:
For, as he swore, the Emp'ror was no more.
If not, he would by force enjoy his wish,
When for my honor, and the Princes life, To Eud.
Your timely succor came.

Arc. No tears, Phylante! now, no sighs but such
As Lovers when the expected minute comes
Can spare. To you, Adrastus, I am sure,
This present will be welcome. Take her, Prince,
Our self will witness to your Nuptial Vows;
Thou, Nicias, to whose Loyalty we owe
Life, Children, Empire, all, thou next to these
In favor and in Friendship shall be first.
Thrace shall again behold her darling Lord,
Whose Crown shall hence be regal, and the bounds
Of this fair Province, which I gave my Son,
Far as the Adriatic shall extend.
This to Adrastus, with his Bride I give.
Renew the sports these tumults have disturbed,
With double Luster gild the face of night,
That day approaching, may with wonder see
Alight Superior to his own.

Eud. and Aur. Hear us, Oh Father! grant our last request,
(kneeling.) Suffer no limits to your goodness, long
This Garden has been ours, and sweet its walks;
To leave these Shades, and launch into the world,
Looks frightful to our Natures, fond of rest.
Oh let Adrastus wear the Crown of Thrace,
This people and this Valley only ours,
Where hand in hand, we may frequent its Groves,
Talk of past changes, and rejoice in this.
There with the morning and the Evening Sun,
With prayers for you and Greece we'll visit Heaven.
Nor will we here be negligent of fame;
For Love and Glory shall divide our care.
And thus like persons who have reached the shore,
With pleasure we'll look back upon the Waves,
And hear the Billows roar, and see 'em foam,
While we securely tread the solid Main.

Arc. Of this hereafter we'll resolve.

Eud. And now
Let all our Military Train disperse,
Let only those who wait upon our sports
Attend, let Love and Mirth succeed our Cares,
And Arms and Battles yield to softer Wars.

End of the Fifth Act.
Scene the Temple of Love. Cupid is seen lying in his Mothers Lap. Cupid.
APpear, old Hymen, from thy Cell,
Where unspotted Pleasures dwell;
Where thy Torch with Beauteous light
Triumphs over the shades of night.
Come, at Cupid's dread command,
Join these happy Lovers hand:
Let 'em be for ever joined,
He be constant, she be kind.

Brisk Music, while Hymen comes forward. Hymen. Love they say is my God, tho
to tell you the truth,
I think he is at best but a slippery youth.
He bids me come to you, ye wonder I came
No sooner; why as I grow old I grow lame;
By which it falls out, as mayhap it does here,
I often come a day or two after the Fair.

Priest of Love. Hymen joins you, happy pair,
Taste the sweets of harmless pleasure.
Joys which you v^ no need to fear,
Without guilt and without measure.
Love has blessed thee happy Swain,
Go possess his richest T^re,
Happy Maid you blush in vain,
Duty now is join d with Pleasure.

Three Pr. of Love* To Love we'll lasting homage pay
For the high blessings of this day;
New Altars to his name we^ raise,
And ev ry Tongue shall speak his praise,
And every Heart his pow r adore,
For none ean hurt or bless us more.

Votary. The Hero his Laurels to Love shall resign,
The Courtier his Pride, and the Toper his Wine;
The Saint his Devotion, the Virgin her Vow,
All states and conditions, the high and the low.
All Ages and Sexes to Cupid shall bow.

Chorus. The Saint his Devotion, etc.

Grand Chorus. Raise you Notes, and lift 'em high,
Love's Immortal Praises sing,
Over the Valley let 'em ring,
For Music charms the powers above amidst their mighty joy.

EPILOGUE.
Writ by Mr Farquhar.
TIme was when Poets ruled without disputes,
Turned Men to Gods, transformed their Gods to Brutes.
Our Poets change the Scene, with mighty odds
Make Men the Brutes, make nothing of their Gods.
It Is strange to see by what surprising skill,
Things are transforme'd by Brothers of the Quill.
No more than this -- high -- Presto -- pass,
Great Jupiter's a Bull -- Great Beaux's an Ass.
Whene' er they please to give their thoughts a loose,
Jove's made a Swan, your Alderman's a Goose.
Things of most differing forms too we may find,
By spells of Poetry in one combined.
The blustering Face, which Red-Coats bear about,
Is the false Flag which Cowards still hang out,
And that shall huff, and rant, swear loud and ban,
Hector his God, and yet be kicked by Man.
They make the Villain look precise and grave,
And the poor harmless Cit, a thriving Knave.
Strange contradictions! reconciled we see,
They sometimes make even Man and Wife agree.
Poets of Old changed Io to a Cow,
But what strange Monsters Women are made now?
Females with us, without the Poet's fraud,
Change often to the worst of Beasts, a Bawd.
There are but two things from all change secure,
Naught can transform a Poet or a Whore.
Others for being changed, their Stars may blame,
Their punishment is this -- still they are the same,
Like paint on Glass that is valued at such cost;
Poets never fade, although the Art be lost.
FINIS.
BOOKS printed for R. Parker, at the Unicorn under the Royal Exchange in
Cornhil.
CHarron of Wisdom, 2 Vol. translated by Dr Stanhope.

Echards Roman History, from the building of the City, to the removal of the
Imperial Seat, by Constantine the Great, two Volumes.

Revolutions in Sweden, occasioned by the change of Religion, and alteration of
the Government in that Kingdom. Written in French by the Abbot Vertot,
translated by Dr Mitchel.

Gennes Voyage to Africa.

Modest Critic by Rapin.

Poems on several occasions, written in imitation of the manner of Anacreon,
with other Poems, Letters, and Translations. By Mr Oldmixon.

Gentleman's Journal, or Monthly Miscellany. By Mr Motteux, either whole sets or
single ones.

Busby's Greek Grammar.

Cambridge Phrases.

Sydenham's complete method of curing almost all Diseases, and description of
their Symptoms, with an abridgment of 5 discourses of the same Author, viz. The
Pleurisy, Gout, Hysterial Passion, Dropsy, and Rheumatism.

Art of preserving and restoring health, etc.

Beraults Latin Grammar, etc.

A Vocabulary of all the Verbs in the Latin Tongue, with their Preter Tenses
and Supines, with the case they govern in construction, by A. Paterson.

The usefulness of the Stage to the happiness of Mankind, Government and
Religion, occasioned by Mr Collier's view of the Stage, etc. By Mr Dennis.

An Account of a Voyage from Archangel in Russia, in the year 1697.

PLAYS.
Plot and no Plot, a Comedy by Mr Dennis.

Novelty, every Act a Play, by Mr Motteux.

Beauty in distress, a Tragedy, by Mr Motteux.

Iphigenia, a Tragedy by Mr Dennis.

Unhappy Kindness, or the fruitless Revenge, a Tragedy, by Mr Scot.

Neglected Virtue, or the Unhappy Conqueror.

Loves last shift or the Fool in Fashion by Mr Cibber

Amyntor a Pastoral by Mr Oldmixon.

FINIS.

