The Opinion of the JVDGES upon the Clause in the Act of 22 and 23 Car. II.
Regis cap. 9. for giving no more Costs than Damages, delivered at Serjeants-Inn
in Chancery Lane, London, in Trinity Term. Anno 23. Ejusdem Regis.
The Clause in the Act.
AND for Prevention of trivial and vexatious Suits in Law, whereby many good
Subjects of this Realm have been and are daily undone contrary to the intention
of an Act made in the 43 year of Queen Eliz. for avoiding of infinite numbers
of small and trivial Suits commenced in the Courts at Westminster. Be it
farther Enacted for making the said Law Effectual, that from and after the
first of May aforesaid, In all Actions of Trespass, Assault and Battery and
other personal Actions wherein the Judge at the Trial of the cause shall not
find and certify under his hand upon the back of the Record, That an Assault
and Battery was sufficiently proved by the Plaintiff against the Defendant, or
that the Freehold or Title of the Land mentioned in the Plaintiffs Declaration
was chiefly in question, The Plaintiff in such Action, in case the Jury shall
find the Damages to be under the value of forty shillings, shall not recover or
obtain more Costs of Suit than the Damages so found shall amount unto. And if
any more Costs in any such Action shall be Awarded, The Judgment shall be
void, and the Defendant is hereby acquitted of and from the same, and may have
his Action against the Plaintiff for such vexatious Suits, and recover his
Damages and Costs of such his Suit in any of the said Courts of Record.

The JVDGES Opinion.
I. That Actions of Debt, are not within this Clause.

II. That no Action upon the Case sur Assumpsit, Account, or other personal
Actions (other than for Assault and Battery or voluntary Trespass, where the
Title comes not, nor cannot come in Question) is within this Clause.

III. That the Judge is bound to Certify on Actions of Assault and Battery
where the Jury shall find Damages to Ten Shillings or less, That the Battery is
sufficiently proved, otherwise the Plaintiff is to have no more Costs than
Damages.

IV. That if the Defendant pleads son Assault Demesne, and the Jury find it ad
Dampnum Querentis, The Certificate must be, that the Jury find by the
Defendants plea, That the Battery is admitted and sufficiently proved.

V. That if an Assault be proved, and no Battery, There needs no Certificate.

VI. That in case of a Certificate, where it is requisite, it must be Indorsed
on the panel or Nomina Jur' with the Judges hand to it immediately after the
Trial, and the Certificate is to be, That the Battery is fully proved.

VII. That the Clause extends only, where Damages are only to be recovered,
and not in Debt, because Debt is not within the words: (although the Debt be
under Forty Shillings, it is all one, it needs no Certificate.)

VIII. That in all Actions for a Common, a Way, a Nuisance, Lights,
Watercourse, etc. The Judges may Certify, because the Freehold may come in
Question, although it be not mentioned in the Declaration.

IX. That the Clause extends not to Judgments by default, or Writs of Inquiry
of Damages.

Trinity Term. MDCLXXI.
Matthew Hale. Tho. Twysden. Ri. Raynsford. Will. Moreton. Io. Vaughan. Tho.
Tyrrill. Io. Archer. Will. Wild. Edw. Turner. Hugh Wyndham. Chr. Turner. T.
Littleton.
March 31. 1688. This may be Printed. R. WRIGHT.

LONDON, Printed for William Canning, at his Shop adjoining to the Temple
Cloisters. 1688.


