UPON THE MARRIAGE OF THE Prince of Orange With the LADY MARY.
I.
AS when of old some bright and Heavenly Dame
A God of equal Majesty did Wed;
Strait through the Court above the Tidings spread,
Strait at the News the immortal Offspring came,
And all the Deities did the high Nuptials grace;
With no less Pomp, no less of Grandeur we
Behold this glad Solemnity,
And all confess an equal Joy,
And all expect as God-like and as great a Race:
Hark how united Shouts our Joys proclaim,
Which rise in Gratitude to Heaven from whence they came;
Gladsome next those which brought our Royal Exile home,
When he resumed his long usurped Throne:
Hark how the mighty Vollies rend the Air,
And shake at once the Earth and utmost Sphere;
Hark how the Bell's harmonious Noise
Bear Consort too with humane Joys;
Behold those numerous Fires, which up and down
Threaten almost new Conflagration to the Town.
Well do these Emblems mighty ORANGE, speak thy Fame,
Whose Loudness, Music, Brightness, all express the same;
'Twas thus great Jove his Semele did Wed,
In Thunder and in Lightning so approached her Bed.
II.
Hail happy Pair! kind Heavens great Hostages!
Sure Pledges of a firm and lasting Peace!
Called not a Match, we that low Style disdain,
Nor will degrade it with a Term so mean;
A League it must be said,
Where Countries thus Espouse, and Nations Wed:
Our Thanks propitious Destiny!
Never did yet thy Power dispense
A more Plenipotentiary Influence,
Nor Heaven more sure a Treaty ratify:
To YOU, our great and gracious Monarch, too
An equal share of Thanks is due,
Naught could this mighty Work produce, but Heaven and You.
Let others boast
Of Leagues, which Wars and Slaughter cost;
This Union by no Blood Cemented is,
Nor did its Harmony from Jars and Discords rise:
Nor more to your great Ancestor we owe,
By whom two Realms into one Kingdom grow,
He joined but what Nature had joined before,
Lands disunited by no parting Shore:
By you to Foreign Countries we are Allied,
You make Us Continent whom Seas and Waves divide.
III.
How well, Brave Prince, do you by prudent Conduct prove
What was denied to mighty Jove,
Together to be Wise and Love?
In this you highest Skill of Choice and Judgment show,
It Is here displayed, and here rewarded too;
Others move only by unbridled guideless Heat,
But you mix Love with Policy, Passion with State:
You scorned the Painters Hands your Hearts should tie,
Which often (and here they must) the Original belie,
(For how should Art that Beauty undertake,
Which Heaven would strive in vain again, to make?)
Taught by Religion you did better Methods try,
And worshipped not the Image, but the Deity:
Go, envied Prince, your glorious BRIDE receive,
Too great for ought but mighty YORK to give:
She, whom if none must Wed, but those who merit Her,
Monarchs might cease Pretense, and slighted Gods despair:
Think You in Her far greater Conquests gain,
Than all the Powers of France have from your Country taken.
In Her fair Arms let your Ambition bounded lie,
And fancy there an Universal Monarchy!
IV.
And you fair Princess, who could thus subdue,
What France with all its Forces could not do,
Enjoy your glorious Prize,
Enjoy the Triumphs of your conquering Eyes:
From Him, and the Height of your great Mind look down,
And with neglect despise a Throne,
And think it as great to Merit, as to Wear a Crown:
NASSAW is all which your Desires or Thoughts can frame,
All Titles lodge within that single Name,
A Name, which Mars himself would with Ambition bear,
Prouder in that than to be called the God of War:
To you, great Madam, (if your Joys admit Increase,
If Heaven has not already set your Happiness
Above its Power to raise)
To You the zealous humble Muse
These solemn Wishes consecrates and vows,
And begs you will not her Offering refuse,
Which not your Want, but her Devotion shows.
V.
May your great Consort still successful prove,
In all his high Attempts, as in your Love;
May he through all Attacks of Chance appear
As free from Danger, as he is from Fear;
May neither Sense of Grief or Trouble know,
But what in Pity you to others show:
May you be fruitful in as numerous Store
Of Princely Births, as She who your great Father bore:
May Heaven to your just Merits kind
Repeal the ancient Curse on Womankind;
Easy and gentle, as the Labors of the Brain
May yours all prove, and just so free from Pain:
May no rude Noise of War approach your Bed,
But Peace her downy Wings about you spread,
Calm as the Season, when fair Halcyons breed.
May you, and the just Owner of your Breast,
Both in as full Content and Happiness be blessed,
As the first sinless Pair of old enjoyed,
'Ere Guilt their Innocence and that destroyed:
Till nothing but Continuance to your Bliss can add,
And you by Heaven alone be happier made;
Till future Poets who your Lives review,
When they would their utmost Pitch of Flattery show,
Shall pray their Patrons may become like you;
Nor know to frame a skilful Wish more great,
Nor think a higher Blessing in the Gift of Fate.
Licensed,

November. 8. 1677. ROGER L'ESTRANGE.

In the SAVOY: Printed by T. N. for Henry Herringman at the Anchor in the Lower
Walk of the New Exchange. 1677.


