Two New TRAGEDIES: THE Black Prince, AND TRYPHON: The first Acted at the
THEATER ROYAL, BY HIS MAIESTIE's SERVANTS; The Other By his Highness the Duke
of York 's Servants.

Both Written by the RIGHT HONORABLE THE Earl of Orrery.

LONDON Printed by T. N. for H. Herringman, at the Sign of the Blew Anchor, in
the lower walk of the New Exchange. 1669.

PROLOGUE Spoken by the Genius of England, holding a Trident in one hand and a
Sword in the other.
IS England's Genius, that Victorious Name,
Which shakes the World and fills the mouth of Fame,
So much forgot, as you mispend your Wit
(which my Great Deeds as Greatly might have Writ)
To court a Fancy, or improve a Dream,
And seek new Worlds for a less noble Theme?
Can you in Arms conspiring Nations see,
And think on any thing but Fame, and Me?
While the loud Cannon, with prophetic sound,
Foretells our King must be in Paris crowned,
And with such Heat once more invade the French,
As all the Waves between us cannot quench,
To the just fury of whose Fatal Blows
Fleets, Walls, and Armies they in vain oppose;
This Trophy, which so gloriously to yours
Add's a fourth Crown, and those four Crowns secures,
The Belgian Admiral usurping bore,
And I from him and all his Tritons tore.
He to another Element was blown,
Who thought himself Immortal in his own;
For still the Sea his Losses did Repair,
Till our Alcides killd him in the Air.
This Sword, which in French blood so often dyed
Entailed success on the young Edwards side,
Resigned to you shall all those Arts exceed
Which made him Triumph and that Kingdom Bleed.
Their frighted Lillies shall confess their loss,
Wearing the Crimson livery of your Cross;
And all the World shall learn by their Defeat,
Our Charles, not theirs, deserves the name of Great.
Dramatis Personae.
King Edward. Mr. Moon. King John. Mr. Wintersell. Prince. Mr. Kenniston. Ld.
Delaware. Mr. Heart. Count. Guesclin. Mr. Burt. Ld. Latimer. Mr. Cartwright.
Page. Mr. Beeston. Alizia. Mrs. Guinn. Plantaginet. Mrs. Marshall. Cleorin.
Mrs. Corey. Sevina. Mrs. Nepp. Valeria disguised. F. Damport. A Lady. Betty
Damport. Attendants.

THE Black Prince.
THE FIRST ACT.
The first Scene is a magnificent Palace, King Edward the Third standing in the
middle of the Theater, environed with his Nobility and Guards; the Lord
Delaware presents the King a Letter which when he has read, the King says;
King. BRave Delaware, my Son does let me know
How much my Empire to thy Sword does owe;
What, generous Youth, could more thy Fame advance
Then with thy hand to take King John of France.

Dela. Sir, What you say, more Fame to me does yield
Then I could gain in Peictiers glorious Field;
For it is more honor to be prized by You
Then it is another Monarch to subdue.

King. No Subject winning Glory can admit
Such Joy, as does his King rewarding it:
The Chape of that Kings Sword whom thou did take
The Crest for ever of thy Arms shall make;
In that addition to them shall be shown,
While the World lasts, the honor thou have won:
To thee thy General leaves it to relate
The English Glory and the Frenchmans Fate.

Dela. As soon, Sir, as the Prince to Bourdeaux came
(So much does Glory his great Soul inflame)
He took the Field, and did forthwith regain
All that King John possessed in Aquitaine;
Then with like speed Anjou he did subdue,
And all his Towns, but Poictiers, of P^itou,
That place alone his Forces durst oppose.
Guesclin the Gallantest of all our foes
Poictiers did for their Governor admit,
And he a while bravely defended it,
Yet our Success was but a while denied,
That by a greater it might be supplied;
For Heaven decreed, that Poictiers, Sir, should yield
As deathless Wreaths to you as Cressy Field;
The noblest Wreaths which ever Victor wore
Wreaths which shall last when Time shall be no more.

King. But tell me how King John employed his time,
While those three Provinces were torn from him.

Dela. He, the mean while, raised all the Powers of France,
And to relieve the City did advance.
The Prince had notice of a strength so great,
And timely might have made a fair retreat;
Yet since before the place he once did lie,
He was resolved to take it, or to die:
From this resolve he could not, Sir, be won.

King. He did therein, but what became my Son;
No humane force could ever yet subdue
An English Prince, and English Army too.

Dela. The French appear, and Po^ctiers spacious plain
Was not enough their Army to contain;
The advantages of ground our General takes,
And plants before his Squadrons sharp'ned Stakes;
With the like Art, but yet in thicker Ranks,
He strongly fortified his Rear and Flanks.
The Word was given, and all our Bows were bent,
When a French Herald to the Prince was sent,
Who told him that his King had thought it good,
To avoid the shedding of much Christian blood,
To let him know he could not win the Field,
And all should have fair quarter, would He yield:
The Prince unmoved did instantly reply,
None does deserve to live who fears to die:
Go tell your King, those English I command
The name of Quarter hardly understand;
But that, ere night, he may have cause to know,
What we refuse to take we may bestow.

King. This answer did the message well befit.

Dela. The Herald, Sir, returned amazed at it,
Their odds in number raised them to that height,
They thought they came to take us, not to fight.

King. How many were the French?

Dela. -- -- -- -- -- Themselves confessed,
That eighty Thousand men they were at least.

King. What was my Son?

Dela. -- -- -- -- The truth I do not wrong,
Protesting he was but eight Thousand strong;
But those eight Thousand, Sir, were English men.

King. And One of those may well be reckoned Ten.

Dela. Sir, since your Army by your Son was led,
We all did then believe what now you said;
For in his eyes we our Success did see,
His looks did ante-date our Victory.
His face, that morning, to us all did show
Those Laurels, which that evening Crowned his Brow;
Now all the Drums do beat, the Trumpets sound,
The Soldiers shout the trembling Air does wound,
The flying Arrows such thick clouds had made,
As even the heat of Fight produced a shade:
Our Van brave Oxford and great Talb^t lead,
Whose Swords, that day, did much increase the Dead:
Suffolk and Warwick did command our Rear,
And there deserved those Titles which they bear;
So did Audley, Sir, and Barkley too,
Whom all did imitate but none outdo.

King. The like at Cressy by those Six was done,
Danger they slight where Glory may be won.

Dela. Fortune, a while, did fear to ruin France,
But when the Prince his battle did advance,
He courted her with Valor so Sublime,
As she turned just, and did declare from him;
They in three Armies did divide their Powers,
And every one of them did treble ours;
By which our Prince found, when the day was done,
That he had fought Three battles to gain One:
So many heaps of Frenchmen there were slain,
As into Hills they seemed to change the Plain;
And all those Clouds, their Horses feet had raised,
Were with the Blood of their dead Riders laid:
Two Lords armed like King John were in the Field,
And by our Princes hand they both were killed;
In doing which he did prodigious things,
For though they were Not, yet they fought like Kings,
While in the Field wars bloody Game was played;
Guesclin did sally, and was Prisoner made.

King. In your Relation you omit one thing
I fain would hear, it is, how you took the King.

Dela. Sir, In the heat of Battle 'twas my chance
To fight with, and to take King John of France;
'Twas Fortune only favored me in this.

King. Your Modesty great as your Valor is,
For here my So^ to me at large does write
The Honor which you purchased in the Fight.
And all those brave Attempts which you did make,
Before your Regal Prisoner you did take;
Nothing which you performed from me is hid

Dela. He writes what I Would have Done, not what I Did:
When the French King into my power did fall,
I did conduct him to our General,
Who then was giving of Rewards to those
Who took two hundred Colors from your Foes,
Amidst those Glorious Trophies, Sir, he stood,
His Armor covered all with dust and blood;
Those sights afresh the Captive King did wound.

King. None in a Nobler Posture could be found.

Dela. When to the Prince I named King John of France,
He hastily to meet him did advance,
And to his Prisoner did as humbly bow,
As, Sir, he could have done, had it been You.

King. He did therein what did a Prince befit,
Fierce in the Fight and Humble after it.

Dela. The King then said, since Fortune does decree,
I should be taken by my Enemy;
Part of the wounds she gives, she also cures,
Since now I fall into such hands as Yours;
I am your Prisoner, Sir, and come to know
The end you aim at by my being so.
The Prince, in whom all Virtues do reside,
Pitying the Kings misfortune, thus replied;
That, mighty Prince, to which I most pretend
Is, from an Enemy you will turn a Friend:
And if you will grant what now is begged by me,
I Will prize it more then this days Victory.
These words the Prince with such an Accent graced,
As by the King he closely was embraced,
Who told him, in this Action you have shown,
You have more ways to Conquer me then one,
And, Sir, to prove this does my Mind subdue;
That which you ask of Me I beg of You.

King. This last Success transcends the other Three:
It Is more to Gain then Beat an Enemy.

Dela. All things to tell you too much time would take,
But then so strict a Friendship they did make,
As Our Prince vowed he would solicit you
To grant the King a Peace and Freedom too;
Then by a Generosity Sublime,
He did that night at sopper wait on Him:
By which that Vanquished Monarch well might boast,
He there Received more Honor then he Lost.

King. My Son in this did such High Worth express,
As I more value It then his Sccess.

Dela. The List of all those (...) which we took
Are by the Prince presented in this Book;
[Gives the King a Book. All things secured which we had won by force,
He with King John, for England steered his course.
The wind so favored him, as yesterday
He safely landed in Southampton-Bay,
From whence he sent me Post to let you know
They both tomorrow, Sir, will wait on you.

King. For their Reception every thing prepare
Which may your joys and your Respects declare.
I Will treat this Royal Prisoner at a rate
Proportioned to his Title, not his Fate.
My Actions, not my Words, shall let you see,
How much, brave Youth, You are esteemed by Me.
[Exeunt.
The Scene is a Garden and a Grotta, in which Alizia Pierce lies as in a
slumber. Enter Sevina, who plays upon the Lute, when she has done, Alizia
rises, embraces her, and says; Aliz. Ah my dear Friend; it is in vain you
strive
To give that Ease which only Death can give.

Sev. This is the day you promised I should know
That Fatal Sorrow under which You bow.
I thought the Charms of Music might abate
The Grief which springs from what you will relate.

Aliz. Too mean a thought you of my Grief admit,
In thinking any thing can Lessen it.
Who would not all delights of Life decline
That had a Soul so out of Tune as Mine?

Sev. Do not from such a Friend your self refrain,
My Help may put your Soul in Tune again:
It Is to your Promise, Madam, that I trust,
Let not your Sorrow make you prove Unjust.
If Grief should make you to such Wrong submit,
You will Deserve as well as Suffer it.

Eliz. My Fatal Promise why do you pursue;
Though Old Griefs, when related, turn to New,
Yet you no longer shall of me complain,
I Will rather Heighten then Deserve my Pain.
You know, Dear Friend, when to this Court I came,
My Eyes did all our bravest youths Inflame:
And in that happy state I lived a while,
When Fortune did betray me with a smile;
Or rather Love against my Peace did fight;
And, to revenge his Power which I did ssight,
Made Edward our Victorious Monarch be,
One of those Many who did Sigh for Me.
All other Flames but His I did deride,
They rather made my Trouble than my Pride:
But this, when told me, made me quickly know,
Love is a God to which all Hearts must bow.

Sev. It Is certain every Creature that has Breath
Is no more priviledg'd from Love than Death:
Think you what is your Duty is your Crime,
Or else do you repent you Conquered Him?

Aliz. Oh had you heard, in what a Mourning way
He the first time his Passion did display,
And had you seen that Grief and matchless Grace
Which did at once Cloud and Adorn his Face;
You had admired such Differing Charms to see,
But more admired had they not Conquered Me.

Sev. I was your Confident in that Bright Fire
Which Both did in each others breast Inspire:
A Fire might teach all Lovers how to Burn,
Then sure it is something else which makes you Mourn.

Aliz. Oh if he had been still to that Bright Flame
As Faithful, and as Constant as I am;
Justice her self, no Fire could higher prize,
But that Blessed Fire in which the Martyr Dies.
But he is False --

Sev. -- If what you say were true,
Madam, my Friendship must have seen it too;
It Is Jealousy which has usurped Love's place.

Aliz. Love has more piercing eyes then Friendship has;
From the Suns sight you may the World remove,
Sooner than hide from Lovers change in Love:
His Glorious Flame from me in Clouds is set,
And he Adores the fair Plantagenet;
To that Bright Widow he his Heart does yield.

Sev. Alas since her Brave Lord in France was killed,
She only does the Power of Grief obey.

Aliz. How soon does Love wipe sorrows Tears away,
She Is Courted by a Monarch whose Renown
Does make him greater much then does his Crown:
To Conquer All he has resistless Powers;
His Sword subdues His Sex, his Virtues Ours.

Sev. Then let his Virtue which you so much Prize
Suppress your Jealousy and dry your Eyes;
Virtue so Firm as nothing can Remove,

Aliz. Virtue is nothing but a Name in Love,
What cannot Love, when he is Victor, do?
Which makes me think their Change their Virtue too.

Sev. With equal Flames the King your Flames did meet,
And daily breathed his Passion at your feet:
Myrtles, when given by You, were Dearer held
Than all those Lawrells Vanquished France did yield.
He went with Grief that Empire to subdue,
Hating what ever severed him from You.

Aliz. I see his Change in spite of all his Art,
He suffers not, but plays the Lovers part.

Sev. Let not such Thoughts be entertained by you,
He Courts you now more then he used to do.

Aliz. This does the Truth of what I said detect,
His Passion now is changed into Respect;
And Love which once was High, and is decayed,
Like the Sun setting, casts the greater shade.
From all his secret Vows he does depart,
It Is False Love only needs the help of Art.

Sev. Such Doubts his Constancy may Overthrow,
Who Thinks him False provokes him to Be so;
Did you to him your cause of Grief unfold?

Aliz 'Twould not deserve that Name, could it be told;
She meanly Loves who slighted can admit,
Ought but her Love alone can tell her it.

Sev. No wonder Grief thus in your Breast does Reign,
When you from your Physician hide your Pain;
Let Him but hear from whence your Sorrow grows.

Aliz. It Is Love, and vain to tell him what he knows.

Sev. Then I will tell it him, and he will fly
Faster to You, than to a Victory;
And quickly learn to clear his Fancied Fault.

Aliz. A Perfect Lover needs not to be taught,
And if he were with Lovers true Passion Fired,
He would not need to Learn, he would be Inspired.

Sev. At my request ease your distempered Mind,
And on my life you suddenly shall find,
To think him faulty is to think Amiss.

Aliz. He is too Guilty, since I think he is.
[Exeunt several ways. Enter Cleorin and Delaware.
Cleo. I hoped your absence (now three years complete)
Had cured your Passion for Plantagenet,
And you would Fame to hopeless Love prefer.

Dela. I courted Fame but more to merit Her,
Since I durst Love, not having Fame achieved,
Since I Adored her while her Husband lived,
Now that the Noble Kent three years is dead,
Now that with Laurel War has Crowned my Head,
How can you be, dear Sister, so unwise,
To think that Love can fall while Hope does rise?

Cleo. You know, Dear Brother, only for your sake
That I three years incessant care did take,
To make my self your Conquerours Confident;
But though I have accomplished my Intent,
Yet all I Gained by it, is to believe
She never your Addresses will Receive;
For since she lost her Lord the Noble Kent,
She thinks all time not paid to Grief misspent.

Dela. In what you say much cause of Hope I find,
Since Grief t^ unwelcom'st Passion of the Mind
She does admit within her to Reside,
Love the most welcome cannot be Denied.

Cleo. Do not your Hopes with such wild Fancies feed,
Here Is is a Grief which does from Love proceed;
You by your Passion strangely are misled.

Dela Is it then possible to Love the Dead?
We but to those Alive can Love express,
For when the Cause does die, the Effect must cease.

Cleo. Your own strange Fate opposes what you said,
Your Love does Live and yet your hope is Dead.

Dela. Since Love has over her Triumphant been,
My Flame is such, to doubt Success were Sin.

Cleo. Nothing from Sorrow can her Soul remove,
And Grief is still an Enemy to Love;
But were her Grief subdued, yet I must say
A greater hind'rance does obstruct your way;
In the King's Heart a growing Flame does rise,
Which he discovers by his Sighs and Eyes;
He is the greatest Monarch of the Earth,
And greater by his Actions then his Birth.

Dela. Had I her heart, his Titles would not sway,
In Loves just balance only Love does weigh.

Cleo. The Nature of our Sex I Will not disguise,
Our Servants Loves less than their Powers we prise;
For but in Name alone their Hearts are ours,
But we effectually do share their Powers.

Dela. Yet Love would tell her, it is a greater thing
To Conquer, then it is to be a King.

Cleo. There Is something else which makes my Care more great
Then all which I to you have mentioned yet.
You know the Prince of Wales did once appear
Your Conquerours Lover, and was loved by her,
And he to wed her gained the Kings Consent;
But unexpectedly she married Kent:
I often pressed the Cause she would reveal,
Yet she the secret does from me conceal;
But though she on the Prince does lay the Blame
Yet she will weep when she but hears his Name.
A thousand other Proofs do make me doubt
That Fire is only covered not put out.

Dela. Ah Cleorin, there is none but I alive
Of that Strange Marriage an account (...) give:
You know when to the Wars of France I went
I made a Friendship with the Earl of Kent;
Which in short time did grow so strong and high,
As when he found he of his Wounds should die,
He to strict silence first did me Engage,
Then told me how he gained his Marriage,
Which is so strange a story, I dare swear
She never can love him, nor he love her.

Cleo. I will not beg you then to tell me why,
Since you have tied your self to secrecy:
Brother, I now must leave you, for you know
Our King does on King John a Masque bestow,
To which he did Plantagenet invite,
And thither I must wait on her to night.

Dela. Ah since you must be gone, yet e're you go
Let me at least what I may hope for know.

Cleo. The highest joy to which you can pretend,
Is, that your Mistress you may make your Friend.

Dela. If She does Friendship and not Love bestow,
At once she will make me blessed, and wretched too.

Cleo. She Will meet your Friendship, but your Love she will shun,
Despair must do what Reason should have done.

Dela. This is a cruelty she should abhor,
She should not do so much, or should do more.
[Exeunt several ways. Enter the King, Alizia, and Sevina. Alizia's Chamber.
King. While your Suspicion to such height does rise,
You wrong at once my Passion and your Eyes:
Ah Madam, be no longer so unkind,
Since you to think me False must think me Blind;
How can you doubt of any change in me,
When such fair Eyes are your Security.

Aliz. Ah do not, Sir, condemn what I have done,
To doubt your Love does more declare my own:
It Is Love, not Jealousy which I detect,
Then for the causes sake excuse the effect.

King. Madam, there is but one degree you know
'Twixt doubting I am false and thinking so.

Aliz. To you no clearer Proof, Sir, I can give
I think you are not false, then that I live;
For did I doubt you guilty of that wrong
My death should tell it you, and not my tongue.

King. The power of Kindness, Madam, you confound,
Making your Love the Sword with which you wound;
If from this day my Ruin you will date,
Then by some other Weapon act my fate;
Your Anger Misery enough does prove
Without ascribing of it to your Love.
'Twere better far I fell by your Disdain
Then have your Love my blessing turn to Pain.

Aliz. What I have said too warmly you pursue.

King. How can you love him whom you think untrue?
Admire not what you said so much does move,
Since if you think me false I lose your love;
Against such groundless Fear there is no defense.

Aliz. Love feels no greater Torment then Suspense,
Since she who truly Loves had rather know
Her Lover false, than always think him so;
For it is an ill more sensible and high
To Live tormented still, then it is to Die:
But you may end those Torments I deplore,
If you will never see my Rival more.

King This is a Remedy severe and new,
Rudeness to her must Kindness be to you;
And of my Love can you no proof admit
But what will make me for your Love unfit?

Aliz. Ah were I Blessed or Cursed to such degree
As that you thought some other loved by Me,
I would for ever from his sight be gone
And would in your contentment find my own;
Were your Affections but for me as great
Then you no more would see Plantagenet.

King. She is the nearest Kinswoman I have,
Her Lord too in my Service found his Grave;
Nature and Honor these respects approve
And make that Duty which you doubt is Love.

Aliz. Alas were you not changed, you would not be
Civil to her, rather than kind to me.

King. Will this your Fatal Jealousy remove?
I swear I never spoke to her of Love.

Aliz. Love is not always by Discourse made known,
It may be spoken in a Look or Groan;
Some in those ways more Passion can dispense
Then others by the Charms of Eloquence;
Your Oath I fear is dictated by Art,
Your Tongue is innocent, but not your Heart.

King. This, Madam, too much your unkindness shows,
You neither will believe my Love nor Vows.

Aliz. Do not admire my Doubts and Fears are high
When you that easy cure of them deny;
I saw you gaze on her, much more then you
Did gaze on me when I did know you true;
Which to my Torment, Sir, does let me see
You loved Me not, or loved Her more then Me;
Man's Art to such a height could never rise
As love from a true Lover to disguise;
Oh Sir, it is high time I let you know
Though Love is blind, yet Lovers are not so.

King. He never yet the height of Love has known
Who only found it in a Look or Groan;
When I to you that Passion did express
Which, Madam, only with my Life shall cease:
Though many Looks and Sighs to you I sent,
Yet by Discourse too I did give it vent;
If through all passages it does not press,
It soon will kill the heart it does possess:
Love is so vast a Passion, as the breast
Is much too small to hold so great a Guest.

Aliz. Great Love is like great Grief, and all, Sir, hold
That Grief is weak or small which can be told.
Enter Lord Latymer, who whispers to the King.
King. Madam, A pressing business calls me now,
Be therefore satisfied with this strict Vow;
My carriage to Plantagenet shall be
Such as shall make you grant you have injured me.
[Exeunt King and Lord Latymer.
Aliz. Now my Sevina, think you not that I
Had a sufficient ground for Jealousy.

Sev. Madam you had, but give me leave to say
You to suppress it took a hopeless way.

Aliz. To what way else could I have had recourse.

Sev. A Lover never was brought back by force;
But since he raises Jealousy in you,
Madam, resolve to make him Jealous too:
You by a double Right must gain his Heart,
First own it to your Beauty, then your Art:
Love is like Health which all men value most,
Not while it is possessed, but when it is lost.

Aliz. I Will rather bear Misfortunes worst Assault
Then own my blessing to a seeming Fault;
If what you now propose I should approve,
Virtue would blush at my Success in Love;
Honor alone shall guide my Actions still,
Rather than I will do, I Will suffer Ill:
My Rival nor the King shall ever say
To gain my Right I took a guilty way;
She has the Happier, I the Nobler part,
She may Possess, but I Deserve his Heart.
Exeunt.
The end of the first Act. The Curtain falls.
THE SECOND ACT.
The First SCENE. The Curtain being drawn up, King Edward the Third, King John
of France, and the Prince of Wales appear, seated on one side of the Theater;
waited on by the Count of Guesclin, the Lord Latymer, the Lord Delaware, and
other Lords, with the King's Guards. On the other side of the Theater are
seated Plantagenet, Alizia, Cleorin, Sevina, and other Ladies. The Scene opens;
two Scenes of Clouds appear, the one within the other; in the hollow of each
Cloud are Women and men richly apparelled, who sing in Dialogue and Chorus, as
the Clouds descend to the Stage; then the Women and Men enter upon the Theater,
and dance; afterward return into the Clouds, which insensibly rise, all of
them singing until the Clouds are ascended to their full height; then only the
Scene of the Kings magnificent Palace does appear, all the Company arise. King
Ed. SInce you are Prisoner by the fate of War,
I shall not only make it, Sir, my Care
Your Grief by such diversions to allay,
But quickly too to take their Cause away;
Two powerful Motives me to this persuade,
The Friendship, Sir, you with my Son have made,
And that rare Fortitude which you have shown
In Poictiers Field, and after it was won.

King Jo. Sir, Of that Fatal place I Will not complain,
Since (...) in it his Friendship did obtain,
Which I so prize as I Would the loss repeat
Rather then miss a happiness so great.
Embracing the Prince.
Prince. As much as Virtue Fortune does outshine,
So much your Victory surpasses mine;
A treaty will my bonds on you untie,
But yours on me will last eternally.

King Ed. That Treaty we to morrow will begin,
And you shall find I Will so proceed therein,
As you and all the world, Sir, shall confess
Justice shall guide me in it, not Success:
Doubt not but what I promise shall be done,
It Is what I ow my Honor and my Son.

King Jo. Thus using your Success, the world will see
How justly you deserve your Victory;
Force in rough Fetters may the Body bind,
But only Friendship Captivates the Mind.

King Ed. It is already, Sir, so late I fear
As I no longer will detain you here;
But only for the Ladies sake to ask
If you have been delighted with their Mask.

King Jo. While they are here, a Sin I should esteem
My being pleased with any thing but them;
To such a height their conquering Beauties rise,
TO admire them only I employed my Eyes.

King Ed. All those who treat of Love are much abused,
If Love be dangerous while it is diffused;
To morrow they attend you at the Ball,
Then 'twill perhaps on one contracted fall.

King Jo. It Is harder, Sir, as it is by trial known,
To resist many then resist but one;
But much more hard when each of them I see
Has Charms enough alone to conquer me.
[Exeunt King John leading out Plantagenet.
As all are going out Alizia stops Sevina, who both return on the Theater.
Aliz. Stay my Sevina, 'ere from hence you go
I must your Heart as you my Heart shall know;
Me thought I saw King Edward by Surprise
Look on my Rival with a Lovers Eyes;
If while I Am present he does her Adore,
Ah when I Am absent sure he does it more.

Sev. Through a false Optic, Madam, still we look,
When Jealousy has once possession took;
I marked the King, and if His Looks were true
He with Loves eyes did only look on you:
But I am sure the Princes Eyes were set
With so much Passion on Plantagenet,
As all my Skill in Looks I think is vain,
If his old Wound bleeds not afresh again;
And I Will never trust a Woman's Eyes if She
Be not as sick of that Disease as He.

Aliz. I am amazed at what I hear from you.

Sev. Madam, You Will find what I have said is true,
And if the Prince and She each other Love
The Kings Addresses will Successless prove.
Should his imagined Passion be as high
As you can think though thought by Jealousy,
This, Madam, ought your Trouble to suppress.

Aliz. It does increase rather then make it less,
Ah what Delight or Glory will it be,
To find her Scorn does drive him back to me;
May she still rather of her Conquest boast,
Then I regain so meanly what I lost:
My Lover to my Rival I will loose,
Sooner then Take a King she does Refuse.
Then do not think I Will do so Low a thing:
I Will Nobly Loose or Nobly Keep the King.

Sev. My hopes of Serving you I must forsake,
When you a Poison of your Cordial make.

Aliz. What greater curse in Love can Fortune send
Then make the way unworthy to the end?
For should He from my Rival now refrain,
I must attribute it to her Disdain:
I by my doubt did but the Pain endure,
But what you said cuts off all Hope of Cure.
[Exeunt.
The SCENE is Plantagenets Chamber. Plantagenet and Cleorin. Cleo. Pray speak
your thoughts since I have told you mine.

Plan. Alas dear Friend, they are the same with thine;
But to be used by Him as I have been
Does make me blush at Love as at a Sin.

Cleo. I often have begged you, Madam, but in vain,
To tell me why you of the Prince complain.

Plan. It Is that alone from thee I can conceal,
Nay I that Secret would to thee reveal,
Had I not Loved the Prince to such degree,
As I had rather be Condemned then he:
Ah what can my Respect more clearly show,
Then willingly his Guilt to undergo.

Cleo. I cannot think a Prince of such high Fame,
As all the World does homage to his Name,
To such a horrid Crime can condescend;
As is unfit for you to tell your Friend.

Plan. To those bright Stars which guide us it is a shame,
That so much Falsehood dwells with so much Flame.

Cleo. Heaven seldom does that man with Laurels Crown
Who ought by Thunder to be stricken down,
And Crimes which you to me dare not relate
Cannot but Merit, Madam, such a Fate:
I doubt you are betrayed by some abuse.

Plan. Oh that his Sin would but admit Excuse;
Which that it cannot doubtless you will admit,
When I have vowed, 'twas he which told me it.

Cleo. Madam, You might his words mis-understand.

Plan. Alas he writ them me with his own Hand.

Cleo. Oh in what Throne can Sacred Virtue Reign.
When Such a Prince does Falsehood entertain.

Plan. I know not which for wonder is more ^t.
The Offense he did or my out-living it;
But though no usage ever was so ill,
Yet, Cleorin, I fear I Love him still;
For when I saw him at the Mask to night,
From him I could not take away my sight;
Blushes and Sighs each other did pursue,
Too certain Signs that what I Fear is True;
But I Will no more this guilty task prolong,
Who can the Offender Love, deserves the Wrong.
[Exeunt.
Enter King John of France, and Count Guesclin. Guesc. Since all things, Sir,
to ease your Grief are done
By the Great Edward and his Greater Son,
Why show you now more Sorrow in your Look
Then when at Poictiers you were Prisoner took.

King Jo. Ah who could think more could by Fate be done,
Then rob me of my Freedom and my Crown.

Guesc. You did unworthy of your Fate appear,
So bravely, Sir, those Losses you did bear.
Your Conqueror, for a constancy so high,
Applauded You, and blamed your Destiny.
Heaven did to you your Miseries assign,
Only to make your Virtues brighter shine.

King. Over my Sorrows I could still command,
Were I but Fortunes malice to withstand;
She could my Hands but as a Prisoner bind,
But now I am a Captive of the Mind;
At Poictiers I by Force did lose the Field
But here alas I willingly do Yield.

Gues. I cannot, Sir, believe so ill of you
As that you blame what willingly you do.
How can you bear the worst of Fortunes blows,
Yet sink with what you on your self impose.

King. This Generous Prince doubly does me subdue,
By force of Arms, and force of Friendship too.
I must lament what he has done for me,
Since now it is Sin to hate my Enemy.

Guesc. Blame not your Fortune, but your self Com^end,
For making a Brave Foe a Braver Friend.

King. He by my Ruin makes his Glory rise,
Then by my Friendship from Revenge he ties,
Oh do not blame me if I feel Remorse,
When I Am subdued by Kindness as by Force.

Guesc. Your Friendship for him, Sir, was never sound,
If such effects of it your Soul does wound;
Ah let him never, Sir, my King subdue
Both by his Fortune and his Virtue too.
Your Honor is so Firm and so sublime,
'Twere Sin to think you Guilty of that Crime:
It Is something else which does your Grief Inspire,
After what you would hide I Will not inquire.

King. Ah Friend, I grant it is something else indeed,
Yet from his Friendship does my Grief proceed,
For at the Mask King Edward made for me
The Bright Plantagenet I there did see,
And soon my Heart a Passion did admit
Vast as those Beauties which created it:
Such Features, Colors, Motions, and such Eyes,
With the Result which from them all did rise,
My Soul to this belief did quickly win,
That Yielding Duty was, Resistance Sin.

Guesc. Your Grief from Love not Friendship then does grow.

King. It springs at once from Love and Friendship too:
For I observed, during the masking Night,
The Prince on her did always fix his Sight,
And often from his breast a Sigh would steal
Which as his Looks his Passion did reveal;
But that which made my Trouble much more great
Was, when her Sight did with the Prince's meet:
A bright Vermillion in her Face would rise,
Then with a Sigh she would cast down her Eyes;
What stronger Prooff could either of them show,
That he loved her, and that she Loved him too:
Condemn not then my Grief who must contend,
Both with my Conqueror, and with my Friend.

Guesc. Let that which does your Grief your Glory prove,
Making your Friendship overcome your Love;
'Twill be by all a Greater Action held,
Thus to Decline a Love then Gain a Field;
As much as Virtue above Fortune is
So much your Glory will out-rival his;
For you a Nobler Conquest this secures,
Let Force his Triumph make, but Friendship yours.

King. Guesclin, Such talk as this you must forbear,
The greatest Glory is her Chains to wear;
In what thou mov'st, thou do mispend thy breath,
None cures her Beauties Wounds but She or Death.

Guesc. It Is strange to be so Vanquished the first hour.

King. That does not show my Weakness but her Power.
Her Beauty only has the Right and Art,
At the first Sight to Captivate a Heart;
Her Eyes can be no more opposed then Fate,
Others may Raise, but she does Love Create.

Guesc. I once believed the Empire of your Breast
Could only by Valeria be possessed.

King. I was my self to that belief confined,
But now Plantagenet has changed my Mind;
She claimed my Heart in such a Charming way,
That to Refuse was worse then to Obey;
Guesclin, She gives, as to my cost I prove,
New Rules in Beauty, and new Laws in Love.

Guesc. This sudden change I cannot, Sir, but dread;
The News of it will strike Valeria dead.

King. Who on my Conquerours Beauty does reflect,
Will find the Cause does justify The Effect.

Guesc. But why have you your Heart so soon resigned
To Outward Beauties, till you knew the Mind.

King. Ah when the Mask was done, I quickly found
Her Mind was like her Eyes with Brightness Crowned;
Such heightened Wit did in her Words appear,
As she subdued my Heart too by my Ear:
'Twas vain alas to think of a Defense,
When she had Charmed my Soul in every Sense;
Then do not hope my Passion to remove,
But as thou art my Friend assist my Love.

Guesc. Though I foresee this Passion many ways
Will to your Fame and Freedom Trouble raise,
And that the Prince's Love obstructs your way,
Yet, Sir, since you Command me I Obey;
I Will make it, Sir, my business now to win
Your Conquerours Confident fair Cleorin:
To Lovers, Sir, the Favorite Women are;
The same as Outworks to a Town of War;
Though to the Town compared but small they look,
Yet those once gained, the Place is sooner took.

King. Go my dear Guesclin then, and quickly try,
If Friendships Wings as fast as Loves can Fly.
[Exeunt several ways.
The SCENE is the Prince's Chamber. The Prince and Delaware. Prince. Oh
Delaware, mine is so strange a Grief,
As I nor Hope nor Wish to have Relief.

Dela. May you not to your Servant, Sir, declare
That Grief in which he begs to have a share?

Pr. Ah why should I that Grief to you impart,
Whose Trouble for it will more Wound my Heart;
With my own Sorrows I can scarce contend,
Add not to these the Sorrows of my Friend.

Dela. Since you to me so high a Title give,
I humbly beg you by it to believe
Nothing to you so Great a Grief can be
As this denial, Sir, would prove to me;
I, Sir, your Friendship Treats me at this rate,
'Twill make your Kindness wound me like your Hate.
Should I want Power to make your Grief decline,
I Will not increase it by disclosing mine.

Pr. That deep Affliction under which I Groan
Cannot alas be eased by being known;
Yet since no proof you will of my Friendship take,
But what your trouble and my own must make,
Rather then you should fear the Truth of it,
I to that proof which you desire submit;
I doubt not you have heard how heretofore
The Fair Plantagenet I did Adore,
And that I had some ground to think that she
Nor Cruel nor Ungrateful was to me;
Heaven knows I Loved her with so chaste a Flame
As I to Marry her did only aim,
To which at last my Father did consent,
When she next day but one did marry Kent;
And which is worse, if worse then this can be,
She for it n'ere excused her self to me.

Dela. To offer at it had increased the abuse,
Who could excuse a fault above excuse?

Pr. I who through all Wars dangers often have past,
I who a thousand times have Death out-fac'd,
In all those Horrors did less Trouble see,
Then in Plantagenets inconstancy.

Dela. It Is she, not you, which should her Change repent,
Since in her Sin she found her Punishment.

Pr. Alas to me a sad Revenge it proved,
To see her Ruined whom so much I Loved:
What worse to me could She or Fortune do,
Then make her Punishment my Torment too;
A Torment which all others did outdo,
Since I who felt it cannot tell it you;
But yet at last Honor prevailed so far,
As I forsook Plantagenet for War;
Hoping in War by Death to find Relief,
Or else in time to wast away my Grief.

Dela. In her Inconstancy and in that War,
Heaven showed it took of you a double Care;
With deathless Laurels you have Crowned your Head,
And m^st a Wife unworthy of your Bed.

Pr. How dare you talk of her at such a rate,
For though her Usage might deserve my Hate,
Yet from her Eyes such conquering Light does break,
As none of her but with Respect should speak.

Dela. Forgive me if the sense, Sir, of your Wrong
Did force a Guilty Duty from my Tongue.

Pr. To her alone that suit you must prefer,
I dare not pardon an Offense to Her,
The Wrong I told thee of concerns not Thee.

Dela. Yes she in Wronging you has injured me.

Prince. From such Discourse I charge you to refrain;
Be thought by me To Endure and not Complain;
If what I said thou do so much deplore,
What I must say I find will grieve thee more;
For know she does again my Conqueror prove;
[Dela. starts. I thought her Change had cured my Injured Love;
But when last night I saw her Beauties Shine,
Resentment did to Love the Throne resign;
And that deep Wound closed up by her Disdain
Was opened by one Conquering Look again;
As when the Murderer does the Murdered see,
The Corpse will bleed a-fresh immediately.

Dela. Oh let it never of my Prince be said,
He yields to one by whom he was Betrayed!

Pr. I glory more my Love that Wrong o'recame,
Then I can Grieve that I so Injured am;
What to my Flame a Remedy can grant,
When her Inconstancy that Power does want?
I find, do what she will, in me she will Reign,
Her Eyes give deeper Wounds then her Disdain.

Dela. What her Disdain did want the Power to do,
Let Honors Dictates now persuade you to:
And, Sir, to arm you for this just Assault,
Know she has said her Marriage was your Fault:
Ah 'twas enough the Injury to do,
Without attributing the Guilt to You.
Malice it self at nothing worse could aim,
She kills your Love and then would kill your Fame.
And, Sir, to show her Fault all Faults surpass,
She of the First makes use to act the Last.

Pr. Ah do not think this can my Love subdue,
Since what she charged me with I wish were True:
I at my Miseries would scarce repine,
Had I the Power to make her Failings mine.
My Love for her would make me be content,
To have her Guilt and my own Punishment;
Yet I have named but half the Weight I bear:
My Father is in Love with her I hear;
And I am much mistaken if last Night,
She the French King Subdued not at first Sight;
By which I find I must the Field maintain,
Against my King, my Friend, and her Disdain.
But though worse Crosses should my Hopes befall,
My powerful Love would Overcome them all.
Dissuade me not, but try for me to win
The Friendship of thy Sister Cleorin;
She most of all my Conquerours mind does sway,
Reply not if thou Love Me, but Obey.
[Exit Prince. Delaware alone.
Dela. Some Fatal Planet at my Birth did Reign,
Since all things which should Cure, Augment my pain;
My Sister who at last for me did get
To be the Favorite to Plantagenet,
Which from Despair till now my Soul did free;
My Prince makes use of now to ruin me;
My Love he aims not only to destroy,
But to obtain that End does Me employ.
Not doing it I Disobedience show,
And if I do it, I my Love overthrow:
That Secret, dying Kent revealed to me,
Which raised my Hopes, now makes my Misery.
My Mistress I betray while it is concealed,
And should betray my Love were it revealed;
What ever happens I must Wretched prove,
For I must Lose, or not Deserve her Love.
Thus from Wars Dangers Crowned with Bays I rise,
Only to fall the greater Sacrifice;
Yet of a Remedy I will not doubt,
Love which has Led me in may Lead me out.
[Exeunt.
The End of the Second Act.
THE THIRD ACT.
The SCENE is King John's Apartment. Enter King John, and a Page. Page. THe
fair Valeria has her Brother sent
TO attend you, Sir, in your imprisonment;
His Sister from the Duke of Lancaster
Obtained a Pass which brought him safely here;
He is but newly lighted at your Gate
And begs your leave that he on you may walt.

King. Valeria's Brother sure it cannot be.

Page. Sir, I but say the words he said to me.

King. Which of her Brothers os't?

Page. -- -- That Brother, Sir;
Who, e're his face was hurt, resembled het.

King. Call him -- --
Exit Page. How can I on the Brother look,
Whose Sister is by me so soon forsook?
But who the Bright Plantagenet shall see,
Must be unjust or else must pardon me.
Enter the Page with Valeria's Brother, whom the King embraces.
King. You are so like your Sister, I should know
You were her Brother though none told me so:
She may increase my Debt as she thinks ^t,
But nothing can the Sense I have of it.
The Battle I have lost I hope that She
Ascribes to my Ill Fate, and not to Me;
Fortune alas too Tyrannous would prove,
If what has lost my Crown should lose her Love.

Val. Bro. Since for your Mistress you of her made Choice,
She at the loss, Sir, does almost rejoice;
For it presents her with a proof that shows,
Her Love is past the reach of Fortunes Blows.
She Will grieve at nothing your ill Fate can do,
Unless at that which fevers her from you.

King. Never Affection to this height did rise,
It proves her Love is matchless as her Eyes;
And makes me scarce repine at what I bear,
Since it does show how I am loved by her.

Val. Bro. She of her Love a higher Proof does show,
In what she has commanded me to do;
For, Sir, She knows that England still affords
Beauties, which are Resistless as her Swords,
And has enjoined me if you here should be
In Love with any one more Fair then She,
I should assist you, Sir, in your Amors,
And Sink her Happiness, to Heighten yours.

King. She does at once in what she bid you do
Declare her Love, and run no hazard too;
For he, who once is made Valeria's prize,
Is armed against all Wounds from others Eyes.
Enter Guesclin. The King goes hastily to meet him to the other side of the
Theater: Valeria's Brother listening to them. It Is with impatience, Guesclin, I
have staid
To learn from you the Progress you have made,

Guesc. In vain I try by Presents, Sir, to win
The Assistance of the Beauteous Cl^in;
She, as I Am told, was preingag'd before.

King. Whoever told you that could tell you more.

Guesc. By Gifts I won a Lady who of late
The Honor on your Mistress had to wait,
Who told me and assured me it was true,
The Prince of Wales does love your Mistress too.

King. In this my Cruel Fate on me does send
The greatest curse which I could apprehend,
Must I the Prince or else my Fortune blame,
Who thus does rival me in Love and Fame?

Guesc. How can you justly, Sir, this News deplore
Since I but tell you what you thought before.
It Is the least Wonder does in Love befall,
To think a Mistress is Adored by all.
I as a Lover to that Thought was bound,
But now that Thought a Certainty is found,
Which justly in my Soul does grief infuse.

Guesc. She has acquainted me with stranger News,
She told me, Sir, this is the second time,
The Bright Plantagenet was loved by him.
He by Despair to the French Wars was sent,
She leaving him to wed the Earl of Kent,
But she the cause of it could not relate.

King. How strange and intricate a Power is Fate,
The Prince of Wales finds in a slighted Flame
The Noblest of all ways to raise his Fame;
Glory does heal what Love made him endure,
And his Despair presents him with his Cure.
He mist her Love a while, that he might be
More worthy of it by his Conquering Me;
A happy Planet at his Birth did Reign;
A seeming Loss brings him a double Gain;
While Fate with me so cruelly does act,
As by one Loss a greater I contract,
Successless Love his way to Fame does prove,
And loss of Fame does make my way to Love.

Guesc. You wrong your Virtue by this strange Debate;
The Brave are still the makers of their Fate;
It Is only, Sir, those men whose Souls are low,
Which first made Fate and then to Fate did bow.
Nor War nor Love, Sir, are Resistless Powers,
Both have their Happy as Unhappy Hours;
But he who does for one Mischance Despair,
Can never be prosperous in Love or War.
As I have told you what has raised your Grief,
So now I will present you some Relief;
For my informer, Sir, to me has swore,
That though the Prince your Mistress does Adore,
He has not yet his Love to her disclosed,
She therefore, Sir, has hopefully proposed.
That you this moment to the Prince would go
And let him from your self this Passion know;
His Friendship for you and so great a Trust
Will make him cease to Love or be Unjust;
If, Sir, he does the first, your End you win,
And by the last make Rivalship no Sin:
This, Sir, which She Proposes I approve.

King. No Friendship ever yet could conquer Love,
He to that Passion vainly does pretend
Who can resign his Mistress to his Friend;
I scarce can relish what she does advise,
It seems to me nor Generous, nor Wise,
For in vain hopes of what it never will do
I clearer shall the lesser Friendship show;
My Friendship too were guilty of a Crime
Should his do more for me then mine for him.

Guesc. But e're her Council, Sir, you Disapprove,
Consider if you can forsake your Love.

King. Sooner then I my Passion will forgo
I will forsake my Crown and Friendship too.

Guesc. Then pray, Sir, follow what she does Advise,
And you will find it is Generous and wise;
If to the Prince you first your Passion own
You first do that which he first should have done,
And lay that Blame on him while this you do,
Which justly else he might have charged on you:
Since you will Court the Mistress of your Friend
This is the fairest way to reach your End.

King. I will approve that which you last did say,
And to attempt it will not time delay.
[Exeunt King, Guesclin and Page.
Val. Bro. In which of both does he not Guilty prove,
In his Dissembling, or his change of Love?
There is but one way left that I can see
To Cure or Punish his Inconstancy. -- -- -- --
Exit. Enter Plantagenet and Cleorin.
Cleo. Guesclin did show no little Discontent
When I refused the Gifts his King had sent,
Who since this way he does Successless prove
He will himself declare to you his Love;
And, Madam, I believe King Edward too
Will suddenly disclose his Flame to you.

Plan. Oh Cleorin how cruel is my Fate
That those should Love me most whom most I Hate,
And he whom most I love in spite of's Fault,
I fear of me scarce does admit a Thought
Enter to them Alizia and Sevina.
Aliz. Excuse me, Madam, if I take this time
TO accuse your Beauty of a seeming Crime:
That Friendship which on me you did bestow
Does make it just I should yet call it so.

Plan. Madam, I am Surpised at what you say,
For that great Friendship which to you I pay,
Does make me confident I never could do
What may be called a seeming Crime by you.
Let me but know my Charge, and you will see
You are more Faulty in Suspecting me.

Aliz. From the first hour in which you did descend
To bless me with the Title of your Friend,
I so much valued it as Heaven does know
I strove to Merit what you did bestow,
Which makes what e're I did in serving you
To be at once my Joy and Duty too.
And though your Goodness often would confess
I served you above all you could express,
Yet I was higher Grieved I did no more,
Then I was Pleased with all I did before*

Plan. Madam, to prove my Debt you need not strive,
I Will own my self the ungratefull'st Soul alive,
If since our Friendship I did e're admit
A thought which might but seem unfit for it.

Aliz. Ah, Madam, can you say what now you do,
And have your Face exempt from blushes too?
Or do you think it is a Friendly thing
To rob me of my Lover and my King?
One, who till now preserved so pure a Flame
As made hime greater for his Love then Fame,
If this be held a Friendly Act by you,
Pursue such friendly Acts, and Kill me too;
To me a much less Cruelty 'twould prove
To rob me of my Life, than of my Love;
For our past Friendships sake you should no^ give
Wounds worse than Death, and after let me live:
Your Cruelty grants half of my Request,
Then let your Pity, Madam, grant the rest:
Accept this Weapon, and no longer shun
To let your Hand cure what your Eyes have done.
Presenting her a Dagger.
Plan. I am amazed at what you say and do,
I Will sooner wound my self with it than you.

Aliz Ah, it is your kindness to the King I see
Hinders your granting what is begged by me;
His Image, Madam, you but love too well,
You fear to strike the Shrine where it does dwell;
But for that Reason what I ask dispense,
Since only Death can banish it from thence;
Else to you Conquest 'twill some trouble give
To know he in your Rivals heart does live.

Plan. Can you believe I Will share that Monarcks Bed
By whose Command my Father lost his Head?
My Father who was Uncle too to him,
And who in Virtue to such height did climb,
As a whole day he on the Scaffold stood,
E're they could find out one would shed his Blood;
King Edwards double Guilt my soul does fright,
First he usurped on his own Fathers right,
Then stained a Scaffold with his Unkles gore
For striving his wronged Brother to restore.

Aliz. You should not charge your Fathers death on him,
Since 'twas his Power, not he, which did that Crime;
His Chancellours, while he was under age,
Clothed with his name the injustice of their rage;
For which when he had reached his Fourteenth year,
He put to death the Guilty Mortimer,
And to appease you for that Murderers Sin
He now does Court you to become his Queen.

Plan. I thought from Nature you had understood
There Is no Atonement for a Fathers Blood:
Then do not think I Will ever Condescend
At once to injure Nature and my Friend.

Aliz Have you forgot how you were almost won,
Madam, to wed your Father's Murth'rers Son?
If only Love prevailed so far with you,
What cannot Love, and thirst of Empire do.

Plan. Into a high Injustice I had run
Had I ascribed the Kings guilt to his Son.

Aliz. You with a worse Injustice can dispense,
You charge the King with Mortimers Offense;
A Fathers Guilt a Son may undergo,
But Kings partake not Sins which Subjects do.

Plan. If on the Prince his Birth a Guilt did lay,
He with his Tears did wash that Guilt away.

Aliz. The Princes Grief was Weak, the Kings was Strong,
The Prince Deplored, the King Revenged your Wrong;
The King did more if rightly understood,
The Son gave you but Tears, the Father Blood.

Plan. 'Twill easier to a Cruel Prince appear,
To spill a Subjects Blood, then shed a Tear:
But those true Showers wept by the Prince of Wales
To judge him Innocent with me prevails.

Aliz. This does but show the King what he should Do,
He need but Weep to be judged Guiltless too;
Or if yet Guilty held, with little Pain
A Lovers Tears will wash off any Stain.

Plan. Though your not Crediting what I have spoke
My just Resentment does too much provoke,
Yet that you may my Friendship clearly see,
Ev^n while you show that you have none for me,
Since what I said has not prevailed with you,
I will Convince you by this Solemn Vow:
I swear the King nor any e're to me
Mentioned that Love which makes your Jealousy;
And should he e're for me a Passion have,
Rather than wed the King I Will wed my Grave:
These Vows your Friendship should to me restore.

Sev. You cannot Ask, nor can she Promise more.

Cleo. Such Vows as these should your Belief persuade,
And Friendship thus Renewed is Stronger made.

Aliz. Ah, Madam, now my Trouble is more high
Then it was lately by my Jealousy;
You could impose no Penance so Sublime,
As thus to Show me and Forgive my Crime.
What ends one Pain a greater does begin,
Since all my Grief for your imagined Sin
Did not so much my wounded Mind Subdue,
As does the Grief of having Injured you:
Yet who can wonder that I Jealous grew
Of so much Beauty and such Virtue too;
The Perfectness of both you now have shown,
The Last has pardoned what the First has done.

Plan. If what I did might to Reward pretend
You give the greatest, being still my Friend.
[Embraces her.
Aliz. And may I be deprived of Life and Fame,
When e're again I lose that Glorious Name.
Exeunt. Enter King Edward, and Lord Latymer as in Discourse.
Laty. To me the assurance she did twice repeat.

King. What! that my Son Adores Plantagenet?

Laty. And with a Passion, Sir, that does appear
More fierce then that which he first paid to her.

King. Ah can he be so mean to Love again
One who his former Passion did Disdain?
One who was Guilty of so strange a Crime,
As to give Kent that Heart she Promised him?
And that her Scorn she might the more Display,
Wedded a Rival on his wedding day;
At least that day which was for him designed.

Laty. Love never was to Reasons Rules confined,
For it is a Passion, Sir, which only knows
Such Laws as on it self it will Impose.

King. But Honor should oblige him to Abhor
One by whose Guilt he was Betrayed before.

Laty. A Lover thinks that no Dishonor lies
In twice submitting to his Mistress Eyes.
We soon may Love and Fortune reconcile,
When either of them after Frowning Smile.

King. Oh Latymer, the News thou do impart
Does with a Double wound afflict my Heart;
First that my Son by such a Love should dare
To blast those Glories he has won in War;
Then that his Flames should be to her Addressed
Without whose Love I never can be Blessed. -- --
Laty. starts. Why do thou start? is it so strange a thing
That so much Beauty should Subdue thy King?
Rather admire I did not sooner bow
To such Bright Eyes, then that I do it now;
The Greatest Men that e're the World did Grace
Have still allowed to Love the Highest Place;
Caesar, who gained many a Glorious Field,
Yet did to Cleopatra's Beauties yield.

Laty. Had he not won many a Glorious Field,
That Love had been but as his Weakness held;
His Conquests make us think his Soul Sublime,
And many Victories Excuse one Crime.

King. Whatever in my Love is judged amiss
I Will expiate by Actions Great as his.

Laty. But how, Sir, can you well Condemn your Son
For Doing that which by your self is Done,
Since both of you Purpose the same Design.

King His Case my Lord does differ much from mine.
For though we both Plantagenet Adore,
Yet he has been Betrayed by her before:
The difference is exceeding great you see
She has Affronted him, but Conquered me;
Love is at worst a Noble Frailty thought,
But Love when Scorned is justly held a Fault.

Laty. May I be Pardoned if I speak my heart?

King. what 'ere you think you freely may impart.

Laty. May not the Prince then, Sir, as justly say
You are more faulty to Alizia?
You cease to love her in whose Heart you Reigned,
And he but loves her who his Love disdained;
He with the best of Loves extremes is cursed,
But you seem guilty of the very worst;
His Fault is, Sir, the lesser of the two,
You too Inconstant are, and she too True.

King. O do not wound me by reminding things
Which rather Trouble than Repentance brings.

Laty. The Fault which you Confess will you Pursue?

King. We should not Sin, and yet we daily do;
I owe Alizia more then you can say,
But what I owe her I want power to pay:
Plantagenet should only Wonders do,
She makes my Fault, and does excuse it too.
Enter to them the Prince and Delaware.
Prince. Sir, I am come to make you a Request
Which if denied I never can be Blessed;
It Is a Request I beg you to Admit,
And beg your Pardon too, for making it.

King. I Will grant what e're you ask though never so great,
If t does not concern Plantagenet.

Prin. Sir, It relates to her in some degree,
But it exceeding'y relates to Me.

King Then you are come, I doubt, to ask again
My leave that she may twice your Love disdain,
Since there is nothing else I can believe
Unfit for you to Ask, or me to Give,
And yet that Sin Honor should so detest,
As you should never make it your request.

Prin. If it is a Sin to love her, Sir, I fear
That every Man must Sin that Looks on her.

King. Loving of her which is her Beauties Due
From any other, is a Sin in you.

Prin. How can it, Sir, by you be justly thought
That what is Mandkinds Duty is my Fault.

King. You know what Scorn she did to you dispense,
And in such ways as Height'ned the Offense;
Without the Blemish of that double Stain,
She had within your Heart deserved to Reign;

Prin. But had not I through those Fierce Trials run,
I had not Merited what I had Won.

King. Too far she in those Guilty Trials went,
When she abandoned you to Marry Kent;

Prin. His Fate is Nobler who Deserves, but Fails,
Then his who Merits not, and yet Prevails.

King. But those Fierce Trials which she used you to
Makes her Incapable to Merit you;
For should she love you now 'twould be too late;
The Wrongs of Honor what can expiate?

Prin. Her Love, when e're Conferred, will Overpay
The Affronts of Scorn and Tortures of Delay;
Against her Beauties 'twere the greatest Fault
To think her Love can be too dearly bought.

King. Rather that cruell'st Injury she gave
Should all your Scorn and all your Hatred have;
Then do not Hope I ever will allow
That by my leave she twice should Injure you,
Ask all those Provinces your Sword has Won,
Ask me to share with you the English Crown,
And that true Kindness with does me dispose
Still to deny you Her, would grant you Those.

Prin. The Empire of the world I should Disdain,
Unless Plantagenet with me did Reign;
No Charms would in that Throne to me appear,
Without I had your leave to place Her there;
But if you grant me what I now implore,
I cannot Ask nor can you Give me more.

King. When first her Beauties in your Heart did Reign,
I had designed to Marry you in Spain;
And the consent I of Don Pedro won,
By which you had Succeeded to his Crown;
But by affection for you I was led
To give you leave Plantagenet to Wed.
What Act of greater Kindness could be shown,
Then yield your Love should lose so fair a Throne?
You have lost Spain by your first Fatal Flame,
And by your second you will lose your Fame.
Those Wreaths which Conquered France for you have made
By such a Guilty Fire will quickly fade.

Prin. I doubt not, Sir, but by my Sword to gain
As large a Monarchy as that of Spain.
Fortune the Valiant may to Thrones prefer,
But it is by Sufferings I must Conquer her.

King. Ah Prince, since nor your Reason nor your Fame
Can cure you of so Criminal a Flame,
I Will try if my Commands can make you do
What Fame and Reason cannot lead you to;
I here enjoy you, Son, by every thing
Which binds you to your Father and your King,
This sinful Love without delay decline,
Which should your Horror cause as, well as mine,
For if this Passion longer you pursue,
You Will lose your Fame, your King and Father too.
Exeunt King and Lord Latymer.
Prin. Two Ills he offers, one he bids me choose,
I must my Mistress or my Father Loose;
Why should he strive by Nature to remove
The highest bond of Nature that of Love?
Though Natural it is To Obey a Fathers call,
Yet to love her is much more Natural;
Since he would have me yield to Natures sway,
Where she most Rules there I should most Obey?

Dela. Since She, your King, your Father, and your Friend
Oppose your Love, give to your Love an End;
Any of them the Conquest ought to Win,
Then to Oppose all Four will prove a Sin.

Prin. Ah Delaware, the Sin were much more Great
Should I now cease to love Plantagenet,
Then I to kill my self I must needs consent
My Love and Life being of like extent.

Dela. Your Passion is Unjust while it is so Great,
You pay Loves Score with what is Natures debt;
If in your Love so prodigal you are,
With what, Sir, will you pay your Fathers Care?

Prin. Ah it is his Love for her, no^ care for me,
Which makes him treat me with such Cruelty;
Against all Rules of Justice he does go,
Making himself both Judge, and Party too;
If to Love her who wronged me be a Crime,
The self-same cause makes Love a Fault in him.

Dela. More by a King and Father may be done
Then may be by a Subject, and a Son;
Let calmer Thoughts you to your Duty bring,
Pronounce the names of Father and of King
With that Respect which is to either due,
And yield to those Effects 'twill work in you,
Those Powerful Names will then Victorious be.

Prin. I find in either dwells Divinity,
For nothing less of Force enough could prove
To hinder me to speak to her I Love.
This is the very utmost I can do,
And this Heaven knows will prove my Torment too.

Dela. Silence, Sir, is but half of what you owe,
You should suppress your Inclination too.

Prin. My Inclinations must be let alone,
For though it is Mine yet it is not my own.

Dela. Only to Lovers this Distinction's known;
How can it, Sir, be yours, and not your own?

Prin. Subjects who from their King the Power have g^
Are still his Subjects though he Rules them not.
Oh Friend, in my Condition there appears
Two Motions like to those which Rule the Spears;
My Love the Rapid Motion I may call,
My Duty to my King the Natural,
Which while it does it is Regular Course obey,
Loves Rapid Motion hurries it away.
[Exeunt.
The End of the Third Act.
THE FOURTH ACT.
The Scene opening, King Edward and Lord Latymer appear in a Garden
discoursing. Lat. SIr, it is past doubt, the' Intelligence is true.

King. What the French King the Princes Rival too!

Lat. And to so great a Height, as I believe
A period to their Friendship it will give;
For never any yet could soar above
The fierce Resentments of a Rivalls Love.

King. Friendship between them two can hardly be
Of so much Strength as Nature is in me;
Since Love in me does Nature's Force subdue,
Doubt not in them 'twill Conquer Friendship too;
It Is the Prerogative of her Bright Eyes
For Love of them to break all other Ties.

Lat. Is it then just you on the Prince should lay
Commands above his Power, Sir, to obey?

King. Oh Latymer, I grant I am to Blame,
But it is not Love alone does me Inflame;
Glory in that I act does bear a part,
Glory does fire my Mind, as Love my Heart;
Nothing for me seems Worthy to Pursue,
But what my Son Attempting Failed to do:
Since he to such an Envied Fame does rise,
Mine will Burn dim if it Outshine not his.

Lat. Oh Sir, can you who have such Glory won
Grow Jealous of the Glory of your Son.

King. He never Glory Loved who could Admit
Of any thing which might Outrival it,
From this Resolve nothing can me remove;
Nature must yield to Glory and to Love.
Enter King John and the Prince, who lock the Chamber Door.
Lat. Sir, I perceive the Prince and the French King,
Something Important does them hither bring,
For they are come alone and lock the gate;
If, Sir, concealed a while you here will wait,
Perhaps you will learn what in their Loves they will Do.

King. That Is a discourse deserves my listening to.
King Edward and Lord Latymer conceal themselves behind the Scene.
King Io. It Is such a Secret as shall clearly show
The perfect Friendship which to you I owe,
Since what to tell my self is scarcely fit
I to your Secrecy shall now commit.

Prin. Though nothing can to me more Pleasure give,
Then Proofs, Sir, of your Frienship to receive,
Yet among Friends there may such Secrets be,
As to disclose them were an Injury;
But you too well the Laws of Friendship know,
And are too Generous to use me so.

King Io. That Friend must to himself appear Unjust
Who takes as Injuries the Marks of Trust;
Yet tell me, Sir, what can that Secret be
Which to Reveal would be an Injury.

Prin. Shoul'd you have bribed your Guards to set you free,
'Twould be an Injury to tell it me;
For I should be, what ever I should do,
False to my King and Father, or to you.

King Io. Could I corrupt or else his Guards deceive,
I Would not return to France without his leave,
That Generous Usage he to me does show
Secures me here more then his Guards can do,
And though this Bond do Strong enough appear,
Yet a far stronger does Confine me here.
By your great Friendship, Sir, I here am ty'd^
But tell me freely, is there ought beside
Which by a Friend a Secret may be thought,
Which told a Friend, his Friend may think a Fault?

Prin. Yes, Sir, yet I will mention but one more;
Looking fixedly on the King. Suppose two Friends one Beauty did Adore;
If he, whose Heart her eyes the last over came,
Should to his Rival Friend disclose his Flame,
He well might think the Injury was Great.

King. I hope you do not love Plantagenet?

Prin. Yes, Sir, I do, and with a Love so High
As it can never Cease until I Die.

King. Ah, Since you Love her and to that Degree,
Why was your Passion not Revealed to me?
Telling you first she does my Conqueror prove.
You make your Friendship Guiltier then my Love.

Prin. Why should I tell you what you needs must know,
For whosoever sees must love her too.

King. Since such high Power does to her Eyes belong,
Think not in loving her I do you Wrong.

Prin. To love such Charming Eyes no wrong can be,
But it is a Wrong to tell your Love to me.

King Since all who Look on her she must Subdue,
Is it a wrong to tell you what you knew?
Because you thought your Love was known to me,
You judged your Silence was no Injury;
But I, as soon as I her Lover grew,
Judged it a Duty, Sir, to Tell it you,
Consider which of us has done the worst.

Prin. I who first saw her must have loved her First,
Therefore my Passion must be known to you.

King. I heard you Loved Her, and she Loved You too,
But afterward she did Inconstant prove,
And I believed that Wrong had Cured your Love.

Prin. Her Beauties were unworthy my Esteem,
If any thing more Powerful were then Them.

King. Knowing their Powers, admire not if you see
That Love more strong then Friendship is in me.

Prin. Yet since I to her Beauties first did bow,
Your Love's a Wrong to me, not mine to you.

King Io. Affronts the Ties of Friendship may undo,
Yet you still love her though she injured you;
You clearly have Declared in what you Did,
That her Fair Eyes does Friendships strength exceed;
And she who spite of Wrongs triumphs over you
Triumphs over me in spite of Friendship too.
Since she over you the greatest Power has shown,
Blaming my Passion you more blame your own;
Our Love in both or neither is amiss,
Yours above wrongs, mine above Friendship is.
But the Success of mine I may despair,
Since now I know that you my Rival are;
I with Disgrace am clothed, but you with Fame,
Which makes me merit Pity more then Blame.

Prin, How can I, Sir, that Pity give to you,
Which o my own Case is more justly due?
Besides her change for which my Soul does mourn,
Besides my Friend who does my Rival turn,
As high an I ^as both of these I feel.

King. May you that Secret, Sir, to me Reveal?
To me who though as Rival you may blame,
Yet I your Friend more than your Rival am;
For at this Name I Grieve, at that Rejoice,
This is the Effect of Force, but that of Choice.
[Embracing him.
Prin. Oh I did err, and in a high degree,
Repining that you Rival were to me,
Since it is more fit that pain I should abide
Then that her Eyes this Triumph were denied;
As both in Love and Friendship I exceed,
So both Disdain in common paths to tread;
Unjust to Her and Love I should appear,
Would I without a Rival conquer her;

King. This Declaration I unmoved receive,
Since you to be your Rival give me leave,
But to Plantagenet should prove unkind,
Yet in my Friendship I some ease shall find;
For should the worst of Fortunes be my share,
Your Trophies I should raise in Love as War:
Thus I by Friendships Power shall be supplied
With what to me my Fate and Love denied;
My Friendship for you nothing can impair
Since it stands firm, though you my Rival are;
For I who best her Beauties power do know,
Find your excuse from thence for being so;
And to confirm this Truth, I now will show
That Secret to you, which you asked to know.

Prin. Those conquering Beauties which did us subdue
Have made my Father turn my Rival too.

King I thought he Loved the Fair Alizia.

Prin. And, Sir, I thought you Loved Valeria.

King. Our Conquerours Eyes must every Heart reduce,
In my own Fate I find the Kings Excuse.

Prince. It Is She alone with the high Power is blessed
Of Captiavating Freedoms prepossessed.

King. She does in the same Fare, such is her Power,
Involve the Conquered and the Conqueror.

Prin. But it is not, Sir, at this that I repine,
I know where e're her Beauties please to slime,
They ought to Conquer as their Native Right,
Me by his Rivalship he does not Fright;
For it is Her choice alone which can improve
The highest Lover to deserve her Love:
And, Sir, my Flame which brightest shall appear,
Would make it Sin should I a Rival fear;
But that which does my Soul with Grief subdue,
Is his forbidding me to Love her too:
Oh why should the Paternal Right oppose
The nobler Right which Love on her bestows.

King. Oh Prince your Case is difficult I see,
He should have treated you, as you treat me;
But in the Fatal strait which you are in,
You must against your Love and Nature sin;
What Resolution think you to pursue?

Prin. Ah it is much easier to Resolve than Do;
For once I thought I could so far Obey,
As silently to Mourn my Life away;
But Love the Monarch Passion of the Soul
That Resolution quickly did control;
Making me find that her Triumphant Eyes
Are much more powerful then all Natures ties:
Yet that no odds of you I may receive
But what my greater Love to me does give,
I let you know on her this night 'Ile wait,
And from her Sentence I Will receive my Fate:
Sir, if you please, you may there go with me,
And both together learn our Destiny;
I hope, if mine does prove a happy Doom,
My Father by Submission to overcome;
But if a Fatal Doom she does dispense,
That will Revenge my Disobedience.

King. Since you allow me, I on you will wait
Of that bright Beauty to receive my Fate,
Though I already cannot but foresee
The certain Ruin that must fall on me:
For she must be Unjust as she is Fair,
If of her Love she makes me not Despair;
Or if she should me with her Favor bless,
Your Grief for it will Kill my Happiness;
Fate neither way to me, nor hope allow.

Prin. The value of her Love you injure now,
Since whosoever her Favor does possess
In part, the relish of unhappiness --

King If of her Love such Thoughts I do admit,
My height'ned Friendship is the cause of it;
And, Sir, you are obliged by Honors Laws
T'excuse Effects where Friendship is the Cause.

Prin. Admire not that my Rival I reprove,
For too much Friendship, and too little Love;
But pardon me, since I therein express
I prize her Right above my Happiness.

King. Ah generous Prince, such Virtues shine in you,
That you in Love as War must all subdue.

Prin. Since, Sir, together we resolve to go,
And from Plantagenet our Fate to know,
It Is fit that we no longer should defer
To beg her leave this night to wait on her.

King. But e're we know the Sentence she will give,
Let us from one another, Sir, receive
A mutual Vow that still we Friends will be.

Prin. That to our Friendship were an injury;
It is its own Security you know,
And does more strongly bind than any Vow;
Against our Friendship Love in vain contends,
For though we Rivals are, we will both be Friends;
Yet give your Friend that pity he does seek,
Who to obey Loves Law must Natures break.
[Exeunt. King Edward and Lord Latymer.
King. Never an Act so Insolent was done,
Affronted by my Prisoner and my Son!
Both know Plantagenet is loved by me,
And yet my Rivals both presume to be;
In my Revenging it I Will lose no Time,
Their Sufferings shall be equal to their Crime;
I Will make them feel that it is a dangerous thing
To dare to court the Mistress of a King.

Lat. I beg you, not for their sakes but your own,
Let first this storm of Anger be o'reblown,
'Ere you determine what is fit to do,
Then such Resolves you safely may pursue.
If Patience guide you not, they will esteem,
Your Passion only, Sir, does punish them.

King. Delay, in the Affront they cast on me,
Would be not Patience, but Stupidity.

Lat. Consider, I beseech you, Sir, how they
The ^ow'r of Love not Reasons Power obey.
Such strange Effects that Passion does produce,
As for all ^aults Love is its own Excuse;
Love does our Noblest Faculties control,
It Is in effect the Fever of the Soul.

King. My Lord, such talk as this I Will not admit,
Share not their Guilt by thus excusing it,
But follow them and let them understand
They now are both confined by my command:
This night in which their Love they should have shown,
I am determined to declare my own;
Since by their Love my Power they injure so,
I by my Power their Love will punish too.
[Exeunt several ways.
Plantagenet, Delaware, Cleorin. The Scene Plantagenets Chamber. Dela. Those
Fires of Love have still most (...) been,
Which though they highly Burned, have Burned unseen,
And under those which I discovered now,
For many years my Conquered Heart did bow;
Admire not yet I could so long disguise
From your own Sight the Acting of your Eyes;
For though the Sun on the Earths face but shines,
Yet by his Influence he does ripen Mines;
Your Eyes, which Shine at least as Bright as He,
Perform like him things which you could not see,
But yet this Breast in which your Beauty Shined
May boast of Love, purer than Gold Refined;
Your Eyes alone perform within may Heart
More then the Sun on Mines though helped by Art.
As it was just my Love I should display,
So it is as just your Will I should Obey;
Which I shall do when you but speak the word,
Though 'twere to pierce my Heart with my own Sword,
And nothing in that Action I shall fear
But to offend your Image which is there.

Plan. My Lord, I think you from your Sister know
The Friendship which I always had for you,
Yet since your words the occasion does admit,
I will my self give you a Proof of it:
Though your declaring of your Love for me
Is in it self no little Injury,
Yet for my Friendships sake I Will pardon you,
If you the Offense will not again pursue.

Dela. Madam, your Justice should this Usage blame,
You cloud your Cruelty with Friendships name,
As Judges to the Tortured Respite give,
To lengthen Pain, but not to make them live;
Such Usage yet were for that Servant sit
Who durst Adore you and not tell you it,
Though it is some Guilt to say I Die for you,
Yet is that Guilt, Madam, a Duty too:
Ah Madam, sure you ought not to deny
To take the Debt, or bid the Debtor die;
You Sentence is too Heavy or too Light,
You either should me Kill, or Save me quite.

Plan. Since by your self, my Lord, I now am told,
Your Love for me is more refined than Gold,
I Will put it to a Trial but so vast,
As never yet that Courted Metal past;
Know then, my Love for which so much you strive
Is not, alas, in my own Power to give:
The Prince of Wales. -- --

Dela. In Pity say no more,
Fate never had a Curse like this in store,
Raised to the Charming'st Hope of all the World,
Into Despair I now from thence am hurled,
You keep that Word to which your self you tied,
And Try me more then ever Gold was Tried;
That Glitterring Earth, when it has passed the Fire,
Is the Refiners Wonder and Desire;
But I, having Loves Fiery Trial past,
Like the Neglected Dross away am cast.

Cleo. Oh Brother, had not Love your Mind depraved,
You Would think you were not Cast away but Saved;
The Crime you act she calmly does reform.

Dela. Ah! such a Calm is worse than any Storm.

Cleo. How can the Princess more obliging prove,
Than to give Friendship, when she cannot Love.

Dela. Oh Sister, he who to her Love aspires,
To nothing less can limit his Desires;
Loves Power must always Friendships power outdo,
For Love at once is Love and Friendship too.

Cleo. You should with Joy what she bestows receive,
She Gives in Friendship all she has to Give,
And to convince you, hers is Great and True,
She the first hour her Secrets Trusts with you.

Dela. Since to Receive my Love she does deny,
She by her Anger ought to make me Die;
That Is the best Proof of Friendship she can give,
And therefore that alone I can receive.
He for her Love does grant himself unfit
Who can be won to outlive the loss of it.

Plan. What I have yet performed can but pretend
To let you see how much I am your Friend.
But that, my Lord, which now I do Design
Shall let you see how much I think you mine;
For by your Council and Assistance too,
The life of all my Hopes I will pursue.
Admire not Shame thus in my Face prevails,
When I confess I love the Prince of Wales;
For though the Affront which I from you received
Does make me blush that after it I lived,
Yet I, whether by Weakness or by Fate,
Still Love that Prince whom I ought most to Hate;
And how that Love with Honor to pursue,
Is that in which I ask advice of you; -- -- --
Dela. starts. For he esteems you in such high Degree,
As you the fittest are to give it me.

Dela. Oh Fate! Oh Love! why do you both agree,
To give such Beauty so much Cruelty?
Is It not enough my Flame is scorned by you,
But you would make me help my Rival too?
And my Resentments higher to Inflame,
These Wrongs you do me under Friendships name;
Madam, if this, if this your Friendship be,
Ah give me Proofs then of your Cruelty;
Either bestow on me your Love or Hate
This Tyranny surpasses that of Fate;
Fate only made me Wretched, but it is you
Alas would have me make my self so too.
To Love you is a Confidence so high,
As I for it do not refuse to Die:
But do not let your Doom be so severe
As thus to make me my own Murderer;
From those Fair Eyes which did my Love create
I beg I may alone receive my Fate.

Plan. Oh why should you be grieved to this Degree?
Love, which does govern you, does govern me;
It Is Love gives Laws to us, not we to it,
And to his boundless Power we must submit;
Since by its Influence of my Love you miss,
I give you that which of next Value is,
And hope by Friendships Kindness to remove
Your Grief for wanting Power to give you Love.

Dela. Ah Madam, How can you that Friendship prize
Which could destroy the Conquest of your Eyes?
And would against its nature make it prove
A Rivals help, and Mutherer of Love.
It Is past the Power of Friendship to bestow
Such Joys as those 'twould ravish from me now,
Yet think not strange that I deny to you
What I denied my Prince and General too;
For your Triumphant Eyes, since his return,
Have made his Fire once quenched more freely Burn;
This Fatal Secret he to me confessed,
And unobey'd made me the like request,
But yet your Cruelty does his Surpass,
He did not know that I his Rival was;
But you who knew it strive to make me do
What known to him Love had not forced him to;
Fortune both ways my Torments does advance,
By Friendships Knowledge and its Ignorance.

Plan. Ah! that Blessed Secret which I learn from you
Makes me with Greater Hopes my suit renew;
For 'twere below your Virtue to undo
At once, my Lord, a Friend and Mistress too.
Sure to that man Loves Power was never known
Who valued others Joys above his own.
Consider, since I loved him while I thought
That his Inconstancy did cause his Fault,
If any other Love my Breast can fill,
When from your self I find he loves me still:
Since it is my Fate only the Prince to Love,
Since therefore all your Hopes must fruitless prove,
Assist your Prince and Mistress in distress,
And help that Love which nothing can suppress;
Quenching by such a Generous Act you. Flame,
From your Misfortune you will increase your Fame.
Retire, my Lord, and think on what I said,
I know, when Love does once the Heart invade,
So Powerful is that Passions Influence,
As it is not easily removed from thence,
But when alone you weigh what is asked by me,
Reason and Honor must Victorious be.

Dela. Oh Madam, though the Trouble be not light
Of being thus commanded from your Sight,
Yet that torments me in a less Degree
Then those Desires which here you lay on me:
Yet e're I go this Sacred Voice receive;
I to Obey you, Madam, will so Strive,
As, If I can, my Flame I will suppress,
And on my Ruin raise my Happiness;
But if I quench not Fires which you create,
Accept the Duty, and deplore the Fate.
[Exit Delaware.
Plan. Go, my dear Cleorin, and lose no time,
Improve th 'Impression I have made on him,
For that Blessed Secret he reveald to me
Shows that on him depends my Destiny.
[Exeunt several ways. Enter Guesclin hastily who meets Delaware.
Guesc. My Lord, I have been seeking you with News
Which will at once Horror and Grief infuse,
My King and your Great Prince are both confined.

Dela. From what Black Coast blows this Tempestuous Wind?

Guesc. By the Lord Latymer I understand,
They are imprisoned by your Kings command.

Dela. The cause of it did he not let you know?

Guesc. It Is what he could not, or else would not do;
Let us by several ways employ our care,
First to discover why they Prisoners are,
That known, we may more hopefully apply
To this Misfortune a quick Remedy.

Dela. Let Us hasten to this Work, for 'twere a Crime
In serving them to lose one moments time.
[Exeunt several ways.
The SCENE is Plantagenets Bedchamber. Plantagenet and Valeria's Brother
sitting, and in Discourse. Val. Bro. The Assurance, Madam, which to me you give
With Joys above expression I receive;
It Is you alone those Blessings can extend
Which both my Merit and my Hopes transcend.

Plan. You in such moving words your Love have shown,
As I m Justice could not less have done;
Some Time and Industry it will require
Fairly to reach that End which we desire,
But leave it to my care if you think fit.

Val. Bro. She who must make my Fate should govern it;
While it is in such fair hands it is secure.
Enter a La^, hastily.
Lady. Madam, the King is almost at the door.
They both rise up hastily.
Plan. The King, Oh strange Misfortune, and so near!

Val. Bro. What would he think if he should see me here?
'Twill ruin all which we designed to do.

Lady. The King does come the way which he should go.
Exit Lady hastily.
Plan. By what dire Planet is he hither led?
I hear him, hide your self within my Bed.
A noise within. Valeria's Brother hides himself in Plantagenet's Bed; She goes
to meet the King. Enter the King.
King. Since I enjoyed at last this longed for time,
I hope you will not think it is a Crime?
Madam, If I employ it now to say,
An Adoration to your Eyes I pay:
An Adoration Words would ill express,
For could I tell its Greatness, 'twould be less;
So high a Passion never was paid before.
And yet I blush, Madam, that it is no more.

Plan. Do you consider, Sir, what now you say,
Such Vows you should but to Alizia pay;
Sir, you mistake, to her alone they are meant.

King. Ah say not I mistake when I repent;
You may believe what I now say is true,
Since of most Love I speak, and speak to you;
To you who have given mine such perfect strength,
As it is incapable of more but length;
That Falsehood might Truths piercing sight escape,
It slowly moves, and in a borrowed shape;
But ^uth which only fears to be unknown,
Moves speedily, and no disguise puts on.

Plan. It Is strange this Love should grow so great so soon.

King. The Dawning of it was a perfect Noon;
For what such Eyes, Madam, as yours create
Must ^each Perfection in their first Estate:
Yet since I did Alizia first Adore,
I grant I merit this neglect and more;
But you the name of Tyranuous will win
Revenging a Misfortune as a Sin;
This usage too will an Injustice be,
You Wrong your Eyes while thus you Punish me.

Plan. Were there naught else 'Ide not be false to her.

King. Beauty should still a Conquest most prefer.

Plan. They Tyrants are who to usurp delight.

King. Who has most B^y has (...) Love most right.

Plan. You wrong your Mistress while my Love you seek,
And I my Friend in hearing what you speak.

King. To Love another after you are seen,
A greater wrong, Madam, in me had been;
I fully know the great debt which is due,
To your fair Eyes and to your V^tues too;
And it had been below them to have gained
A Heart in which no Beauty e're has reigned;
But mine before had yielded to the Powers
Of conquering Charms which none excel but yours:
What greater merit can my Passion show,
Then thus to leave Alizia to love you,
This of its vastness is a proof sublime.

Plan. Ah what you call your Merit is your Crime,
Since perfect Love in Justice must excel,
Falsehood and her together cannot dwell.

King. That perfect Love is just I grant is true,
And I prove mine is Just in Loving you.
Your Eyes which act the Change you so abhor,
Are my security I Will change no more;
Since to the highest Beauty I pretend,
Blame not if by Degrees I reach that end;
And as my Love that blessing does pursue,
So now I find it only shines in you.
Enter Alizia and Sevina.
Aliz. This Duty daily must be paid by me,
And though it is late -- -- --
She starts back amazed seeing the King. Oh Heaven! what is it I see?
Ah! would these Eyes, rather than see this Sight,
Had been closed up by an eternal night.

King. What is it, Madam, which you thus b^oan?

Aliz. Can you ask that since you two are alone,
And at an hour, so Guilty as it shows
The Falseness of her Friendship and your Vows!
To me this Sight so vast a Grief does give,
As makes me wish rather to Die than Live.

King. And, Madam, it is some cause of Grief in me
To find in you so strange a Jealousy.

Aliz. If you who do the Wrong, Sir, can admit
Of Grief; What then must I that Suffer it?
But, Sir, your cause of Grief shall be removed,
My Death shall show you soon how well I loved:
[To Plan.] Go treacherous Woman, False as thou art Fair,
Those Hopes you raised on your wronged Friends Despair
Shall soon be blasted, for my injured Ghost
Shall still pursue you for those Joys I lost;
Where e're you go, revenge it shall invoke,
And show you still that Heart your Falsehood broke:
You still shall see it or shall hear it groan,
And it shall haunt you in his Bed and Throne.
[She offers to go out.
Plan. Oh go not yet away.

Sev. At ^east be pleased to hear what she can say.

Aliz. Whatever she can tell I do despise,
I Will not believe her Words above mine Eyes;
And I have seen so much, as I ^ow fly
To seek out Death my only Remedy.
Exeunt Alizia and Sevina.
Plan. So well her height'ned Spirit, Sir, I know,
As what she Threatens she too soon will do;
If by your instant Kindness or my Care
We do not stop the Effects of her Despair,
Forgive me if I leave you to attend
The Debts I owe to a Dispairing Friend.
The King stays her.
King. Oh leave not your Adorer to pursue
One who does hate you, and usurped your due;
If to receive my Passion you decline,
Even her Despair will be less great then mine.

Plan. Deta^n me not, She Will die through our delay.

King. And I shall die should you thus go away.

Plan. She needs my help.

King. But does not it implore.

Plan. Her Case deserves it.

King. Mine deserves it more.

Plan. Her Grief does wound me.

King. So my Love should do.

Plan. Your Love's her debt.

King. It Is only due to you.
A great skreik within.
Plan. That Fatal Skreik must cut off our debate,
For my best speed I fear will come too late.
She breaks from the King, and goes out hastily.
King. She Is gone and left me in a deeper Grief
Then here is to whom she flies to give Relief;
She does her Hatred to my Love prefer,
To me she is Cruel, but she is Kind to her:
It Is Fortune only or resistless Fate
Which governs all the World in Love and Hate.

The King stands musing a while: Valeria's Brother thinking him gone, comes
from behind the Bed; The King lifts up his eyes, sees him, and starts back;
Valeria's Brother runs into the Bed again. King. A Man, and here, and at this
time of night,
How quickly did He vanish from my sight?
Does she a Visitant like this admit,
Though my bad Angel 'twere I Will speak to it.
The King draws his Sword, and goes toward the Bed. Who art thou? and what is
it brought thee here?
The King plucks Valeria's Brother out of the Bed, who trembles, but answers
not. His Tongue is tied by Guiltiness or Fear;
Prepare for Death, or else resolve my Doubt;
He Is silent still, what Ho, who wai^s without?
Enter two Courtiers running. Since my Commands thy silence cannot break,
I Will find ou^ Tortures which shall make thee speak.
Seize on this Mute, and with him follow me.
They seize on Valeria's Brother. Why should the Thrones of Kings so envied be.
When such strange Griefs assault me in one hour,
As make my Sorrows greater than my Power.
[Exeunt.
The End of the Fourth Act.
THE FIFTH ACT.
Enter King Edward and Lord Latymer. King. I Have in short told you my cause of
Grief,
Which is as Just as it is above Relief.
Ah! to forsake one in whose heart I Reigned,
To Court another who my Flames disdained,
And such a Lovely Youth thus hid by her,
Are loads too heavy for my Soul to bear.

Lat. Though, Sir, the Fair Plantagenet may be
Too justly blamed for one Inconstancy,
Yet in all else her Virtue such has been,
As to suspect it, Sir, would turn a Sin.

King. Oh she, who could for Kent my Son forgo,
What is it after, which she might not do?
She must have given that Love for which she pressed,
Were not her Heart by other Fires possessed;
I Will not defame her since she bears my name,
But she for ever has suppressed my Flame.
Enter Sevina hastily.
Sev. If with your Love, Sir, for Alizia
You have not thrown your Pity too away,
Be pleased to see where She Despairing lies,
And with your Hand vouchsafe to close her Eyes.

King. Madam, what is it which her Despair does move.

Sev. Oh ask not that when she has lost your Love;
She did a while that Misery suspect,
But when the certainty she did detect,
She had, but that our strength was her Relief,
By one dire blow ended her Life and Grief;
When from her Hand the Weapon we did wrest,
Such storms of Sighs did crow'd out of her Breast,
And from her Eyes such streams of Tears did flow,
As we repented that we stopped the blow;
For sure the loss of Life is a less Ill
Then that Despair which does possess her still.
But though we did one sort of Death prevent,
Yet she on dying, Sir, is so intent,
As from Plantagenet I now am come,
Who dares not, Sir, one moment leave the room,
To tell you that the Assurance of your Love
Can only these resolves of Death remove;
Despair alas so powerful is in her,
'Twill be too late should you the Cure defer.

King. Ah lead me then where my Alizia lies,
For in her Sorrow I so Sympathize,
As I alas without disguise may swear,
Her grief wounds Me much more than it does Her.
[Exeunt. Enter Delaware and Cleorin.
Cleo. It Is a strange Secret which you have revealed,
But why alas was it so long concealed?
Repair that Fatal Sin you did commit,
And fly to tell your Prince and Mistress it.

Dela. As all those Sins which for a Crown are done
Heaven does absolve, when Heaven does put it on;
So all those Crimes which are performed in Love
Do lose that name when we successless prove.

Cleo. But since of yours you cannot hope Relief,
Do not delay to cure your Prince's Grief.

Dela. Ah my dear Sister, if my hopes were fled,
You soon should see your wretched Brother dead;
But who in Love does as a Lover strive,
Lives while he Hopes, and Hopes while he does Live.

Cleo. Ah! to such empty Hopes impose an end,
By making Blessed your Mistress, Prince and Friend;
So losing of your Hopes, you soon will see
A greater blessing then your Hopes can be:
Has Love the Power to sink the Soul so low,
As to deny what Virtue bids you do?
What Nobler Fate can Love give to your pain,
Then to deserve that Love you cannot gain.

Dela. Should I this Secret to them both confess.
'Twill rather raise then make their Troubles less,
While under their Delusion they remain,
Their just resentment robs them of their Pain;
But were that happy Fallacy removed,
She with such Passion by the King is loved,
As they can never possess what I shall lose,
And 'twill in them a lesser Grief infuse,
Never a hope of Union to admit,
Then be so near, and after miss of it:
Besides the Kingdom may be plunged in War
When such a Son and Father Rivals a^e.

Cleo. Ah! you should blush to talk at such a rate,
Make not your Crime an interest of State;
Better that War you dreamed of should ensue,
Then you should shun what Honor bids you do:
Oh it is in you too Guilty a Distrust,
When you fear ought more then to be Unjust;
Consider should the Prince or she e're know
That Secret you to me discover now.

Dela. I fear not that it is, only known to you.

Cleo. Yes but it is.

Dela. -- -- to whom?

Cleo. -- -- -- You know it too.
Ah! little Honor in your Soul does shine,
Should not your Knowledge fright you more then mine;
To what low State Love does a Lover bring,
Is your own witness then so slight a thing?
Let Virtue and not Fear make you repent,
Guilt is a greater Ill than Punishment;
Have you not found what I have said is true?
[Studies a while.
Dela. My Passion strives my Virtue to subdue,
Pity your Brother whom Love Masters so,
As he does fear what Honor bids him do;
Pity your self, for it is you alone
This hopeless guilty Passion must Dethrone.

Cleo. To conquer Love there needs but little skill,
Since none can want the Power who has the Will.

Dela. There Is none does want the Power his Hopes to kill,
But to Destroy them who can have the Will?

Cleo. Your Care were finished were it but begun.

Dela. Ah this is easier said then it is done:
Yet I from you this double good have got,
To know my Debt, and grieve I pay it not.

Cleo. Who grieves he does not what he can and ought,
Is guilty of his Torment as his Fault.

Dela. Ah! you did never yet the Torment prove,
Which springs from Honor that disputes with Love.

Cleo The Torment lies in the Dispute alone,
Let Honor Conquer, and the Torment's gone.

Dela. But Love assumes over me so strange a right,
As it is at once my Torment and Delight.

Cleo. You Will find, if Virtues Dictates you pursue,
Greater Delights exempt from Torments too;
For though successless Love be no small pain,
Yet Guilt in Love wounds deeper than Disdain.

Dela. Oh Cleorin! that which you have now said,
Has in my Soul such an Impression made,
As I perceive Love made me too long stay,
And Honor now would lead me in the way;
To that bright Guide I am inclined to Trust,
I Will rather be Unhappy then Unjust.

Cleo. Such Charms in following Virtue you will find.

Dela. Ah! should you press me more you would be unkind.
Do not all Honor of my change ingross?
Leave me part of it to support my Loss.

Cleo. It Is not to Virtue that you now resort,
If it wants strength its own self to support;
It Is only Sin not suffering that it fears,
It grows the stronger the more weight it bears.

Dela. I know in all it is own support 'twill prove,
Unless in quitting such a Charming Love;
Then think it is my Wisdom, not my Fault,
If I seek every help in this Assault.
Sister, Farewell, I will retire a while,
That I may Love and Virtue reconcile;
Consider well what such a Love must be,
As with your Virtue dares to disagree.
[Exeunt several ways.
The Scene opens. Alizia appears lying on a Couch, King Edward, Plantagenet,
Latymer, Sevina, and Women Attendants standing about the Couch. Aliz. Ah, it is
enough to Die, Sir, by your Hate!
Too much, your Triumph thus to Celebrate;
Yet I repine not, since you come to see
That your Contentment is so dear to me:
As when I found my Life opposed your Love,
I chose by Death that trouble to remove;
And I implore your Pardon since the debt
Is only paying, and not paid you yet.
But, Sir, my Rival can declare for me,
It Is not my Fau't, though it my Trouble be;
For she, her Cruelty is grown so high,
Makes Death my wish, yet hinders me to die.

King. Oh I am come to wait upon you now,
That I may be both Just to her and you;
I must contess that her Enchanting Eye;
Did for a while my Guilty Heart Surprise;
But what I now shall tell you is as true,
Madam, 'twas I, not she, was false to you;
Her Friendship for you did the Conquest get,
I did Assault, but could not vanquish it.
Do not believe that what is spoke by me
Is only to suppress your Jealousy,
That I thereby the safer Power may win
To persevere in and repeat my Sin;
Oh no, that Love and Grief which you have shown
Has all the Magic of her Eyes overthrown:
On Fancies Wings I my past flight did take,
But it is on Trials Wings that I fly back.

Aliz. Alas! if Words could cure a broken Heart,
Those you have now spoke would have that Power or Art;
They come too late, they should have come before,
Life you can take away, but not restore:
But, Sir, the loss of mine my joy shall be,
If in my Death my matchless Love you see;
For, Sir, to you I me more concerned to give
Proofs of such Love then I Am concerned to Live,
Which justly you might doubt, if after I
Did know I lost your Love I should not die.

King. Ah the best Proof you of your Love can give,
Is that you will Pardon me, and that you will Live;
Has my first Crime made me so black in Sin,
As my Repentance no Relief can win?
Do not believe I did the Sin commit,
Or else believe my Penitence for it.
Let not one Fault which is already past,
Have greater force then Love which still shall last;
Ah! sure you could not thus your Death pursue,
If you believed what I have Vowed is true;
But all those Doubts entirely to overthrow,
My Lord I charge you instantly to go -- --
[Speaking to Latymer. And let at once King John and my Son free
Who were the Prisoners of my Jealousy.

Lat. It Is a Command I joyfully obey.

King. I Charge you do it and without delay.
[Exit Latymer. That King Madam, may safely court you now,
[To Plantagenet For I before you and Alizia vow,
My flame for you shall never revive again,
And my Alizia only here shall Reign.

Plan. In what, Sir, you have said and vowed, I find,
To me you are Just, and to Alizia Kind.
Nor can your Solemn sacred Vow, Sir, be
More pleasing to my Friend, then it is to me.
I hope that name, Madam, I may resume,
And safely keep it for the time to come.

Aliz. Heaven knows my Sorrows never were more high,
Then when I thought that you had laid it by;
And yet my Joy that you forgive my Sin,
Is no was vast as e're my Griefs have been;
Twice now your Friendship you to me restore,
May you refuse it, if I need it more.

Plan. No fear of loseing yours I can admit,
Since I will never do that may forfeit it.
Madam, it is fit I leave you with the King,
That he your Cure may to perfection bring.
(Exit Plantagenet.
King. Ah Madam, why in her, should Friendship be
Of greater power, then Love or Grief for me.
Since Friendship her Resentments does subdue,
Let Love for me as Powerful be with you;
Madam, to you my Heart this Suit prefers,
Which needs your Pardon more then you did hers;
To this sad State your King alas is brought.

Aliz. Sir, I forgave you when you saw your Fault,
And I repine not at my Lingering Death
Which lets me Seal it with my Dying Breath:
No Proof of Love could ever be more high,
Then to forgive the offense which makes one Dye.

King. If you forgive me, yet your Death pursue,
You will at once Forgive and Kill me too:
Loves Power you wrong while at this rate you grieve,
For Love should heal worse Wounds, then it can give.

Aliz. I can alas, Sir, but too truly say.
It Is only Love which makes me disobey,
For I should not deserve the Love you give,
If after you recalled it I could Live.

King And I of Life should too unworthy be,
If I could Live after you Died for me.
Your Love for me by Living must be shown,
For you to save my Life must keep your own,
And if my Words you give no credit to,
What I have Vowed my Grief will make me Do.

Aliz. Ah then all thoughts of Dying I Will decline,
Since you have vowed your Life depends on mine,
But if again to her your Love you give,
My just Despair will be above Repreive.

King. Oh Madam, you will wound my Soul again,
If such a fatal Doubt you entertain;
My Grief for the great Crime I did commit,
Will still preserve me from repeating it;
By all those Vows which bind me most I swear
I Will still love you and never more love her.
The Scene closes
The SCENE is Plantagenets Chamber. Plantagenet, the Prince, Cleorin and
Delaware. Plan. OH what has been revealed by Delaware
His Freindship shows, but heightens my Despair.
It makes me Guilty, Sir, to such Degree
As you would be Guilty should you pardon me,
The Knowledge of my Fault so wounds my Mind,
As only I in Death my Ease can find.

Prince. Alas your Grief more cruel is to me,
Then, Madam, your supposed Inconstancy;
For to such Height my Ardent love is grown,
As your Grief wounds me more then does my own,
You Will punish, by a Sorrow so Sublime,
My Innocence more then you did my Crime:
But though the Word of Innocence I named,
Yet only I can be with Justice blamed,
For had I not that Fatal Letter writ --

Plan. Oh, Sir, I cannot such Discourse admit,
For while requests I for your Pardon make,
Alas, my Guilt you on your self would take,
When all the Guilt to me alone is due,
Who did believe a Letter more then you.

Prin. Alas, have you Designed to let me see,
That every way you mean to ruin me?
For while you did suspect my Innocence,
You to my Rival did your love Dispense:
Ah Madam, now that Heaven has thought it fit,
To make it evident, you punish it;
For by these precious Tears, which now you spill,
You make me wish, I were thought Guilty still.

Plan. Oh Sir, what does your Innocence prove,
Makes me too Guilty to deserve your Love.

Prin. Ah be not cruel to this strange degree,
Let not my Innocence my Ruin be.
No Reparation could be reckoned more,
Then what the injured person does emplore;
But you will make, if this be your intent,
Your Reparation my worst Punishment,
A Punishment so cruel, and so high,
As it transcends the imagined Injury:
Yet if you think, that you amiss have done,
Let me then name the Reparation.
'TisMadam, that you will never think so more,
But give me leave your Beauties to Adore.

Plan. Heaven, Sir, does know, and so does Cleorin,
That while I thought you guilty of that Sin;
Which only my Misfortune made me do,
I Loved you Sir, and Loved none else but you.

Prin. And Heaven does know and so does Delaware,
That while I thought you Guilty as you're Fair
I did not you but my ill Fortune blame,
And still preserved for you a deathless Flame.
To Delaware, My Lord, to her and me, this Justice do,
As to oppose me, if I speak not true.

Dela. Sir, you for her did still such Love express,
As Heaven knows too, I grieved it was not less.

Prin. Ah if you give belief, to what we say,
Do not refuse the perfect Love I pay.

Plan. Alas, a greater Sin I should commit,
Then that I mourn for, by accepting it,
But all the world will know that I repent,
When on my self I lay this Punishment,
Which, Sir, by Justice dictates I have chose,
Since it is the highest which I can impose.
Your Glory, Sir, would wither if not dye,
Should you Love one so guilty, Sin, as I.
The penance I designed let me pursue;
It Is what, Sir, on my knees I beg of you.
She offers to kneel but is hindered by the Prince.
Prin. Ah do not doubly thus my Soul subdue,
By such denyals, and submission too;
But to my Suit be pleased to condescend,
Or else my Grief my tortured Life shall end.

Dela. Such were the Arts used by the Earl of Kent,
As both seemed Guilty, yet were Innocent.

Cleo. Madam, while you such scrupulous Virtue show,
The Prince may of your Love suspicious grow;
That moveing sorrow, which he does express,
Invites your kindness now to make it cease.

Plan. Sooner then you such Grief, Sir, shall admit,
I will obey, what ever you think fit;
I rather, Sir, will an Injustice do
To my own self, then seem unkind to you.

Prin. Ah Madam, in those happy words I find,
You are to me at once both Just, and Kind;
No Satisfaction e're was hoped by me,
But that you might that Innocence see
Which Delaware's great Friendship made appear,
Who is thereby for ever settled here,
Where Madam next to you he still shall grow.

Dela. Ah could a Prince ought to his Subject owe;
I might then think, to me you are in debt.

Prin. To me your Friendship has bin always great,
Yet I must Tax it of a seeming wrong,
Since this blessed Secret, you concealed so long.

Cleo. What Justice does this seeming wrong excuse,
Shall, Sir, present you with more welcome news;
While your great Father was in Love with her,
He as a Subject, Sir, had cause to fear
A Secret so important to declare,
As might perhaps have caused a Civil War.
But, Sir, now that the King has this blessed day
Resumed his Love for fair Alizia,
And has by Vows, which often he did repeat,
Renounced his Passion for Plantagenet,
Which from her sef, this very hour we know,
My Brother lost no time, to tell it you.

Prin. These charming Words which now from you I hear,
His Justice shows, and ends my greatest Fear;
Nothing from Heaven was left me to implore,
But that my Father Rivall'd me no more.

Cleo. What fitter time can Fortune give to you,
Then thus your Ends in Love still to pursue;
Lose not one Moment of it, for perhaps
Those Conquering Eyes may make him soon relaps.

Prin. What you advise your care of me does show,
Forgive me, Madam, If I leave you now;
Since it is so vast a Blessing to implore,
As granted I shall never leave you more.

Plan. That Grant the noblest Blessing, Sir, would be,
Could it make you as happy as 'twill me.
[The Prince offers to go out.
Dela. Stay Sir, I scorn your Goodness to abuse,
Or own your Pardon, to her Feigned Excuse;
Fear made me not the Secret, Sir, conceal,
Nor the King's Change the Secret now reveal;
For those were Motives of such mean degree,
As, Sir, I blush that they were named for me;
Those Reasons, Sir, of which she did make use,
Obtained but did not Merit your Excuse;
My guilty Doubts, a while have kept me Dumb,
But Love and Honor have those doubts o^e'come.

Plan. My Cleorin, what will your Brother do,

Cleo. I am as ignorant of it as you.

Dela. Now all the Truth shall be to you revealed,
For it is too Glorious, Sir, to be concealed.
Know, Sir, those Beauties which did conquer you,
Became, while Kent did live, my Conquerors too.
At Poitiers they did me to Glory bring,
And made me grace your Triumph with a King;
And though some Honor I acquired that day,
Yet, Sir, that prosperous Action I may say
Did on no score to me so welcome prove,
As making me more fit to Court her Love;
Raised by this thought for England, Sir, I came,
Where soon her Beauties did revive your Flame,
And Fortune against me was so much bent,
As you your Rival made your Confident;
And by a Cruelty unknown to you,
You in your Love my help Commanded too.

Prin. I ^m amazed, my Lord, at what you say.

Dela. Though that Command I wanted power to Obey,
Yet ^eaven my witness is how much I strove,
To make my Duty overcome my Love;
But when I found, by what I did endure,
That she alone, the Wounds she gave could cure;
I meant the Secret never to disclose;
And when your Father did your Flame oppose,
I tried your Love by reason to subdue,
But that attempt, Sir, proveing fruitles too,
Inspired by Love or guided by Despair,
I to her self my Passion did declare.

Cleo. Of this Discovery I Fear the event.

Plan. It merits Wonder and not Punishment.

Dela. But when I for her Favor, Sir, did sue,
Alas she said her Love was given to you,
So given as nothing could recall her Grant,
Since your forsakeing her that power did want;
And in her Words and Accents made appear,
Her Flames for you did equal yours for her;
Convinced by this, that following my Design,
Would blast your joys, but not procure memine,
In which I was confirmed by Cleorin,
The Noble Fatal Conquest I did win;
And forc'ed my self that Secret to declare,
Which builds your Blessings on my own Despair.

Cleor. Yet Glory must on that Despair attend,
In which you served your Mistress, Prince, and Friend.

Dela. Though, Sir, it was much your Mistress to adore,
To help you, while your Rival, yet is more;
Now, Sir, my Story to an end is brought:
Or Praise my merit, or condemn my Fault.

Prin. Oh you so nobly, have overcome your flame
As your Despair cannot transcend your Fame.
That Heightened Friendship which our Loves secures,
In our Contentment will present you yours;
Your Friendship yet on me such Debts does lay,
As I must too Despair, those Debts to pay;

Plan. It Is Nobler much, if you dare credit me,
To be the Obliger than the Obleig'd to be;
But in that Heart your Prince did first obtain
By Freindship placed, you shall for ever Reign.

Dela. If ought could cure the Grief of loosing you,
What you both said, that Miracle would do.
(Exeunt Enter King Edward, King John, Lord Latimer, Count Guesclin, and all
the Men.
King. Ed. What, as a Lover, could I less have Done,
Hearing what past betwixt you and my Son;
Strange are the Effects which Jealousy produce,
But fully, Sir, to purchase your Excuse,
I come to visit you, and let you know,
That I no more a Rival am to you,
My Anger though 'twere great, yet it was Short.

K. John. Sir, I admire no more at your Transport
Over hearing all we in the garden said;
But you have now full Reparation made.
Enter Delaware and Prince
Prin. Sir I more Greive I did a Fault Commit,
Then I am Pleased that you have Pardoned it,
But, Sir, I hope that Freedom you would restore
Is but an Earnest that you will grant me more;
My Great Request, Sir, is Renewed by me,
Granting me that is more then Liberty;
Such Strange Discoveries I have made this day,
As all the favor for which now I pray
Is, that to let me court her you will consent,
When you your self have judged her Innocent.

King. Ed. But will you cease to court her when I prove,
You being judge, she Merits not your Love?

Prin. This by my Duty, Sir, I promise you.

K. Ed. Then what you begged of me I grant you too,

Prince. Be pleased then, Sir, to order Delaware
Without Reserve his Knowledge to Declare,
And what he Says I hope you will Believe.

King. Ed. To what he speaks I still will Credit give.

Dela. I should be too Unworthy of this Trust,
Should I abuse a King so Great and Just;
When to the Wars of Aquitaine I went,
I made a Friendship with the Earl of Kent,
Who in a Charge did such deep Wounds receive,
As, finding that he had not long to Live,
A Messenger in have for me he sent,
As soon as ever I came into his Tent,
He told me Something on his Heart did lie
Which grieved him more then he was Grieved to Dye,
Then in my Hand he did this Letter lay,
And in a Sigh his Soul did fly away.

Prin. When you have heard it Read, it will Afford
Proof of her Virtue.

King. Ed. Read it then my Lord.

The Earl of KENT to the Lord DELAVVARE.
MY Death forces me to discover by what Arts I obtained, from the Prince of
Wales, the fair Plantagenet. Before He adored her I did; and as soon as he
fell in Love, (not knowing mine) he made me his Confident; but the King, being
against the match, the Prince the better to cloud his real passion for
Plantagenet, seemed to have one for the fair Aurelia; but still trusted me with
the Superscription, Cipher, and Seal, which he used when he writ to my
Plantagenet, and I had the fatal employment of carrying all their Letters.

At length, the Glory the Prince wonn at Cressy, joined with his grief for the
King's denial, conquered his Father; and the Day was appointed for his marrying
Plantagenet, which, if not prevented, I found would be the Day of my Death.

This I imparted to my Mother, who had no small ascendant over Plantagenet, and
by my Mothers advice, I got the Prince to write a Letter to Aurelia, (whom I
seemed to be passionatly in Love with) wherein he begged her pardon, for having
counterfeited a Love to her, when his was otherwise disposed of; but to repair
it, he earnestly recommended me to her affection, as most worthy of it.

This Letter I sealed, and superscribed with the Cipher the Prince always made
use of to Plantagenet, whom my Mother had so warmly alarmed, with the Prince's
passion for Aurelia, that this letter being delivered to Plantagenet, in a fit
time, all written with the Prince's own hand, sealed and superscribed, as all
his Letters to her were wont to be, made her so abhor the Prince's
inconstancy, that in the dictates of those resentments, she gave her self to
me, whereunto my Mothers Friendship with her, did highly contribute.

The Prince in despair, undertakes the war with France, and, I, soon after,
disguised to all but you, followed him, in hope by some great action to wash
off the Guilt my Love forced me to contract; but here I met my Death. Tell them
all this; and that I hope their hatred to me, will be buried in my Grave.


Dela. This Letter till this day I have concealed,
For Causes, Sir, unfit to be Revealed.

Prin. I hope you find in what he did relate
She was not Guilty but Unfortunate.

King. Ed. I must confess these Arts which Kent did use
Do her forsaking you too much Excuse.

Prin. Since this has washed off her imagined Stain,
Give me your leave to love her, Sir, again.

King Ed. I would not have defamed her, but I see
To cure his Love there is but that Remedy;
No, Prince, the Sin she did last night Commit
Makes her for ever for your Love unfit.

Prin. Oh Heaven! must I endure a new Assault?
Tell me I beg you, Sir, this Fansied Fault,
For she is of such an unblemished Fame,
As I can give it well no better Name:
But, Sir, to try me this perhaps is done.

King. Ed. I do not use to trifle with my Son,
And I believe you I credit what I said,
When I my self found hid within her Bed
A Lovely Youth, who since is dumb with Fear:
My Lord, bring instantly that Prisoner here.
(to Latimer. (Exit Latimer.
Prince. Though I my self what you have said should see,
Yet I would think my Eyes were False not She.

King. Ed, Since to your Witness I did credit give,
Methinks what I have said You should Believe.

Prin. Forgive me if her Virtue and my Love
Forced me to speak what may your Anger move,
Fate never man to such a straight did bring,
I must offend my Mistress or my King,
Esteem her Guilty, or not Credit you,
That, Sir, I cannot, this I Dare not Do.
Enter Latimer and Valeria's Brother
King. Io. Valeria's Brother! Love is just I see,
Since he Revenges my inconstancy,
And makes him punish his fair Sister's wrong.

King. Ed. If still thy Fear has not tied up thy Tongue,
Discover to the King and to my Son,
How thou by Charms Plantagenet have won,
I found thee in her Bed, there is no Excuse,

Valor. Broth. Sir, that is a place which few men would refuse.
Enter Plantagenet, Alizia, Cleorin, Sevina, and all the Women. Shall (not one
moment) stay thy Destiny.

Plan. The Words and Anger of the King are High:
Alizia, Sir, and I but now did hear,
That with this Gentleman you Angry were,
We come to beg you to forgive his Crime.

King Ed. Of all the World you should not plead for Him,
For you by it so Great a Guilt do show,
As I had rather but suspect then know.

Plan. I know not what you mean by what you said.

King. Ed. You know not too you hid him in your Bed.

Plan. Who could to you that Secret, Sir, declare.

Kig Io. Oh Heaven! does she Confess then he was there?

Val. Bro: That, Sir, I hope is no Offense to you. [do?

King. Io. False Youth, to me what worse Wrong could thou

Val: Bro. I thought my Sister had your Heart possessed.

King. Io. But did thou not from her to me protest,
She bid thee help me if I ere should be
In Love with any one more Fair then She?

Val. Bro. And do you, Sir, confess that you are so?

King Io. Those Charming Eyes must every Heart ore'throw.

Val. Bro. This Guilt in you will cause her Death I fear.

King: Io. Thy Guilt to me is more then mine to her,
What do thou aile, thou tremblest and lookst pale?

Val. Admire not, Grief does or' my soul prevail,
When to Valeria's self such Words you said,
taking off her Disguise As, Sir, does make her wish that she were Dead,
But though she is killd by your Inconstancy,
Yet in your Arms she begs your leave to Dye.
she faints. Plantagenet holds her up.
Plan. She faints;
Ah, Sir, that Guilty Change in you!

King, Io. Oh Madam, blame not what you made me do.

Plan. Sir; it is not Just to charge your Fault on me.

King. Ed. Is it Valeria then?

King. Io. Yes Yes it is she,
Her Broth'rs face so much resembles hers,
As I, deluded by the clothes she wears,
Did to her self my Change in Love avow.

Prince. The Clouds of my Despair do vanish now,
And Charming Hopes in me begin to Reign.

Plan. Give her more Air for now she Breaths again.
Valeria is set in a Chair.
King. Ed. Oh I the fair Plantagenet did wrong.

Prince. The Proofs that she is Guiltless are so strong,
As I now beg you will no more deferr
To give me leave to make my Court to her.

Alizia. Sir, in the Princes Suit I also Join,

King Ed. Her Virtue now does with such Luster Shine,
As to Repair my having Injured it,
I his Addresses to her do permit.

Prince. In this more then a Father you appear,
T^s less to Give me Life then Grant me Her;
But, Sir, before this Blessing I pursue,
I must do Justice to my Rival too,
Sir, I did promise you on her to wait,
(speaks to K. John. And from her Sentence to receive my Fate,
This Promise I am ready to Perform.

King Io. No Heart did ere endure so Fierce a Storm,
Who can support those burdens which I bear,
My Vows confirm me here, my Passion there;
By leaving her my Noblest Hopes I end,
And by not leaving her I Wrong my Friend,
Some Sacred Power teach me what I should do.

Plan. Your Honor ^indes you, Sir, to keep your Vow;
She told me, Sir, that Sacred Oath you Swore
That you no other Beauty would Adore,
And though you often for her Love did press,
Yet still Misfortune brought to you Distress;
She never could, though she did often strive,
Persuade herself his Passion to receive;
But then all Danger, Sir, She did Despise,
And came to Visit you in this Disguise;
But oh what Horror did her Soul invade,
When she over heard what you to Guesclin said,
Of that unhappy Love you had for me;
She for that wound no better Cure could see.
Then to make me her friend and Confident.

King Io. Ah what for me could Fortune worse invent?
Love she denied when it would have made me Joy,
And only gives it now it is to Destroy.

Plan. This, Sir, by Vow she tied me to conceal,
Till you to me your Passion should reveal,
Beleiving that would be the fittest time
To tell you, and Convince you of your Crime,
In which I promised my Assistance too:
All I have told you happened, Sir, when you
(to King Ed. Did (unexpected) visit me last night,
Which put us both into so great a fright,
I, least Ill Thoughts in you it might create,
Finding a man (supposed) with me so late,
And she to be discovered did so dread,
As, Sir, I did conceal her in my Bed,
Where I forgot her in my Friends Despair.

King. Io. Madam, we wait till you your Doom Declare.

Plan. Oh let not, Sir, my Sentence make you Do
What Love and Honor now do call you to;
She Merits you, so Bright her Love does Shine,
And, Sir, the Prince of Wales possesses mine;
Behold the fair Valeria does revive,
If you will Ask Pardon she will a Pardon Give;
She your past Fault but for a D^eam will take,
If, Sir, she finds you True when she does wake.

King Io. I can no more (your Power so high does rise)
Refist your Sentence then I could your Eyes,
And those Commands which now on me you say
I beg you will Assist me to Obey.

Plan. You have your King so wounded with your Grief,

To Valeria. That he, as much as you, does need Releif.

King Io. With an Afflicted Soul I wait on you,
To my own Fault and beg your Pardon too;
Madam, I hope a Love which never shall Dye
Will expiate one short Inconstancy.

Valeria. Ah! though I never more Reparation fought
Then, Sir, that you should see and own your Fault,
Yet you my Heart so wounded by your Crime,
As to recover it requires some Time.

King Io. Though I this Penance, Madam, must deplore,
Yet I must grant my Fault does merit more.

Prince. Now, Sir, to raise our Joys above Increase,
To this great King give Liberty and Peace.

King Ed. Those Offers which I always did Decline,
To Gratify you both, I now will Sign.

King. Io. While in this way my Freedom you Restore,
You and the Prince make me your P^s'ner more:
Your former Conquest, Sir, to t^is must Yield,
This wins my Friendship ^t but won the Field.

King. Ed. This is a Conquest we delight to own,
It Is more to gain your Friendship, then your Throne.
Now all the Alarm's of Love and War shall cease,
And yield their rooms to the soft Joys of Peace.
The Curtain falls.
PROLOGUE TO THE KING.
THe Poet, Sir, has offered to your sight
An English prince, whose Fame appeared so Bright,
As never any since his time was known,
To shine with clearer Luster, but your Own;
For though Immortal Honor he did gain,
By conquering France, and by restoring Spain,
Yet, Sir, you brought Three Kingdoms to Remorse,
And gained by Virtue more then he by Force;
Which, Sir, on you a greater Name bestows
By conquering Them by whom he conquered Those:
It Is more by Virtue England to overcome,
Then by the English to beat Christendom.
As when the Universe was to be made,
The Vast Design was on the Waters laid;
So you in Conquering it like Method keep,
Laying your first Foundation in the Deep:
Though the Black Prince, so happy, Sir, did prove,
As to be Crowned with Victory and Love,
Yet Sir, he knows from you he may receive
A Nobler Crown then War or Love can give;
This makes him like the Poet trembling stand,
Till, Sir, that Crown be given him by your Hand.
FINIS.
Tryphon. A TRAGEDY: As it was Acted By his HIGHNESS THE Duke of YORK 's
SERVANTS.

Written by the RIGHT HONORABLE THE Earl of Orrery.

LONDON, Printed by T. N. for H. Herringman, at the Sign of the Blue Anchor, in
the lower walk of the New Exchange. 1669.

THE PROLOGUE Spoke By Mr Nokes and Mr Angel.
A. HOld, hold.

N. Why, Sir?

A. What is it you mean to say?

N. I mean to speak the Prologue to the Play.

A. Therefore to stop you I esteem it fit.

N. The Poet then will not be thought a Wit.

A. A wit Forsooth!

N. Yes, Sir, a wit.

A. What Is that?

N. A wit is in one word -- I know not what.

A. Of that kind Title give your Poet Joy.
A wit is then in French, A je ne scay quoi.
A modish Name.

N. Yet, Sir, that Name to gain,
How many of our Writers crack their brain?

A. That Is a mistake, for who'd that Name contract,
Must, e're he Court it, first his brain have cracked.
To be a Wit (believe me, Sir, it is true)
Is the worst State a Man can Fall into.
The Wits first vow, is, that they none will spare,
But jeer at every Creature that they dare;
And the No-Wits, these Wits so dis esteem,
That they give Money often to hiss at them;
It Is the Wits Nature, or at best their Fate,
Others to scorn, and one another hate.
They would be Sultans if they had their will,
For each of them would all his Brothers kill.

N. Hold, Sir, the Wits you too severely school.

A. I say, to be a Wit's to be a Fool;
For who but such a Creature would not grudge,
TO have any one for half a Crown his Judge;
Nay, toil, that he such a wise Act may do,
Then lets the Players get the half Crown too.

N. Why was this Play then by the Author writ?

A. In fear, it is said, of being called a Wit.
And many a Man does doubt that it his Friend,
Ere three hours hence he will have reached his end.

N. Take heed, if at this rate we gable ^re
Our Poet will attain his end before.

A. For fear of that it is best we should be gone.

N. What without Prologue?

A. I Am resolved to have none.
For some on Wit that needless Tax did lay,
Which Poets now are grown too poor to pay.
But yet as mettled School-boyes set to cuff,
Will not confess that they have done enough,
Though dea^ly weary, till spectators do
At once both part and call them good Boys too;
But then these Cussers monstrous joyful are:
Just thus it would with all our Poets fare,
Would you decree (what I for them implore)
Poets with Prologues nere should meddle more.
It Is the best thing you for your selves could do,
For Prologues first tire Poets and then you;
If you will not do it, while in your power it lies,
They Will do it of themselves, if they be wise:
Our Poets tired and has with Prologues done^,
But those which yet are fresh, let them cuff on.

The Persons Names.
Tryphon The King. Aretus and Demetrius Friends. Seleucus Capt. of Tryphon's
Guard. Nicanor Father to Cleopatra and Stratonice. Arcas Tryphon's Freeman.
Cleopatra and Stratonice Sisters. Hermione Confident to Cleopatra. Irene
Confident to Stratonice.
Tryphon.
THE FIRST ACT.
The SCENE is the Garden of Tryphon's Palace in Antioch. Demetrius and Aretus.
Them. TRyphon, I grant, through Seas of blood has gone
To force his passage to the Sy^ian Throne;
But how men gain their Power the Gods do not
So much regard, as how it is used when got.
Our Murdered King Antiochus did own,
That Tryphons Father did restore his Crown,
Which made him trust the Sons ambitious youth
With so much power as did corrupt his truth:
This our dead Prince discovered, but too late,
Which did provoke Tryphon to act his fate:
For Kings should not to too great Subjects show
They mean their ruin, till they act it too;
And he almost deserves to lose his Throne
Who makes a Subject's power exceed his own.

Are. What ever you in his defense have brought,
Rather then lessen does augment his fault;
For what could show this Tyrant more unjust
Then to abuse such gratitude and trust;
Trust, which the wicked often does reclame,
This monstr'ous wickedness does more inflame.
That he repents nothing can us persuade,
Since what makes others good has made him bad.

Them. When once Ambition does the mind devour,
Men Sacrifice their Virtue to their Power.
Antiochus had raised him up so high,
As he was either to usurp, or die;
And when he had perceived the Kings distrust,
He made him think, that what was safe was just.

Are. Oh let him not be pleaded for by you,
Who did his King depose and murder too,
Lest on your self the Usurpers blood you bring;

Them. It Is less to kill, then to arraign a King;
And he who does an Empires loss endure
Cannot think death a punishment, but cure.

Are. But Actions should be taken as they'are meant.

Them. To vindicate him is not my intent;
Since all which can in his excuse be said
Is, that his Pride his Virtue has betrayed.

Are. No glimps of virtue e're in him could shine
Who killed his King, and all the Royal line.

Them. After he had the chief of it suppressed,
He thought it was unsafe to save the rest.

Are. Ambition made him act the Parricide,
And Cruelty must then preserve his Pride.
By the same rule he ought to shed the blood
Of all his Countrymen that dare be good:
Then from the Throne let us the Usurper fling.
To save our selves, and to Revenge the King:
For should we to this Tyranny submit,
We shall deserve as well as suffer it:
And to the virtuous 'twill much more appear
Such a misfortune to deserve then bear.
That Tryphon calls you favorite I know,
But to his Fear alone that name you ow:
Yet though the kindness which he feigns were true,
Even lays the ground of what I call you to;
From you he merits death, since he has dared
To hope, such Friendship could such Guilt have spared.

Them. Whom Tryphon fears he does to death pursue,
And if he feared me he might kill me too,
But, that he fears me not, he could not give
A stronger proof then that he lets me live.
Yet do not think his friendship such a charm,
As from revenge it could confine my arm;
But if my patience you a sin esteem,
It springs from Love to Syria, not to him:
For since the Royal line are made away,
Were Tryphon killed, who should the Scepter sway?
All the Ambitious for the Throne would fight,
For where none has the Title, all have Right.
Thus while we cast a bloody Tyrant down
By Blood, we raise another to the Crown.
It Is this, it is this which chiefly frightens me,
We may change Tyrants, not the Tyranny.
Where Force is Title, Force must make it good,
And who comes in by Arms must reign by Blood.

Are. Banish such groundless fears, for he alone
Who kills the Tyrant should ascend his Throne.
Who from this Tyranny does Syria free,
All will confess, deserves our King to be.
If by your Arm this generous Act is done,
Saving the Kingdom will deserve the Crown.

Them. Oh my Aretus should I yield to this,
It Would then be my Ambition punished his:
And he is unfit a Tyrant to dethrone
Who with his Countries ends dare mix his own;
Since Tryphon is called King, I Will rather bear
His Tyranny then be his Murderer,
That name Aretus is a sacred thing.

Are. But Tryphon's an Usurper, not a King.
Ah shall he keep his blood from being spilt,
By taking off that name which makes his guilt:
If such a principle we should endure,
Then the most guilty would be most secure.

Them. What ever sins to gain a Crown are done,
The God's do pardon when they put it on.
We ought, when Heavens Vicegerent does a Crime,
To leave to Heaven the right to punish him.
Those who for wrongs their Monarchs murder act,
Worse sins then they can punish they contract:
And while his favor I so much possess,
My Power will hinder any new excess.

Are. But from new crimes while Tryphon you withhold,
You bribe our swords from punishing the old.

Them. He that is so bad as to gain power by Blood,
Some reparation makes if he turn good;
And it is my hope as much as it is my care,
To fill his Court with those who virtuous are.
If Virtue in his Court it self advance,
Vice there will soon grow out of countenance.
That he no more into new crimes may fall,
He Will make this day Nicanor General;
And our Seleucus free from Vice as Fear
Shall head the guards --
Tryphon, Nicanor, Seleucus. and Tryphon's Guards. But Tryphon does appear
Who must not see me since he sent me now
On an affair which you at night shall know.
Demet. and Aret. go out several ways.
Try. No, no, Nicanor, I can truly own
My safety made me chiefly take the Crown;
Antiochus had raised me to such height
As I had felt what was an Empire's weight,
And scarce the Ambitious would be brought to reign
If with the Pomps of Power they knew the Pain:
But when false doubts of me his mind did fill,
Then whom he Raised he had designed to Kill:
And though the Father placed him in the Throne,
Yet this return he would have made the Son;
Finding that he or I must be oppressed,
I of two evils did embrace the least;
Since to my Services he was severe,
From him what might not his best Subjects fear;
Which shows, my Countries good in what was done
As much did urge me to it as my own.

Nica. Sir, you have known me long, and that my heart
In what I speak disdains the vails of art:
If therefore you would now my silence break,
Be not offended if I freely speak.

Try. Naught you can say, such an offense will be,
As doubting freedom can be so to me.

Nica. Then Sir, my mind I Will freely speak to you
Yet with that reverence which to Kings is due.
I know your Fathers Valor, and your own
Did to Antiochus restore his Throne;
Since for your King you did that Service do,
Ah Sir, forget not 'twas your duty too:
Subjects, too often, whose services are great
Consider that as merit, which is debt;
And have the ruin of their Kings designed,
Judging them cruel when not over-kind:
Those are sad truths which Histories often show,
Judge Sir if this has been your case, or no.

Try. I need n^ clearer proof to let you see
That once Antiochus was kind to me,
Then, when he altered and my murder meant,
I by his ruin could my own prevent:
To me his kindness he had largely shown,
Trusting me with a Power above his own;
Had he but told me he would that Power recall,
I at his feet would have resigned it all;
But why because he raised me up so high
Should he conclude I merited to Die?
If he did err, placing me where I stood,
Why must his fault be washed off with my Blood.

Nica. Ah Sir, though this had been the state of things,
Yet subjects, Sir, should die to save their Kings;
Much rather they their own death should endure
Then by their King's their Safety's to procure;
And Virtue does oblige us, where it is strong,
Rather to suffer then to act a wrong.

Try. But Natures Dictates which no man can wave
Obliges every one his Life to save.

Nica. Nature whose Dictates in defense you bring,
Ties subjects ^y their Deaths to save their King,
Nature is Reason, Sir, and that does show
More to our Kings then to ourselves we owe,
Form a subjects Death but one does fall,
But a King's Life contains the Life of All.

Seleu, Yet though your Safety, Sir, did you Incline
To Kill your King, you might have spared his Line,
Oh, Sir, you needed not their Bloods have spilt.

Try. Their Births to me Seleucus, made their Guilt,
Who his own Murder by his Monarch's Shuns,
Makes it more certain if he spares his Sons.

Sell. But though to save the Sons unsafe was held,
Why was Antiochus the grandchild killed?
An Infant who was then not two years old?

Try. Whatever of his Death my Foes have told,
Yet to you both here solemnly I Vow,
That child, for ought I know, is living now,
And one who often informs me what is True
Tell's me* Nicanor, he is conceall'd by you.

Nica. I do not doubt but many there may be,
Too apt to give ill Characters of me,
But, Sir, I think if you reflection make,
With what Affront the King from me did take
The Generals place, you will scarce believe he durst
To one so wronged commit so great a Trust,
Yet if you think it true -- --

Try. -- -- -- -- -- Nicanor hold,
It Is not what I believe but what I Am told;
And to convince you what I say is true,
The Generals Office I restore to you;
If I to Syria meant not to be Just,
I would not lodge in you so great a Trust;
A Trust which if I use the Syrians ill,
Gives power to punish me, and Power gives Will!

Nic. That Trust which, Sir, you now on me would lay,
Does merit more then I have Power to pay,
But when my King did wrong me, I did swear
No public Office I again would bear,
Forgive me, Sir, since it is a Sacred Vow
Makes me decline what you have offered now,
I should for such a Trust appear unfit,
If I forswore my self accepting it.

Try. Take heed, for if this Offer be refused,
I may believe you Justly are accused.

Nic. You should methinkss much rather, Sir, from thence
See my Foes Malice and my Innocence;
Were I possessed of the Thrones lawful heir,
Why should I wave a Power might place him there.

Try. But if you would accept what I restore,
That Action would convince me of it more,
For since your Virtue binds you to be just,
'Twould bind you too not to betray your Trust;
Yet I Will believe it is nothing but your Vow
Keeps you from taking what I offered now,
You shall therein by me no more be pressed,
And that you may still on my Friendship rest,
Demetrius is this day employed by me
In an Affair shall let Nicanor see,
That I have made it now my chiefest End
To make him by a sacred tie my Friend*
Seleucus, whose High Worth deserves Rewards,
Shall from this day be Captain of my Guards.

Sell. This Trust I Will strive to merit by my Care.

Nic. Those clearliest show that they your Servants are
Who at your Faults judge it a sin to wink,
And tell you Truths which others scar ce dare think.

Sell. Those who their Princes flatter May be thought
Guiltier then those who have against them fought,
Since more by Flattery have been undone
Then have been ruined by Rebellion.

Nic. Monarchs those servants highest should esteem
Who, when they err, dare not but tell it them,
And he who does by Force a Throne obtain,
Ought to repair it by a Generous Reign.

Try. This Freedom and the Council which you give
As Proofs of both your Friendships I receive,
And I resolve my Reign shall be so good
As shall outweigh my want of right by Blood.
(They all go out, Enter Cleopatra. Stratonice, Irene, and Hermione.
The SCENE Nicanor's Palace. Stra. That sacred Friendship which so firm has
stood,
And joins us more than Nature does by Blood,
Makes me not fear, dear Sister, you will believe,
That it is my Envy this advice does give;
Demetrius has but too officious been,
Persuading Tryphon to make you his Queen;
Improve his Error to exalt your Fame,
And scorn both Tryphon's scepter and his Flame,
You Will merit to a lawful Throne to rise,
If an unlawful one you can despise,
Since greater to the Virtuous twill appear
A Crown to Merit then a Crown to Wear.

Cleo. Though Tryphon did by Blood the Crown obtain,
Yet a Crown worn does wash off every Stain.

Stra When Heaven admits a Tyrant to a Throne,
It Is but from Vaster Heights ^o cast him down,
To do it whilst he is climbing would appear
A less Revenge, then being seated there,
And since such Guilt does most the Gods incense,
The ^unishment should equal the Offense.

Cleo. Since he, while Wicked, in the Throne has ^ood,
The Gods will not depose him now he is Good,
His past Offenses he does much deplore.

Stra. Tha^ for their Vengeance ripens him the more,
For men might think, were not quick Justice done,
Repentance Usurpation might atone.

Cleo. Ah Sister, those to whom the Gods allow
Repentance, with it give their Pardon too.

Stra* But those who to destroy their Kings consent,
Heaven lets them never perfectly Repent,
But leaves them quite, when they so Wicked be,
Their Sorrow is but their Hypocrisy.

Cleo. Let not your Virtue Judge against your Sight,
Nor limit Mercy which is Infinite;
But since a Crown is still the gift of Heaven.
What matter is it by what Hand it is given.

Stra. When by a Tyrants Hand a Crown is given,
How can you think that Crown the Gift of Heaven.

Cleo. Since Tryphon's in the Throne, what Syrian dare,
Without a Crime, dispute how he came there.

Stra, Rather what Syrian who dares Virtue own,
Thinks not he is bound to cast him from the Throne.
My Father great Nicanor, I dare say,
Thinks this a Duty which he ought to Pay;
You from this Duty may his hand restrain,
If you w^h Tryphon in one Throne should Reign.

Cleo. Usurpers, who enforced their Crimes forsake,
To^ all past Crimes full sati faction make;
If I by Love continue Tryphon Good,
Nicanor ought not then to shed his Blood;
If he relapse, he by his Death may prove,
His Country he more then his Son does love,
Syria to us, what 'ere Tryphon shall do,
Either his Change or her Revenge shall owe.

Stra. Ah think not Love the softest thing that is
Can dwell in such a Cruel Heart as his.

Cleo. Rather believe since Love has him Inflamed,
His Heart from Cruelty is now reclaimed.

Stra. Since by such Guilt he in the Throne does sit,
Rather believe his Virtue Counterfeit.

Cleo. It Is the least Miracle which Love can do
To change dissembled Virtue into true.

Stra. Ah Cleopatra, this discourse has shown
You Will lose your Happiness to gain his Throne,
For I was now, in brave Aretus name,
To have disclosed to you his hidden Flame,
A Flame so High and so Respectfull too,
As it appeared worthy of him and you;
Oh had you seen the Fear in which he spoke,
When he my help did in his Love invoke,
It would have you as well as me it moved,
That Fear had let you see how much he Loved.

Cleo. Aretus ought to blush that durst appear
At once my Lover and admit a Fear.

Stra. He of that Fear, rather then blush, should boast,
Since Flames which highest rise still tremble most.

Cleo. Sure, my dear Stratonice, this is but said
Me from the Love of Tryphon to diswade,
For did Aretus Burn to such degree,
He would have first disclosed his flame to me;
Draw not from what his High Respect does prove,
An argument that he is not in Love.

Her. I have observed, so has Irene too,
Of late Aretus often gazed on you,
And when by chance your Eyes on him were turned,
He with a Sigh would seem to say he burned.

Irene. I must acknowledge, Madam, I admire,
That you did never take notice of his Fire;
Hermione and I have often said,
Never more Love in any Looks were read.

Cleo. It Is haypy for him that he never did dare
Himself to me his Passion to declare,
For if he had been Guilty of that Crime
Twould have suppressed the Esteem I have for him.

Stra. His Virtue the Esteem of all does move,
But is there nothing due unto his Love?

Cleo. Yes, yes, my Pity while it is concealed,
But hate when it is by him to me revealed.

Stra. You more then he should this Resolve deplore,

Cleo. Press me, dear Stratonice, in this no more,
Tryphons Address has so Succesfull been,
As he has now my Word to be his Queen.

Stra. Ah such as have to Thrones of Tyrants rose,
Have bin the more exposed to Fortunes blows.

Cleo. She does not merit on a Throne to sit,
Who can fear ought more then to miss of it.
Exeunt
THE SECOND ACT.
The SCENE the Palace Garden. Demetrius and Aretus as in discourse: Them. BUt
for his interrupting of us, you
Had then known all which I have told you now:
Methinks you seem amazed at what I said.

Are. Alas your Words have struck me worse then Dead:
Fortune no Curse so bad as this could send,
Made sharper too, since acted by my Friend.

Them. How could I think that you concerned had been,
In Cleopatra's being Tryphon's Queen.

Are. I am so much concerned in it, that I,
Rather then see her Tryphon's Wife, would Dye.

Them. Do you then love her --

Are. Love's too low a name
For that which does Aretus heart Inflame,
For never any Fire resembled mine
But that Bright Fire which in her Eyes does shine.

Them. Was It fit this Love from me concealed should be?

Are. Alas 'twas till last night unknown to me,
Something I felt of late had Charmed me so,
As did at once Please and Subject me too;
But those Emotions were so far above
All that the world has ever known of Love,
As, that 'twas Love no more by them I knew,
Then I can now describe that Love to you:
'Twas fit that Eyes that shoot unusual Rays
Should kindle Fires too in unusual ways.

Them. I am not Guilty though my self I Blame,
But Sure you might suppress so young a Flame,
Your Friend from no small Trouble it would free.

Are. Ah 'twere not Love, did it depend on me,
Those Guilty Words therefore you should recall,
Love does not take but gives the Law to all.
Would you not think me cruel or unwise
Should I beg you not to love Stratonice?

Them. I durst not ask that you'de your Love decline,
If it had took so deep a root as mine.

Are. Nothing can fix a Love to such degree
As Cleopatra's Eyes have done in me.

Them. You have not yet your Conquerors Favor gaind,
But I my Stratonice's have obtained,
That Secret's only trusted to your breast.

Are. And there in silence it shall ever rest:
But o^ in what you say you have not proved
That I love less than you, but less am loved,
Success may raise my Joys but not my Flame,
The World for Love like mine does want a Name.

Them. Ah my Aretus, had I known before,
That you fair Cleopatra (...) Adore,
I had prevented those s^ streights ^e're in,
And hindered Tryphon cou^ting her for Queen;
Now there is no cure for a disease so high.

Are. Yes but there is -- --

Them. -- what is it --

Are. -- -- -- -- -- Tryphon shall dye;
On two accounts his death to him I owe,
For he is my Tyrant and my Rival too;
Yet with the last I merit to be cursed,
Since I to kill him needed but the first.

Them. In killing him your Country you will expose.

Are. Not killing him I Cleopatra loose,
And he unworthy of her will appear
Who above all things does not value her.

Them. This Truth with greater luster may be seen,
If you would not oppose her being Queen.

Are. I Will not oppose (by taking Tryphons life)
Her being Queen, but being a Tyrants wife.

Them. Since she would have him as her Choice or Fate,
She Will take su^ proofs of Love as proofs of Hate.

Are. Her Virtue which has still appeared so High
S^ews it is a ^arriage of Necessity,
Which has engaged me by one generous blow
To f^ my Mistress and my Country too.
Farewell I Will go and act what I intend,
And If I ^ll say you have lost a Friend.
Embracing him
Them. ^eel'e perish in the attempt -- Aretus stay,
And is the (...) your c^e no other way?

Are. In (...) question you mispend your breath,
In (...) Love what Cure is there but Death.

Them. You'^e meet your own* attempting his I fear.

Are. It Is twice a Death to be deprived of her,
Farewell -- wast this for which you called me back.

Them. Stay Friend, for I Am contriving for your sake
That which may ^ach your End a safer way;
Suspend ^h' Attempt the remnant of this day,
Since in your Love you are engaged so far,
To serve you in it 'Ile employ my care;
You know the Power which I with Tryphon have.

Are. This is but spoke the Usurpers Life to save.

Them. How Is this, your self as me you now offend;
Can you suspect me and yet call me Friend?

Are. What I have said in such a Storm of Fate
Dese^ves your pity rather then your Hate,
Do not the Pardon which I beg deny,
It Was my Distraction wronged you and not I.

Them. Alas I see you are or'come with Grief.

Are. Yet to my Sorrows 't would be some Releif,
Would you then Swear if you in your Design
Should fail, you would assist me then in mine.

Them. But will you swear his Death you will not attempt,
If from his Rivallshipp I you exempt?

Are. In such a vow myself I cannot Trust,
It Is less to be Unhappy then Unjust,
Which I should be if I to you should give
A promise that I Would let the Usurper live.

Them. The Vow which I desire that you would make
Is not for Tryphon's but for Syrias sake.

Are. Poor Syria! since Demetrius thinks it good
To bind me not to shed thy Tyrants Blood,
What greater Curse could Heaven on thee have sent,
Then make thy safety be thy Punishment.

Them. Since it is the will of Heaven we must submit
What will you do,

Are, I Will do -- what shall be fit.

Them. But will you then too no more condescend,
To loose a Rival and oblige a Friend.

Are. Would you have me do more then what is fit.

Them. But will you Vow to make me Judge of it?
If By my Power with Tryphon and my Skill
I make him cease to Rival you.

Dre. I will --
Oh Cleopatra! never Lover yet
Did of his Passion give a Proof so great,
With such Devotion to your Eyes I bend,
As I pay them what I denied my Friend;
Nay for their sake, and what more could I do,
I spare the Tyrant of my country too;
If I in this Act against Duties Laws,
Let Love forgive the Effect which Love did cause;
Ah Friend! from me you have extorted now
That which I fear may prove a Guilty Vow,
But you are judge of all which gives me Rest.

Them. Can you then doubt what is trusted to my Breast?

Are. You see I do it not, since I decline
Even to inquire what you for me design.

Them. Fear not, I Will never betray a Trust so High.

Are. When you betray me it is high time to Dye.
[Embracing him they go out Enter Nicanor, Stratonice, Irene.
The SCENE Nicanor's Palace. Stra. I thought my Sister your consent had got.

Nic. So far from getting, that she askd it not;
Hermione to me has been Unjust,
I left my Cleopatra to her Trust,
And know not well which most I should Suspect,
Or her Unfaithfulness or her Neglect:
The Ambition of your Sister, I foresee,
Will make her Wretched and will Hazard me;
For if she marryes Tryphon She Is undone,
And me he will ruin if his Love she shun.

Ire. Hermione and I have but one Breast,
And she to me did solemnly protest,
She not, till 'twas too late, the Business knew,
And, Sir, laments for it as much as you.

Nic. In such a Fault she would show herself Unwise,
If she from you did not herself disguise.

Stra. Hermione is Innocent therein,
Sir, it is my sisters Fate or else her Sin.

Nic. You both absolve Hermione from Guilt,
Show me on what your Confidence is built.

Stra. The cause of mine to you, Sir, I le relate,
She Loves my sister and does Tryphon Hate;
And would not, Sir, I know, deserve your Frown,
To gain for her own self the Syrian Crown.

Iren. I know she does Aretus much esteem,
And thinks your Daughter only merits him;
And to Hermione he told this day
The Love he does to Cleopatra pay;
Besides she vowed to me it is her Intent,
In that Address, to be her Confident.

Nic. Does then Aretus, Cleopatra love?

(...) And in that height, I fear, his Death 't will prove,
For when he knows she will be the Usurpers Wife,
He will attempt his own or Tryphon's Life.

Nic. That Happiness at which I most did aim
Is now fallen on me,, but is fallen in vain,
That Height'ned Worth Aretus still has shown
Makes me esteem him above Tryphon's Throne.
My Stratonice, Irene, you and I,
Must for this Ill find a quick Remedy;
All must assault her in a several way,
On Cleopatra my Commands I Will lay,
And with Hermione you two must join,
To make your Sister break off her Design.

Stra. You may be of our best Endeavor sure,
But, Sir, I fear this Ill is past our Cure.

Nic. Those who of Fear in their Attempts admit,
Do take the surest way to fail in it;
Her Resolutions cannot be above
Her Duty, Friendship, and Aretus Love;
But we lose Time while we together stay,
And this Affair admits of no Delay.
[They go out several ways (Enter Cleopatra, Hermione.
The SCENE a Garden and a Grove of Trees. Her. Forgive me, Madam, that I thus
have pressed
To know the Grief which does invade your Breast,
For though, when you in public do appear,
Your Speech is Cheerful and your Looks are Clear,
Yet they are clouded when you are alone,
And every Word is brought forth with a Groan.

Cleo. That which you have observed alas is true,
Those various Actings to my Fate are due;
I ought, since Destined to a Tyrants Throne,
Joyful to seem, yet mourn when I Am alone,
Nor know I which my Soul does most subdue,
Feigning false Joys, or hiding Grief that is true.

Her. Rather then Griev me thinks you should Rejoice,
Since Tryphon, Madam, you have made your choice.

Cleo. Rather then I, Hermione, would have
Tryphon for husband I would wed my Grave.

Her. Why did you his Addresses then receive,
And never so much as ask Nicanor's leave;
Had (...) but to your Father told your mind,
He, to prevent it, Something had designed.

Cleo. It Is that which made me do what I have done,
For I more fear his Ruin then my own.
This is my Duty which appears my Crime,
Better he mourned for me then I for him;
But now my Word is given it is past recall;
I Will be Unhappy to prevent his Fall;
He gave me Life, and therefore for his sake
The Life he gave me I will Wretched make,
For such 'twill be when I am Tryphon's Wife;
This way alone could Save Nicanor's life,
For by th'Usurpers Fury he had died,
If he to many me had been denied.

Her. Since 'twas your Duty, Madam, as you own,
And not Ambition led you to the Crown,
Why did you not your head and arm employ,
To save your self and Tryphon to destroy?

Cleo. Ah I was loath to act the Guilty part
Of Owing and not Paying him my Heart.

Her. Do you so hate him as you will Wretched be,
Rather then yield his Sword should set you Free,
And under Tryphon let your Country bow,
Sooner then let him save both it and you?
Ah, Madam, to my Grief alas I see,
That you would now conceal your self from me.

Cleo. Think not that I conceal my self from you,
Telling you what my Duty made me do.

Ar. Duty might you to marry Tryphon lead.
If that alone could (...) Nicanor's head;
But you a much (...) Easy Way may choose,
To reach that End, and yet that Way refuse,
When, Madam, by pursuing of it, you
Might save at once Your Self and Country too;
For none but brave Aretus, that I see,
The valor has to end this Tyranny;
From which his Love to you will him restrain,
If you with Tryphon as his Queen should Reign.
Alas, what is the poor Aretus Crime,
That rather then you will be obliged to him,
You Will of your Contry's Tyrant be the Wife,
And which is worse you will save that Tyrants Life.

Cleo. Do not I show I think him free from Crime,
That lose my self rather then hazard him?

Her. In that Attempt he will but some Hazard run,
But i^ you marry Tryphon he is undone;
Thus from the Hazard you Aretus free,
But to destroy him the more certainly;
Ah, Madam, by such reasoning you declare,
That in your Confidence I have no share;
It Is therefore fit our Friendship here should End,
For who Distrusts, deserves to Lose a Friend.
And since with me so Cruelly you deal,
I Will bid you now eternally farewell.
Would to the Gods this had been done before,
That none might think I Like what I Abhor;
But though from you my self I thus divide,
Yet still I Will pray that Heaven may be your Guide.

Cleo. Raise not the Sorrows under which I bend,
By threatening to deprive me of my Friend,
This usage so severe I needs must blame.

Her. Why do you thus abuse that Sacred Name?
Alas for me, it is no longer fit,
For your Mistrust, Madam, has canceled it;
Therefore from you for ever will I part.
she offers to go out
Cleo. Oh stay and I Will Disclose to you my Heart,
Yet with so cross a Fortune I contend.
As I Am ashamed to tell it to my Friend.

Her. What ever Sorrows have oppressed your Heart,
Yet since you strove to hide your self by Art
From me whom you call Friend, you ought much more*
That Sin then those Misfortunes to Deplore.

Cleo. My Grief from you I will no longer hide,
That you may Pity her whom now you Chide;
But let us first, Hermione, remove
To some such Shady Place as yonder Grove,
That when to you my Secret I commit,
You scarce may see how much I blush at it.
[They go out Enter Tryphon and Seleucus
The Scene Tryphon's Apartment Sell. Forgive me, Sir, if I presume to say
You have appeared in too much Grief this day,
And all last night you took so little Rest
As if some Sorrow had your Heart oppressed.

Try. Alas, Seleucus, I am under, now,
Sorrows would make the Strongest Soul to Bow,
And I have often for Demetrius sent,
That in his Friendship I might give them vent;
But since he does not come, and since I know
That perfect Friendship which he has for you,
Being with Trouble so much overprest,
I will commit that Secret to your Breast.

Sell. This Favor no addition can admit,
Unless, Sir, I may serve you too in it.

Try. That Friendship for Demetrius which I have;
And which shall never cease but in the Grave,
Made me resolve by his Advice to gain
The Syrians Kindness by a gentle Reign,
And since Nicanor's Virtue most does Shine,
That I without Reserve might make him Mine,
I by Demetrius Council too was led
To raise Nicanor's Daughter to my Bed.

Sell. Which of Nicanor's Daughters is it, Sir,
That he would have you to your Crown prefer.

Try. It Is Cleopatra whose Bright Eyes I own
Makes her deserve to share the Syrian Throne;
You seem to Sigh at what I told you now.

Sell. Under your Grief how could I choose but Bow,
But under what Affliction can you bend,
Having a Crown, that Mistress and, that Friend?

Try. Most men with one of those might Happy be,
But I am Wretched though I have all three,
For Heaven decrees, from whence our Law we take,
How much shall every mortal Happy make;
And if he does but fail in one of those
Desires, which must that Happiness compose,
That one Denied, though with all the other Blessed,
Will rob him of the Gust of all the rest:
If I must Love and in Love miss my ends,
Fortune in vain sends me a Crown and Friends.

Sell. Does Cleopatra your Addresses slight?

Try. That she will receive them even my Heart does fright;
I who Undaunted through such Storms did steer,
As the most Brave would tremble but to hear,
I who have Kings deposed, and Battles won,
Andnever any thing like Fear have known,
Am now to see my Dearest Friend afraid,
And of the Yeildings of a Lovely Maid.

Sell. To share your Crown can you esteem her fit,
And yet, Sir, fear that she will accept of it?
Those words appear a Mystery to me.

Try. Seleucus, I Will unvail the mystery;
'Twas yesterday that I Demetrius sent,
My Crown to Cleopatra to present;
But 'twas last night alas that I did see
A Brighte* Beauty which has Conquered me,
Whose Eyes are blessed with such a Powerful charm
They Burn those Hearts which others can but warm;
Till I that Beauty saw, I did believe,
A man resolved the Law to Love could give.

Sell. Why should you, Sir, appear afflicted now,
Since it is to so much Beauty that you Bow;
Love is a Fate which every one must Taste,
Some soon, some late, but all must Burn at last.
Your Fate you rather should Applaud then Blame,
(Since you must Burn) that it is in such a Flame.

Try. To wear her Chains, Seleucus, is to Me
A Happiness transcending Liberty,
Then do no longer think it is my Love,
But it is my Friendship does my Torment prove,
Since with Demetrius I did once contract,
I never yet, in Thought or Word or Act,
Yielded to what might it in Question call,
But now I fear, Seleucus, that I shall;
For while that he by me employed has been
To Court fair Cleopatra for my Queen,
This other Beauty has so Conquered me,
As without her thy Prince must Wretched be,
Which justly my Demetrius will offend:
Hard choice when I must wrong my Love or Friend.

Sell. Is this, Sir, the Misfortune you Lament?

Try. You ask as if Fate could a Worse have sent.

Sell. Demetrius would not Merit your Esteem,
If that which makes your Joy should Trouble him.

Try. Yet that I shall offend him I must Grieve.

Sell. Such an Offense as this he will soon Forgive.

Try. My Grief, (though he forgave it) would not end,
It Is sad to need the Pardon of a Friend.

Sell. It Is more when Fortune does a Subject bring
To such a height as to Forgive his King,
That Glory will the heaviest Wrong outweigh.

Try. Through all this Darkness I might see some Day,
If my Demetrius e're in Love had bin,
For then he would judge this Change my Fate not Sin:
Lovers still pay to Love a deep Respect,
And where Love is, Causes excuse the Effect.

Sell. At my request, Sir, banish all your Care,
Leave it to me to manage this Affair.

Try. Ah if to this thou giv'st a Happy End,
Thou have for ever made thy King thy Friend:
Embracing him. It Is not enough that he forgives my Sin,
He must be still my Friend as he has been
For know I need, my Sorrows to remove,
As much his Freindship, as my conquerors Love,
Since if to Win the Last I Lose the First,
I shall thereby at once be Blessed and Cursed.
[They go out
The End of the second Act
THE THIRD ACT.
The SCENE an obscure grove. Enter Cleopatra and Hermione. Cleo. Do not, my
Dear Hermione, admire,
That to this Gloomy Grove I did retire,
Since here I thought I could my Heart Reveal,
While the kind Shade my Blushes did Conceal;
But now I find I Am in as High a Fright,
To tell my Fate in Darkness as in Light:
Shame, like the World when it in Chaos lay,
Knows not distinction betwixt Night and Day;
Ah, judge what are my Troubles, since I fear
Their sad Relation from my self to hear.

Her. No such Just cause of Grief your Fate can send
As, Madam, at this rate to use your Friend;
It Is by that Powerful Name I beg again,
That you will from me no longer hold your Pain,
Perhaps I may the Cause of it remove.

Cleo. Oh tell me first, have you been e're in Love.

Her. Why, Madam, do you ask --

Cleo. -- Because I know
That none can ease my Pain that is not so.

Her. I was, but Love to Friendship did submit.

Cleo. Ah 'twas not Love, if ought could Conquer it,
You loved not well, or knew his Power but Ill,
That say you were in Love and are not still,
The Name of Love for Love it self you took,
Since Real Love can never be forsook:
Had yours been True, you might as well have swore
You do not Live as that you Love no more.

Her. What you have spoken does, methinks, declare,
You to the Power of Love no stranger are;
But would you thus reproach me if you knew
That what you now condemn I did for you?

Cleo. Why did you cease to be in Love for me?

Her. By many Proofs I did so clearly see
That such a Pleasing Sadness conquered you,
As I to Love could judge it only due,
And since Your Heart and Mine were still so like,
I feared one Arrow both of us did strike.

Cleo. Ah say not that your Heart resembles Mine,
Since you once Loved and could your Love decline,
Not can I fancy who this Man can be,
Whom you could leave yet think could Conquer me.

Her. Aretus is --

Cleo. Aretus did your name?

Her. And at that word your Face is in a Flame,
What Friendship should have done your Blushes do,
They are to me more Kind and Just then you,
Why has Hermione been thus abused?

Cleo. May not one blush that is wrongfully accused?

Her. But my Belief on a sure ground is built,
I see your Love to him, to me your Guilt,
Madam, a Blush, when Love is in the case,
Is in Effect the Conscience of the Face:
Though in this Secret you my Faith did doubt,
Deny it not now I have found it out.

Cleo. Too much your Friendship I have Wronged and Tried,
My Blushes tell you what my Words denied;
Alas I fear I for Aretus prove
That Fatal State the World does call in Love;
Yet do not, since I did but Hide my Flame,
Condemn my Friendship but Commend my Shame:
Nor blame me if to you I feared to show
What of my self I am ashamed to know;
But my, Hermione, since you could see
That Powerful Passion which has Conquered me,
Spite of my Care to Cloud it, oh I fear
It may to others as to you appear;
Should that befall me which so much I dread,
Honor and Grief would justly strike me dead.

Her. That Fear you ought not, Madam, to admit.

Cleo. How did you then come to discover it?

Her. That Grief which when retired, you still expressed,
Made me Suspect what now you have confessed,
For she who Greives while courted by a King,
Shows that such Grief alone from Love can spring;
And when I found you Loved, I quickly knew,
Your Love could be but to Aretus due,
Which since you have acknowledged, give me leave
To ask why Tryphon's Love you did receave;
Was not Ambiton in your soul too strong?

Cleo. Do not at once my Love and Vi^tue wrong
For if I had Aretus Passion known
I would have valued it above a Throne?

Her. But now it is known, why is it not embraced?

Cleo. Because my word was first to Tryphon past.

Her. As you my Love, so I your Love must blame,
Since you before your Love prefer your Fame.

Cleo. I should appear unfit for his Esteem
Did I not value more my Word then Him;
And this great Pleasure, to my Act is due,
That which does lose me him, deserves him too;
Ah why did not Aretus let me see,
That Passion which you say he has for me,
Before my Promise was to Tryphon past?

Her. But why to give it did you make such have?

Cleo. I feared that he who did my Heart subdue,
Would, my Hermione, have seen it too,
And I his Love for ever would decline,
Rather then he should first discover mine;
It Was fitter since I owed it to my Fame,
To suffer Ruin then to merit Shame;

Her. But e're you did admit the Kings Address,
Aretus looks did so much Flame express,
As sure you could not but his Passion see.

Cleo. That Is not enough, he should have told it me,
But what soe'r his Proofs of Love have been,
By me, Dear Friend, alas they were not seen,
For I so feared that I might act amiss
In my own Love that I never minded his;
Blushes a Woman's Passion may reveal,
But Men their Passion by their Words should tell.

Her. Could he your Love more Generously seek,
Then to Deserve it and yet Nothing Speak?

Cleo. Rather what more could he have done amiss,
Then Lose my Love by so Concealing his?
A Love that is at once both Great and Strong,
While it does Bind the Heart, Sets Free the Tongue;
And lest that mine should make me Faulty prove,
I to my Honor Sacrificed my Love;
So I did fear, his Merit was so Great,
That asking Nothing he might All Things get.

Her. How cruel is your Virtue or your Fate*
Which makes your Love produce the Effects of Hate?

Cleo. Aretus yet more Cruelty does show,
That durst Love me, yet durst not tell me so.

Her. You do him Double Wrong, since his Respect
You first Mistake, then Punish as Neglect;
Such awful Flames you in his Heart have bred,
As he thinks Silence ought his Love to plead;
He but defers to Speak what he does feel,
Till by his Actions you his Love may tell;
And to declare his Passion does delay,
Only to show it you the Noblest Way.

Cleo. Fatal Delay, the Fatal'st that could be,
It loses me to him and him to me;
Yet such a High Respect to him I pay,
That on My Self I Will Punish his Delay;
And since my Promise is to Tryphon made,
To Break it Love it self shall not persuade;
That which for me your Friendship made me do,
My Honor makes me now Perform for you;
Your Rival I will never be again.

Her. I for Aretus did a Love but feign,
That in your Blushes, Madam, I might see
What by your Modesty was hid from me;
Yet had I loved, I Would not that Love pursue,
Since you best merit him as he does you;
But how can you so lust to Honor prove,
And yet resolve to be Unjust to Love?
Ah you much more then he have done amiss,
You prize your Word more then your Flame and his,
And by a Sacred Bond your self you Tie
To him you hate, and him you love you Fly.

Cleo I owe him less then I do owe my Flame,
And fly not from his Love but from my Shame;
She to her Honor too Unjust does prove
Who dares not value it above her Love;
Press me not then to Do what I should Shun,
Rather then be Unjust I Will be Undone:
Those who are lost while Virtue they pursue
In their Destruction find their Comfort too.
(They go out. Enter Demetrius and Seleucus.
The SCENE Demetrius's Apartment. Sell. Those were the Words which between us
did pass,
Bull I perceive some Sadness in your Face.

Them. My Heart and Face do then but ill agree,
Since nothing could more welcome seem to me.

Sell. I cannot guess from whence your Joy should rise,
Since Tryphon told me 'twas by your Advice,
That he did offer her to be his Queen,
And, which is more, that you employed had been,
To Court her to be Consort to his Throne.

Them. All this and more then this I freely own.
For I not only wooed her to be Queen,
But her Consent to be it I did winn;
But why at this, Seleucus, do you start?

Sell. Alas what you have said has pierced my Heart,
Yet from my Friend I Will not my self disguise;
The Charming Light of Cleopatra's Eyes
Over my Soul the Victory did win,
But to herself this has a Secret been;
For, my Demetrius, I did judge it fit,
Not Words* but Service should discover it;
That High Respect I did resolve was due
To such a Beauty and such a Passion too;
Methinks at this which I have spoke you start,
I think her Beauties too have pierced your Heart.

Them. How can you think for Tryphon I Would appear,
If I my self had been in Love with her?

Sell. But why should you such Satisfaction show,
That he declines what you advised him to?
Ah sure your Liberty she did surprise,
Since first to Court her you did him advise;
I see what Beauty has made Tryphon do,
What it has wrought in him it may in you,
And what I said such Change in you did move,
As I have Cause t'impute it to your Love.

Them. If any Change does in my Looks appear,
It Is not, I vow, that Im in Love with her.

Sell. Give me then leave there my Address to make.

Them. That Is what I cannot Give but you may Take.

Sell. Neither for Tryphon nor your self to woo,
And yet deny me leave to court her too?
I cannot guess what it is that you intend.

Them. I were unfit to be Seleucus Friend,
Should I act otherwise ^en now I do,
For he who to one Friend does prove untrue,
That he may gain another Friend's Esteem,
Deserves too justly to lose both of them:
Though I am yours above what I can say,
Yet I must be it too in Honors way;
In Friendship every other Tenure's ill,
By that mine has been held and shall be still,

Sell. Fate ore my hopes another Cloud does send,
I Am Rivaled and by one that is your Friend;
But may you not acquaint me with his Name,
Who is my Fellow Martyr in this Flame?

Them. No I Will be just to both, he shall not know
You Rival him or that he Rivals you;
Yet both thus far shall be oblieg'd to me,
From Tryphon's Rivallship I Will set you free:
But did he not acquaint you with her Name
Who in his Heart has lighted such a Flame?

Sell. So vast a Cause of Joy to me it proved
That he no longer Cleopatra loved,
As I did not remember to inquire
Who this new Passion did in him inspire.

Them. By what he said could you not gues; at it?

Sell. Ah! he who Cleopatra's Love could quit,
The Power of Love forever must forswear,
For could he Love, who should he love but her?
Sure this new Love is but a Love of State,
But he for our return too much may wait.

Them. I long to know to whom he does Submit,
As much as he that I Will consent to it.
[Exeunt. Enter Nicanor, Stratonice, Aretus and Irene.
The SCENE Nicanor's Palace. Ire. Sir that Demetrius may your Pardon winn,
That he made Tryphon court her for his Queen,
He bad me tell you every way he will try
To make that Love, which he gave Life to, Die,
And hopes himself this night to let you know
He has performed what he has promised you.

Nic. I at this Promise so much Joy admit,
As naught can Heighten but his doing it.

Stra. What ever Demetrius hopes yet, Sir, I fear
Tryphon will not decline his Love for her.

Nic. Demetrius Power with him you know is Great.

Stra. The Power of Beauty, Sir, is Greater yet,
And though th'Usurper were more fierce and strong,
A Family like ours he durst not wrong.

Nic. Who dares in Royal Blood his hands imbrue,
What is it, after, which he dares not do?
Nor can ^e think his leaving her a Crime,
Since it is what we so much desire of him.

Stra. Though it is what we most wish yet, Sir, you know
Since none of us will tell him that it is so,
'Twill as a Wrong on us to him appear,
And therefore to perform it he will fear,
For though Antiochus's Blood he spilt,
Yet in a Crown he did contract that Guilt,
And by the Wicked nothing can be known
Of too High Price, when it is to buy a Throne:
They will Do All, that they in one may Sit,
But Suffer All rather then hazard it.

Nic. Yet since Demetrius takes of it the ca^e,
I of a good Event would not despair.

Stra. I fear the Usurper will his Suit deny.

Nic. Let Us not afflict our selves by Prophesy.

Are. The Wrath of Heaven must needs that man pursue
Who tyrannizes Men and Beauty too.

Stra. But though the Punishments from Heaven we know
Are always Just, yet they are often Slow.

Are. When ever a Subject does Usurp a State,
Any Brave Man has Right to act his Fate:
The Gods make every Man a Judge of him
Who against every Man commits a Crime;
And Heaven permitted him to act this last
TO invite us to Revenge all that is past;
What more to merit Death could Tryphon do,
Then to offend the Crown and Beauty too?

Nic: He whom the Gods into the Throne do call,
Should therefore only by their Justice fall.

Ar^. Heaven's Justice Monarchs only should dethrone*
But Tyrants they abandon to our own;
The R^ght they give us we too much abuse,
Hoping they will Act what we ourselves refuse;
The Powers Divine we injure, while we thus
Remit to them what they have left to us.

Nic. Yet he is to blame who does to Death pursue
That Man to whom the Name of King is due.

Ar^. But him with greater Justice we should blame
Who as his due usurps that Sacred Name;
Since he our lawful Monarch's Blood has spilt,
Who ever revenges not contracts the Guilt.

Nic. If Tryphon by a Private Hand does fall,
That Hand wrongs him as much as he wronged all;
The Affronts which are on a whole Nation laid,
By that whole Nation ought to be repaid;
It should not by a Single Hand be done.

Ar. What Is due from All is due from Every one,
And since the Syrians do decline to Pay
That Righteous Debt, I that am willing may.

Nic. Do you their Toughts by Silence understand?

Ar. Their Silence in this case is their Command;
Who is it at his Reign does not repine
That to gain Power killed all the Royal Line?
Such Usurpation every one does fright.

Nic. Where none can Claim, Possession is a Right.

Ar All have more Right, since he those Crimes has done,
To Tryphon's Life then he has to the Crown:
(...) Cleopatra Danger calls on us
To ^ee her and revenge Antiochus:
'Twere Sin if longer we the Crimes withstood
Of Injured Beauty and of Guiltless Blood.

Nic. Suspend this Generous Anger till we know
What in her Cause Demetrius can do.

Ar. But if Demetrius, Sir, should not prevail.

Nic. I then will find a way which shall not fail.

Ar. May you not, Sir, discover it to me;

Nic. Not till the Event of this Design I see,
Then I engage, if he successles prove,
I Will free my Daughter from the Usurpers Love;
Be pleass'd, Sir, to depend on what I say.

Ar. What you Command it is fit I should Obey.
(They go out. Enter Tryphon, Demetrius, and Seleucus.
The SCENE Tryphon's Apartment. Try. Though many Proofs you gave that you are my
Friend,
Yet this last Proof does all the rest transcend,
For you in this have evidently shown
That you are more my Friend then you are your own;
Never was any Torment yet above
That in which Friendship does contest with Love;
But what you now have done has cured my Pain.

Sell. When of your Fate you did to me complain,
I told you from Demetrius you would find*
A Cure for all the Afflictions of your Mind.

Try. You did, I of his Friendship judged amiss,
I feared it was not what now I find it is;
But yet I cannot say that I am more
His Friend since this then I was heretofore,
My Kindness for you to such Height was grown
As it could not admit Accession --
[Embracing Demetrius.
Them. Ah, Sir, those Words which now were spoke by you
Over pay all I have done or e're can do,
Yet I may say, and not Presumptious be,
Some Reparation, Sir, was due to me,
Since you could doubt I valued any thing
Above the Blessing, Sir, to serve my King.

Try. That Error to repair, I Will now employ
Only your self to place me in my Joy;
By such Fair Eyes my Heart has been surpised,
As I adore that Passion I despised;
I who till now Loves Votaries did blame,
Find him a God I thought was but a Name:
This Heart which has been bred in War and Blood,
And all Death's Horrors dauntlesly withstood,
Charmed by Loves Magic trembles with such Fear,
As I her Conquest dare not tell to her;
Which shows that in her Bright Triumphant Eyes
A Fate more to be feared, then Dying, lies;
Your Help, my Dear Demetrius, I must Seek,
To tell her what to her I dare not speak.

Them. Whatever you Command I must Obey,
Yet pardon me if I presume to say,
How can she think you to her Eyes submit
If you your self, Sir, will not tell her it?

Try. Ah in this answer I your Fear perceive,
That I Will repeat that Fault you did forgive;
No, my first Love was but a Love of State,
But this Love is as much my Choice as Fate;
She with so strange a Fire my Breast does fill,
As I to quench it want the Power and Will.

Them. Permit me then the Employment to decline,
For since her Beauties with such Luster Shine,
They may wound me, for it is a likelier thing
She should subdue a Subject then a King.

Try. I know your Friendship which you have for me
Against her Eyes your Antidote will be.

Them. Yet Vassals, Sir, and Monarchs are alike,
When ever the Dart of Love or Death does strike.

Try. Let not such Fear your Sacred Friendship blot,
Why should you doubt it when I doubt it not?
But to confirm you, know you often have seen
Her whom I Would have you court to be my Queen;
And since to her Bright Eyes you did not bow
Ere I adored them, you will not do it now;
For, my Demetrius, it is her Beauties Right,
That who can Love must Love her at first Sight,
Nor shall I think, if you the Employment wave,
You have forgiven me as you said you have.

Them. Ah then, Sir, it is unfit I struggle more,
Tell me that Beauties name which you adore,
And all her Charms, to serve you, I Will despise,
This Sir I vow.

Try. Her name is --
Stratonice (Demetrius starts and trembles Why at that Name Tremble you thus
and start?

Them. Oh why am I Condemned to Act this Part?
Alas how can I to that Beauty go,
Whose ^ster you by me have injured so?
Who are to one another too so Kind,
As Friendship them does more then Nature bind:
They are alike concerned in all they do,
And who wrongs one does wrong the other too.

Try. These Words have (...) (...) my (...) (...)
For since their Friendship is so Firm and G^t,
I shall, presenting Stratonice my Crown,
Repair what to her Sister I have done,
Who since the Wrong she did by you Endure,
It Is just she should from You Recieve her Cure.
By this a Trebble Gainer you will be,
For you will obliege Yourself, and Her and Me.

Them. Oh Sir, forgive me if I let you know,
That it is your Love not Reason argues so,
For to their Friendship it will give an End,
Should she wed him who has so wronged her Friend;
Honor would make her too the Throne despise
To which she by her Sisters Fall must Rise;
That Family to visit I Am unfit,
Having so much affronted one of it.

Try. I wrong but one while I my Love recall,
But marrying the other I obliege them All;
That Family will with a Fault dispense,
Whose Reparation does exceed the Offense;
'Twas Interest my first Addres did move,
But this Address is the Result of Love;
Whatever Fault True Love does make us do,
Must carry with the Offense the Pardon too:
On this Oblieging Embassy then go,
And let me to my Friend my Mistress owe;
Lay at her Feet at once my Crown and Heart,
My Joy depends on the Acting of your Part.
[Demetrius offers to speak. Then Strive no more, since what I ask you now
Is what you owe My Friendship and Your Vow;
While Stratonice you to my Throne invite,
To Cleopatra my Excuse I Will write.
(Tryphon goes out. Demetrius stands gazing after him. Seleucus Enters.
Sell. You in your Looks have so much trouble shown,
As I dare hardly venture you alone;
So great and Moving your Disorders be,
As I partake in Griefs which I but see.

Them. Alas, I have reciev'd so strange a Blow,
As I endure more Grief then I can show.

Sell. To my unequalled Friendship be so just,
As to commit your Secret to my Trust;
To cure those Sorrows under which you Bend,
Employ the Life and Service of your Friend;
Some ^tall Grief does now your Soul surprise,
Or you are too in Love with Stratonice,
For I perceived, when he pronounced her Name,
You trembled and your Face was in a Flame.

Them. Admire not at those Sorrows which I show,
Since you their Cause at once both ask and know;
On me what sharper Curse could Fortune bring,
Then make my Rival be my Friend and King.

Sell. Under the like Misfortune I did Bow,
And Suffered Lately what you Suffer Now;
Since his Inconstancy my Pain has Cured,
Be in my Fortune of your own affur'd.

Them. Who thinks, does know her Beauties Power but ill,
That who once Loved her will not Love her still.

Sell. Do not by that Belief your Grief Inflame,
Of Cleopatra's Eyes I thought the same;
His Friendship sure as strong for you will be,
As his Inconstancy has been for me.

Them. Have you forgotten what he lately said,
'Twas a State Love he Cleopatra paid.
But over this Love what can the Conquest get,
Which makes State Interest resign to it?
Than do not think he did your Fear remove
By his Inconstancy but by his Love;
Our Stars on us with different Influence Shine,
What wrought your Cure makes me despair of mine.

Sell. Part of your Secrets trusted to my Breast,
To serve you, I now beg to know the Rest;
You told me Stratonice had Conquered you,
Now let me know if she does Love you too.

Them. Ah if I were not in that happy State,
Why should I thus exclaim against my Fate?

Sell. I cannot See* since you are sure of her,
Why you the King should as a Rival fear;
Since she does You and Virtue so esteem,
She Will value you more then she will value him.

Them. Her Love to me and Virtue Shine so clear,
As 'twere a Sin her Rivallship to fear;
No it is not that from wh^ce my Sorrows rise,
But I, not dreaming he loved Stratonice,
Am by a Fatal yet a Solemn Vow
Engaged to Court for him my Mistress now;
Should I not do it I my self Forswear,
And doing it I Wrong my Love and her;
Never Misfortune did so cruel prove,
I must betray my Friend or else my Love;
Seleucus, it is a Horrid Choice, when I,
Rather then either choose, would choose to Die.

Sell You^ Case is hard, it cannot (...) (...),
Yet Stratonice's Love is on your side;
I against Fortune justlier might repine,
For that Fate you deplore I wish were Mine;
That Cleopatra's Love might be for me,
I would consent he should my Rival be;
(...) since the King your Passion never knew,
(...) since his Friendship is so firm to you,
(...) ^t from him the Pain that you are in;
(...) over Love the Victory may win.

Them. Ah if I told him I his Rival am,
And that his Mistress does approve my Flame,
Alas a much more likely Way 'twil prove,
To Raise his Height then to Suppress his Love;
My Flame must therefore be concealed by you,
Rivals in Love and Friends none ever knew.

Sell. My Faith in Such a Secret do not fear,
Tell me the Course that you resolve to Steer,
That I in it may useful be to you.
[Demetrius studies a while.
Them. I am resolved to Do what I did Vow,
For were I Guilty of so Mean a Thing
As to be False both to my Friend and King,
And should thereby my End in Love obtain,
The Joy would scarce be equal to the Pain;
Perhaps she will not be to me Severe,
When Sacred Friendship only made me err,
Methinks it were Injustice to suspect,
When that is the Cause, that she will condemn the Effect,

Sell. While such an Unexampled Act you do,
She cannot Blame so much as Pity you.

Them. To lose her yet Deserve her is more fit,
Then to Posses her and not Merit it.
[They go out
The End of the Third Act
THE FOURTH ACT.
Stratonice Demetrius and Irene. The SCENE Nicanors Palace. Ire. to Str. SUch
are the Sorrows he does now endure,
As, if You be not, Death will be his Cure.

Stra. Those Griefs, Demetrius, which in you I see
Contagious prove and have infected me;
You (...) (...) since you the Cause conceal
O^ ^ows whose Effect your Looks reveal.

Them. Madam I hoped you rather would deplor
Those Griefs I fear, then load me thus with more,
Judge with what Malice Fate does me pursue,
Since I Am afraid to tell my Grief to you,
To you who only have the Power to Cure
Those Matchles Miseries which I endure.

Stra. Alas what you have told me now, I find,
More then your Silence is to me Unkind,
For you lament, and in a high degree,
Those Griefs whose Cure you say depends on me:
What have I done that you should use me so?

Them. Ah Madam, sure you my Transgression know,
Or your Resentments could not be so High,
As by such Cruel Words to make me Dye,
Which now I humbly beg your leave to do,
Since twice you say I was unkind to you;
But for those Words I never could have thought,
That my Misfortune did Transcend my Fault,
I must Despair your Pardon now to win,
My Grief for needing it being judged my Sin.

Stra. You never my Resentments did provoke
But by your Silence and what now you spoke.

Them. Would to the Gods I never had, then I
Should but Unhappy and not Guilty Dye,
But I alas must by a Fatal Oath
Ending my Life contract the Guilt of both,
This is my Fate whatever I shall do.

Stra. I fear your Sorrows have Distracted you.

Them. A las Distraction, Madam, would appear
A Happiness compared to what I bear,
For though the Joys I in your Love Recieve
Transcend all those which Heaven to me can give,
Yet I those Charming Glories must foregoe,
And to my self the Sin thereof must owe.

Stra. Demetrius, I believed you had a Soul.
Which could the approaches of Despair control.

Them Condemn not, Madam, the Despair I show,
Since Tryphon is Declared my Rival now.

Stra. Since this is the Misfortune you deplore,
I have more cause to Blame you then before,
For could you Grieve at this, did you not fear
I would his Crown above your Love prefer?
By your first Fault you did but wrong my Love,
But this a wrong does to my Virtue prove;
Alas what two worse Actions could you do,
Then thus to doubt my Love and Virtue too.

Them. Ah Madam, if you would have heard me out,
You would have ^ound that I do neither doubt,
For Nothing can to either equal be,
But that Misfortune which has fallen on me;
When I thus grieve he does my Rival prove,
I fear his Cruelty, not doubt your Love;
But though his Fire for you I must Lament,
Yet Fate on you a sharper Curse has sent;
For he not knowing I his Rival am,
Imployes me to acquaint yon with his Flame;
To court you for him I am hither sent
And he his Rival makes his Confident.

Str. He has more cause to mourn for this then you.

Them. Yet to a Trust Fidelity is due,
That Man who can be faithless to his Friend,
Though it is in Love, deserves to lose his End:
Could I but one Unworthy Action do,
I should by it forfeit my Right in you,
And though you might to Pardon me think fit
Yet to my self I never could Pardon it.

Stra. Heaven this strict Virtue does in you Inspire,
Which therefore I Condemn not but Admire;
Then with what you did Promise him Comply,
But what you ask for Him I Will still Deny;
Thus you to Friendship's Duty Just may prove,
And I as Faithful to the Rights of Love.

Them. Oh gods! What is Demetrius's Offense,
That you to him so strange a Fate dispense;
Your Fiercest Anger could not plague him worse,
Then thus to turn his Blessings to his Curse;
Your Love and Virtue which should give Releif,
But more contributes to Augment my Grief,
Yes, Madam, your Inconstancy and Hate
Had been to me a less Tormenting Fate,
Less Horror I had felt from Deaths Assault
Caused by my Mistress Justice then my Fault;
I Am as Unfortunate as you are Fair.

Stra. Alas what causes in you this Despair?
Since I have let you know how you might be
Just to your Vows, to Tryphon, and to Me.

Them. It Is more then all the World has Power to do,
I must be False to Him or False to You,
For not believing he Adored your Eyes,
I swore a solemn Oath I would despise
His Conquerors Charms to serve him, thus you see
I must Forsake you or must Perjured be,
I know which of the two I ought to do,
It Is less to loose then be unfit for you;
Heaven which your Merits and my Faults has known
Calls me to Death, you to the Syrian Throne;
Death is to my Ambitious Passion due
Which from the Throne can only hinder you,
My Fate I therefore shall Undaunted bear,
Since it is my Ruin helps to raise you there.

Stra. Could I of what you now propose admit,
I of that Throne should judge my self Unfit;
Tryphon, to gain it, has acquired such Hate,
As it is scarce strong enough to bear his Weight,
And to his Guilt if I should add my own,
'Twould be a Certain Way to sink the Throne.

Them. If with his Power your Virtue you do mix,
Madam, the Throne you would not Sink but Fix;
Then what he offers you vouchsafe to take,
Both for your own and for your Countries sake.

Stra. My Country will deserve those Chains she is in,
Could she consent to Break them by my Sin.

Them. Your Country cannot charge them with a crime,
Since, Madam, I Resign you up to Him.

Stra. Resign me up to him! Ah you shall find,
That I to Tryphon will not be Resigned;
Now you Pretend to more then you can Do,
For you would Forsake me and Bestow me too;
You may, if you think fit, your Love Resign,
But I, Demetrius, never can alter mine.

Them Ah the more Kindness you to me Express,
You still to it Entitle me the less.

Stra. I see 'twas clearly what you told me now,
And mourn your Sin more then the Losing you;
Yet I by Scorning Tryphon will make known,
I Value you more then the Syrian Throne;
If to your Guilt I so Oblieging prove,
Ah judge what I Would have been unto your Love;
Farewell, you are the first the World e're knew
Who Loved his Mistress and Forsook her too.
Stratonice and Irene go out. Demetrius gazing after them.
Them. Thus when the Sun from us withdraws his Light,
He leaves the World to Horror and to Night;
Why to the Throne did Heaven let Tryphon climb
And then Revenge on me my Truth to him?
Prodigious is my Fate, my Death I find
In Friendships being True and Beauty Kind;
Oh Gods! to what must I hereafter Trust?
Since you Destroy me but for being Just;
If you for Virtue only will Admit,
Why am I Ruined for pursuing it?
[He goes out. Cleopatra and Hermione, Cleopatra holding Tryphon's letter in
her hand.
The SCENE the Garden of Nicano^'s (...). Cleo. To Court and gain my leave his
Queen to be,
And after dare thus to Abandon me!
The Affront which he therein on me would lay,
Can only by his Blood be washed away.

Her. Why should his leaving you your Anger move,
Since now you may Accept Aretus Love?
That Fatal Promise which eclipsed your Joy
Tryphon's Inconstancy does now Destroy.

Cleo. I should Aretus Flame too much Abuse,
If I gave him what Tryphon does Refuse.

Her. Sure, Madam, if you argue at this rate,
To lose Aretus is your Choice not Fate.
(Enter Aretus.
Ar. Madam, I bring before your Justice now
One who has been so Criminal to you,
As he no longer could deferr to come,
And beg he may from you Receive his Doom?
He would have freed you from pronouncing it,
But that he did believe it was unfit,
Since against you he did commit the Crime,
That any but your self should Sentence him;
His Sorrow for his Sin must needs be High,
Since he himself makes it his Suit to Dye.

Cleo. Who e're, Aretus, has Offended me,
And then does Grieve for it to such degree,
As proves it was not his Design but Fate,
Deserves my Pardon rather than my Hate.
And since by me he is exempt from Blame,
You safely may acquaint me with his Name,
And in what it is he did so guilty prove.

Ar. I am the Offender and the Offense is Love,
By my Respects to you I Guilty am;
It Is they alas make me miscal my Flame,
For those blessed Fires which on your Altar shine
Are not more Sacred or more Pure than mine,
Judge, Madam, of your Beauties Influence,
Which makes me call such Love as this Offense,
A Love which does produce so bright a Flame,
As nothing can Displease you but the Name.

Cleo. Aretus, I Am Amazed at what you say.

Ar. But yet my Vows to you I durst not pay,
Till you to Tryphon gave that Fatal leave,
Which showed you might a Lovers Vows Receive,
And since you did not his Address decline,
It made me Hope that you might Pardon mine,
For he never did what a Brave Man should do,
Unless it were in Daring to Love you;
I would not therefore make my Passion known,
While he by his might place you on a Throne,
And yet that Throne appeared to you Unfit,
Since such a Tyrant once had sat in it,
But now that he your Service has Forsook,
I come to beg those Chains which he has Broke;
I would have begged I might Revenge you too,
But he has done it by Forsaking you;
Heaven could on him no Greater Curse have sent
For such a Sin than such a Punishment.

Cleo. The Affront's too Great which he has laid on me,
To think his Choice his Punishment should be,
But since you say your Love for me is Strong,
Prove what you say by Punishing this Wrong;
The Tyrants Guard will but in vain Withstand,
A rip'ned Vengeance from a Lovers Hand,

Ar. Of such a sharp Revenge you well might Boast,
Would you give me that Blessing he has Lost,
'Twill be much Worse for him than to be Dead,
To see me have what he has Forfeited.

Cleo. Aretus hold, while I my self persuade
Not to Resent what you so boldly said,
And to obtain me, Love would have you do
But what your Country's Wrongs do call you to,
You can against my just Commands contend,
Though Glory be your Way, and Love your End,
It Is only I who a fit Judge can prove,
In what relates to my Revenge or Love;
It Is just you knew, since you my Love have sought,
The bravest Price at which it can be bought.
Cleop. and Herm. go out.
Ar. O Love, O Friendship, and O Fatal Vow!
To which shall I pay my Obedience now?
My Friend has done that which he promised me,
And I from Tryphon's Rivalship am free,
By which my Vow and Friendship ties my Hand,
From Acting what my Mistress does command,
In Love for ever I must miss my End,
Or must be false both to my Oath or Friend;
Fortune to me too Tyra^nous does prove,
Opposing thus my Virtue to my Love,
And yet I Merit what I suffer now,
Since I could make so criminal a Vow.
Demetrius comes in. Heaven, my Demetrius, does you hither send,
That you the Torments I am in may end.
What I more wish than Life or Fear than Death
Does now entirely Hang upon your Breath,
For neither those nor ought that I can name
Should come in Balance with my Love or Fame.

Them. If I can ease your Pains, you will do me Wrong
If you Suspect they shall Afflict you long;
Tell me what Service I must pay you now.

Ar. You know you made me make a hasty Vow,
That I the Usurpers Life would not Pursue.

Them. Has he not Done that which I Promised you,
And from your Mistress does his Love recall?

Ar. It Is therefore by my Hands that he must Fall.

Them. Rage over your Reason has the Empire got,
You Will kill him when your Rival and when not.

Ar. From this Resolve nothing can me Remove,
His Life does Rival me as did his Love,
For Cleopatra will not mine Admit,
Till Tryphon's Death evince the Truth of it;
It Is therefore by your Friendship that I now
Beg you to free me from that Guilty Vow.

Them. That Hate which she for Tryphon does Express
Ought sure to make your Hatred for him Cease,
Since Cleopatra Tryphon does abhor
Only because he Rivals you no more.

Ar. I find some Reason in what now you say,
But I find Greater her Command To Obey;
Since I Would have killed him while I did but Fear,
That from my Hopes he might have Ravished Her,
How can I now the Usurpers Death delay,
Since to Obtain her it is the certain Way?
Heaven which my Sacred Flame for her does know,
And that same chiefly made me take that Vow,
Pitying that on a Love so free from Guilt
The Safety of a Tyrant should be Built,
Does, to Repair that Sin it did contract,
Engage me now by Love his Fate to Act,
'Twas fit, as Love made me the Sin commit,
So it should free me from the Guilt of it;
Since too by Friendship I to it was won,
Let Friendship free me from't as Love has done.

Them. Sure such Discourse as this you'de not approve,
Did you conferr your Reason with your Love.

Ar. Ah this Reproach you cast upon me now
Would have been Just when I did make the Vow,
A hated Name you for your self will win,
Making the killing of a Tyrant sin;
Can you then more for an Usurper do,
Than for your Friend and for your Country too?

Them. To what you Ask I cannot Condescend,
In Kindness to my Country and my Friend.

Ar. Alas you will show that you abhor them Both,
If you will not absolve me from an Oath,
By which your Friend the happiest Man may be,
And Syria will from Tyranny be free.

Them. To Grant what you Desire would be so far,
From Ending Tyranny, 'twill Raise a War.

Ar. Though I consider War as no small Curse,
Yet to be Ruled by an Usurper's worse.

Them. All would, were Tryphon killed, fight for the Throne,
It Is worse to have Many Tyrants than but One.

Ar. If by our Hands they saw this Tyrant fall,
'Twould frighten Usurpation from them all.

Them. The Power so fully Tryphon's Friends engross,
As they on us would soon Revenge his Loss,
And Syria would such ill by War endure,
As the Disease seems easier than the Cure.

Ar. Such as to fight for his Revenge would dare,
Are people fit to be destroyed by War.

Them. But by the Power they have so long enjoyed,
They 're likelie^ to destroy then be destroyed.

Ar. Ah you your self what now you said must blame,
Or must think Justice but an empty Name;
Who has the Right has on his side the Odds,
Else chance does Rule the World and not the Gods.

Them. The Right Antiochus had on his side,
And yet alas by Tryphon's Sword he died.

Ar. You know that hapless Monarch did not dye
By Tryphon's Force but by his Treachery;
Those only then to bear his Yoke are fit
Who can Fear ought more than to suffer it;
Do not a Guilt so great as this pursue.

Them. I have more Cause to be his Foe than you,
For he is fallen in Love with Stratonice,
And me he did into a Vow surprise,
Before to me his Conqueress he did name,
That I would Help and Serve him in his Flame,
By which the Death of Tryphon, you may see,
Cannot more Grateful prove to you than me,
But my concerns from Syria are above
Even those I have for Stratonice's Love;
Then do not Blame me, if I hinder you
From Doing what I think is Sin to Do.

Ar. The Justice of the Gods in this you see,
He punishes in you your Guilt to me;
You Cross my Love and bind me to my Oath.
Tryphon alike Revenges me in both;
It Is Heaven permits him thus to do you Wrong,
Because his Death you have delayed so long.

Them. That Wrong you mention I with Patience take,
Since I Am convinced it is for Syria's sake;
By me be taught to give your Passion Laws,
And B^avely Suffer for your Contry's cause;
Farewell, to Sacred Virtue let us trust;
The Gods would not be Gods were they not Just.
(Demetrius offers to g^ (...). Aretus draws his Sword.
Ar. Demetrius stay.

Them. -- Ha! what mean you now?

Ar. Since you Deny to free me from my Vow.
By which my Hopes of Cleopatra End,
And Syria must under a Tyrant Bend,
Either of which, too Clearly you must see,
Is worse a thousand times then Death to me,
Thus I cast off that Friendship which does prove
So Fatal to my Country and my Love;
My Death must End the Grief of losing both,
Or yours Absolve me from my Guilty Oath.

Them. Put up your Sword, for when this Storm is Laid,
You Will Curse your self for what you now have said;
Though to your Rage your Friendship you Resign,
Yet you shall see nothing can alter mine.

Ar. How dare you mention Friendship's Sacred Name
And yet Oppose my Country, Love, and Fame?
By that Enchanting Word you shall not now
That payment Stop which to these three I Owe.
Draw or I Will kill thee.

Them. -- Hear me but one Word.

Ar. I will not hear thee till thou draw'st thy Sword.

Them. Then thus I draw it, but to Heaven I Vow
I Will sooner Kill my self with it then You.

Ar. Thy Guilt to me thy Courage has betrayed,
It makes Demetrius now of Death afraid.

Them. When thou reflect'st the King my Rival is,
How by my Oath I have lost Stratonice,
And how thy self on whom I did rely
Art from my Friend become my Enemy,
It may perhaps to thee a Truth appear,
That Death is what I Wish not what I Fear;
What I have told thee now I thus make good;
[Opening his doublet and spreading his arms. Here quench thy Rage in my
^guarded B^ood,
And in such Death no (...) I shall endure,
But that thy Rage not Friendship acts the Cure.
(Aretus turns away. Why do thou turn away? we are Agreed,
My Death is what thou Seek'st and what Need.

Ar. Oh my Demetrius, that which now you do
Is worse then not to Free me, from my Vow (...)
For Friendship's sake methinks you should not give
Words worse then Death, yet after let me Live.

Them If this appears a Cruelty to thee,
Then be not Gu^lty of the like to me.

Ar. I bu^ provoked you to that High Degree
To get that Death from you you seek, from me.

Them. Such Woun^s from You and Fate I now Recieve,
As I much rather Death would Take then Give.

Ar. I hoped for me your Friendship was so High,
As, when you found Tryphon o^ I must Dye*
You then to Kill him your Consent would give,
Or let me the Denial not Survive,
But now alas both are refused by you.

Them. Ah do not blame what Honor makes me do,
You know how much Tryphon my Friend has bin.

Ar. Call you him Friend who is Guilty of the sin
Of Tying you by Oath from Stratonice?

Them. He does not know that he my Rival is;
But, she whom I acquainted with it now,
And how I was surprised into my Vow,
Does Scorn his Passion and Condemn my Crime
In being False to her and true to him,
For thus she terms what my Oath binds me to,
By which I am under such Torments now,
As if the Gods should but one day deny
The Cure I need, the Grief will make me die;
So long your Aims at Tryphons Death suspend,
It Is but one day and begged too by your Friend.

Ar. So long I Will respite Justice for your sake,
But know, so long I shall be on the Rack.

Them. Heaven Knows, which on us both such Ills has thrown,
That I lament Your Sufferings as my Own. They go out embracing.
Enter Tryphon and Nicanor.
The SCENE Tryphons Palace. Try. Yes, in my first Address my chiefest End
Was by Alliance to make you my Friend,
And this Address to the like End does move,
But with the Addition of a Deathless Love;
The Bond between, us nothing can ^doe,
When tied by Love and by Alliance too*

Nic. That Honor you to Stratanice design
Deserves her best Acknowledgements and mine.

Try. You then Consent I place her in my Throne.

Nic. Sir, it were fit you first Obtained her Own.
For as by Natures Dictates she is led
Not without my Consent her self to Wed,
So 'twould ^n me* Unnatural appear,
Should I without her leave dispose of Her.

Try. 'T would much Advance the Union I pursue,
If I could tell her it is Approved by you.

Nic. Too much to me it like Injustice shows
TO Approve that Union till I know she Does,

Try. You Will make me doubt, your Scruples are so nice,
That you on it do set too Low a Price.

Nic. No Sir, I do Esteem her (...) I ought,
Call not my Duty to my Child a Fault.

Try. I Know what ever you Please she will always Do,
And therefore I Will alike Ascribe to you
Those Charming Joy I^m her Love shall find,
As all my ^orments should she prove Unkind;
To you, Nicanor, I this Ev^ning give,
TO engage her, my Addresses to receive,
But if to be Rejected be my Fate,
Know I Will resent it at the Highest Rate.

Nic. I Will Rather to a Punishment submit,
Then to the Guilt of what may Merit it.
(Tryphon and N^canor go out several ways. Enter Cleopatra and Seleucus.
The SCENE Nicanors Palace. Sell. Though Tryphon does to me much Favor show,
Yet, Madam, the Respect to you I owe
Makes me abhor the Affront he did to you,
And makes me offer to Revenge it too;
All men Condemn that which he now has Done
More then they do his Usurpation;
Since it in Reason cannot be denied,
But that Inconstancy is worse then Pride;
Pride often in Heighthned Souls does it self show,
Inconstancy Rules only in the Low,
And since your Sex does your own Hand Confine,
From Acting your Revenge, accept of mine.

Cleo. That Generous Sense you of my Wrongs do show,
And the Brave Offer which you make me now,
Joined with that Friendship which I always see
You have both for Nicanor and for me,
Makes me believe I should Unjustly do,
If I in ought could hide my Grief from you;
Know then my Wrongs to me so Weighty seem,
As I am Racked till I Am Revenged on him;
And know that no Revenge can Grateful be,
But one as Vast as is the Injury.

Sell. Will you not judge that our Deposing him
Is a Revenge proportioned to his Crime?

Cleo. A^talk not of deposing him, you know
That Is less then what you to your Country owe,
For Syria's Wrongs and mine will you pursue
A less Revenge then is to either due?
And for those Sins which he has Done before,
Will you Restrain him but from Doing more?

Sell. Tryphon will find, since he in Crimes was bred,
That such Restraint is worse then to be Dead,
To one Deposed what Sentence can you give
So Cruel as Condemning him to Live;
Some Generous men who did that Fate endure,
To shun the shame in Death have Sought the Cure.

Cleo. A Generous man, Seleucus, I will own,
Finds Death an Ease when he has lost his Throne;
But he whose Soul is Low, and Crimes are High,
Thinks it the Greatest Punishment to Dye;
And that Revenge has still the Sharpest bin,
Which is held such by him who did the Sin.
Ah for my Wrongs there is no Revenge seems Good
That is not written in the Offenders Blood;
In all else you Propose you Lose your Breath,
And to Obliege me you must ask his Death.

Sell. If nothing else your Anger can atone,
Madam, depend upon it, it shall be Done;
But it is a Deed so Daring and Sublime,
That to Perform it will require some time;
Though I his Guards command, I dare not yet
Trust them with things so Dangerous and Great.

Cleo. To Dangerous Acts the Brave should always run*
Those must not be Consulted of but Done;
A Tyrants Power still on his Life depends,
Who cuts it off cuts off with it his Friends;
But that you may this Deed the boldlier do,
My Secrets I will now Disclose to you.
Aretus who your Friendship does Possess,
And who is Gallant even to an Excess,
Co^ts my Affection to a High Degree,
And, I must ^ing say is Owned by me;
In my Revenge him I engaged of late,
He shall join with you to Act Tryphons Fate,
Which by the Usurper cannot be declined,
When two such Men his Ruin have designed;
But some ^ders in your Looks I see.

Sell. Why have you Trusted any one but Me?
I am perplexed that you Revenge Design,
And yet make use of any Arm but Mine.

Cleo. Into new Griefs me my Revenge had Thrown,
If I had owed so Great a D^ to one,
I therefore choose to share it betwixt two,
Love does in him what Friendship does in you.

Sell. Yes, to Aretus, Madam, I Will be ^ust,
He does Deserve this Honor and this Trust;
We Will both Consult which is the surest Way,
In this Great Work your Orders to Obey.

Cleo. This Favor no Addition can admit,
But by Celerity in Doing it,
Since while my best Revenge you both defer,
I feel those Pains which Tryphon ought to bear.
[Cleopatra goes (...) Seleucus alone. O Prodigy of Fate! I hither came
TO Acquaint Fair Cleopatra with my Flame,
And scarce could doubt but I should Happy prove,
Since I through her Revenge di^ Court her Love;
But ever my Heart I at her Feet could lay,
She tells me she has given her Own away,
Nay more in her Revenge she would have me Join
With him who most of all does Merit Mine:
Never was any Lovers Fate so hard,
The Danger I must Share, not the Reward;
Was it her Ignorance or else her Art,
Thus to accept my Hand but not my Heart:
Aretus hitherto has been my Friend,
But Love now to that Name does give an End.
And to Obtain her he shall quickly see
He must not only Tryphon Kill but Me.

THE FIFTH ACT.
The SCENE is Nicanors Palace. The Scene opens. Tryphon Demetrius Stratonice
and Irene. Demetrius from behind Tryphon fixes his Eyes on Stratonice, folds
his Arms the one Within the other, Sighs and goes out still g^ing on her. Try.
NIcanor and Demetrius having been
Employed by me to Court you for my Queen
And having found by both that my Address
Has not obtained the much desired Success;
I now am Come, Madam, to wait on you,
To pay that Love which to your Beautie's due.
A Love which 'twere Injustice to despise,
Since it is the powerful Influence of your Eyes.

Stra. That Love which now is offered me by you
Is, Sir, to Cleopatra only due;
The Injustice then much Greater would appear,
Should I usurp that which belongs to her;
Then do not, Sir, Solicit me to do
A Wrong to Nature and to Justice too;
It Were Sin if such Desires were not denied.

Try. Nature and Justice both are on my side;
Where Nature does most Liberally bestow
The Charms of Beauty, there our Loves we Owe,
And I the Rules of Justice but pursue,
Paying a Debt where Na ure shows it is due.

Stra. Since your first Love you did to her afford,
Justice oblieges you to keep your Word;
And to my Sister, Sir, I am Confined,
By Natures Law to be both Just and kind.
Thus, Sir, the Right is on my side you see,
Fancy does Govern you but Reason me;

Try. Such Cruel Words ought not from you to fall,
What you term Fancy I must Duty Call;
If you I first had seen, then her Adored,
By you most Justly I had been abhorred,
But you being seen, I should my self abhor,
If after I Your Sister could Adore;
Your Justice into question will be brought,
If my Misfortune should be called my Fault;
Madam, it must be, sure, some other thing
Which makes you at this rate to use your King;
And from his Proffered Throne thus to Retire,
A Glory to which all but you Aspire.

Stra. She does not Merit to a Throne to Clime,
Who does acquire that Glory by a Crime;
To be a Quen I would not wound my Name.

Try. Your only Crime is that you slight my Flame,
A Flame which, if by you Contemned it be,
Shall Ruin others as 'twill Ruin me.
Madam, take heed of being thus unkind,
Least you your Judge should in your Lover find.

Stra. Nothing can me to Unjust Actions move,
Not will I, Sir, be threatened into Love.
Ah if true Love ever in your Heart had Reigned,
You would have known it could not be Constrained;
Under Heavens Care Love above Life does stand,
Tyrants may Love but cannot Love Command;
Act what you said to me, it will easier prove
T'indure your Sentence then endure your Love.

Try. Mistake not what your Scorn forced me to say,
For to your Beauties such Respect I pay,
I Would Kill my self sooner then threaten you,
But with Revenge Nicanor I Will Pursue;
He to my Love, when told him, was unkind,
And then I feared the Effects which now I find.

Stra. This Menace is beyond your first severe,
You Threaten now what only I can fear,
But Fear to Love was never yet the Way.

Try. I must not Credit that which now you say,
For of Loves Theory so much you show,
Stratonice seems disordered. As I believe the Practick too you know;
This is a Truth your blushes now have shown,
Nor could you scorn my Passion and my Throne,
Had not some other prepossest your Heart;
To find him out I Will use my Power and Art,
And, Madam, then it will perhaps appear,
You can for him as for Nicanor fear;
I am now certain you a Lover have,
Him and my hopes I Will bury in one Grave;
For since you make me Wretched, you shall know
I have the Power to make you Wretched too,
And though my Rival might escape my Hand,
Yet still your Father's Life's at my Command,
Which he shall Lose, if by to morrow night
You value not that Love which now you slight.

Stra. Yes, Tyrant, thy Resentments more to move
I will Confess to thee I am in Love.
But yet to thee the Man shall never be known
For whom I scorn thy Passion and thy Throne;
Act then thy Menaces that thou may see,
I too am more in Love with Death then thee;
To those who feel such Cruelties as these
Dying is not a Punishment but ease.

Try. Know that to Morrow Night's the utmost date
Given to Nicanor's Life or to thy Hate.

Stra. To Morrow Night In both it shall appear,
Who fears not Death does not a Tyrant fear.
[Exeunt severall^. Enter Seleucus Alone.
The SCENE is the Garden of Tryphons Palace. Oh whether by my Passion am I Led?
My Love should die after my Hopes are dead;
She has her self declared to me that she
Has given to him that which is sought by me,
Nor is Aretus guilty of the Crime,
He does to me what I Would have done to him;
Because in Love I cannot reach my End,
Why should Revenge deprive me of my Friend?
Great Gods! how can I grow so Cold and tame,
As on a Rival to bestow that Name?
And while Aretus does my Joys Ingross,
Talk my self into Patience for my loss.
Since Friendship thus does plead for my Disgrace,
Revenge do thou ascend and take the place;
Thou more like Virtue do to me appear
Then Friendship can, in this Affront I bear;
Since to the Brave nothing should be above
Revenge in Wrongs or Constancy in Love;
Therefore thy Death, proud Rival, I Will pursue,
If I must Loose her, thou must Loose her too.
[Tryphon comes in to him.
Try. Seleucus, now I feel a Matchless Pain,
My Perfect Love Meets with the like Disdain;
'Twixt what her Beauty and her Scorn does do,
At once I Hate her and Adore her too;
Ah when Provoked by what to me she said
I Menaced her to take Nicanor's Head,
So Bravely she the threatening did Despise,
Her Spirit I Admire above her Eyes:
Thus what I thought the speediest Way might be
To Conquer her, has the more Conquered me;
For to my Bondage Iam now Confined,
Both by the Luster of her Eyes and Mind,
But that which does my Highest Torment prove
Is, She Confessed to me she was in Love,
And proudly said it was past my Power and Art
To find him out to whom she gave her heart.

Sell. This and the scorn which you from her Endure
Should make you to your Reason owe your Cure.

Try. To one in Love do not of Reason speak,
For Love is never strong till Reason's weak;
My Passion is so Powerful and so High,
As if I miss Enjoying her I Die;
But if by thy Assistance she be won,
Thou shall with her devide my Heart and Crown.

Sell. Wealth is a thing I never did regard,
To have your Favor is the best Reward,
Which I Will deserve since, Sir, to reach your Ends
I will expose my Mistress and my Friends;
Yes, Sir, to me alone, you now will know,
That both your Life and Mistress you shall owe,
Then summon all your Fortitude to hear
That which at once will wound your Heart and Ear;
Our Fortunes, Sir, with the like Malice move,
You Love one Sister, I the other Love;
You have a Rival who her Heart has won,
To me my Rival the like. Wrong has done;
But that at which we both should most repine,
Your Friend's your Rival and my Friend is mine,

Try. What Friend of mine can dare affront me thus.

Sell. That name you give but to Demetrius.

Try. Oh Gods! what Horrors does my Soul invade?
Scorned by my Mistress, by my Friend betrayed?
This fatal Secret who disclosed to thee?

Sell. 'Twas he himself that opened it to me.

Try. From me conceal it, and yet tell it you?
Should I believe Demetrius is untrue,
Oh do not take this way to Usurp his Place.

Sell. He durst not tell you he your Rival was,
But had you marked those Horrors he was in,
When him you pressed to court her for your Queen,
You would not have been doubtful of his Crime,
Your Eyes had told you what I learned from him.

Try. It Is true his Troubles as it were above
What any Passion could produce but Love*
My Erro^ and thy Faithfulness I see;
Ah since Demetrius. proves so false to me,
Sure it is he too that does my Life pursue.

Sell. No, Sir, that Guilt is to Aretus due,
With ^e he Cleopatra does Adore,
Who does so much your Leaving her Abhor
That she has made my Rival promise her,
Charmed by Loves Power to be your Murderer;
She ^y'd my help in the Design to win,
But, Sir, I did detest so base a Sin.

Try. Thou art my Genius, and I owe to thee
All that I am, and all I hope to be,
Though Cleopatra's Guilt be raised so high
That, as Aretus, she deserves to Dye,
Yet if she will marry thee I Will pardon her,
But I one hour will not his Death defer.

Sell. This favor ties me, while I live, to you,
But, Sir, in your own case what will you do?

Try. In that, Seleucus, I am doubtful yet,
For on each side the difficultie's great;
I look with Horror on Demetrius guilt,
Yet tremble to pluck down what I have built;
Friendship and Love so in my Bosom strive,
As I yet know not which shall there survive;
I now am under an unheard of Fate,
My Friend and Mistress I both Love and Hate;
^h would Aretus all my Blood had spilt,
That against either I might shun the Guilt;
In this sad straight I Would be advised by thee.

Sell. The Resolution easy seems to me,
For to your Love if you can give an End,
You ought to pardon and make blessed your Friend;
But if your Being to your Love you tie,
Then there is no doubt Demetrius, Sir, must Dye.

Try. But if my Love while guiltless was denied,
I doubt when in her Lovers Blood it is died,
That Cruelty may more her Hatred move.

Sell. Yet it is a Crue^y produced by Love;
When by your Power you make her be your Wife,
And when your Mercy spares her Fathers Life,
Both those joined with the Charming Name of Queen
Over her Hate the Victory may win;
But if; when she is you Wife her Hate endures,
The Trouble, Sir, will be more hers then yours.

Try. But since, when but to fright her I did say
That I Nicanor's Life would take away,
She told me to her Death she too would fly;
I fear if I should make her Lover Dye,
She in despair to her own Death would run.

Sell. Killing one's self is sooner said then done,
But if to him that Proof of Love she would give,
Think not she will marry you while he does live.

Try. Ha! what thou say admits of noe reply,
And does on Love bestow the Victory:
Those Words have torn Demetrius from my Mind,
And for his Death the Orders they have signed;
He and Aretus instantly shall Dye;
Prepare the Guards with speed and secrecy;
Thy Care of me has made me judge it fit
To thee this Execution to commit.
(They go out several ways.
The SCENE of Nicanor's Palace opens. Nicanor, Aretus, Demetrius. Cleopatra
and Stratonice both weeping Stra. Yes Sir, I scorned his Love and Anger too,
Till he with speedy Death did threaten you,
My Constancy he then did more than fright,
Yet I concealed my Terrors from his fight;
But, Sir, my Eyes, as soon as he was goue,
Wept as my Heart, while he was here, had done;
For if to morrow night I Am not his Wife,
He has declared he will take away your Life.

Nic. I Will rather to his Rage submit my Head,
Than yield that you should such a Tyrant wed,
I Will sooner Die then I Will that Union see,
Such Hate I have for him such Love for thee.

Are. to Cleo. From your Fair eyes those Tears you ought to wipe,
This Crime for Heavens Revenge makes Tryphon ripe,
So ripe that through his Guards along I Will go
To pay that Death which to his Guilt we owe;
The Danger does less then the Duty seem,
I Will dry your Tears or strive to merit them.

Them. to Stra. I thought by Love he would your heart have won,
And therefore I did yield to be undone;
But since to this vile way he has recourse,
It Is just to end such Tyranny by Force;
I Will now with much less Gr^f his Death pursue,
Then I resigned to him my claim to you.

Ar. Since we to kill the Tyrant are agreed,
I see the Gods his Ruin have decreed.

Nic. Though that is just which is designed by you,
Yet Just things we should do as Wise men do;
Seleucus who the Usurpers Guards commands,
When this new Tyranny he understands,
To join with us I hope may soon be won.

Cleo. I dare assure you it is already done.

Nic. Already done! by whom?

Cleo. it is done by me;
His Hate to Tryphon and his Tyranny
Is such, as I am sure in this Design
He will with you, when you desire it, join.

Are. Whoever does ^o Virtue but pretend,
To what we have resolved must be a Friend.
Enter Irene hastily
Ire. I on your privacies would not int^ude,
Did not my duty force me to be (...).
Some of the Servants from the Garden call,
To tell you many soldiers scale the Wall,
A^n (...) (...) a Fight they every one appear,
And all of them do Iryphon's Livery wear.
Hermione running in.
Herm. Seleucus is into your Palace come,
And does w^ Tryphon's Guards fill every Room.

Nica. What may this Mean?

Her. My Eyes are much mistook.
If Rage and Horror dwells not in his Look.

Seleu* Yield up your Swords, in vain you will fight or fly.

Aret. Betrayed! then let us acting our Revenges die.
Seleucus forces open the doors, he runs in with several of the guards N^canor
Aretus and Demetrius draw their Swords, but ere they ^an make use of them, are
oppressed by Number and are disarmed, Seleucus b^kons to the Guards to retire,
while they are going out Seleucus says. Secure the Palace Guards, if you Admit
Any ^escape, your Lives shall pay for it,
These orders read will let you understand,
That what I do is by my Kings command;
You are my Prisoners all, Aretus you
Must bear the Fate which to your Sin is due,
For you the Murder of the King did plot.
he gives the orders to Nicanor.
Aret. I Merit Death because I killed him not.

Seleu. Demetrius too the like hard Fate must prove;
He does not only Rival Tryphon's Love,
But knew Aretus did his Death intend,
And yet Concealed it to preserve his Friend.

Deem. Perfidious man, the Tyrant could not be
Told that he was my Rival but by thee.

Seleu. Madam, the King in hope that you will receive
His Love, does yet Nicanor's Life reprieve.

Nica. Since these two generous Friends are doomed to Die,
Sparing of me is but his Cruelty.

Stra. Who would the loss of so much Wor^h survive,
Or by A Tyrant's Mercy who would Live?
Death is then either Welcomer to me.

Seleu. to Cleo. Here Prostrate, Madam, at your Feet you see
One who long since has paid to you his Heart,
And who by Love is forced to act this part;
For when I came to tell you of the Fire
Which your Bright Eyes did in my Soul inspire,
And, that it might more acceptable be
Did offer to revenge your injury,
You, ever I could make you my great Request,
Told me Aretus Reigned within your Breast;
Ah! When I found that he was Monarch there,
I did, Compelled by Love and by Despair,
Discover all to Tryphon with Design
Helping his Love to make him further mine;
This, Madam, you may Look on as my Sin,
But what you think my Guilt I Glory in;
For what more fully could my Passion prove
Then sacrificing of my Friends to Love.

Aro. Since Love makes no man Cruel or Unjust,
That which thou call'st thy Love is but thy Lust.

Cleo. Seleucus, I have Listened unto you
At once with Horror and with Pity too,
Horror that you this Falsehood could Commit,
Pity that Love seduced you into it;
Ah! to my Love what wrong could be so high.
As thinking 'twould be won by Treachery?
No, No, though my affection for you were
Such as for me you would have yours appear,
Yet Honor, which of all things most I rate,
Would by this Falsehood turn that Love to Hare;
And could I be obtained by what you do,
That Crime would soon work the like Change in you;
Oh do not think that Love can ere be built
On such a false foundation as your Guilt.

Seleu. In my sad loss what could I else have done?
To me you are lost, or this way must be won.

Cleo. This way be Won! Oh Gods let me not see
That you can have so Low a thought of me;
For then I Will rather my own Death Pursue,
Then owe the saving of our Lives to you;
I would have had you to my Love pretend
By ways which were proportioned to the End,
And would have had you, though your Hopes were Crossed,
Yet to have Merited what you have Lost;
More Grief in such Revenge I might then find,
Then in this mean one you have now designed;
For when true Honor in a Soul does Reign,
To b^ ungrateful is the fowlest Stain,
And she must in her Breast feel more Remorse
That is overcome by Merit then by Force.

Seleu. Merit would have but played a Hopeless part,
When he by Inclination had your Heart;
Madam it would have much encreast my woe
To have Deserved you and have Lost you too.

Cleo. And yet both these had been an Easier Fate
Then not to Merit me and Merit Hate;
Ah! when you thought that he my Heart had won
By that which you call Incination,
You then should by Desert and not Despair
Have cast him thence and fixed Seleucus there,
This might perhaps have been performed by you,
Had you revenged my Wrongs and Syria's too;
And this Perhaps though Late may yet be done.

Sell. Ah, Madam, I to your Revenge will run,
If you to me will now a Promise give,
That when it is acted you will my Love receive.

Cleo. Ah Run not thus into another Fault,
Love would not be what it is could it be bought.

Ar^. Why Madam should he now rewarded be
For doing that from which he hinders me?
Pay not so high a price for our Repreive.

Cleo. My Love, Aretus, is my own to give.

Ar^t. Yet to your Love give him not a pretense
By that which cannot wash off his Offense.

Cleo. Death would to me, Seleucus, happier prove
Then if I made a Bargain for my Love.

Seleu. Madam, I beg that it your Gift might be.

Cleo. Doing your Duty you should trust to me.

Stra. Alas why should you her Unkindness dread,
When so much Merit on your side shall plead?

Nic. Consider, should you run your Fatal way,
The present Times and Times to come will say,
Because Seleucus in his Love had failed,
He on his Country Tyranny ^tayl'd,
A Sin so black it were better to submit
To slighted Love, then bear the Guilt of it.

Cleo. But though to sell my Love I do abhom,
She offers to kneel and be hinders her. Yet on my knees your Virtue I Implore.
To free your Country and remove our Fears,
And to those Prayers behold I add these Tears,
[She weeps. Since it was your Love forced you to do these Wrongs.
This Reparation to your Love belongs
Seleucus M^ses a while gazing on Cleopatra.
Seleu. Love ^l with a resistless Power appears,
When Beauty Pleads the Cause and speaks in Tears;
The fiercest storms which over Souls has Power
Cannot but be suppressed by such a Shower;
I Can no Longer my hard Temper keep,
It Is less to Loose you then thus make you weep;
In you and in my Services I Will trust,
They shall be Great, and you I know are Just;
Thus Clouds a while may the Suns Light Confine,
But when they Vanish it does brighter shine.

Sell. to Are. Now brave Aretus we will together prove
Who has the Highest Title to her Love.

Are. When of most Merit you can truly boast,
Then I deserve she should to me be Lost.

Them. to Stra. Madam your Wrongs call me with them to go,
So does the Duty I to Syria Owe.

Sell. Then against Tryphon Let us all declare;
The Guards which I have brought my Creatures are,
And I even Long till I his Blood have spilt,
The Victim due both to my Love and Guilt;
We must this Moment kill him by surprise,
Our Safety now in Expedion Lies.
Nica. Deem. Aret. and Seleucus goes out.
Cleo. Sure it is the Gods that thus their Hearts Incline.

Stra. And may the Gods smile too on their design.

Cleo. You both must to the Tyrants Palace go,
To Hermione and Irene. And Let us hourly all that Passes know.
Cleopatra, Stratonice, Hermione and Irene go out.
The SCENE is Tryphons Palace. Tryphon alone. Demetrius Knows 'ere now that
it is a thing,
Too bold to be a Rival to a King,
And in his Ruin Stratonice shall see
Nothing is dearer then her Love to me,
Nor dare Nicanor my Address det^st,
Who by such Proof he finds I Am not in Jest;
Aretus still so proud A heart did show,
As I long owed him what I pay him now;
My faithful Freed Man Arcas I have sent,
Sooner to learn of my Revenge the Event.
Arcas Runs in hastily and affrighted.
Arcas, Sir you are lost.

Try. What makes thee so afraid?

Ar. Oh Sir, you by Seleucus are Betrayed.

Try. This News my Soul does with Amazement ^ill.

Arcas, He Is Joined with those whom he was sent to kill?
My have has almost robbed me of my Breath,
And, Sir, with them your Guards conspire your Death;
The People too call for your head aloud,
And to those Traitors in whole troops they crowd.

Try. Arcas, who told this fatal news to thee:

Ar. Sir what I tell you I my self did see,
And through the streets they Marched at such a rate,
As they must now be near the Palace Gate,
Which is abandoned, Sir, by all the Guards,
Bribed by Seleucus Arts or his Rewards;
If you would fly, you should not loose your time.

Try. Death's but a Punishment, but Flight a Crime,
I Will rather Loose my Life then they shall see
That ought which they can do can frighten me;
The name of King by no base act I Will Blot,
Nor Dying loose the Fame my Life has got.

Arcas, Were but these Words, Sir, to the Syrians known,
They yet would grant that you deserve the Throne;
To me you seem so Generous and High,
That fighting by your side I mean to Die.

Try. Do thou then think I will with Traitors fight?

Ar. Sir you disdain to save your self by Flight.

Try. But who like me a Kingdom did Command,
Should scorn to Die by any Subjects hand;
No, No, he Merits not to fill a Throne
Who when Fate calls, dares not employ his own;
'Twould be the Traitors Glory as their Guilt,
If they could say that they my Blood had spilt:
Go watch their coming in the outward Room,
And, when they Enter, say aloud they Come;
Mean while for such a Death I will prepare,
As shall Deserve thy kindness and thy care.
Arcas stays weeping and fixes his eyes on Tryphon. Will Arcas then my last
Request deny?

Ar. Sir I but beg that I with you may Dye.

Try. They will surprise me by this fond delay.

Arc. Since you will have it so I must obey.
[Arcas goes out:
Try. This turn I owe to Cleopatra's Eyes;
Yet since I am deprived of Stratonice,
My Death which they united do conspire,
Is not my Fear but that which I Desire.
Tryphon goes to an elevated place like a Throne, seats himself in (...) then
draws a Poniard, and viewing it says, My Hand is yet of this Bright Scepter
sure,
Which for my Sufferings is a Certain Cure:
Thus armed I will my Enemies outbrave,
And, spite of Fate, deserve a Glorious Grave.
Ah Stratonice, if thou my Heart could see,
Thou Would find I only grieve at leaving thee;
Such Charms are in thine Eyes.
(Arcas cries within.
Arcas They come, they come.
Tryphon rises lifting up his Hand with the Poniard in it.
Try. Then I no longer will deferr my Doom.
Nicanor, Demetrius, Ar^tus, Seleucus rush in with their Swords drawn, followed
by the Guards; All make a stand seeing Tryphon in that Posture. Though of my
Death your Treacheries may boast,
The Triumph yet of your Revenge is lost;
Since Heaven designs this my last hour shall be,
Thus I my self act what the Gods decree:
(Stabs himself. Pleased that my Fate within my own Power lies,
And that in Death I can my foes despise;
I dye content, since my last breath can boast,
That I your Plot of Murdering me have crossed.
Tryphon dies.
Nic. The Tyrant with himself has been at strife
To make his Death as Guilty as his Life.

Them. 'Twas ^ust this Execution he should do,
That as he wronged us he may right us too.

Are. Yet I must Grieve at that which all Rejoice,
Death should have been his Punishment, not Choice.

Sell. His thirst of Humane Blood so great was grown,
As he, rather then spare it spilt his own.
One of the Guard leads in Arcas bound.
Guard, Arcas confesses 'twas he cried they come.

Arc. I do expect, but do not Fear your Doom.

Them. Let him in safety to his Country go.

Are. For our Revenge this Object is too low.

Sell. See how he shakes, Guard let him be unbound.

Nic. We should prize Faithfulness where ever it is found.
The Guard unbind Arcas.
Are. To show I merit what I now enjoy,
The Freedom you bestow I thus employ.
Arcas runs to Tryphon, takes the Bloody Poniard which lay by him, and with it
stabs himself. That Death you thought I feared, I run to meet
And dye content since at-my-Masters -- feet
[He falls dead at Tryphons feet.
Nic. Arcas deserved, who could so bravely Do,
A better Fate and better Master too.

Are. Tryphon deserved his Gratitude to have,
Him he did free and all the rest enslave.

Sell. Arcas I wronged thinking he shook for Fear.
Enter Cleopatra, Stratonice, Hermione and Irene.
Cleo. The news of Tryphon's Death has brought us here,
We heard that he by his own Hand did Dye.

Sell. See where he now Pale as his Guilt does lie.
(They all go toward the dead Body.
Cleo. This sight at once my Joy and Grief does raise.

S^ra. It Is an ignoble Triumph thus to gaze,
Sir, let his Body be from hence conveyed;
He by his Death for all his Crimes has paid.

Sell. Since by, the Justice done by Tryphons Hand
The Throne of Syria does now empty stand,
And since the Tyrant; to confirm his sway,
The Royal Line at once did make away,
Princes, 'twere (...) we instantly agreed,
Who is the Worthiest Person to succeed,
And, since his Merit only can pretend,
I judge Nica^ should the Throne ascend.

Them. Seleucus you my motion but prevent.

Are. I to whatboth propose with Joy consent,
To you alone the Syri^ Crown is due.

Nic. Excuse me, Sir, it does belong to you.
Nicanor kneels to Aretus Admire not that my self I prostrate thus,
Since now I kneel before Antiochus:
(They all start and seem ama^ed. Preserved by Heaven from Tryphons bloody
Power,
To all the blessings of this glorious Hour;
Your Father, Sir, who found he did design
[Are. takes Nica. up. T'Usurp the Crown and kill the Royal Line,
Sent you that night by a safe hand to me,
Hoping that I shut up in privacy,
(For when the King revoak'd the Generals place
I in Retirement mourned out my Disgrace)
Might best protect you from the Tyrants Rage;
This noble Trust did all my Griefs assuage.

Them. 'Twas a high Proof that he your Virtue knew,
Since whilst he Wronged you he did trust you too.

Nic. Out of my House but still within my Care
You by the Gods till now protected were,
Under the name of Le^'s son you went,
The Prince by whom you first to me were sent,
Who when your Father and the King was killed,
Overcome by Grief his Life to Death did yield;
In reading this short Letter, Sir, you will know,
Why what you are till now I durst not show.
He gives Aretus a Letter. Aretus reads.
Antiochus to Nicanor.
SInce Heaven this Ruin throws on us,
I trust you with Antiochus;
Let him by you with Care be bred,
But till you see the Tyrant dead,
(Oh I conjure you grant me this)
Let not himself know who he is,
The Affront my Father cast on you forgive,
And let me still in your Remembrance live.
ANTIOCHUS.


Aretus gives the Letter to Demetrius and Seleucus. Sell. If it is the Prince's
hand, the hand I know,
It is his writing;

Them. His subscription too.

Nic. My Testimony were enough alone,
Since I thereby do gain the Syrian Throne,
To which by all your Votes you would me bring.

Sell. We all acknowledge that you are our King.

Are. Though a lost Crown the Gods to me restore,
Two things there are which yet I value more;
Oh would to Heaven, Seleucus, that I knew
How to be just both to my Love and you.

Sell. Under such loads of Guilt my self I find,
That I though forced by Love your Death designed,
As I the Greatest Sufferings ought to bear,
And therefore yield to endure the loss of Her;
A hopeless Love to the best End I bring,
Pleasing by it my Mistress and my King;
Blessed if the Sin caused by my Love and Fate
By this Atonement I can expiate.

Are. This Generous Act which now you for me do
Does most obliege me and Amaze me too.
(Embracing him.
To Cleo. Now, Madam, I dare humbly beg of you
To take that Heart which to your Eyes is due,
They make me know that it is a greater thing,
To be their Captive then to be their King;
A King who does as his chief Glory own
The Power of laying at your feet a Crown;
In taking it you will Raise his Joys above
All things except your Beauty and his Love;
Nicanor who to me does Empire give,
I hope will yield that you should let me Live,
Which I shall not till I your Pleasure know.

Nic. The Duty, Sir, she to her King does owe.

Cleo. That Love for which so Generously you sue,
I give not to your Title but to you.

Are. Though from your Father I receive a Throne,
Yet now you give me more then he has done;
Amidst these Joys which Heaven on me does send,
I dare not be Unmindful of my Friend;
Demetrius, Sir, Adores Fair Stratonice.

Nic. Sir, I with Joy consent that she be his.

Them. (...) (...) Madam, so Guilty I have been to you,
That I scarce dare for your Forgiveness Sue,
Mercy it self but rarely does bestow
At the same time Rewards and Pardons too.

Stra. to Them. Since what you did, Honor did lead you to,
Love shall forgive what Honor made you do;
And since your Guilt I thus have took away,
It Is fit that I Nicanor should Obey.

Them. None by Excess of Joy can Death receive,
Since after this which you have done I live.

Are. to Nic. Sir, I have now b^t one Request to make,
It Is that the General's Place you now will take,
This is the Lowest Reparation due,
For that affront the King did cas^on you.

Nic. Since I have lived to Place you in the Throne,
The only Duty made me Live is Done.
Besides a Solemn Oath I once did swear,
That I would never Public Office bear;
Think how Seleucus, Sir, Obliged may be,
You have already done too much for me.

Ar. Then for Seleucus I that place Design,
To which all Tryphon's Forfeitures I join;
It Is just since all our Lives to you we owe,
That you should have the Power to guard them too.

Sell. These Gifts not for their Greatness I esteem,
But that the Evidence of trust they seem.

Are. to Nic. Is there then nothing in my Power to do,
Which, Sir, may show my Gratitude to you.

Nic. You Have given me all the Honor I desired:

Are. You for your self a Nobler have acquired.
The Way in which me to the Throne you bring,
Is Greater then to be your self a King.
Now let us to the Gods Oblations pay,
For all the Blessings of this Glorious day:
To them a Double Debt from me is due,
Much for my Crown I owe them, more for You.
(Taking Cleo by the Hand. The Curtain falls
Epilogue.
YOur dealing, we confess, is very fair;
You paid your Money ever you saw our Ware,
And if you should dislike it now it is seen,
I pray how would you get it back again?
Since never yet at Law an Action lay
For Money paid to see a Cry'd-down-Play;
Then whatsoever it be, dispraise it not,
But do as some when they a Clap have got;
Commend the Wench that more to her may go,
Thus if they Ieer you, you may jeer them too;
New Plays, like Wives, are subject to the curse
Of being took for better or for worse.
ERRATA in the Black Prince.
PAge 1. Line 7. read praised, for prized. l. 16. r. Frenchmens, for
frenchmans. p 3. l. 18. r. for, for from. l. 25. r. made, for railed. l. 42. r.
Royal, for Regal. p. 6. l. 3. r. moving. for mourning. l. 24. r. for, for from.
l. 39. r. men, for me. p. 7. l. 7. r. sacred, for secret. l. 14. r. Ought but
her death should tell her Lover i. l. 18. r. Low, (...) Love. p. 10. l. 4. r.
my, for to. p. 11. l. 6. r. told, for ^ound l. 32 r. owe, for own. l. ^6. r.
owe, for own. l. 44. r. I Will, for I p. 13. l. 43. r. taught, for though. p. 15.
l. 11. r. talk, for task. l. 43. r. then me by friendship. p. 18. l. 4^ r.
wear, for wast. p. 19. l. 12. r. taught, for thought. p. 24. l. 21. r. I love,
spite of his fault. p. 25. l. 44. r. Counselors, for Chancellors. p. 27. l.
32. r. with, for may. p. 28. l. 11. r. intend, for purpose. l. 28. r. he, for
she. p. 30. l. 15. r. enjoyne, for enjoy. p. 32. l. 19. Garden-dore for
Chamb^r-dore. p. 34. l. 33. r. though, for to. p. 35. l. 22. r. or, for and. l.
35. r. you may go there with me. p. 36. l. 1. r. does, for nor. l. 4. r. is
past, for in part. p. 38 l. 11. r. your sentence. l. 12. r. or, for me. p. 39.
l. 11, r. him, for you. p. 40. l. 6. r. feircely, for freely. l. 20. r. who
valued not her joys. l. 41. r. vow, for voice. l. 44. r. your, for my. p. 42.
l. 6. r. since I enjoy at last. p. 43. l. 10. r. he, for her. p. 44. l. 3. r.
say, for tell. p. 46. l. 36. r. succesful, for successess. p. 47. l. 45. r.
cure for care. p. 48. l. 13. r. that which you now have said. l. 15. r. stray,
for stay. p. 48. l. 21. r. do not all the Honor. p. 49. l. 9. r. Eyes, for
Eye. l. 36. r. belief, for releif. p. 50 l. 1. r. Madam that King may safely.
l. 18. r. what, for that. p. 51. l. 22. r. my love for you is grown. l. 38. r.
and Madam. p. 53. l. 15. r. justly, for justice. p. 55. l. 33. r. you for
you will. p. 62. l. 12. r. confine, for confirm. l. 20. r. till, for still. p.
63. l. 14. r. to own my fault.

ERRATA in Tryphon.
PAge 1. l. 13. r. and he too much deserves. l. 20. r. this Monster's
wickedness. l. 28. r. it, for, he. l. 31. r. guilt, for blood. p. 2. l. 19. r.
worse, for more. l. 24. r. it, for even. p. 3. l. 2. r. you will, ^r will. p. 7
l. 22. r. his sorrow is but his hypocrisy. l. 43. r* what Tryphon ere shall
do. p. 10. l. 44. r. it is worse then death. p. 12. l. 13. r. now, for well. p.
14. l. 15. r. it is., for 'tw^. l. 17. r. not Aretus Arm employ. p. 17. l. 32.
r. much, for sad. p. 20. l. 39. r. for, for. so. p. 21. l. 35. r. which did
betwixtus pass. p. 23. l. 40. r. for, for in. p. 24. l. 10. r. hand, for man.
p. 25. l. 1. cries, for crimes. l. 21. r. said, for done. l. 38. r. help. for
self. p 26. l. 21. r the, for your. l. 24. r. or, for e're. p. 29. l. 26. r.
makes, for made. l. 17. r. truth, for faith. l. 31. r. and, for yet. l 38. r.
are, for be. p. 30. l. 4. r. bear, for fear'. l. 29 r. that, for this. p. 31.
l. 8. r. me, for you. p. 32. l. 19. r. you, for them. l 25. r. decline, for
resign. l. 29. r. too, for 'twas. p. 33. l. 1. r. of, for for. l. 8. r.
thereby, for therein. p. 34. l. 11. r. for, for (...). l. 25. r. of a more
sharp revenge. l. 38. r. lowest, for bravest. p. 35. l. 38. r. love, for same.
p. 37. l. 1. r. for, for from. l. 30. r. hate, for curse. p. 38. l. 10. r. my,
for such. l. 18 r. wounds, for words. p. 39. l. 23. r. it, for her. p. 40. l.
42. r. act, for ask. p. 41. l. 16. r. what, for why. p. 41. l. 29. r. just.
for best. p. 43. l. 28. r. tyr^nts may life. l. (...). r. same, for name. l.
16. r. mine, for it. p. 44. l. 21. r. prove, for grow. p. 45. l. 27. r. we
just^y should repine. l. 36. r. can, for should. l. 31. r. could, for would. p.
46. l. 10. r. with, for (...). p. 47. l. 17. r. wept, for went. p. 49. l. 37.
r. Case, for loss. p. 50. l. 1. r. where, for when. p. 52. l 25. r. they, for
you. p. 53. l. 10. r. loosing, for leaving. p. 55. l. ^8. r. Zeno's son, for
Leno's son. p. 56. l. 6. r. loose, for gain. l. 22. r. both, for most. l. 26.
r. (...), for their. l. 34. r. that, for t^.


