PROPOSALS TO The Honorable House of Commons, Humbly offered and presented,
for the Laying A Tax upon Raw Hides, etc.
By RICHARD ORGAN.
I. THE said Richard Organ, Humbly Proposes that a Duty be laid upon Raw-Hides,
etc. and not upon Tanned Leather, because the Charges in Collecting the said
Duty will be less, and the Tanners and Fell-Mongers will be only, or chiefly
concerned to pay it, who have long since raised their Commodities, upon hearing
a Tax would be laid upon them, as much as if such Tax were already laid: And by
this means some of them have got considerable Estates.

II. That the Duty to be laid upon Raw-Hides, etc. continue as long as that of
the Hackney Coaches, and that the Duty to be laid upon Soap be joined with it,
which will be a Fund for a Million and an half of Money, and that the Duties be
as follows:

III. Every Cow, Ox, Bull, Steer and Heifer Hide, fold under 20 s. or for 20 s.
and no more, to any Tanner or Fell-Monger, 2 s. Duty shall be paid to the King
by such Tanner or Fell-Monger, or other Person who shall buy the same; and all
such Hides as come to more than Twenty Shillings, Three Shillings Duty shall be
laid upon them.

IV. Every Calves Skin Sixpence Duty, every Sheeps Skin a Penny, every Lambs
Skin a Halfpenny.

V. All Bucks Skins, Goat Skins, and all Foreign Leather to be Taxed as shall
to the Honorable House appear most fit and convenient.

That in order to Collect this Duty there be an Office appointed at
Leaden Hall, and that Two Pence per Pound be allowed to the several Collectors,
and One Penny per Pound to the Receiver General; and that this Office extend to
all Places within the Bills of Mortality.

That this Duty be Collected in all other Parts and Places of this Kingdom, by
the Clerk of the several Markets, with the Allowances aforesaid; and that an
Office be appointed in every City, to receive such Moneys by them Collected.

That all Hides, Skins, etc. so bought be entered, and a Penalty as this
Honorable House shall think sit, be laid upon all Persons who shall buy such
Raw-Hides, etc. without entering the same, and Paying the Duties aforesaid.

The Benefit of such Duties may appear by this, that there are great quantities
of Leather Exported, and particularly Calves Skins. The King has but a
Shilling Duty for every Hundred Weight of them now, but hereby the Duty will
arise to Six Shillings a Dozen.


