Some Law Books lately Printed for J. Walthoe.
CAses in Chancery, Folo, price 12 s. Daltons Country Justice, with large
Additions, Fol. 14 s. The Practice of all the Courts at Westminster, Octavo, 5
s. A View of all the Penal Laws concerning Trade, to April 1697. 12o. 3 s. The
Method of Pleading by Rule and President, etc. 8o. 5 s. Trials per Pais, 8o. 5
s. The Complete Sheriff, with the Office of a Coroner, 8o. 5 s. The Table of
Fees of all the Courts at Westminster, as they were delivered in Parliament,
8o. 1 s. 6 d. The Modern Conveyancer, or Conveyancing Improved, the Second
Edition with Additions, 8o. 5 s. The Law of Obligations and Conditions, 8o. 5
s. Blunts Law Dictionary, Fol. 10 s. All the Pleadings and Arguments upon the
Qu^ Warrant^ against the City of London, Fol. 6 s.
Ordines Cancellariae:

BEING ORDERS OF THE HIGH COURT OF CHANCERY, FROM THE First Year of King
Charles I. To this present Hillary Term, 1697.

EXAMINED By the ORIGINAL ORDERS.

To which is added the RULES and ORDERS Of the COURT of EXCHEQUER.

LONDON, Printed by the Assigns of Rich. and Edw. Atkins Esquires, for I.
Walthoe, and are to be sold at his Shop in the Middle Temple Cloisters, School.

A TABLE OF THE Names of the Orders.
A.
ACcounts, 201 Affidavits, 15, 91, 207 Amending Letters Patents, 20 Answer, 55,
121, 192 An Act for ascertaining the Fees of the Masters in Chancery, 95
Attachments, 54
B.
BBankrupts, 198 Bill, 55, 80, 113
C.
CAuses to be set down for hearing, 135, 196 Clerks of the Inrolment, 40
Commissions for examining of Witnesses, 11 Commissions, 55, 132 Contempts, 141
Common Rules, 54 Costs, 80 Contempts, 13, 137, 187 Cursitor, 146
D.
DDecrees made with the Assistance of the Judges, 48 Decrees, 56. 142, 213
Demurrers, 62, 117 Depositions, 55, 73, 134, 247 Differences between the Six
Clerks and Examiners, 26 Division of Business of the Six Clerks Office
according to the Letters of the Alphabet, 36, 107, 157 Dismissions, 55, 56
E.
EXaminers, 3, 64, 73 Examiner suspended, 215 Examination of Witnesses, 38, 72,
125, 154, 204 Exceptions, 123, 209, 175, 234, 236, 239 Examiners Clerks not to
practice as Solicitors, 254
F.
FEes, 44 Fees of Affidavit Office, 33 Filing of Affidavits, 58 Filing Bills,
77, 83, 86 Filing Exceptions, 197 Filing Reports and Certificates, 237
H.
HEaring Causes, 30, 210, 232
I.
Idiots, 70 Imposition on Law Proceedings 176, 178 Injunctions, 55, 56 Joint
Commissions, 56 Inrolments of Patents, 101 Interrogatories, 216
L.
LVnaticks, 70
M.
MAsters in Chancery, 70, 144 Motions, 65 Misdemeanors of the Young Clerks,
221, 240, 244 Masters Clerks not to practice as Solicitors, 254
N.
NObility Answering, 63
O.
ORders on Petition, 217
P.
PAper Copies to contain 15 Lines, 53 Plague, 24 Paupers, 151 Pauper Writs, 173
Petitions, 49, 151 Persons committed to the Fleet for imbezling Records, 51
Pleadings, 55 Pleas, 62, 117 Privilege, 6, 31 Privy Seals, 55 Prisoners, 61
Privilege Writs, 100, 173 Proceeding in hearing Causes, 136 Private Order,
231, 240
Q.
QVakers, 189
R.
REferences, 256 References of Insufficient Answers, 5 Registers Office, 87, 88
Register, 54 Registring Affidavits, 8 Records, 60, 66, 68, 78, 79, 90, 194, 211
Recognizances, 183 Rehearing, 208, 233 Renewed Writs, 173 Regulating the
Vnder-Clerks, 222
S.
SIx Clerks, 61, 81, 205, 244 Sergeant at Arms, 205, 251 Solicitors, 205
Solicitor Committed for an Assault, 188 Subpoena Office, 85 Subpoena's, 45,
106, 115 Subpoena ad audiendum Judicium, 1, 46, 53 Subpoena ad Rejungendum, 54
Surrender of one of the Six Clerks to the Master of the Rolls, 219
T.
TRansferring of Records, 42
U.
UNder-Clerk allowed Parchment, 23 Under Clerks, 171, 244 Vnder-Clerks Fees,
161 Usher of the Court, 158
W.
WArrants, 55 Writs in Forma Pauperis, 100
A List of the Lord Chancellors, Lord Keepers, and Lords Commissioners of the
Great Seal of England, from the First Year of King Charles the First, to the
Ninth Year of the Reign of King William the Third.
SIR Thomas Coventry was made Lord Keeper of the Great Seal, Nov. 1. in the
First Year of the Reign of King Charles the First, 1625. Sir John Finch was
made Lord Keeper the 23th of Jan. 13 Car. 1. 1639. Sir Edward Littleton, Knight
made Lord Keeper the 23th of Jan. 16 Car. 1. 1640. Sir Richard Lane, Knight,
made Lord Keeper the 30th of Aug. 25 Car. 1. 1649. Sir Edward Hide, Knight,
made Lord Chancellor of England, the 29th of Jan. 12 Car. 2. 1660. Sir Orlando
Bridgman, Knight, made Lord Keeper the 30th of Aug. 19 Car. 2. 1667. Anthony
Lord Ashly, Earl of Shaftsbury, Constituted Lord Chancellor of England, the
17th of Nov. 24 Car. 2. 1672. Sir Henage Finch, Knight, made Lord Keeper, the
19th of Nov. 25 Car. 2. 1673. Sir Francis North, Knight, made Lord Keeper, the
22th of December. 34 Car. 2. 1681. Sir George Jefferies, Knight, Constituted Lord
Chancellor of England, the 28th of September. 1 James 2. 1685. Sir John Maynard,
Sir Anthony Keck, and Sir William Rawlinson, made Commissioners of the Great
Seal in Hillary Vacation the First of King William and Queen Mary, 1689. Sir
John Summers made Lord Keeper in Hillary Vacation, the Fourth of King William
and Queen Mary, 1692. And Constituted Lord High Chancellor of England, the 23th
of April, the Seventh of King William, 1695.
ORDO CVRIAE: OR, ORDERS OF THE Court of Chancery.
From the First Year of King Charles the I. to Hillary-Term, School.
Veneris 30 die Junii, Anno Regni Caroli Regis primo. 1625.
Concerning Subpoena's Ad audiendum Judicium.
Ordo Curiae.

WHEREAS the Right Honorable the Lord Keeper being informed of sundry Abuses,
Vide postea.
in the untimely and disorderly setting down of the Causes of Hearing in this
Court, and the obtaining of Subpoena's Ad audiendum Judicium thereupon, whereby
ancient Causes were stopped back from hearing, and other Causes thrust in, to the
prejudice of the other Clyents, and scandal to the Court, the six Clerk toward
the said Causes never being made acquainted therewith: For reformation whereof,
the then Lord Keeper did Order and Require, That hereafter it should be
carefully observed, that no Subpoena should be made Ad audiendum Judicium for
any Cause of hearing whatsoever, before the Clerk that makes the same Writ have
a Note under the Hand of the six Clerk that is Attorney, and under the Hand of
the Register; and in their absence under the Hand of their sufficient known
Deputies, to warrant the same; No Subpoena's to be made Ad audiendum judicium,
before the Clerk that makes the same Writ have a Note under the Hand of the six
Clerk and of the Register to warrant the same.
And if any such Clerk should after presume to offend therein, then the said
Clerk was to stand committed for his wilful contempt. Forasmuch as the Right
Honorable the Lord Keeper was this day informed by the said six Clerk, that of
late the said Order had been neglected in diverse Subpoenas Ad audiendum
judicium which had been made without any such notice from them or their
Deputies, in contempt of the said Order. It is therefore now ordered by his
Lordship, That the Clerk of the Subpoena Office, The Clerk of the Subpoena
Office to observe the said Order.
having notice hereof, shall hereafter observe and perform the said former
Order, his Lordship minding to have the same put in Execution in all points.

Anno Regni Caroli Regis primo. Ter. Hill. 1625.
Touching Examiners.
Ordo Curiae.

FOrasmuch as Complaint has been often made by the Examiners of this Court,
Vide postea, 19 May, 1658.
how that after Depositions of Witnesses have been taken before them, between
parties Plaintiffs and Defendants, and otherwise, one of the said parties,
Plaintiff or Defendant, after publication have taken out the Copy of the
Depositions for his own part only, and then afterward the same party which
has so taken out Copies, delivering the same to his Solicitor or Agent, to the
end they should abbreviate or keep the same, the said Solicitors or Agents by
mutual practice and combination with the adverse party in the Suit, his Clerk,
Solicitor or Agent, without the consent or privity of the said party who took
out the said Copies, has for Money, or other rewards, either given or suffered
other Copies to be made and delivered to the adverse party, his Solicior or
Agent, without the Examiners knowledge, by reason whereof the Examiners have
been often times defrauded of the said second Copies, and of the fruits of
their own Labors, to the abuse of this Court, and to the prejudice of the
Examiners, who, besides the said Disinherison of the due Fees, do also incur a
scandalous imputation for the writing, by reason the Copies so surreptitiously
made, are for the most part very ill and loosely written, which are commonly
supposed to be taken out of the Examiners Office. It The Examiner may take our
Subpoena's ag inst such as shall be suspected to deliver undue Copies of
Depositions to the adverse party his Clerk, or Solicitor to defraud him of his
Fees of second Copies, for the Examination of such Offenders, upon
Interrogatories, to be executed before the other Examiner, and to be allowed of
by a Master of ^h^ Court.
is therefore ordered by the Right Honorable the Master of the Rolls, That if
at any time hereafter it shall probably appear unto the said Examiner, or
either of them, that any undue Copies shall be made as is aforesaid, the
Examiner who finds himself so abused, may if he will take out Subpoenas
against one, two, or any three such persons as he shall suspect to have
deceived him, for the examination of such misdoers, upon Interrogatories in
that behalf to be executed before the other Examiner, and first allowed of by a
Master of the Court, touching the point of the Fraud and Abuse in delivering
out any such unlawful Copies as are before mentioned. And if upon consideration
had of the Answers of the said parties suspected, unto the said
Interrogatories, it shall appear unto the said Master of this Court, who
allowed of the Articles, and be so certified by him, that the said parties are
faulty in making or procuring such undue Copies, to the prejudice of the
Examiner, That then every such person so found offending, shall for such his
Misdemeanor be committed to the Prison of the Fleet, from whence he shall not
be discharged till he has satisfied the Examiner, Upon a Certificate of the
said Master, the Offender to be Committed to the Fleet till satisfaction to the
Examiner.
for the said undue Copies. Provided, That if the parties drawn in question
shall acquit themselves, upon their Examination, that then the Examiner, who
called them in by such Process, shall pay such Costs for unjust Vexation, If
the suspect party acquits himself, the Examiner to pay Costs.
as the Court shall think meet.

Mercurii 10 Decembris, Anno Regni Caroli Regis Quarto. 1628.
Concerning References of Insufficient Answers.
Ordo Curiae.

IT is Ordered by the Right Honorable the Lord Keeper, in respect of the great
expense of time, and many delays used, upon References of insufficient Answers
to the Masters of this Court, That if hereafter upon any Reference of
insufficient Answers made to any Master of this Court, Report upon a
Referrence, upon insufficient Answer, to be filled within one Month after date
of such Refererence.
a Report be not thereupon procured and filed in the Register within one Month
at the farthest, after the date of such Reference, that the same Reference
shall stand absolutely void, by this general Order, without any Motion or
special Order to be obtained in that behalf. Or else the Reference to be
absolutely void, without Motion or special Order.


Martis 22 die Decembris, Anno Regni Caroli Regis Quinto. 1629.
Of Privilege.
Ordo Curiae.

THE Right Honorable the Lord Keeper taking notice of the great Abuse that
has been lately offered to the Dignity of this Court, in the frequent granting
of Privilege, unto such as no ways have any dependence upon the Court, but
only under color that they are or have been Servants to some of the Masters,
Ministers and Officers of the Court, which heretofore has not usually been
admitted, but to such as have been menial Servants unto such Ministers and
Officers. For prevention of which Abuse, his Lordship does Order, That from
henceforth no Writ of Privilege shall be granted to any person whatsoever, but
only unto such as are Ministers, Officers, and known Clerks of the Court, No
person to have Privilege but Masters, Ministers, Officers, and known Clerks of
the Court, and their Menial Servants.
and shall be so certified by the Master of the Office where such Clerks write,
and to such others as shall first make Affidavit, that they are menial Servants
unto some one of the Masters, Ministers, or Officers of the Court, and such
Writ of Privilege to continue in force no longer unto such Servants, than they
shall continue menial Servants: And before any Writ of Privilege shall pass
the Seal, except it be for a Minister, Officer, or known Clerk of the Court, It
is Ordered, That it be first presented unto, and signed by the Lord Chancellor
or Lord Keeper for the time being; and where any Writ of Privilege shall be
presented to his Lordship to be signed for any such menial Servants, as
aforesaid, the Affidavit so to be by him made, is to be annexed to the Writ it
self. And it is lastly Ordered, That no Writ of Privilege do issue for any
menial Servant, until such time as his Writ of Privilege has been first
allowed of by his Lordship, Writ of Privilege, how and by whom to be allowed.
as aforesaid.

Sabbati 23 Jan. Anno Regni Caroli Regis Quinto. 1629.
Concerning Registring of Affidavits.
Ordo Curiae.

Post 8 Anno and 21 June, 1660.
THE Right Honorable the Lord Keeper of the Great Seal of England, and the
Master of the Rolls, having this day taken into their serious Consideration,
the present state of the Office of Registring Affidavits in this Court, and the
necessary use thereof, and observing upon what just and honorable grounds the
same was first Instituted and Erected, by our late Sovereign Lord King James,
of blessed Memory, for preventing the embezilling and falsifying of Affidavits,
whereby the Court has been often abused, the course of Justice interrupted,
and the Suitor apparently wronged, or unduly prejudiced; and finding withal,
That notwithstanding the said late Kings express Commandment, by Letters
Patents under the Great Seal of England, and since revived by his Majesty that
now is, by like Letters Patents, dated the 18th of December last, for
prohibiting the making or entering of any Order, Attachment, Commission, or
other Process or Procedings of the Court, grounded upon an Affidavit, except
such as properly belong to the Supplicavit Office, till the Affidavit were
first Filed and Registered in the Affidavit Office. And notwithstanding special
Orders of the Court heretofore made to that purpose, and by Directions both
publicly and upon private Petitions given, for due observation thereof, yet
the same has been of late years so much neglected, as it is now found
necessary for the honor of the Court, the good of the Suitor, and the righting
of the Officer, to give reformation thereunto. It is therefore, upon due
consideration of the Premises, Ordered by their Honors, That all Affidavits
of this Court, except those only which belong to the Supplicavit Office, shall
before the same be exhibited in Court, or otherwise produced, to ground any
Orders, Writs, Process, or Proceedings of Court thereupon, be brought into the
said Office for Registring Affidavits, and be there duly Filed and Registered;
All Affidavits, except those that belong to the Supplicavit Office, before they
be read in Court, to be first Filed and Registered in the Affidavit Office, and
attested by a Copy thereof under the Officers hand.
and that no Copy of Affidavit be made or subscribed but by the sworn Register
of Affidavits, No Copy of Affidavit to be subscribed, but by the sworn Register
of Affidavits.
or his Deputy for the time being, and that no Council at Law, nor any of the
six Clerks, or other Clerks or Officers of this Court, nor any Solicitors of
Causes there depending, shall from henceforth offer to read or give in Evidence
to the Court, any Affidavit that is not first Filed and Registered in the said
Affidavit Office, and attestation thereof given by a Copy under that Officers
Hand, or his Deputy: And that neither the six Clerk, nor any of the Cursitors,
nor the Register of the Court, their Clerks or Deputies, do make, pass, or
enter any Orders for Attachments, Commissions of Dedimus potestatem, or other
Commissions, Writs, Processes, or proceedings, grounded upon an Affidavit,
unless the said Affidavit be first Filed and Registered in the Affidavit Office,
Six Clerks, Cursitors, Register of the Court, not to pass or enter any proc^ss
grounded upon an Affidavit, unless they be first filed.
as aforesaid. And that all Clerks of the Court and Solicitors of Causes there,
do before the last day of this Hillary-Term, bring in all such Original
Affidavits as are remaining in their Hands into the said Office, and cause them
to be duly Filed and Registered at their Perils. All which particulars their
Honors do straighly charge and require to be from henceforth duly observed,
that his Majesty's express Commandment therein be not contemned or neglected.

Tho. Coventry C. S. Jul. Caesar.


Veneris 7 die Martii, Anno Regni Caroli Regis Quinto. 1629.
Concerning Commissions for Examination of Witnesses.
Ordo Curiae.

Whereas Complaint has been made unto me, by the Examiners of this Court,
that diverse Commissions Ad Examinand' Testes, have issued under my Name, which
have been executed in or near London, in such secret manner, that the Examiners
have not been able to get timely notice for suppressing of the same. Forasmuch
as I find by the Ancient Constitutions and Ordinances of the Court, that no
Commission Ad Examinand' Testes ought to be granted, but for Age, Impotency,
and remote distance of place. And by the general and approved practice of the
Court, all Examinations of Witnesses in or near London, have been taken by the
Examiners in their Office, and not by Commission, unless by stealth, as
aforesaid, or by special Order of Court. And because the issuing and executing
of such Commissions, contrary to the said Order and Usage of the Court, is a
great wrong and discredit to the Examiners and their place, who with their
Clerks do give daily attendance at the Rolls, as well in the Vacation as
Term-time, for the more speedy dispatch of such Witnesses as are to be examined
in or near London, upon Causes depending in Chancery; and for the parties to
decline the sworn Officers of the Court, constituted for that purpose, without
any just exception against them, gives cause to suspect the same to be done
for sinister purposes (Examinations taken in Court being always esteemed better
and more indifferent there taken, than by Commission.) I have thought fit, for
preventing the said Wrong and Abuse for the time to come, hereby to declare and
make known, That I do therefore Order and Require the six Clerks and such their
Clerks and under Clerks, who do write Commissions, to forbear to make, or cause
to be executed in or near London, any Commission Ad examinandum Testes, The six
Clerks or under Clerks not to make or cause to be executed any Commission Ad
examinand' Testes, in or near London.
in or under my Name, and if any such Commission shall be hereafter made in my
Name, I do hereby likewise declare, That I will both disavow the same as
Irregular and contrary to Order, and do resolve to question them for doing
thereof. All which I have the rather been moved to declare and make known, out
of the indifferent and equal respect I bear to all parties, and my care and
desire that each Officer under me should contain themselves within their own
proper Bounds, without incroaching the one upon the other, that so I may
preserve and leave things in the same state and order wherein I found them,
without innovation or alteration. At the Rolls this 7th of March, 1629.

Jul. Caesar.

Jovis 17 die Novembris, Anno Regni Caroli Regis septimo. 1631.
Touching Contempts.
Ordo Curiae.

THE Right Honorable the Lord Keeper finding much inconvenience and prejudice
to fall upon diverse of his Majesty's Subjects, who are Suitors in this Court,
by the undue proceedings of such as sue out the Process of the Court upon
Contempts, the same oftentimes running out to a Commission of Rebellion, or to
a Sergeant at Arms, before the party against whom the Process made out has had
notice of the precedent Process issued forth against him, which is occasioned
by reason the said Processes are oftentimes made unto a County where the Party
is not resident, and when it is made into the right County, by reason of an
unusual neglect and want of endeavor in the Prosecutor to get the same
executed, the Sheriff returns a Non est inventus, or a Proclamari feci, and
sometimes that Return made by others in the Sheriffs name, in an ordinary
course. His Lordship therefore, to remedy such Inconvenience and Abuse
hereafter, and to prevent the vexation of the Subject in this kind, does think
fit and Order, That all Process hereafter to be made upon any Contempt, be made
out into the proper County where the party against whom the same Process
issues, shall be resident or dwelling, unless he shall be then in or about
London, All Process made upon Contempt to be made out into the proper County
where the party is resident, unless in or about London.
in which case it may be directed into the County where he shall then be, that
it may be served upon him there; and that every Suitor who prosecuteth Process
of Contempt against any of his Majesty's Subjects, shall do his best endeavor
to procure the said Process to be duly executed, He who prosecuteth for
Contempt, to do his best endeavor that the precedent Process be duly executed.
and the supposed Contemners to be apprehended thereby; and if any be hereafter
arrested upon a Proclamation or Commission of Rebellion, or by the Sergeant at
Arms, and shall make it appear unto the Court by proof, that the Prosecutor of
those Processes has not done his best endeavor to have had the first and
precedent Process duly executed, as by the Order is required, then the party so
offending shall pay unto the other party grieved, very good Costs for his
wrongful vexation, contrary to the direction of this Order. And his Lordship
does also Order, That notice be given thereof to the Officers and Clerks of the
Court, that so their Clyent may have knowledge thereof, that the same may be
observed accordingly.

Jovis 28 die Februarii, Anno Regni Caroli Regis Octavo, 1632.
Concerning Affidavits.
Ordo Curiae.

Whereas the Right Honorable the Lord Keeper of the Great Seal of England,
and the Master of the Rolls, have by an Order of this Court, dated the 23th day
of January, Antea An. 1629.
in the 5th year of his Majesty's Reign, Ordered and straightly charged and
required, That all Affidavits of this Court, except those only which belong to
the Supplicavit Office, should before the same be exhibited in Court, or
otherwise produced, to ground any Order, Writs, Process, or Proceedings of
Court thereupon, be brought into the Office of Registring Affidavits, and be
there duly Filed and Registered, and that no Copy of Affidavits be made or
subscribed, but by the sworn Register of Affidavits, or his Deputy for the time
being, and that no Counselor at Law, nor any of the six Clerks, or other
Clerks or Officers of this Court, nor any Solicitor of Causes there depending,
should from thenceforth offer to read or give in Evidence to the Court, any
Affidavit that is not first Filed and Registered in the said Affidavit Office,
and attestation thereof given by a Copy under that Officers Hand, or his
Deputy; and that neither the six Clerk, nor any of the Cursitors, nor the
Register of this Court, their Clerks or Deputies, do make, pass, or enter any
Order for Attachments, Commissions, Writs, Process, or Proceedings, grounded
upon any Affidavits, unless the said Affidavit be first Filed and Registered in
the Affidavit Office, as aforesaid, and that all Clerks of the Court,
Solicitors of Causes there, should by the end of Hillary-Term then next
following, bring into the said Office all such Original Affidavits as should
remain in their Hands, and cause the same to be there duly Filed and Registered
at their Peril. All which notwithstanding, many Original Affidavits have not
been brought into, nor Filed in the said Office, as in and by the said Order
was required; but contrariwise, many Affidavits have since been read and used
in Court, and Orders and proceedings have been thereupon made, drawn up and
entered, before the said Affidavits have been Filed and Registered in the said
Affidavit Office. And whereas also many Affidavits have been and are brought
into the Register of the Affidavit Office, by the parties themselves, whose
Cause the same concerns, and by others for many Weeks, Months, and some Years
after the same Affidavits sworn, with sundry Interlineations, sometimes in
another Hand, oftentimes a Line or two struck out, usually blotted or altered
in one place or another, not without apparent suspicion of being corrupted and
falsified, after the Master of this Court his Hand put thereunto, or use made
thereof, upon Motion in Court, or Orders or Process thereupon grounded. Now
upon due consideration had by their Honors of the Premises, It is this
present day Ordered, and by their Honors strictly given in charge and
commanded, That the said Order of the 23th of January, in the said fifth year
of his Majesty's Reign, shall be henceforth, both at the Court at Westminster,
at the Seals, and at the Rolls, by the Officers of this Court, and all others
whom the same does or may concern, duly observed and kept, at the perils of
such as in contempt of this Honorable Court, shall presume wilfully or
negligently to decline or not observe the same. And further it is Ordered by
their Honors, That neither the Register of this Court, his Clerk or Deputies,
shall, or do at any time hereafter, draw up, sign or set his or their Hand or
Hands unto any Order whatsoever, grounded upon an Affidavit, unless the
Affidavit be first Filed and Registered with the Register of the Affidavits,
Filing Affidavits, vide ant^ f. 10.
and attestation thereof brought and showed to the said Register of this Court,
his Clerk and Deputies, under the Hands of the said Register of the said
Affidavits, or his Deputy attending in the said Office. And it is further
Ordered by their Honors, That no Master of this Court shall accept of, or take
the Oath of any person to an Affidavit, except the same be fairly and
handsomely writ in one hand, without blotting or interlining; Affidavits to be
fairly written in one Hand, without blotting or itnerlineation, otherwise no
use to be be made of them in Court.
and in case any Affidavit shall escape the said Master of this Court, and pass
so blotted and interlined, under their or any of their Hands, It is further
Ordered, That the Register of Affidavits or his Deputy shall thereupon refuse
the same, and that afterward no use shall be thereof made in any of the
proceedings of this Court. And lastly, It is wished and directed by their
Honors, That all Affidavits taken, or henceforth to be taken before any Master
of this Court, be brought unto the said Register of the Affidavits, or his
Deputy for the time being, to be there Filed and Registered, in some due and
convenient time after the same be sworn unto, Affidavits to be Filed in due and
convenient time after they are sworn and the reason of this part of the Order.
and before use be made thereof in Court, as well to prevent the vexation and
trouble of his Majesty's Subjects, in coming so often to enquire for such
Affidavits, before they come unto the said Office, as also that the parties
against whom the said Affidavits be made, may have time by their Council to
inform this Court of any just Cause of Exception they may have to allege
against the same. And to the end that none may have any excuse of being
ignorant hereof, It is lastly commanded, That this Order, being fairly Written,
shall be set up in Tables, and so shall remain in the several Offices of the
Register of the Six Clerks, and of the said Affidavits.

Tho. Coventry. C. S. Jul. Caesar.


Lunae 16 die Novembris, Anno Regni Caroli Regis undecimo. 1635.
Concerning the amending of Letters Patents.
Ordo Curiae.

Whereas a Petition was lately exhibited to his Majesty, by Sir Kenelm Digby
Knight, the Tenor of which Petition, and the Answer thereunto follows in
these words:

To the Kings most Excellent Majesty. The humble Petition of your Majesty's
Servant, Sir Kenelm Digby, Knight,
Humbly Shows;

THAT whereas your Majesty was graciously pleased to bestow upon him certain
Lands Escheated to your Majesty, by the death of John Calverley Esquire; without
Heir, part of which Lands lie in the County of Kent, and were so mentioned in
the Office found to entitle your Majesty, and in the Bill Signed with your
Royal Hand for passing thereof to your Petitioner; but at the Signet Office, by
the mistake of the Clerk taking the Letter L for a K, are mentioned to lie in
Com. Kank. and by that Error are so mentioned, both at the Privy Seal, and
Great Seal, and the Inrolling thereof, which your Petitioner cannot have
amended, without your Majesty's special Warrant.

Your Petitioner therefore most humbly beseeches your Majesty to be graciously
pleased to give a Warrant, that they may be amended and made agreeable to the
Bill Signed, and the Patent after the Amendment thereof new Sealed, as in such
cases is usual.

And Your Petitioner shall daily pray, etc.
At the Court at Salisbury, the 9th of August, 1635.
HIS Majesty's Pleasure is, That these Mistakings be Amended and made agreeable
to the Bill Signed; and the Patent, after the Amendment thereof, new Sealed, as
in such Cases is usual, and as here is desired.

John Coke.

In conformity to which his Majesty's pleasure, the Right Honorable the Lord
Keeper having seen as well the said Letters Patents, as the Privy Seal
whereupon the same did pass, remaining in this Court; and having also seen the
Original Bill signed under his Majesty's Hand, and the Transcript thereof which
passed the Signet, and finding the Information in the said Petition to be very
just and true, and having advised thereof with his Majesty's Attorney General,
has Ordered, That the Privy Seal remaining in this Court, and the Inrolment
thereof be amended, and that the Seal be pulled from the Letters Patents, and
the same Patent amended and new Sealed, according to his Majesty's good
Pleasure. And this Order, grounded upon his Majesty's Direction, Amendment of
Letters Patents, for a mistake in the Privy Seal, and the Inrolment, and the
Original Bill under his Majesty's Hand.
shall be a sufficient Warrant to the Clerk and other Officers of the Court to
whom it appertains for the doing thereof.

Tho. Coventry C. S. Jo. Bancks.


Martis 5 die Januarii, Anno Regni Caroli Regis undecimo. 1635.
For Under Clerks being allowed Parchment for Engrossing Decrees, etc.
Ordo Curiae.

THE Right Honorable the Master of the Rolls having taken Consideration of the
Oath Administered unto the Under Clerks in the six Clerks Office, whereby they
are sworn not to carry nor consent that any other may carry forth of the House
called the Six Clerks Office, any Bill, Answer, Commission, Decrees,
Dismissions, Bills signed, Privy Seal, or any other Record whatsoever, which
ought to be there remaining, except by special Order of the Court: And being
also advertised, That their Under-Clerks have used and ought to have from the
Usher of this Court, Parchment for Engrossing of Decrees and Dismissions, which
are to be Enrolled, which cannot be well proportioned unto them, without sight
of the said Decrees and Dismissions, that the Parchment may be allowed and
delivered unto them, proportionable to the length of the said Decrees and
Dismissions; It is therefore this present day Ordered by his Honor, That it
shall be lawful from henceforth for any of the said Under Clerks in the Six
Clerks Office, to bring over from the Office into the Chapel of the Rolls any
Decree or Dismission, after the same shall be so signed, to be seen by the
Usher of this Court, or his Deputy only for that purpose, that he or they may
see what Parchment is fit to be allowed for the Inrolling thereof, Under Clerks
may bring over from the six Clerks Office to the Chapel of the Rolls, any
Decree or Dismission after the same shall be signed, to be seen by the Usher of
this Court, that Parchment may be allowed for the Inrolment thereof.
and to no other intent or purpose; which being done, the same are by the said
Under-Clerks to be safely returned into the Office whence the same was so taken
out as aforesaid, without suffering the same to pass out of their own Hands.

Jul. Caesar.

Mercurii 15 die Junii, Anno Regni Caroli Regis Duodecimo. 1636.
By reason of the Plague.
Ordo Curiae.

THE Right Honorable the Lord Keeper having taken into his Consideration the
Danger of the increasing of the Infection of the Plague, by the assembling of
much People together at this time, does therefore this present day Order, That
all unnecessary resort unto his Lordships House, by the Officers and Clerks of
this Court, and others be forborne, both at General Seals and at other times,
and that all Patents, Commissions and Writs, whereof an Entry is to be made in
the Comptrollment Book, shall be brought to the Riding Clerk or his Deputy,
before they be Sealed, who are then to take such particular notice thereof in
Writing, that when the same shall be Sealed, a perfect Entry thereof may be
made in the Comptrollment Book, whereby a due account may be given to his
Majesty, and otherwise, as is and has been used; and after such Notes shall be
taken as aforesaid, and the Hand of the Riding Clerk or his Deputy, put to the
said Patents, Commissions and Writs, then the Riding Clerk or his Deputy is to
send the same to be Sealed, at such time and places as his Lordship shall
appoint for that purpose; and after the said Patents, Commissions and Writs
shall be Sealed, the same are to be taken from the Seal by the Clerk of the
Hannaper or his Deputy; and then the Officers and Clerks who writ and prepared
the said several Businesses for the Great Seal, are to receive them from the
Hands of the Clerk of the Hannaper or his Deputy, as formerly they have done,
and for all other Writs and Seals that are in Farm the same Writs are to be
delivered at the Subpaena Office to the Farmers thereof, or their Deputies, who
are to that purpose there to attend to receive the Writs, and cause them to be
carried to the Seal and to be brought back unto them when they are Sealed, and
then the same Writs are likewise to be fetched from them by the Officers and
Clerks who writ and prepared the same Writs for the Seal, as is usual, which
Course before directed and ordered is to be observed by all those whom it shall
concern, until his Lordship shall signify his pleasure to the contrary.

Tho. Coventry C. S.

Jovis 3 die Martii, Anno Regni Caroli Regis undecimo. 1636.
Touching Differences between the Six Clerks and the Examiners.
Ordo Curiae.

WHereas the Examiners of this Court have lately Petitioned the Right
Honorable the Lord Keeper thereby desiring to be righted against the Six
Clerks of this Court in sundry Particulars pretended by the Examiners to be by
the Six Clerks encroached upon the Rights of the Examiners Places, as namely
touching the Returning, Copying, keeping and Filing of all Examinations and
Depositions taken as well by Commission as in Court, and touching the Six
Clerks exemplifying of Examinations taken in Court by loose Copies, and the
Examiners claim to write to the Great Seal for the making of their own and
their Clerks Attachments of Privilege and other Writs, and also that no
Commission to examine Witnesses should be executed in or within 20 Miles of
London without special Order from the Court, and this day being appointed by
his Lordship for the hearing and settling of the difference, and his Lordship
together with the right Honorable the Master of the Rolls being now attended
by both parties and their Council Learned on both sides, and the matter being
long debated, the Examiners to maintain their claim to the said Particulars,
did produce a Copy of an Ordinance alleged to be made in this Court in 36 Hen.
8. and a Letter written by Mr. Thomas Poule about thirty-years since he being
then a Six Clerk of this Court to Mr. Rob^nson then one of the Examiners, and
likewise produced another Ordinance of the 5th. Car. Regis, made by the now
Master of the Rolls, and by way of President diverse Orders made for suppressing
and superceding such Commissions executed or endeavored to be executed in or
near London; Differences between the Six Clerks and the Examiners touching
Exemplifying Examinations, Attachments of Privilege and Commissions to examine
Witnesses within 20 miles of London debated, but not settled; and referred to
examination of Presidents.
and on the contrary the Six Clerks did now produce by way of President diverse
Commissions, some from the beginning of the time of King Hen. 6. and many since
from King Henry the 8th's time, which have been executed in and near London
without exception, and as was alleged returned into their Offices, and there
copied, kept and filed, and justified their Exemplifying of Examinations taken
in Court as properly belonging to them only, none but them alone as they
pretend having authority to write such Writs as aforesaid unto the Great Seal:
And as for the said Ordinance pretended to be made in 36 Hen. 8. Mr. Attorney
General of Council with the Six Clerks alleged that the same Ordinances make
not against the Six Clerks, nor do they limit any certain distance of place
from this Court for Execution of Commissions, nor are they binding; besides the
said Ordinances are not authentical, but conceived by the Six Clerks to be
suspicious and entered into the Book of 36 Hen. 8. of late time by one Bailiff
without Warrant in a torn Leaf in the very last Page of that Book, and that
they seemed to be of a much newer handwriting than the rest of the Book.
Whereupon his Lordship declared that it is material to find out the Authority
of the said Ordinances, and when and by whom the same was entered in the
Register, whether of late time by the said Bailiff, as is pretended by the Six
Clerks or no, which if they were so lately entered, the same are fit to be
expunged out of the Register, and therefore his Lordship does Order, That the
Master of the Rolls be attended by both parties herein, who is desired to
Examine and find out the truth thereof, and upon his Honors Certificate
further Directions shall be given therein: And as for the several Orders and
Presidents produced by each party as aforesaid, forasmuch as neither party had
seen the others Presidents, nor knew not upon what either side would insist, so
that the parties were not at present provided to give answer whereupon his
Lordship might ground a resolution; It is ordered that each party shall permit
and suffer each other to have a sight of the Orders and Presidents produced by
either party, unto which either side may take what Exceptions they think fit,
and in case it shall fall out to be necessary for any to be examined upon Oath
for clearing of any doubt, his Lordship upon knowledge, and considering the
necessity thereof will give further order therein. And thereupon and upon a
further hearing thereof his Lordship will finally determine and settle the
differences between the said Officers.

Veneris 25 die Novembris Anno Regni Caroli Regis Duodecimo 1636.
Concerning Hearing of Causes.
Ordo Curiae.

WHereas by reason of the late Infection, the Causes appointed and set down for
Michaelmas Term could not then be heard, his Lordship taking the same into
consideration, and desiring to give as much Expedition to those Causes as the
season will permit, and his Lordship shall be able; has thought fit, and does
hereby order, that the Causes formerly set down in Michaelmas Term shall now
according to their then Order, Speeding of Causes because of the Remanets
during the Plague.
and in their due places continue ranked for Hillary Term. And whereas there
were only four Causes appointed for every day, his Lordship does propose (God
willing) though it may prove the more labor and trouble unto his Lordship, to
hear Six Causes; to which purpose his Lordship does also order that six Causes
of those already set down be set down for every day, and that the Register
enter this Order, and make a Book of Causes accordingly, and give notice to the
Six Clerks, and their Clerks, that they or their Clients if they intend to have
their Causes heard, do sue out and serve Process ad Audiendum Judicium, as is
accustomed in the like case against the days now appointed. And for such Causes
as shall remain unset down, his Lordship does propose, God willing, to set down
those in the first place for Easter Term next.

Lunae 30 die Januarii Anno Regni Regis Caroli Duodecimo. 1636.
Privilege allowed to a Clerk that stood suspended.
Ordo Curiae.

WHereas George Mynn, Esquire; Clerk of the Hannaper in the High Court of Chancery,
by Sentence and Decree in the High Court of Star Chamber was, and yet stands
suspended from the Execution of the said Office: Now forasmuch as it has been
certified to the Right Honorable the Lord Keeper by the Right Honorable the
Lord Cottington Chancellor of the Exchequer, and Master of the Court of Wards
and Liveries, that it is his Majesty's Gracious Pleasure, that the said George
Mynn notwithstanding the said Sentence and Suspension aforesaid shall have and
receive the benefit of his Privilege in the said High Court of Chancery in as
full and ample manner as he had enjoyed the same before the said Sentence of
Suspension, Clerk of the Hanaper though suspended from the Execution of his
Office, yet allowed his Privilege.
as by the said Certificate under the hand of the Lord Cottington, filed with
the Register of this Court appears; and forasmuch as the said George Mynn
though suspended as aforesaid, is and remains still an Officer of this Court:
It is therefore Ordered by the Right Honorable the Lord Keeper that the
Officers, Clerks and Ministers of the said Court of Chancery, do from
henceforth take notice of his Majesty's Gracious Pleasure, and do permit and
suffer the said George Mynn to have, take and sue forth the Process and Writs
of the said Court of Chancery, and to have and enjoy his Privileges and
Pre-eminence of the said Court in such ample manner as the said George Mynn had
(and of right ought to have had before the said Sentence of Suspension, and in
such sort as they themselves the said Officers, Clerks and Ministers of
Chancery, or any of them, do now hold and enjoy the same.

Martis 24 die Junii Anno Regni Caroli Regis 13tio. 1637.
Fees of the Affidavit Office.
Ordo Curiae.

WHereas William Robinson, and John Robinson Registers of Affidavits in this
Honorable Court have been Suitors to have the Fees belonging to them in
respect of the said Office of Affidavits reduced into a Table to be Signed and
hung up in the Affidavit-office, alleging that such a Table was heretofore
made and Signed by the late Lord Chancellor Elesmore, and Sir Julius Caesar,
Knight, late Master of the Rolls, but the same Table has been missing for
diverse years past; and albeit by special direction of this Court diligent
search and enquiry has been made for the finding out the said Table for the
space of a year and more last past, yet the same can in no wise be found or
produced: Whereupon by further Order and direction of this Court
Interrogatories have been exhibited, and diverse ancient Clerks and Practicers
of this Court have been examined to discover and find out the due Fees
belonging to the said Office, and contained in the said Table of Fees, Signed
and subscribed by the said late Lord Chancellor and Master of the Rolls, which
Depositions the right Honorable Thomas Lord Coventry Lord Keeper, etc. and Sir
Dudley Diggs, Knight, Master of the Rolls, having seriously perused and advised
of, and well weighing how needful it is that the Fees of the said Office should
be certainly known, as well that the Subject may know what to pay, as the
Officer be directed what he ought to receive or take: It is therefore this
present day by the said Lord Keeper, with the advice and assistance of the said
now Master of the Rolls, Ordered, declared, and decreed, that the Fees
hereafter mentioned, are the due Fees belonging to the said Office, and so
shall be esteemed and taken hereafter; and the Register and Registers of
Affidavits of this Court for the time being, and their Deputy and Deputies
successively from henceforth shall and may receive and take the several Fees
hereafter mentioned, and none other, that is to say for Filing every Affidavit
4 d. for Registring of every Affidavit 4 d. the side, Table of Fees of the
affidavit Office for Filing, Registring, Copying, Signing. and cer^i^ying any
Affidavit.
for the Copy of every Affidavit 4 d. the side, for the Register or his
Deputies hand to every Copy o^ an Affidavit 12 d. for every Certificate with
the Registers hand or his Deputies hand to it 12 d. And it is Ordered that a
Table of the particular Fees before expressed shall be fairly written and
Signed by the said Lord Keeper and Master of the Rolls, and then hung up in the
said Office, to the end that all Suitors may certainly know what they ought to
pay for the Filing, Registring, Copying, Signing or certi^ying of any
Affidavit. Provided always, that if the said Table subscribed by the said late
Lord Chancellor, and the then Master of the Rolls, shall be hereafter found;
and if thereby, or by any other due proof it shall be made appear that the Fees
allowed by the late Lord Chancellor, and Master of the Rolls, did in any thing
vary from the Fees thereby allowed, then this Court will take such further
consideration and order for reducing the Fees herein limited to the former rule
or proportion as shall be meet.

Tho. Coventry C. S. Dud. Diggs.


Sabbati 4 die Novembris Anno Regni Caroli Regis 13tio. 1637.
Division of business of the Six Clerks Office according to the Letters of the
Alphabet.
Ordo Curiae.

WHereas the Six Clerks of this Court according to the power and liberty by the
Kings Majesty in that behalf given to them, Vide infra 25. Jan. 63. and per 1
Feb. 68. that Order repealed.
have with the allowance and approbation of the Right Honorable the Lord
Keeper divided and disposed the Pleadings and Businesses of their several
Offices according to the Letters of the Alphabet, and in that manner do now
exercise and continue the doing thereof which allowance and approbation was
only temporary until upon trial the Convenience or Inconvenience should appear
therein. And now lately some complaints having been made by the Under-Clerks
touching the said course which the Lord Keeper and Master of the Rolls do
intend to take into their consideration with all possible speed. And whereas by
the Death of Mr. Caesar, lately one of the said Six Clerks, and in that no other
Six Clerk is yet sworn or admitted into his place, the business of the said
Office may suffer much by delay and want of oversight thereof during the
Vacancy of an Officer in the said place, Division of the Pleadings, and several
businesses of the Six Clerks Office, according to the Letters of of the
Alphabet, but a Temporary and probationary custom, yet during the Vacancy of a
Six Clerk allowed to one who was appointed by the Court so to do.
his Lordship and the Master of the Rolls being informed thereof, and taking
the same into their Consideration, and having care to prevent delay to the
Client in his ordinary proceedings, and for the better furtherance and dispatch
of the business of the said Office, have thought fit, and do hereby order and
appoint without prejudice to any thing which may be said for or against the
said Division by Alphabet, that for and during the Vacancy of a sworn Officer
in Mr. Cesar's said place, Francis Heath who was Deputy under Mr. Caesar when
he lived, and is still a Clerk in the said Office, shall and may in and for the
said Office, and according to the Division aforesaid, Sign and File all Bills,
Answers and other Pleadings, and Sign all Copies, Decrees and Dismissions, and
Certificates, and in his own name during the said Vacancy, shall give, receive
and enter all kind of usual Rules and Bills of Costs, and pass all Writs and
regular Orders, and dispatch all other business and proceedings which shall
happen or ought to be done within or for the said Office according to the
Division aforesaid, and receive the due Fees for the same several services in
such manner and form as the said Master Caesar himself should, might or ought
to have done if he had lived, and that all such business and proceedings being
by the said Francis Heath so done and expedited as aforesaid, shall stand and
be firm to all intents and purposes, as if the same had been done by Mr. Caesar
himself living, or by any Officer sworn in his said place since his decease:
Provided that this Temporary and Provisional Order be not in any thing
prejudicial to any benefit profit or power of the Mr. of the Rolls, but be used
only for the necessary dispatch of the Subjects business until a more settled
course may be taken therein.

Tho. Coventry. Dud. Diggs.


Martis 7 die Novembris, Anno Regni Caroli Regis 13. Inter Hugonem ap Richard
Lewis, and al' quer' William Owen and al' Defendants. 1637.
Touching Examination of Witnesses.
Ordo Curiae.

WHereas in this cause some Questions did arise touching the course of the
Court; whether any new Interrogatories might be exhibited to new Witnesses in
Court after a joint Commission executed in the Cause; and the Master of the
Rolls having heard what the Six Clerks and Examiners could say touching the
same. And the Six Clerks affirming that by the course of the Court no new
Interrogatories may be exhibited in Court after a joint Commission executed in
the Country. And the Examiners averring that it has always been the constant
course of the Court, that new Interrogatories may be exhibited in course for
the Examination of any new Witnesses, as often as the Client had occasion till
publication, what Commissions so ever there had been in the cause, and that the
Right Honorable the Lord Keeper had so declared himself at the publishing of
the late Ordinances when this very point was urged by the Six Clerks; New
Interrogatories may be exhibited into Court for Examination of new Witnesses at
any time before publication, tho there have been joint Commissions in the cause.
the Master of the Rolls did this day declare in Court that he has perused the
Orders of this Court, and the late Ordinances made by the Right Honorable the
Lord Keeper, and does not find any thing therein to restrain the Exhibition of
new Interrogatories into Court at any time before publication for examination
of new Witnesses. And that he having had conference with the L. Keeper for his
opinion therein, his Lordship was clear of opinion that new Interrogatories may
be exhibited into Court for Examination of new Witnesses at any time before
publication, although there have been joint Commissions formerly executed in
the Cause, and therefore this Court does now declare the same to be the course
of the Court herein, and does order that the Order of reference to Sir John
Mitchill for suppressing such Depositions taken in this Cause be discharged,
and a Vacat entered thereupon.

Privil' per Exam'.

Lunae 18 die Junii Anno Regni Caroli Regis 14. 1638.
Concerning the Clerks of the Inrollments.
Ordo Curiae.

WHereas by the Letters Patent of Incorporation of the Clerks of Inrollments
16 Eliz. it was ordained for the prevention of many abuses that one of those
Clerks, or at least one of their Deputies should always attend the
acknowledging, vacating or cancelling of all Deeds and Recognizances, which as
appears by the Rules of the Court succeeding Chancellors have ordered, as
also that all Deeds and Recognizances should within few days after the
acknowledgment be Enrolled and duly brought over to the Chapel of the Rolls;
forasmuch as after many Commandments and Intimations given by me for the
performance thereof, there is yet continually so great a neglect that no Clerk
of the Inrollments, nor any of their Deputies do at any time attend that
service; I have thought fit to order, Clerks of the Inrollments, or their
Deputies to attend their Office, and that Deeds and Recognizances be Enrolled
within few days after the acknowledgment.
and do hereby order and require the Clerks of Inrollments to reform this
Error, and either cause their Deputies to wait more diligently, or else to
change them according to the power given them by those Letters Patent; and
because the Records which heretofore were duly brought over to the Chapel of
the Rolls once in six Months, are now diverse years detained in the hands of
Under-clerks, I do Order and require the Clerks of the Inrollments immediately
to take order that all the Inrollments of 11 and 12 Car. or before be brought
this ensuing long Vacation into the Chapel of the Rolls according to the
ancient manner there to be Filed and Calendred for the service of his Majesty,
and the use of his Subjects.

Martis 9 die Junii Anno Regni Caroli, Regis 14. 1638.
Concerning Transferring of Records.
Ordo Curiae.

THE Master of the Rolls in the Examination of a Cause depending in this Court
betwixt Matthew Brookesby Esquire; Plantiff, and Tho. Mason Clerk, and others
Defendants, having discovered some irregularities in the transferring of
Records from one Attorney to another in the Six Clerks Office by the
Under-clerks, whereby diverse inconveniences and prejudices have and may
hereafter come to the Client by miscarrying of the said Records; and finding
howsoever the same is now practiced and permitted by the Six Clerks, who when a
Pleading is Filed with one of them do many times entrust the Under-clerk, who
is toward that Cause with the delivery thereof to the Attorney of the other
side: Whereas by the ancient course and practice, the Attorney with whom the
said Record is once Filed, ought with his own hands, or by the hands of his
Filing Clerk to deliver the said Record to the hands of the Attorney of the
other side, or his Filing-Clerk without trusting any other therewith, whereof
the Master of the Rolls having certified the Right Honorable the Lord Keeper,
wishing a reformation might be had thereof, his Lordship having taken the same
into his grave consideration, for the preventing and avoiding of any farther
prejudice or mischief that may at any time hereafter come unto the Client by
such Errors or miscarriages as aforesaid, does think fit, and so order, that
from henceforth the Attorney of this Court upon the Filing of any Pleadings or
Record with them, The Attorney of this Court upon the Filing of any pleadings
or Records with him shall by himself or his Deputy transfer the same to the
Attorney of the other side.
shall by himself or his Deputy transfer and deliver the same Pleadings or
Record to the Attorney of the other side or his Deputy without trusting any
other Clerk to do the same, and to the end that those Errors and inconveniences
may be prevented and avoided for the future, which do and may arise by reason
sometimes more Records and Pleadings are entered in the Attorneys Filing-Book,
than in the Tituling Book of the same Attorney: It is thought fit, Every Six
Clerk after the end of every Term shall examine their Tituling Book by the
Filing-Book.
and so ordered by his Lordship, that every of the Six Clerks or their Deputies
shall from henceforth after the end of every Term, and before the beginning of
the then next Term, examine and compare the Tituling-Book by them kept, and the
Filing-Book kept for the same Office, the one with the other, and certify the
Errors and supply the defects and omissions which they shall find therein, that
both may be made perfect and agreeable the one with the other.

Ordo Curiae vel Ordo Regis pro Fees. 1638.
Concerning Fees.
Ordo Curiae.

IT is his Majesty's pleasure that the Judges of all his Majesty's Courts at
Westminster, Juries in all the Courts to enquire the Fees of the Courts.
that have occasion to Impannel Juries of the Officers and Clerks of the same
Courts to enquire of matters concerning the same Courts shall Impannel such
Juries this Term, and enquire what Fees have been usually taken in such of his
Majesty's Courts of Justice by the several Officers of the same Courts for the
space of thirty years last past, upon Certificate whereof his Majesty will take
such course for the settling of those Fees in the said several Courts as to his
Wisdom shall seem meet; and the Lord Keeper is not only to perform this his
Majesty's pleasure in the Court of Chancery, but to signify the some his
Majesty's pleasure to the Judges of the other Courts that they may perform the
same this Term.

The Oath of the Officers that are to enquire of Fees in the Court of Chancery.
YOU shall diligently enquire and true Presentment make of all such Fees and
payments as now are, and by the space of thirty years last past have been used
to be taken by any Officer, Minister or Clerk of this Court, as belonging or
claimed to belong to him or them by reason of his Office, place or Clerkship,
and what Fees now taken or claimed have been begun, inhansed, increased or
innovated within the space of thirty years, and when, and how long since, and
how the same were so begun, innovated, inhansed or increased.

Martis 23 die Junii Anno Regni Caroli Regis 16. 1640.
Concerning Subpaena's.
Ordo Curiae.

THe Right Honorable the L. Keeper taking notice that Subpaena's retornable
immediate have been lately granted upon Petition by the Master of the Rolls,
which is a thing proper to be granted by his Lordship, No Clerk shall take out
any S^bpaena retorn. immediate without Order of the Lord Keeper.
and not otherwise. It is ordered that all the Clerks of this Court do hereby
take notice that from henceforth they may not take forth any Subpaena retorn.
immediate without the special command of the Lord Keeper.

Veneris 26 die Junii, Anno Regni Caroli Regis 16to. 1640.
Concerning Subpaena's ad audiendum Judicium.
Ordo Curiae.

WHereas several Lord Keepers of the Great Seal of England having been informed
of sundry abuses in the untimely and disorderly setting down of Causes for
hearing in this Court, Vide supra, 1. Order confirmed, fol. 1.
and the obtaining of Subpaena's ad audiendum Judicium thereupon, whereby
ancient Causes have been kept back from hearing, and other Causes thrust in, to
the prejudice of other Clients, and scandal to the Court, the Six Clerks
toward the Cause never being made acquainted therewith, for Reformation
whereof their Lordships upon sundry Complaints to them made, have by several
Orders of the 18th. of Feb. 19 Jacob. Regis, the 28th. May, 21 Jac. and the
30th. June 1th Car. now perused by the Right Honorable the Lord Keeper that
now is, Ordered and required that hereafter it should be carefully observed
that no Subpaena should be made ad audiendum Judicium for any Cause of hearing
whatsoever before the Clerk that makes the same Writ have a Note under the hand
of the Six Clerk that is Attorney in the Cause, No Subpaena ad audiend' Jud'
before the Clerk have a written Note under the hand of the Six Clerk and
Register to warrant the same.
and under the hand of the Register, and in their absence under the hand of
their sufficient known Deputies to warrant the same; and that if any such Clerk
should presume to offend therein, then the said Clerk so offending was to stand
committed for such his contempt. Now forasmuch as the Right Honorable the now
Lord Keeper was this day informed by the Six Clerks of this Court that of late
times the said Order has been neglected, and diverse Subpaena's have been made
without any such Note from them or their Deputies in contempt of the said
Order: Whereupon his Lordship minding, as his Predecessors have done, to have
the said Order put in Execution in all points, and the penalty aforesaid to be
inflicted upon the offenders; Does now Order, that the Clerks of the
Subpaena-Office having notice hereof, shall at their peril, and under the
penalty aforesaid, observe and perform the aforesaid recited Order, without
putting the said Six Clerks to make further Complaints to his Lordship for
breach thereof.

Jo. Finch C. S.

Sabbati 23 die Januarii Anno Regni Caroli Regis 22. 1646.
At the Rolls, Master of the Rolls Sir Edward Low. Concerning Decrees made with
the Assistance of the Judges.
Ordo Curiae.

IT is ordered that all Injunctions, Decrees and Dismissions hereafter to be
granted or made by any of the Judges sitting in Chancery, Injunctions, Decrees,
and Dismissions made by any of the Judges sitting in Chancery, to be Signed by
them.
shall be first Signed by them, or such of them as shall grant or make the
same, before the Order, whereby the same shall be so granted or made, shall be
entered in the Register; whereof all the Six Clerks and other Clerks of this
Court are to take notice, and carefully to observe the same, and to enter the
Orders before the same be Signed by the Commissioners.

Lunae 26 die Aprilis Anno Regni Caroli Regis 23. 1647.
Concerning Petitions* The Earl of Manchester Speaker.
Ordo Curiae.

THE Right Honorable the Commissioners for the Custody of the Great Seal of
England taking into consideration the many complaints that have been made of
diverse Process of this Court, and other proceedings therein grounded upon
Petitions Signed by their Honors, or by the Master of the Rolls, without
Filing such Petitions with the Register, and entering Orders thereupon, whereby
diverse persons have been put to trouble and charge unwarrantably, and the said
Petitions and the Process and Proceedings thereupon have been discharged for
want of entering Orders upon the said Petitions, and Filing them as they ought
to be, to the end the same may be and remain as a Warrant for such Process and
Proceedings where the Suitors may expect to find the same, by which undue
courses the Suitors have lost the benefit of such Petitions, and the Process
and Proceedings thereupon, their Honors do therefore order and command all
Officers and Clerks of this Gourt for the prevention of the like prejudice and
loss to the Suitors for the future, that no Officer or Clerk of this Court
shall from henceforth make or issue forth any Subpaena's Attachments, No
Subpaena, Attachment, or other Process of this Court shall issue out upon any
Petiton until such Petition shall be first Filed with the Register, and an
Order entered thereupon.
or other Process of this Court, nor proceed or admit of any Proceedings in any
Cause depending in this Court upon such Petitions so Signed by their Honors,
or by the Master of the Rolls, until such Petition shall be first Filed with
the Register, and an Order drawn and entered thereupon, to the end the Suitor
may know whither to resort to see the Warrant for such Process and Proceedings:
And their Honors do declare and Order that all such Subpaena's, Process and
Proceedings, as shall at any time hereafter issue and be had upon such
Petition, being not Filed, nor any Order entered thereupon, shall be null and
void as irregular and undue, and shall not bind the adverse party, whereof the
Officers and Clerks of this Court are to take notice at their peril.

Martis 19 Octobris Anno Regni Caroli Regis 23. 1647.
Two Persons committed to the Fleet for Imbezelling the Records of the Court.
Ordo Curiae.

WHereas the Honorable the Master of the Rolls, For committing to the Fleet
two persons that imbezelled the Records of the Court.
having been informed of a great abuse and misdemeanor committed by William
Newdigate and Robert Gold in taking out of the Six Clerks Office diverse Decrees
and Records of the Court, and disposing them to other uses, and his Honor
having Examined the matter, and finding the said persons guilty of the said
Crimes: It is Ordered that the said William Newdigate and Robert Gold, do stand
committed to the Prison of the Fleet until further Order shall be taken. This
Court intending to inflict Exemplary punishment upon them, as the nature of
such offense does deserve.

Ordinances received and provided this Hillary Term, Anno Caroli Regis 22.
1646. by the Right Honorable Edward Earl of Manchester, Speaker of the House
of Peers pro tempore, and the Honorable William Lenthall, Esquire; Speaker of the
House of Commons, and Master of the Rolls, Commissioners for the Great Seal of
England, for the Redress of sundry Disorders in Proceedings in Causes and of
other Abuses of late crept into his Majesty's High Court of Chancery.
FOrasmuch as by undue Proceedings and abuses, especially of the under Clerks
serving in the Offices of the Six Clerks who are the only and proper Attorneys
in the High Court of Chancery, the Ancient Rules and settled Government of this
Court are disturbed and perverted, to the Dishonor of this Ancient and
Honorable Court: For the more speedy redress of which Enormities, and to
prevent the like for the future, until the Committee appointed by Parliament
for the Regulating the Proceedings in Chancery, shall take further care
thereof: This Court upon due and mature consideration had, has thought fit to
publish and declare, and do hereby publish, declare and order to the end that
all disorders already crept into the Office of Six Clerks in this Court may be
reformed, and for prevention of abuses for time to come, in the practice and
proceedings of and in the said Office of the Six Clerks.

1. Paper-Copies in Chancery to contain fifteen Lines in every sheet, and to be
Signed by the Six Clerk before they are delivered out of the Office.
That all Copies in Chancery written in Paper, shall contain 15 Lines at the
least in every sheet thereof written orderly and unwastefully, all which Copies
before they shall be delivered out of the Six Clerks Office shall be Signed
with the name of the Six Clerk to whom they do belong of his proper
handwriting, or in his absence by his Deputy by him to be appointed, for whom
he will answer, and if any Copy shall be delivered out of the Clerks Office not
so Signed as aforesaid, the same shall not be made use of in Court, or by any
Master or Solicitor.

2. No Subpaena ad Audiend' judicium to be sued forth but by Note in writing
under the Six Clerks hand.
No Subpaena ad audiendum Judicium shall henceforth be made or sued forth but
by Note in Writing of the Six Clerks hand, as shall be the parties Attorney in
the Cause, or such his Deputy as aforesaid in his absence for Warranting the
same, for which Note only no new Fee shall be taken.

3. Replication to be first entered and Filed before a Subpaena ad Rejungendum
shall issue out.
No fruit shall be taken of any Subpaena ad rejungendum, unless there be a
replication first entered with and Filed by the Plaintiffs Six Clerk in the
Cause according to the course of the Court, before the issuing out of the said
Subpaena, or at least before the return thereof; and the parties upon whom such
Subpaena shall be served, finding no Replication so Filed before the return
thereof, shall have the ordinary Costs taxed.

4. Register not to enter any common Rule or Attachment, but by Warrant under
the Six Clerks hand.
The Register of the Court shall not enter in his Office any common Rule or
Attachment, which issues from the Six Clerks Office, but by a Note or Warrant
under the Six Clerks own hand that is Attorney in the Cause, or such his Deputy
as aforesaid. And the Six Clerks are carefully to see that all Common Rules and
Attachments be from henceforth duly entered in the House-Book, and with the
Register according to the ancient course of the Court, All common Rules and
Attachments to be duly entered into the House-Book, and with the Register.
and no under Clerk in the said Office shall enter any Rule either in the
House-Book, or the Register, until the same be first entered with the Six Clerk
to whom the said Rule is proper to be given.

5. No Bill, Answer or Pleadings shall be Copied till they be duly filled.
No Bill, Answer, or other Pleadings shall be Copied before they be duly Filed,
and the hands of the Six Clerk toward the Cause, or in his absence such his
Deputy as aforesaid thereunto put; nor any Depositions or Answers taken by
Commission to be opened or Copied till they be truly returned and delivered to
the Six Clerk himself out of whose Office the Commission issued, No Deposition
or Answer taken by Commission to be opened or Copied till they be truly
returned to the Six Clerk.
or in his absence to such his Deputy as aforesaid, and until the Publication
be duly passed in the Cause as has been anciently used.

6. No Bills, Privy Seal, Commission, Decrees, Dismission, Injunctions or
Record to be carried to be Ingrost, Enrolled, Copied, etc. by the under-Clerks
at their Chambers, and so soon as they are Engrossed, Copied, or Enrolled, then
he shall bring the Original Bill to the Six Clerk.
No Bill, Privy Seals, Commissions, Warrants, or other Pleadings, Commission,
Decrees, Dismissions, Injunctions or Records whatsoever shall from henceforth
be carried to be Engrost, Enrolled, Copied, or otherwise used by any of the
under Clerks to their Chambers, or else where out of the Six Clerks Office or
Lodgings there, and when, and so soon as any Clerk shall have Engrossed,
Enrolled, Copied, or used any such Warrants, Pleadings, Commissions, Decrees,
Dismission, or other Record in the said Office, he shall bring the Original
thereof presently back to his Master, or to such of the Six Clerks to whom the
custody of the same does or shall belong, for the more safe keeping or
disposing thereof: Within one Term any cause shall be determined by Decree or
Dismission, the same be delivered to the Six Clerk.
And it is further ordered, that within one Term after any Cause shall be
determined by Decree or Dismission, every Clerk that shall have any Decree or
Dismission, or that shall have any other Record of or touching the Cause in his
custody, shall deliver the same to that Six Clerk to whom it shall belong to
keep the same, or to such his Deputy as aforesaid, according to the Ancient
Usage.

7. No Decree, Dismission, Injunction, etc. shall be presented by the Register
to be Signed without the Six Clerks hand Subscribed.
No Decree, Dismission, Injunction, or other Writ, shall be presented by the
Register of this Court, his Deputy, or any other, to the Lord Chancellor, or
Keeper, or other Commissioners for the keeping of the Great Seal, or Master of
the Rolls for the time being, to be Signed without the proper hand of the Six
Clerk in the Cause, or such his Deputy as aforesaid in his absence first
Subscribed thereunto.

8. In all Joint Commissions the Commissiers Names shall be enterd in a Book
for that purpose to be kept by the Six Clerk.
That in all Joint Commissions to take Answers, examine Witnesses, prove
Contempts, and other special Commission directed by the Court, the Name of the
Commissioners agreed on shall be entered in a Book for that purpose to be kept
by the Six Clerk himself who has the carriage of the Commission, and
Subscribed unto by each Six Clerk in the Cause, or in their absence by such
their several respective Deputy or Deputies, whereby no alteration may be had
of the Commissioners Names agreed on, but by Order, and that the under Clerk
presume not to agree upon the Commissioners Names after any other manner.

Lastly, It is Ordered that these Orders be fairly written in several Tables,
and hung up in the Office, every Term, in the Court, to the end that all
Counselors, Clients, Clerks, and Sollicitors, may the better take notice of
them to observe them, and that they be likewise entered with the Register of
this Court.

Rec. 21. Jan. 23 Car. and Intrac. tunc. E. Manchester C. S. William Lenthall
C. S. William Lenthall Mag. Rot.


Lords Commissioners. Sabbati 26. die Maii Anno Regni Caroli Regis 25. 1649.
Filing of Affidavits.
Ordo Curiae.

WHereas Mr. Attorney General did this day move on the behalf of Sheffield
Stubbs Register of the Affidavits of this Court, and produced several General
Orders made by this Court, concerning the Filing of Affidavits, contrary to
which Orders there have been several abuses committed in not Filing of
Affidavits, and therefore was prayed that a General Order might be made for the
redress thereof: It is Ordered that their Lordships be attended herein and put
in mind thereof when other General Orders are made, and then such Order shall
be made as shall be fit.

Lunae 26 die Novembris Anno 1649.
Concerning Injunctions.
Ordo Curiae.

WHereas heretofore the course of the High Court of Chancery has been, when
the Defendant or Def^ndants pray a Dedimus Potestatem, to answer in the Country
upon motion made by the Plaintiff, the Court did grant an Injunction to stay
Suits at Law, which motion many times was hard to be obtained, and chargeable
to the Client; this Court for a remedy of the said inconveniency, and for the
ease of the Client does order and declare, that for the future whenever the
Defendant or Defendants shall pray a Dedimus Potestatem to take their Answer,
Plea, or Demurrer in the Country that the Plaintiff, Six Clerk, Writ of
Injunction of course upon a Dedim' Pot' to take Answer, Plea, or Demurrer
without motion by the Plaintiff.
or such his under Clerk as he shall appoint, shall without motion made to the
Court, prepare and draw a Docquet and Writ of Injunction of course, unto which
Docquet it is ordered by the Court that the Six Clerks that are Attorneys in
the Cause, or their respective Deputies, shall subscribe their Names, and in
which Writ the Cause of granting the said Injunction is to be expressed in the
usual form; which Docquet and Writ being so prepared shall be presented to be
Signed as formerly. And this Court does further order, that this Order shall be
observed for a constant Rule in this Court by the Six Clerks, and their under
Clerks, that the Client may have the benefit thereof; and if any Injunction in
such case do issue forth in any other manner than as before is expressed, it
shall be void and of no effect.

B. Whitlock C. S. R. Keble C. S. Jo. Lisle C. S. W. Lenthall C. S.


Sabbati 8 die Decembris, Anno 1649.
Touching Records.
Ordo Curiae.

IT is this day Ordered by the Honorable the Master of the Rolls, that the
Records of this Court until 5 Car. now remaining with the Six Clerks of this
Court in the Office of the said Six Clerk, Records to be transferred over to
the Chapel of the Rolls.
be tranferred over to the Chapel of the Rolls to be safely kept there
according to the usual course, and all the Callender thereunto belonging, that
may be had between this and the beginning of next Term. And it is also Ordered
that the Clerks of the Chapel of the Rolls do receive the said Records, and
give a Catalogue to the Six Clerks for a receipt of so many of the Records as
shall be transferred over to their hands by the time aforesaid.

William Lenthall C. S.

Lunae 1. Aprilis Anno 1650.
Concerning Prisoners.
Ordo Curiae.

IT is this day Ordered by the Right Honorable the Lords Commissioners for the
custody of the Great Seal of England, that such Prisoners now in the Custody of
the Warden of the Fleet, Prisoners in the Fleet not worth 5 l. to have their
Liberties by Habeas Corpus.
who have made Affidavits according to the late Act of Parliament for Prisoners
that are not worth 5 l. shall have their Liberty by their Habeas Corpus, upon
their own Security to be given to the Warden of the Fleet.

Veneris 21 die Junii 1650.
Touching the Six Clerks.
Ordo Curiae.

WHereas only Mr. Hales one of the Six Clerks of this Court gave his Attendance
this Morning sitting the Court at the entering into the hearing of the Cause
wherein Kitchen is Plaintiff against Meredith Defendant, Fine on a Six Clerk
for not attending at an Hearing.
and the rest of the Six Clerks made default: It is therefore this present day
Ordered that such of the Six Clerks who so made default of their attendance and
service to this Court at the beginning of that Cause, be fined 10 s. a-piece to
the Poor, and the Usher of this Court is to receive the same to the use
aforesaid.

Lunae 17 die Febr', Anno 1650.
Pleas and Demurrers.
Ordo Curiae.

THe Right Honorable the Lords Commissioners for the Custody of the Great Seal
of England, taking notice of many inconveniences by the entering Demurrers in
the Paper, after the same is set up in the Registers Office, Plea and Demurrer
to be put into the Paper at least two days before the hearing such Plea or
Demurrer, and after such Paper put in the Registers Office, no alteration to be
made therein.
whereby the other Side is many times surprised; do think fit and order, That
from henceforth the Registers do not enter any Plea or Demurrer in the Paper,
at the instance of any person, or Warrant for setting down the same on any
certain day, unless the Suitor shall bring such Order or Warrant to the
Register to be so entered, at least two days before the day appointed for
hearing such Demurrers or Plea; and that after such Paper made and set up in
the Registers Office, no addition or alteration shall be made therein.

Jovis 31. die Decembris Anno Regni Car' Regis 16. 1640.
The Nobility Answering.
Ordo Parl'.

ORdered upon the Question (Nemine Contradicente) That the Nobility of this
Kingdom, and Lords of the Upper House of Parliament are of Ancient Right to
answer in all Courts, as Defendants, Peers of the Realm to answer in all Courts
upon Protestation of Honor only.
upon protestation of Honor only, and not upon the Common Oath; and that the
said Order, and this Explanation does extend to all Answers and Examinations
upon Entries in all Causes as well Criminal as Civil, and in all Courts and
Commissions whatsoever; and also to the persons of the Widows and Dowagers of
the Temporal Peers So the Widows and Dowagers of Temporal Peers.
of the Land; and that the Lord Keeper of the Great Seal of England, for the
time being, or the Speaker of the Lords House, for the time being, do forthwith
give notice of it, together with the explanation, to all the Courts of Justice,
and the Judges Clerks and Registers of them, by causing our former Order, with
this explanation, to be recorded in all Courts; and that all Orders,
Constitutions, or Customs entered or practiced to the contrary whenever, may
be abolished and declared void; and the Lord Keeper of the Great Seal, for the
time being, or Commissioners of the Great Seal out of Parliament-time shall see
all practice to the contrary hereafter to be punished with exemplary
severities, to deter others from the like attempts.

Jo. Brown, Cleric' Parl'.

Lords Commissioners. Wednesday the 15th of October. 1651.
Concerning Examiners.
Ordo Curiae.

UPon motion this day made unto the Right Honorable the Lords Commissioners
for the Custody of the Great Seal of England, by Mr. Rich, and Mr. Raven on the
behalf of the Examiners of this Court, touching an abuse by some persons of
late, often committed in taking out and executing Commissions in and about
London, contrary to the General and Known Rules and Practice of this Court,
that no Commission shall be executed in London, No Commission to be executed in
London, or w thin 20 miles thereof.
or within twenty miles thereof; and several Orders of Court heretofore made in
confirmation thereof; their Lordships do appoint the Examiners to attend them
with the Orders and Presidents of the Court in this Case, and they will then be
pleased to give such order for relief of this abuse as shall be just.

Lords Commissioners. Friday the 18th of June 1652.
Concerning Motions.
Ordo Curiae.

WHereas heretofore, Thursday in every Week in the Term-time was appointed by
the Right Honorable the Lords Commissioners, etc. for the hearing of Motions,
and so observed for several Terms together, to the great benefit of the
Suitors; but of late the said Custom has been let fall without any Direction
or Order from their Lordships, and Causes appointed to be heard every day,
except the First and last, through the whole Term. Their Lordships, upon the
motion of Mr. Chute, do order that from henceforth, Thursday in every week in
the Term-time to be observed for motions only.
Thursday in every week in the Term-time (unless when it happens to be the the
second of the beginning, or the last day save one of the end of the Term) to be
observed for hearing of Motions only, and the Six Clerk, as also the Secretary
are to take notice thereof, and not to tender or procure any Cause to be set
down for hearing on that day.

Thursday the 16th of March, 1653.
An Order made by the Honorable William Lenthall, Esquire; Master of the Rolls,
for the better ordering and safe-keeping the Records in the Six Clerk Offices.
FOr as much as there have been Complaints lately made to the Honorable the
Master of the Rolls of diverse Records lost, or so mislaied in the Six Clerks
Offices, that they are not to be found; which abuse and other mischiefs, upon
enquiry, he finds to grow from the great neglect of due filing of Bills,
Answers and other Pleadings, and carrying them out of the Office to be copied,
and lying scattered up and down the Offices in the Under-Clerks Seats. His
Honor taking consideration thereof, and for redress for the future does order
and command all the Clerks in the said several Offices, that they forthwith
turn over all Bills, Answers and Pleadings which they have in their several
custodies, or have delivered out to be copied, and which ought to have been
turned over and filed before this time, to the end they may be all forthwith
filed with the several Six Clerks for their safe custody. And that all the
Clerks hereafter be more careful for the filing all Bills, Answers and other
Pleadings in due time, and that no Clerk hereafter presume upon any pretenses
whatsoever, to Copy any Bill, Answer, or other Pleadings before they be duly
filed; Bills, Answers and Pleadings to be duly filed, and no Copies to be taken
thereof till they are filed.

No Record to be carried out of the Office to be filed.


and that the Client who delivers any Bill, Answer, or other Pleading to be so
copied before the filing thereof, shall be adjudged equally faulty, as the
other Clerk that shall so copy them. And that no Clerk shall deliver any Record
to be carried forth of the Offices to be copied. And it is further ordered,
That if hereafter any disobedience by any of the Under-Clerks in that Office
shall appear; it is thereby ordered, That the Six Clerks in whose Office the
default shall be found, shall forthwith present such default to the said
Master; and if the same be found true, such Clerk or Clerks are hereby disabled
to sit any more in that Office, as an Under-Clerk, or keep any Desk there, and
shall pay the full Damage and Costs that the party grieved, whom it may
concern, shall be at by such default: And it is further ordered, That this
Order be fixed up forthwith in the Office of the Six Clerks, that every one may
take notice thereof. And his Honor does further charge and command the Six
Clerks, that they respectively see these Orders from time to time duly
observed, as they will answer the contrary at their perils.

William Lenthall.

Order of the Master of the Rolls. Thursday the 29th of June, 1654. Concerning
Records to be brought into the Chapel of the Rolls.
FOr as much as it appears to me, and also upon several Complaints made to me,
and diligent enquiry thereupon, that many inconveniences arise to the people of
this Nation, for that you the respective Officers under my charge, do neglect
to return and bring into the Chapel of the Rolls, all Inrolments, Inquisitions
and Records in your several charges; These are therefore to will and require
you, and every of you, and I do hereby order you the several Clerks, the Clerk
of the Inrolments, and the Clerk of the Petty-Bag to bring into the Chapel of
the Rolls all such Inrolments, Inquisitions and Records as have been usually
brought into the Chapel of the Rolls, Clerk of the Inrolments and of the
Petty-Bag, Inquisitions and Records to be brought into the Chapel of the Rolls.
and are not yet brought, and are now in any of your respective Custodies,
together with the several and respective Callenders thereof, fairly written and
delivered to my self, at or before the first day of August 1654. that thereby
such use may be made of them, as shall be for the most advantage and ease of
the people, and the preservation thereof more immediately under my view: and if
any of the said Officers shall neglect their duty herein, such course shall be
forthwith taken for their disobedience, by sequestration of their several and
respective Offices, or otherwise as shall appertain to Justice, and according
to former Presidents in like cases. And it is further ordered, That this Order,
or a true Copy thereof be forthwith delivered to every one of the Officers
aforesaid whom it may concern: And also that this Order be forthwith fairly
written and fixed in every Office, that no excuse may be made for want of
notice.

William Lenthall.

Monday the 23th of July, 1655.
Concerning Idiots and Lunaticks.
Ordo Curiae.

IT is this day ordered, That no Order, Affidavit or Certificate touching any
Idiot, Lunatic, or Non Compos Mentis, shall be made use of in this Court,
unless the same be filed with Mr. Shadwell the Clerk of the Custodies Order,
Affidavit, or Certificate touching any Idiot, Lunatic, Non Compos Mentis, to
be filed with the Clerk of the Custodies.
within the space of five days inclusive, next after the several and respective
dates of such Orders, Affidavits, or Certificates.

N. F. C. S. J. L. C. S.


Thursday the 9th of October, 1656.
Order on the behalf of the Masters of Chancery in Ordinary.
WHereas it appears by several Rules and Orders of this Court, made by several
Lord Chancellors and Lord Keepers, that the Masters of the Chancery
Extraordinary have been, and are restrained from the exercising or doing any
manner of Act as Masters of Chancery within the City of London, or five miles
compass thereof; Masters Extraordinary not to act as Masters in Chancery in
London, or within five miles thereof.
and the Clerks and Officers of this Court are prohibited to receive or proceed
upon any Acts done by the said Masters Extraordinary, within the Compass
aforesaid: Upon consideration whereof had, and upon hearing the Masters of
Chancery in Ordinary, It is this 9th day of October 1656. ordered by the Right
Honorable the Lords Commissioners for the custody of the Great Seal of
England, that the said former Rules and Orders of Court do from henceforth
stand revived and continue in force. And to the end the same may be the better
observed, it is further ordered, That from and after the 25th day of December
next, all Masters Extraordinary, when they certify any Answer, Affidavit, Deed
or Recognizanc, shall therewith also certify as well the place where, as the
time when the same were sworn or acknowledged; or in default of such
Certificate of the place; Masters in Chancery Extraordinary to certify the
time and place of taking any Answer, Affidavit, Deed, or Recognizance.
or in case the same shall be sworn or acknowledged within London, or five
miles compass thereof, such Affidavit, Answer, Deed or Recognizance shall not
be admitted filed or enrolled without the special License of the Lords
Commissioners or Master of the Rolls. And that this Order be entered in the
Register of this Court, and Copies thereof set up, and from time to time
renewed and preserved for public view in the Office of the Chief Register,
Chief Clerk of the Petty-Bag, and Clerk of the Inrolments, to the end that the
said Master Extraordinary, and the said Clerks, and all Attorneys, and other
Officers of this Court may take notice and demean themselves accordingly, and
not otherwise.

Monday the 16th of February, 1656.
Of Examination of Witnesses.
Order of the Court.

THe Right Honorable the Lords Commissioners for the Custody of the Great Seal
of England, taking into their serious Consideration the words of the late
Ordinance for regulation, touching the Execution of Commissions, wherein it
declared, That after one Commission taken out by the Plaintiff, The Plaintiff
may take no more Commissions than one to examine Witnesses.
and not executed, the Plaintiff shall be utterly debarred from exaamining any
further Witnesses in his Cause. Their Lordships are clear of Opinion, that
notwithstanding the literal sense of the said Regulation, the Plaintiff in any
Cause depending in this Court, may have liberty to examine his Witnesses in
Court as he shall see cause.

Wednesday the 19th of May, 1658.
An Order of the Court, made for preventing the abuses arising from making of
Copies of Depositions, by Copies taken from the Examiner.
FOrasmuch as Complaints have been often made by the Examiners, and several
Suitors of this Court, of the great injury and prejudice that has been done to
them by Under-Clerks and Sollicitors, making and writing out Copies from Copies
of Depositions delivered by the Examiner out of his Office, and selling the
same to the Client. Upon strict inquiry into, and examination of the aforesaid
complaint, it has appeared to the Right Honorable the Master of the Rolls, as
well by Certificates of the Masters of this Court to whom some of the said
abuses have been referred; as also by other good proof, that after Copies of
the Deposions have been taken from the Examiners, the same Copies have been
altered in diverse places, and material parts of some Depositions quite struck
out by the party himself or his Agent, who took the same from the Examiner, and
afterward Copies thereof have been made and given, or sold to the adverse
party himself at mean rates, and sometimes to his Clerk or Solicitor, who has
delivered them to his Client, and taken the Examiners full Fees for them; and
sometimes the Clerk or Solicitor, when he has had the Copies of Depositions
given to him by his Client to breviate or keep for him, has privately written
Copies thereof, and has extended the same to an unreasonable number of sheets
more than those taken out of the Examiners Office, and then by combination with
the Clerk or Solicitor for the other Side, without the knowledge of the Client
who took out the said Copies, or the Examiners, have delivered the said
wastfully written Copies to the adverse party, pretending the same are true
Copies taken out of the Examiners Office; and have demanded and received of the
Client the Examiners Fees for the same, and shared the moneys amongst
themselves; and do also use diverse abuses and practices of like nature, whereby
Clients have been ruined in their Causes, the Court wronged in their Judgment,
and the Examiner cousened of his due Fees, who has not only the fruits of his
own labor unjustly swallowed up by Clerks and Solicitors for want of the
delivery of such second Copies, but does also incur scandalous imputations, by
reason such surreptitious Copies are many times fasly made, out of design to
ruin the adverse party, and are generally ill and loosly written, being
supposed by the party, who paid for them, and by all others who take notice
thereof, to be taken out of the Examiners Office; some of which said abuses and
foul practices have been formerly taken notice of, and much endeavored to be
prevented and suppressed by this Honorable Court, by imprisoning the Offender,
and other ways, as by an Order of this Court, dated the 8th of Febr. 1 Car. and
another made between Locksmith Plaintiff against Creswell Defendant, dated the
16th of May 10 Car. another between Allington Plaintiff, against Dandy
Defendant, dated the 5th of July, 13 Car. and diverse other Orders appears.
Therefore the Right Honorable the Master of the Rolls taking the Premises
into his consideration, does think fit and order, That if at any time hereafter
it shall probably appear to the said Examiners, or either of them, The Examiner
may take out Subpaena's against such as shall be suspected to deliver undue
Copies of Depositions to the adverse Party or Solicitor, for the examinations
of such Offenders upon Interrogatories, and against such persons as he
conceives are able to prove such abuse.
before or after the hearing of any Cause, that any such surreptitious Copy
shall be made as aforesaid, the Examiner who finds himself aggrieved, may, if
he will, take out Subpena's against any two, three or more such persons as he
shall suspect to have a hand therein, for examination of such misdores upon
Interrogatories in that behalf to be exhibited before the other Examiner, and
first allowed of by a Master of this Court touching the point of Fraud and
Abuses before mentioned; as also against such persons whom he conceives to be
able to prove the said Abuse in case it be denied; and if upon consideration
had of the Answers of the said parties suspected to the said interrogatories or
proofs, Vide supra Anno Regni Car. 1. primo.
it shall appear unto the said Master of this Court who allowed of the
Articles, and be by him certified, that the said parties are faulty in all or
any of the Abuses before mentioned, or any of like nature, that then every
person so offending, shall for such his misdemeanor be committed to the Prison
of the Fleet, from whence he shall not be discharged till he has given
satisfaction to the Examiner touching the same, provided that if the parties
drawn in question shall acquit themselves upon their Examination, and the
Examiner not be able to prove the same, that then the Examiner who called them
in by Process, shall pay costs for unjust examination, as the Court shall think
fit.

Mr. Justice Windham, Mr. Hobart, Mr. Gyles.


Friday the 25th of June, 1658.
Concerning Filing Bills.
Ordo Curiae.

UPon consideration had by the Right Honorable the Master of the Rolls, of the
many inconveniences and mischiefs that have and may arise by reason of the not
duly filing of the Bills, Answers, and other Proceedings in Causes in this
Court, and for preventing the same for the future, his Lordship does order,
Certificates to be brought at the hearing, that the Bills and Answers are duly
filed, and that the Books are duly signed.
That the Parties or their Clerk in Court shall bring a Certificate at the
hearing of the Cause, that the Bills and Answers are duly filed with the Six
Clerk, and that the Books are duly signed, or else his Lordship will not
proceed to the hearing of those Causes: And in case default shall be made in
bringing in such Certificate, then the party in whose default it is, shall pay
very good costs in respect thereof.

Monday the 19th of July, 1658.
Concerning Records.
Ordo Curiae.

WHereas there have been diverse complaints made to his Lordship, that the
Records in the Six Clerks Office are not duly brought over into the Chapel of
the Rolls, as in former times have been used to be done; his Lordship does
hereby order and require, That the Six Clerks do this ensuing Vacation bring
over into the Petty Bag Office, all the Patent Rolls, and their Warrants, with
their Extracts of 1656. and before; and that the Clerk of the Petty Bag do
examine the Extracts with the Rolls, and send the Extracts into the Exchequer,
and the Patent Rolls into the Chapel of the Rolls, The Six Clerks to bring
into the Petty Bag Office all the Patent Rolls and Extracts, to be examined
with the Rolls, and send them into the Exchequer, and the Patent Rolls into the
Chapel of the Rolls.
with their Warrants, at or before Trinity Term next ensuing; and the Six
Clerks do also immediately send into the Chapel of the Rolls all the Decree
Rolls of 1656. and before, with the Paper Books that are the Warrants for the
same, there to be carefully laid up, preserved and callendred for the service
of his Highness, and the benefit of the Commonwealth.

Will. Lenthall.

Monday the 19th of July, 1658.
Concerning Records.
Ordo Curiae.

WHereas there have been diverse Complaints made to his Lordship, Vide supra, 30
July 76. 27 June 54.
for that the Records now remaining in the Inrolment Office are not brought
over to the Chapel of the Rolls, as formerly have been used to be done,
Records to be brought into the Chapel of the Rolls and examined.
his Lordship does hereby order and require, that the Clerk of the Inrolments
do bring over into the Chapel of the Rolls, all their Inrolments of 1656. and
the years before this ensuing Vacation. And his Lordship does order and require
the Clerk of the Chapel of the Rolls, that when the Inrolments are brought
over, that they do forthwith lay up the same in Presses appointed for that
purpose, and do make Calenders and Entries of them, that so they may be ready
for the service of his Highness, and the benefit of the Commonwealth.

Will. Lenthall.

Master of the Rolls, Sir Nath. Hobart, Mr. Escott. Saturday the 30th of
October, 1658.
Concerning Bills and Costs.
Ordo Curiae.

WHereas upon the motion of Mr. Powell, this present day, made upon an
Affidavit then read in Court, Paper Books called, the Bills and Costs to be
brought into Court.
whereby it appeared, that one Robert Todd does keep several Paper Books,
commonly called the Bills and Costs, wherein he enters many Bills and Costs,
without any authority for the same, to the great disturbance in proceedings,
and in danger of the Clients Causes, it was therefore prayed, that the said
Todd may be ordered to bring in the said Books, and all Bills entered therein by
him, and what other public Books concerning proceedings in Causes he has, or
lately had, to his Lordship within some short time. It is therefore ordered by
the Right Honorable the Master of the Rolls, that the said Todd do bring in
the said Books, and all other Books concerning proceedings in Causes in this
Court, which he had at the time of the making this Order, or any time before,
together with the Bills therein entered, to his Lordship upon Thursday next,
whilst he is sitting in his Court in the Chapel of the Rolls, or else to show
good cause to the contrary, or in default thereof to stand committed to the
Prison of the Fleet.

Friday the 18th of February, 1658.
Concerning the Six Clerks.
Order of the Court.

Whereas upon expiration of the late Ordinance for Regulation of the Chancery,
there did arise several Questions and Differences between those who had been
formerly the Six Clerks in Chancery, and those persons who had, according to
the said Ordinance, been sworn Attorneys in Chancery; upon which differences
between them, Injunctions to quiet differences between the former Six Clerks
and the later, till the meeting of a Parliament.
there was much variety and difference upon Opinion, testified by diverse
Eminent Persons, learned in the Law, under their Hands; and that those
differences, at length, proceeded so far, that there arose from thence a great
disturbance in the Six Clerks Office, and in the proceedings of the Court, to
the prejudice of the Clients there attending their Causes. For prevention
whereof, and settling the matter for the present till further order, and until a
Parliament might be sitting, who could apply the properest and most effectual
remedy thereunto, an Order was made, bearing date the 4th of March, 1657. and
afterward (that is to say) on Tuesday the 20th of July, 1658. An Injunction
was granted in pursuance of the said Order, and for settlement of the matters
aforesaid. And whereas now there is a Parliament sitting, to which the Parties
concerned, if they think fit, may apply themselves, and unto whom the Lords
Keepers of the Great Seal of England do conceive it does most properly belong
to determine the matter in question between the said Parties. Their Lordships
do declare, that the said Order and Injunction be from henceforth set aside and
determined, and that the Parties be left to apply themselves to the Parliament,
or to take such other course as they shall be advised.

N. F. C. S. J. L. C. S. B. W. C. S.


Lord Keeper Mr. William Lenthall.
Monday the 16th of May, 1659.
Touching filing of Bills.
Order of the Court.

Whereas by reason of the late differences between the Six Clerks, and their
Under-Clerks, Post 86.
many disorders and disturbances have risen in the Court of Chancery, by not
filing of Bills and other Pleadings with the Six Clerks, according to the
ancient Course and Order of this Court, by which means the Clients have been
obstructed in their several Suits, and the Court abused, having granted
Injunctions without Bills duly filed; for the taking away of which
disturbances, and for prevention of other inconveniences for the future, it is
ordered by the Right Honorable, William Lenthall, Lord Keeper of the Great
Seal of England, and Master of the Rolls, That all Bills brought unto the Clerk
in the Six Clerks Office since the 4th of February, Bills to be brought in,
entered and filed with the Six Clerks according to their several dates. Answers
Pleadings and Records to be entered and filed.
1657. which are not entered and filed with the Six Clerks be forthwith brought
unto the Six Clerks to be entered and filed according to their several dates.
And that all Answers, Pleadings and Records whatsoever shall forthwith be
likewise entered and filed with the Six Clerk, and that no Copies or
Certificates shall be delivered out of the Office, or used, without the Hand of
one of the Six Clerks thereunto set, or in their absence the Hand of one of
their respective Deputies. And it is likewise ordered by his Lordship, that all
Pleadings and other Records whatsoever which the Clerks have in their Houses or
Chambers, be forthwith brought into the Six Clerks Office, there to remain in
their custody, according to the ancient and usual course of the Court. And that
no Records for the future shall by any Clerk or his Servant be carried out of
the Office to be copied, or otherwise used, No Records to be carried out of the
Office to be copied.
unless to a Master of the Court, or by Order of the Court. And whereas his
Lordship has been informed, that one Robert Todd, an Under-Clerk in the Six
Clerks Office, Antea. 80.
does keep Books for entering Bills, Attachments, Rules and Costs to the great
disturbance of the Proceedings in the Office. It is ordered by his Lordship,
that the said Todd shall forthwith bring in all the said Books that are in his
custody, or have been in his custody since the 4th of February. 1657, unto his
Lordship, to be disposed of according to the ancient course and custom of the
Court.

Will. Lenthall, C. S.

Lord Keeper. Saturday the 21th of May, 1659.
Subpoena Office.
Order of the Court.

Whereas I am informed that, Writs to examine Witnesses in perpetual memory,
Writs of Duces Tecum, and Writs to show Cause upon Orders, are of late made use
by the Clerks of the Six Clerks Office upon the pretense, that if the word
(process) be in the Order, that then as Clerks of the Court they may make them.
And that also by such Clerks and others appearing on counterfeit Writs of
Subpaena, much damage does accrue not only to the Subpaena-Office it self, but
also unto the Clients thereof. It is therefore ordered, that from henceforth no
Clerk of the Six Clerks Office, or others do appear on any Counterfeit Writ of
Subpaena; and that no person that shall be guilty of counterfeiting any
Subpaena shall be permitted to write under, or for any Clerk of the Six Clerks
Office, whereof the Six Clerks and their Clerks are to take notice. And also
that no Clerk of that Office making any Writs of Duces tecum, Writs to examine
Witnesses in perpetual Memory, Writs of Duces tecum, Writs to examine Witnesses
in perpetual Memory, or Writs to show cause on Orders to be made by the Clerk
of the Subpaena-office only.
or Writs to show Cause on Orders, but that they be made by the Clerk of the
Subpaena-Office, as formerly has been accustomed.

Will. Lenthall, C. S.

Lord Keeper. Monday the 30th of May, 1659.
Concerning Filing Bills.
Order of the Court.

Antea 83.
Whereas by an Order, bearing date the 16th of May instant, it was ordered
amongst other things, That all Bills brought unto the Clerk in the Six Clerks
Office since the 4th of February 1657. should be entered and filed with the Six
Clerks according to their several dates; His Lordship does declare, That it was
not his intention to make good any Process of Contempt that issued out for not
appearing, or not answering to any such Bills, not duly filed with the Six
Clerks at the time of issuing out of any such Process, nor to discharge any
Costs duly obtained for want of due filing All Bills to be brought into the
Clerk in the Six Clerks Office to be entered and filed according to their
several dates. This Order not to extend to Process of Contempt issuing out for
not appearing, and not answering to any such Bills not duly filed, nor to
discharge any Costs for want of due filing.
of any such Bills with the Six Clerks, but for supporting of Injunctions and
other Proceedings upon the merits of the Cause. And it is ordered by his
Lordship, That all Bills and other Proceedings brought, or to be brought unto
the Clerk in the Six Clerks Office for the future, shall be entered and filed
with the Six Clerks, according to the ancient use and custom of the Court.

Monday the 16th of April, 1660.
An Order between Walter Long Esquire; and the Lady Jermyn touching the Registers
Office in Chancery.
THe said Parties appearing before us this day, upon complaint made by the Lady
Jermyn, that Mr. Long had lately taken diverse Books out of the said Office, and
carried them to another Place, so as the business of the Office is hindered.
Order to be heard by Council touching taking of Books out of the Office.
And Mr. Long now desiring time to be heard by his Council; it is ordered that
both sides attend as to be heard herein on Thursday next, and in the mean time
the business of the Office is to be done by the usual persons, and in the usual
place.

T. W. C. S. T. J. C. S.


Lords Commssioners. Thursday the 19th of April, 1660.
Pursuant of the former Order.
WHereas complaint has been made to your Lordships, that several Books and
Papers belonging to the said Office, have by force been lately taken away from
thence by Walter Long Esquire; accompanied with one Robert Smith, and others his
Assistants therein, and carried away to another place, whereby the business of
the Court has been, and is hindered; and this was done, pending a Reference of
Parliament touching the said Office, made to Denzill Hollis Esquire; and Sir
Harbottle Grimstone Baronet: And their Lordships have made an Order of the 16th
of this Month for both Sides to be heard herein this day, touching the said
Books and Papers, and all Parties concerned, with their Council attending. Upon
debate of the matter, and hearing what was offered on all Sides, their
Lordships having respect to the business of the Court, and that the same may be
carried on, and dispatched without interruption, do think fit, and so order,
Mr. Long to bring back the Books which he had removed, into the Registers
Office.
that all the Books and Papers so removed, and by force taken and carried away
out of the Registers Office aforesaid, by the said Mr. Long, and his Agents,
and Assistants, and also the Book or Books seized upon, and taken away by one
Lanselot Emot and his Assistants, and since delivered over to the said Mr.
Long, be by him the said Mr Long brought back, and delivered into the Registers
Office in Symonds-Inn in Chancery Lane, before Saturday the 28th instant, there
to remain, and be disposed into the hands of those persons who formerly had the
same in their custody. And their Lordships do further order and declare, That
for the time to come, and until further order, the business of the Office shall
be done by the usual persons, and in the usual place aforesaid; for which their
Lordships do understand that a Rent has been constantly paid, whereunto Mr.
Long, or any for him, may have free liberty of access. And as to the Order of
the 19th of October last made on the behalf of Mr. Long, their Lordships do
declare, that they will take the same into their consideration at the first
General Seal after Easter next. And do further order and declare, That all
persons concerned with their Council, do then attend touching the same. And
their Lordships do further declare, That this Order shall be without prejudice
to the Right, Title, or possession of any person or persons concerned in the
said Office, or pretending any Right thereunto. And that the same is not
intended by their Lordships to hinder or prejudice the said Reference, or any
Order or Award to be made by the said Referees This Order not to prejudice any
Reference or Award to be made by the Referees.
therein, but only that the Affairs of the said Office may be carried on
peaceably without disturbance, for the good and benefit of the people, which
they looked upon as a thing of present necessity, and as a duty incumbent upon
their Lordships.

T.W. C.S. T.J. C.S.


Thursday the 21th of June, 1660.
Concerning Records.
Order of the Court.

WHereas Nicholas Strode Esquire; is duly sworn, Vide ante 5 Car. 1.
and admitted one of the Examiners of this Court, and is kept from the
Execution of the said Office by one Robert Sheires Esquire; who detains the
Exhibitants Records and Writings belonging to the said Office, whereby many of
the Suitors of the Court are prejudiced and delayed in their Causes. The Right
Honorable the Lord Chancellor does therefore order, that the said Mr. Sheires,
Records to be delivered to a new Register.
at his peril, does forthwith upon sight hereof, this night deliver the said
Records and Writings to the said Mr. Strode.

Ed^. Hyde C. S.

Sabbati 15 die Novembris, Anno Regni Caroli secundi Regis 12. 1660.
Concerning Affidavits.
Ordo Curiae.

WHereas the Right Honorable the Lord Chancellor of England, and Master of the
Rolls, have upon due consideration had by their Honors of the present State of
the Office of Registring Affidavits in this Honorable Court, and the necessary
use thereof for preventing the imbezelling and falsifying of Affidavits,
whereby the Court has been often abused, the course of Justice interrupted,
and the Suitor apparently wronged, or unduly prejudiced. And notwithstanding
Special Orders of the Court heretofore made for that purpose, and by directions
both publicly, and upon private Petitions given for due observation thereof,
yet the same has been of late years so much neglected, as it is now found
necessary for the Honor of the Court, Vide supra 23. Jan. 27.
the good of the Suitor, and the righting of the Officer, to give reformation
thereunto. It is therefore this present day ordered by their Honors, That all
Affidavits of this Court (except those only which belong to the Supplicavit
Office) shall before the same be executed in Court, All Affidavits (except
those that belong to the Supplicavit Office) before* they be read in Court
shall be first filed and registered in the Affidavit Office, and attested by a
Copy thereof under the Officers hand*
or otherwise produced to ground any Order, Writs, Process or Proceedings of
Court thereupon be brought into the said Office of Registring Affidavits, and
be there filed and registered. And that this Order, both at the Court at
Westminster, at the Seals, and at the Rolls by the Officers of this Court, and
all others whom the same does, or may concern, be duly observed and kept at the
perils of such, as in contempt of this Honorable Court, shall presume
wilfully, or negligently to decline, or not observe the same. Register not to
sign any Order granted upon any Affidavit, unless the Affidavit be first filed
and registered.
And further it is ordered by their Honors, that neither the Register of this
Court, his Clerks or Deputies shall, or do at any time hereafter draw up, sign
or set his, or their hand or hands unto any Order whatsoever granted upon any
Affidavit, unless the Affidavit be first filed and registered with the Register
of the Affidavits, and attestation brought and showed to the said Register of
this Court, his Clerks or Deputies under the hand of the said Register of the
said Affidavits, or his Deputy attending in the said Office. And it is further
ordered by their Honors, That no Master of this Court shall accept of or take
the Oath of any person to an Affidavit, except the same be fair and handsomely
writ in one hand, without blotting or interlining: And in case any Affidavit
shall escape the said Masters of this Court, and pass so blotted and
interlined, under their, or any of their hands, it is further ordered, That the
Register of the Affidavits, or his Deputy shall thereupon refuse the same, and
that afterward no use shall be made thereof in any the proceedings of this
Court. And it is further ordered by their Honors, That all Affidavits taken,
or henceforth to be taken before any Master of the Court, be brought unto the
said Register of Affidavits, or his Deputy for the time being, to be there
filed and registered in some due and convenient time To be filed and registered
in ^ue and convenient time.
after the same be sworn unto, and before use be made thereof in Court, as well
to prevent the vexation and trouble of His Majesty's Subjects in coming so
often to enquire for such Affidavits before they come into the said Office; as
also that the parties against whom the Affidavits be made, may have time by
their Council to inform the Court of any cause of Exception they may have to
allege against the same, and that all the Clerks of the Court, and Solicitors
of Causes there, shall by the end of Hillary Term now next following, bring
into the said Office all such Original Affidavits as shall remain in their
hands, and cause the same to be there duly filed and registered at their perils.
And to the End that none may have any excuse of being ignorant hereof, it is
lastly ordered, That this Order, being fairly written, shall be set up in
Tables, and so shall remain in the several Offices of the Register, the Six
Clerks, and of the said Affidavits.

E. H. C. Har. Grimstone.


Anno 13 Car. II. Reg.
An Act for ascertaining and establishing of the Fees of the Masters of the
Chancery in Ordinary.
WHereas the Office of the Masters in Chancery is of very ancient Institution,
and of necessary use, and continual attendance for the dispatch of the business
depending in that Court; it appearing by ancient Records, that the constitution
of that Court was long before the Conquest, much of the Duty, Pains and
Attendance whereof lies on the said Masters; and for that it conduces much to
the Administration of Justice, that those who exercise places of Trust, should
have competent and certain rewards, suitable to their pains and labor, whereby
they may have due maintenance to support the quality of their Places, and that
it is but fitting and necessary for the Subject to allow a moderate payment,
where they receive a proportionable advantage; a Fee of four pence, in times of
that Antiquity, being as much in value as two shillings now; by reason whereof
in process of time, and the improved rate of all necessaries, the present
recompense of those ancient Offices is no way competent and proportionable to
their pains and attendance, which are likewise very much increased, without any
increase hitherto of what was so anciently allowed as aforesaid: And for that
it appears in all other Courts at Westminster, there is twelve pence taken for
every Affidavit, and for that it has been found inconvenient for Suitors to
put in Answers, or return Commissions in the private Studies of the Masters, so
that through the difficulty of finding such Answers and Commissions with what
Master they were left, or through the Masters absence at such time as they were
called for, it frequently happens the persons conceived to be in contempt, are
exposed to much trouble and charge thereby; and for that it is more proper,
safe and satisfactory to the Subject in general that Affidavits, Answers,
Recognizances and Acknowledgments of Deeds shall be dispatched in some public,
certain and open place, where the persons that do the same, may be seen and
known, rather than in private Studies or Houses, for the more proper and solemn
dispatch of the aforesaid business, and for the better encouragement of the
aforesaid Masters in the due discharge of their places; be it enacted by the
Kings Most Excellent Majesty, by, and with the advice and consent of the Lords
and Commons assembled in Parliament, and by the Authority of the same, That
from, and after the three and twentieth day of October, in the present year of
our Lord 1661. there shall be one Public Office kept, and no more, as near to
the Rolls as conveniently may be, in which the Masters, some, or one of them
shall constantly attend for the administering of Oaths, caption of Deeds and
Recognizances; and the dispatch of all matters incident to their Office;
references upon Accounts, and insufficient Answers only excepted from the hours
of seven of the Clock in the Morning until twelve at Noon; and from two in the
Afternoon until six at Night; and that from henceforth it shall and may be
lawful, to and for the Masters of the Chancery in Ordinary now being, and which
hereafter for the time to come shall be, to demand and take the several Fees
hereafter expressed, that is to say, For every Affidavit, or Oath taken in the
Office, 12 d. For every Bill of Costs to be taxed by them for the Plaintiffs,
not putting in his Bill, or not proceeding to Reply, or for the Defendants not
Appearing in due time, 2 s. 6 d. For the acknowledgment of every Deed to be
enrolled, 2 s. For the caption of every Recognizance, 2 s. For every
Exemplification examined by two of the said Masters, to each of the said
Masters who shall examine the same, for every Skin of Parchment so examined, 2
s. For every Report, or Certificate to be made in persuance of any Order made
upon the hearing of the Cause, 1 l. And for every other Certificate, or Report
of any Order made upon Petition or Motion only, 10 s. to be paid by the party
that takes out the Report or Certificate, 10 s.


Any Law, Statute or Custom to the contrary hereof in any wise notwithstanding.
And be it further enacted by the Athority aforesaid, That if the said Masters
of Chancery, or any of them shall hereafter, directly or indirectly, by any
Act, Shift, Color or Device, have, take or receive any Money, Fee, Reward,
Covenant, Obligation, Promise, or any other thing for his Report, or
Certificate in Writing or otherwise, or for any other the matters in the Act
expressed, other than the respective Fee or Fees in the Act before mentioned,
that then every such Master, being thereof legally convicted, shall thenceforth
be disabled from the execution of his said Office of Master of the Chancery in
Ordinary, and also shall forfeit and lose for every such Offense, to the party
grieved in that behalf, so much Money as he or they shall take contrary to this
present Act; and moreover shall lose and forfeit 100 l. Sterling, whereof one
moiety shall be to our Sovereign Lord the King, His Heirs and Successors, and
the other moity to the party grieved in that behalf, who shall sue by Action of
Debt, Bill, Plaint, Information or otherwise, in any of the King's Courts, for
the recovery of the same; in which Action no Essoign, Protection or Wager of
Law shall be allowed.

Mercurii 12 die Feb. Anno Regni Caroli II. Reg. 14. 1662.
Privilege Writs, and Writs in Forma Pauperis.
Ordo Curiae.

WHereas the Right Honorable the Lord High Chancellor of England was this day
informed by Mr. Collins, on the behalf of several Officers and Clerks of the
Court, that all small Writs which pass the Great Seal for all privileged
persons, and for such as are admitted to sue in this Court in Forma Pauperis;
and renewed Writs were, and usually have been by ancient course delivered to
the person for whom such Writs have been sealed, or to their Clerks, without
paying of any Fee therefore, until of late, that one Mr. Hutton, a Clerk or
Deputy to the Right Honorable the Lord Newburgh, through whose Office all
Writs of that nature do pass, has refused to deliver the same without paying
of Fees for the Seals thereof; his Lordship does order, that all Writs which
shall be Sealed for privileged persons, Privilege Writs, and Pauper Writs to
be sealed without Fee.
and for Suitors to this Court in Forma Pauperis, and renewed Writs, be from
henceforth delivered to the persons, for whom the same shall be Sealed, or to
their Clerks, without paying or giving any Fee for the same. And the said
Hutton is required to observe this Order, and to conform thereunto accordingly.

Mercurii 20 die Aug. Anno Regni Caroli II. Regis 14. 1662.
Touching Inrolments of Patents.
Ordo Curiae.

WHereas upon the Humble Petition of the Six Clerks of His Majesty's High Court
of Chancery, on the 29th of April last, preferred to the Right Honorable the
Lord High Chancellor of England, showing, that it having been their ancient and
undoubted Right to inroll the Warrants of all such Leases as pass the Great
Seal, which they peaceably and quietly enjoyed, until about the tenth year of
the late King, one Baseley, by color of a Patent to him granted of inrolling
the King's Deeds, did prefer several Petitions to the said late King, and to
the then Commissioners, for exacted Fees, the Lord Keepers, Coventry, Finch and
Littleton, that all such Warrants might be delivered to him to be enrolled. But
upon hearing the Six Clerks he had no relief, but the Six Clerks and their
Predecessors enjoyed their ancient Rights therein; and in the 11th year of the
said late King, the Lord Coventry (upon careful examination thereof, with the
concurrent opinion of the then Master of the Rolls, and Sir John Banks then
Attorney General) did, amongst other of the Six Clerks Rights, certify the
said late King, under his Hand, that it was the Right of the Six Clerks to
inroll all Warrants for Parents whatsoever; and that it was the right of the
Clerk of Inrolments to inroll all Recognizances, etc. in the Close Rolls, which
were made from Subject to Subject, or from the Subject to the King, for the
Subjects benefit, for the accustomed Fee, and (if the Attorney General, or
Solicitor require it) to inroll any Deed or Writing, made to his Majesty, for
his own use, without Fee. Whereupon the said late King, in the said 11th year
of His Reign confirmed the said Rights (amongst others) to the Six Clerks, and
the Clerk of the Inrolments, with an Inhibition to all others to intermeddle
with their said Rights. Nevertheless Mr. Kipps (upon a claim by Mr. Hains, by
color of the like Grant to him, as formerly to Baseley) refuses to deliver
such Warrants of Leases, that lately passed the Great Seal, to them, to be
enrolled. And therefore they humbly prayed his Lordship to order Mr. Kipps to
deliver the said Warrants to the riding Clerk to be enrolled, according to
their Just Right. Whereupon his Lordship desired the Master of the Rolls to
call all parties concerned, before him (having heard their several Allegations)
to certify his Lordship how he found the case between them: who having
accordingly heard them, made his Report or Certificate to his Lordship in these
words, 9 July 1662. To the Right Honorable the Earl of Clarendon, Lord High
Chancellor of England: According to your Lordships directions the 29th of
April, 1662. Upon the Six Clerks Petition to have the Warrants of Leases
delivered unto them by Mr. Kipps, to be enrolled, I have heard them; and Hains,
with his Council, who made it appear, that there had been several Patents of
like nature to his, granted to several persons since the 26th of Henry the 8th.
In Answer whereunto the six Clerks say, that notwithstanding the said Patents,
Mr. Hains does not show that ever any of the said Patentees did inroll any
Warrants for Grants, that pass the Great Seal; nor do any words, as I conceive
in his, or any former Patents mentioned by him, extend to the inrolment of any
such Warrants. The Six Clerks further made it appear, that Edward Basely, the
late Patentee, petitioned the lat King against them in 1634. concerning the
inrollments of His Majesty's Deeds, which was referred to the Commissioners of
exacted Fees; and I find in the year following, upon examination had by the
Lord Keeper, Coventry, with the concurrent Opinion of Sir Julius Caesar, Master
of the Rolls, and Sir John Banks, Attorney General, it was certified under the
hand of the said Lord Keeper, amongst other things, to have been the due
ancient Right, held and enjoyed by the Six Clerks, to inroll all manner of
Warrants for Patent Leases, etc. whereby the said Patent Leases, etc. pass the
Great Seal; Six Clerks to inroll all Warrants for Patent Leases, etc. whereby
the Patend Leases, etc. pass the Great Seal.
whereupon his late Majesty, by his Letters Patents, bearing date the 17th of
June 1635. to take away all questions, doubts and ambiguities that heretofore
have been, or hereafter may be raised concerning the same; and to the end the
Six Clerks, and their Successors for ever after, might inviolably hold the
same, did allow, approve, grant, ratify and confirm the same. And it was
therein declared to be His Majesty's pleasure, that the said Warrants shall be
delivered from time to time by him or them, in whose custody they shall remain,
to the Six Clerk, who shall be riding Clerk for the time being, to the end the
said Warrants might be enrolled: His Majesty, further, by the said Patent,
straightly charging and commanding, that no other person or persons whatsoever
should from thenceforth encroach or usurp upon them therein, or molest or
disturb them touching the same. And the Six Clerks accordingly have ever since
enrolled the said Warrants; and before, and ever since have received the Fees
due for the same. All which I humbly submit to your Lordships grave
consideration; as by the said Report, remaining filed with the Register of this
Court appears.

Har. Grimstone.
And his Lordship having perused the said Report, does declare his Concurrence
in Opinion with the Master of the Rolls, and does therefore order and appoint
the said Mr. Kipps to deliver out the said Warrants to be enrolled, as by the
said Petition is desired.



Master of the Rolls, Sir. Tho. Estcott, Sir. Mondeford Bramstone.
Lunae 25 die Januarii, Anno Regni Caroli II. Regis, 15. 1663.
Concerning Subpaena's.
Ordo Curiae.

FOrasmuch as this Court was this day informed by His Majesty's Attorney
General, that one John Hungerford has forged, made and counterfeited
Subpaena's, and that he has put Seals thereon, like unto those sealed with the
Great Seal, as by two several Affidavits, now produced and read in Court
appeared. And further informing, that one Theophilus Aylmer had lately bespoke,
paid 18 s. for, and had from the said Hungerford one forged and counterfeit
Subpaena for 51 l. 13 s. 4 d. Costs in a Cause depending in this Court between
Sharp and Brooks; which coming to be examined before the Master of the Rolls,
he committed the said Hungerford and Aylmer for such misdemeanour, contempt and
abuse of this Court, unto the Prison of the Fleet, Punishment of those that
forge Subpaena's.
who are still in Custody. It was therefore prayed, that the said Hungerford
and Aylmer may be punished, and made exemplary for such their Misdemeanour,
Abuse and Contempt of this Court, and his Majesty's great Seal. Whereupon it is
ordered, that the said Hungerford and Aylmer be brought into this Court, when
the Right Honorable the Lord High Chancellor of England does sit in Court; and
in the mean time the Register is to search Presidents of what has been done by
the Court in punishing Offenses of like nature.

Mercurii 18 die Julii Anno Regni Caroli II. Regis 18. 1666.
Touching the Business of the Court divided according to the Letters of the
Alphabet.
Ordo Curiae.

THe Right Honorable Edward, Earl of Clarendon, Lord High Chancellor of
England, and the Honorable Sir Harbottle Grimstone Baronet, Master of the
Rolls, taking into their Consideration the manifold disorders, and undue
practices which in the late times have crept into the Six Clerks Office, to the
great dishonor of this Court, the obstruction of Justice, the damage of the
Client, and confusion and loss of the Records, and the several ways of
redressing the same. And having diverse times heard the Six Clerks and their
Under-Clerks concerning the settlement by division of Letters, formerly (to
this end) ordered by the Lord Coventry, late Lord Keeper of the Great Seal, and
after long deliberation, and several conferences with some of the Reverend
Judges, and of the King's learned Council finding no expedient so equal and
effectual for the due filing and easy search of the Records, and the orderly
proceedings, and quiet dispatch in all Causes, nor so proper to prevent the
mislaying and the imbezling the Records, ^eceiving; filing, bundling of Bills,
Answers, etc. and the making all Exemplifications, Writs and Copies thereof to
be divided amongst the Six Clerks, according to the Letters of the Alphabet.
Vide infra. Feb. 1. 1668. this Order Repealed.
and that confusion which is every day discovered from thence, to the extreme
scandal of the Court, and prejudice of the Subject, as the reviving and
re-establishing the aforesaid settlement: Do hereby Order and Ordain, that the
said method be revived and from henceforth observed by the present Six Clerks
and their Successors, and by their Under-Clerks (viz.) that the receiving,
filing, bundling and keeping of all Bills, Answers, Pleadings, and all
Proceedings thereupon, and the making and expediting of all Exemplifications,
Writs and Copies, of or concerncerning the same, be divided among the said Six
Clerks and their Successors respectively, by and according to the Letters of
the Alphabet in manner following, that is to say, that all Bills, Answers and
other Pleadings of Clients in Causes wherein the Plaintiffs, or first
Plaintiffs Surname shall begin with A. B. C. D. F. or Y. and all Proceedings
thereupon in the said Six Clerks Offices be from henceforth received, filed,
bundled and kept by Mr. Pyndar, and Mr. Bluck, or one of them, and their
Successors in their Offices respectively, and by no other. And all Bills,
Answers and other Pleadings of Clients in Causes wherein the Plaintiffs, or
first Plaintiffs Surname shall begin with E. G. H. J. K. L. M. N. or O. and all
Proceedings thereupon in the said Six Clerks Offices be from henceforth
received, filed, bundled and kept by Sir Cyrill Wych and Mr. Wilkinson, or one
of them, and their Successors in their Offices respectively, and by no other.
And all Bills, Answers and other Pleadings of Clients, in Causes wherein the
Plaintiffs, or first Plaintiffs Surname shall begin with P. Q. R. S. T. V. W.
X. or L. and all other proceedings thereupon in the said Six Clerks Offices be
from henceforth received, filed, Bundled and kept by Sir John Marsham and Mr.
Longville, or one of them, and their Successors respectively, and by no other,
in manner as formerly has been done by the Six Clerks. And that all Cross
Bills, Bills of Reviver, and Bills of Review, and all proceedings thereupon be
revived, filed, bundled and kept in the same Division of Letters where the
former Suit touching the same matter began, and not elsewhere; and all
Exemplifications, Writs and Copies, of or concerning the same Bills, Answers,
Pleadings and Proceedings thereupon, be made and expedited by them to whom the
reviving, filing, bundling and keeping of the Records does belong, according to
the allotments of Letters aforesaid, and by no other. And it is further ordered
and ordained, That if at any time hereafter there shall happen any difference
to arise betwixt any of the Six Clerks touching any of their Under-Clerks, or
touching their Clients or their Causes, or touching the filing of any Bill,
Answer or Pleading, or other thing according to the division of Letters
aforesaid, or any other matters of their Offices, that then the said
differences be from time to time examined by the rest of the Six Clerks for the
time being, whom such difference (for the present) shall not concern, who are
to decide and determine the same, or otherwise to certify the true state of
the Fact, with their Opinion to the Master of the Rolls. And because it is very
manifest that these misdemeanors and enormities are gotten into the Office of
the Six Clerks by the liberty and license which the inferior Clerks have of
late assumed to themselves, and by their withdrawing their Obedience from, and
their dependence upon the Masters of the several Offices in which they write,
and by receiving too many Clerks of little or no experience into the several
Offices. It is likewise further ordered and ordained, that every of the Six
Clerks shall be limited and stinted to twelve Clerks Every Six Clerk to be
stinted to 12 Under-Clerks.
at the most, to serve immediately under him, whereof fix at the least shall be
expert in writing the Chancery Letter, and every of those twelve shall take a
Corporal Oath before the Master of the Rolls not to imbezil, falsify, corrupt,
raze or deface any Bills, Answers, Pleadings, Commissions, Depositions,
Warrants, Decrees, Dismissions or other Records whatsoever belonging to the
High Court of Chancery, and to deliver forthwith unto the Six Clerks
respectively, or his Deputy, unopened, all Commissions and Depositions that
shall come to their hands, to be kept safely and secretly by the Six Clerk till
publication; and after being copied, forthwith to return them.

Orders heretofore used in Chancery: With such Alteration and Additions as the
Right Honorable Edward Earl of Clarendon, Lord High Chancellor of England,
with the Assistance of the Honorable Sir Harbottle Grimston, Baronet, Master
of the Rolls, have thought fit to Ordain.
Bills.
THat no Counselor do put his Hand to any Bill, How Counselors are to demean
themselves in drawing Bills.
Answer or other Pleading, unless it be drawn, or at least perused by himself
in the Paper-draught before it be Engrossed (which they shall do well for their
own discharge, to sign also after perusal) and Counsel are to take care that
the same be not stuffed with the repetition of Deeds, Writings or Records in
haec verba; but the effect and substance of so much of them only as is
pertinent and material to be set down, and that in brief terms, without long
and needless traverses of points not traversable, tautologies, multiplication
of words, or other impertinencies, occasioning needless prolixity, to the end
the ancient brevity and succinctness in Bills and other Pleadings may be
restored and observed; much less may any Counsel insert therein matter merely
criminal or scandalous, under penalty of good Costs to be laid on such Counsel,
to be paid to the party grieved, before such Counsel be heard in Court.

If there be matter scandalous in a Bill, Bill scandalous.
a Master of Chancery is to expunge it, and to tax Costs for the Party
scandalized; but if on such reference the Master Reports the Bill not
scandalous, the Party procuring such reference shall pay Costs to the Plaintiff
for such his reference.

That all Bills be dated the same day they are brought into the Six Clerks
Office, Bills to be dated the same day they are brought into the Office.
and that no Six Clerk presume to antidate any Bill, and that no Under-Clerk
presume to keep any Bill by him, but with the first opportunity deliver the
same to the Six Clerk or his allowed Deputy, in his absence to be accordingly
filed.

No Bill, Answer, or other Pleading shall be said to be of Record, or to be of
any effect in Court, until the same be filed with such of the Six Clerks with
whom it ought properly to remain.

Subpoena's.
THat all Plaintiffs may have liberty to take forth Subpoena's ad respondendum,
before the filing of their Bills, if they please, notwithstanding any late
Order or Usage to the contrary.

That every Subpoena to Answer, How every Subpoena is to be served.
Revive, Review, Rejoyn, to Testify or to hear Judgment, shall be served
personally, or left at the Defendants Dwelling House, or place of Residence,
with one of the Family. And no Clerk of this Court shall issue any Attachment
for not appearing, but upon Affidavit first made, Affidavit to be made of the
Service.
positive and certain of the day and place of such Service of the Subpoena, and
the time of the Return thereof, whereby it shall appear that such Service was
made, if in London, or within twenty miles thereof four days at the least,
excluding the day of such Service: Attachment for not appearing.
and if above twenty miles, then to have been eight days before such Attachment
entered; and that such Attachment shall not be discharged, but upon payment of
usual Costs, and so the succeeding Costs to be double.

Note, That a Subpoena for to hear Judgment is to be served How a Subpoena to
hear Judgment ought to be served.
personally, or to be left at the House of the Party with one of the Family,
save that you are to give fourteen days notice exclusive before the time to
hear Judgment; but if it be in the short Vacation between Easter and Trinity
Term, you are to give but ten days notice, because of the shortness of the
Vacation.

How a Subpoena for Costs to be served.
Now there is also a Suboepna for Costs, not mentioned amongst the Subpoena's
in the general Rule, which is also to be personally served because of demanding
of the Costs thereby required, and you cannot serve it otherwise unless you
have the Order of the Court on an Affidavit that you cannot find the person to
serve him personally to leave it with the Clerk in Court, or otherwise, as the
Court on a Motion or Petition shall direct, and that deemed good if personally
served.

Now because there is so frequent Mistakes made to the great prejudice of the
Plaintiff, in serving of Subpoena's, it is not amiss if you understand how to
serve it rightly; How to serve a Subpoena rightly.
Now if the Subpoena be against only one then you may leave the Body at such
persons place of abode, or serve him with the Label if you meet him personally;
but if one or two more are in the Subpoena, two are to be served personally,
and the Body under Seal showed to them at the time of such service, and the
Body may be served personally or left at the House, as you please, of the other
person.

Pleas and Demurrers.
FOrasmuch as the Defendant being served with Process to answer, may by advice
of Counsel upon sight of the Bill only be enabled to demur thereunto, if there
be Cause, or may by like advice be enabled to put in any just Plea which he
has in disability of the person of the Plaintiff, or to the Jurisdiction of
the Court: It is therefore ordered, that such Demurrer or such Plea in
disability, or to the Jurisdiction of the Court, Demurrer or Plea in
disability, or to the Jurisdiction of the Court.
under the Hand of Counsel learned, shall be received and filed, although the
Defendant do not deliver the same in person, or by Commission. And therefore if
the Defendant shall pray a Commission, and thereby return a Demurrer only, or
only such a Plea which shall be afterward overruled, the Defendant shall pay
five Marks Costs: And although it be allowed, the Defendant shall have no Costs
in respect of the Plaintiffs needless trouble occasioned by such Commission.

Every Demurrer shall express the several Causes of Demurrer, Every Demurrer to
express the Causes of Demurrer.
and shall be determined in open Court. And such Pleas also as are grounded
upon the Substance and Body of the Matter, or extend to the Jurisdiction of the
Court, shall be determined in open Court; and for that purpose the Defendant is
to enter the same with the Register within eight days after the filing thereof;
To be entered with the Register within 8 days of the filing.
or in default of such Entry made, the same shall be disallowed of course, as
put in for delay. And the Plaintiff may then take out Process to enforce the
Defendant to make a better Answer, and pay 40 s. Costs; and the same shall not
afterward be admitted to be set down or debated, unless upon Motion it shall
be ordered by the Court: And if any Cause of Demurrer shall arise and be
insisted on at the debate of the Demurrer (more than is particularly alleged)
Cause of Demur^er which is sufficient to dismiss the Bill which was not
particularly alleged.
yet the Defendant shall pay the ordinary Costs of overruling a Demurrer
(which is hereby ordered to be five Marks Costs) if those Causes which are
particularly alleged be disallowed: Although the Bill, in respect of that
particular so newly alleged, shall be dismissed by the Court.

A Plea of Outlawry, Plea of Outlawry when good or not.
if it be in any Suit for that duty, touching which Relief is sought by the
Bill, is insufficient according to the Rule of Law, and shall be disallowed of
course, as put in for delay: And the Plaintiff may notwithstanding such Plea,
take out Process to enforce the Defendant to make a better Answer, and pay five
Marks Costs; otherwise a Plea of Outlawry is always a good Plea, so long as the
Outlawry remains in force: And therefore the Defendant shall not be put to
set it down with the Register. And after the said Outlawry reversed, the
Defendant upon a new Subpoena served on him, and payment unto him of 20 s.
Costs, shall answer the same Bill, as if such Outlawry had not been: But if the
Plaintiff conceive such Plea of Outlawry throrough Mispleading, or otherwise to
be insufficient, he may, upon notice given to the Clerk on the other side, set
it down with the Register, to be debated with the rest of the Pleas and
Demurrers in course: But if the Plaintiff shall not in such case enter it with
the Register within eight days after the same shall be filed, the Defendant may
take out Process against the Plaintiff for his ordinary Costs of five Marks, as
if the same had been heard.

The dependency of a former Suit for the same Matter, Plea, depending of a
former Suit for the same matter.
is also a good Plea, and therefore the Defendant shall not be put to set it
down with the Register: But if the Plaintiff be not satisfied therewith, the
same shall be referred to one of the Masters of the Court to certify the truth
thereof, and if it shall be determined against the Plaintiff, he shall pay five
pounds Costs to the Defendant. But if such Reference shall be procured by the
Plaintiff, and if a Report thereupon within one Month after the filing of such
Plea, then the Bill to stand dismissed of course, with the ordinary Costs of
seven Nobles.

If after a Suit commenced at the Common Law, or any other inferior Court, a
Bill shall be exhibited in this Court to be relieved for the same Matter, the
dependency of the former Suit shall be admitted as a good Plea, and the
Defendant not to be put to motions for an Election or Dismission, and that Plea
shall be proceeded in, as in case of a Plea of a former Suit depending in this
Court for the same Matter.

After a Contempt duly prosecuted to an Attachment with Proclamation returned,
no Commission to answer shall be made, nor no Plea or Demurrer admitted, but
upon Motion in Court, After Attachment with Proclamation returned, no
Commission to answer shall be made, nor no Plea ordered, but upon Motion.
and Affidavit made of the Parties Inability to travel, or other good Matter,
to satisfy the Court touching that delay.

Answers.
AFter a Commission once obtained to answer, no second Commission shall be
granted without special Order No Second Commission to answer, without special
Order.
of Court, upon good reason showed to induce the same, or the Plaintiffs own
assent.

An Answer to a Matter charged as a Defendants own Fact, Answer, how to be
drawn.
must regularly be without saying, To his remembrance, or As he believes, if
it be laid to be done within seven years before, unless the Court upon
Exception taken shall find special Cause to dispense with so positive an
Answer: And if the Defendant deny the Fact, he must traverse or deny it (as the
Cause requires) directly, and not by way of negative pregnant. As if he be
charged with a Receipt of a Sum of Money, he must deny or traverse that he has
not received that Sum, or any part thereof, or else set forth what part he has
received. And if a Fact be laid to be done with diverse circumstances, the
Defendant must not deny or traverse it literally, as it is laid in the Bill,
but must answer the point of Substance positively and certainly.

When the Defendants have answered, the Plaintiffs and their Council are
seriously to advise of the Answers, and if they find that upon the Answer alone
without farther proof, there be sufficient ground for a final Order or Decree,
to proceed upon Answer without farther lengthning of the Cause. Or if it be
needful to prove one or a few particular points, to reply unto those points,
and not to draw into Pleadings or Proofs any more than those necessary points,
thereby making long Books, and putting both sides to unnecessary Charges, the
Defaulters herein to be punished by paying the Charge of the Copies, or
otherwise, as Cause shall require.

If a Hearing be prayed upon Bill and Answer, Of hearing upon Bill and Answer.
the Answer must be admitted to be true in all points, and no other Evidence to
be admitted unless it be Matter of Record, to which the Answer refers, and is
proveable by the Record: The Plaintiff is therefore to be well advised, that
the Court be not put to unnecessary trouble, and himself to a certain Charge,
in bringing his Cause to hearing, which will not bear a Decree.

Exceptions.
WHen a Plaintiff excepteth to a Defendants Answer, Exceptions to an Answer how
to be drawn, and when to be filed.
he shall set down his Exceptions in writing; and if the Answer be filed in
Term-time, he shall the same Term, or within eight days after that Term,
deliver the same Exceptions to the Council, whose hand is to the Answer, or to
the Defendants Clerk in Court: And if the Defendant do within eight days after
such delivery, satisfy the Plaintiff of the invalidity of those Exceptions, or
amend the Answer in the same time, or agree with the Plaintiff or his Clerk, or
Solicitor, to amend it accordingly, and pay 20 s. Costs, 20 s. cost for
amending.
the Plaintiff shall go on to reply: But if the Defendant shall fail to do the
same, or put in a second insufficient Answer, the Plaintiff may get the Answer
or Answers referred: And if the same shall be ruled insufficient, the Defendant
shall pay 40 s. Costs. But if an Answer be filed in Vacation time, then the
Plaintiff shall have eight days in the beginning of the next Term, if he see
cause to put in his Exceptions, and deliver them in writing in like manner, as
before is appointed; and the Defendant within eight days after such delivery to
proceed as is before ordered.

If the Plaintiff shall procure a Reference of an insufficient Answer within
the time before limited, and the same be reported good, the Plaintiff shall pay
the Defendant 40 s. Costs.

If the first Answer be certified insufficient, and ruled so, the Defendant
shall pay 40 s. Costs, If the first Answer be certified insufficient, Defendant
to pay 40 s. Costs.
as aforesaid, if the Answer was put in person; but if the same came in by
Commission, the Defendant shall have 50 s. Costs, and no new Commission shall
be awarded for taking a second Answer, Second Answer.
unless it be by Order, upon Affidavit made of the Party's inability to travel,
or other good matter, to satisfy the Court touching that delay, and first
paying the Costs of such insufficient Answer, or by the Plaintiff, or his
Clerks assent for expediting the Cause. If the second Answer be reported
insufficient unto any the points formerly certified, the Defendant shall pay
three pounds Costs: And upon the third insufficient, four pounds Costs: And
upon a fourth Answer certified insufficient, he shall pay five pounds Costs, 5
l. Cost to pay if the second Answer be reported insufficient. 4 l. upon the
third: upon the fourth 5 l. and be examined upon Interrogatories.
and be examined upon Interrogatories to the points reported insufficient, and
shall be committed, until he has perfectly answered those Interrogatories, and
paid the Costs, in respect of the great vexation and delay which in such Cases
will happen to the Plaintiff.

No Subpoena ad rejungendum Subpoena ad rejungendum.
shall be of force, unless there be a Replication filed in the Cause, according
to the course of the Court, before the issuing out of the said Subpoena, or at
least before the Return thereof: And the Parties upon whom such Subpoena shall
be served, finding no Replication filed before the Return thereof; shall have
the ordinary Costs taxed, according to the course of the Court.

Examination of Witnesses.
WHen the Parties are at Issue, and proceed to examine Witnesses, the
Interrogatories are to be penned with care, that the same be pertinent, and
only to the points necessary, and the Witnesses are to be sorted and examined
on those Interrogatories only that their Testimony does extend unto, without
the needless Interrogatories of Matters unnecessary or immaterial, as well to
avoid the Charge of both Parties, Plaintiff and Defendant, in superfluous
Examinations, as the apt Interrogatories (which are the Life of the Cause) may
be exhibited.

No Witness shall be examined in Court by the Examiner, Witnesses how to be
examined in Court by the Examiner.
without the privity of the adverse Party, or of his Clerk who deals for the
adverse Party, to whom the person to be examined shall be showed, and a Note of
his Name or place of dwelling delivered in writing, by such as shall produce
him; and the Examiner is to take care, and be well satisfied that such notice
be given, and then shall add to the Title of the Witnesses Examination the time
of such notice given, and the Name of that person to whom it is given and by
whom, that at the hearing of the Cause the Suitor be not delayed, upon pretense
of want of notice.

When Witnesses are examined in Court upon a Schedule of Interrogatories, there
shall be no new Interrogatories put in to examine the same Witnesses; nor shall
any Witnesses be examined in Court after the day of Publication, No new
Interrogatories put to examine the same Witnesses. Witnesses to be examined in
Court after the day of publication.
though they were sworn before, so as a Copy of the Rule or Order whereby
Publication passed, be delivered to the Examiner, that he may take notice
thereof.

That all Copies of Bills, Answers, How many Lines in a Sheet Copies to contain.
Depositions, or other Record, or thing whatsoever belonging to the Six Clerk
to copy, shall contain fifteen Lines at the least in every Sheet of Paper,
written fairly, and orderly, and unwastefully: And that no such Copy shall be
henceforth delivered out of the Office, before it be signed by such Six Clerk
to whom it belongs, with his own proper Handwriting, or by his Deputy in his
absence.

Nor any Copy not so signed, Copies to be signed by the Six Clerk.
shall be made use of in Court, or before any Master, which all Clients are to
take notice of, to the end they may be prepared with such Copies at the hearing
of their Causes.

And whereas many Inconveniences do frequently arise by undue copying Bills,
Answers and other Pleadings, before they be filed; No Copy to be made till the
Originals be filed.
so as they are neither filed, or very irregulary, to the prejudice of the
Client, and trouble to the Court, by unnecessary Motions: It is therefore
ordered, That no Under-Clerk, or his Man, or other from him, do from henceforth
presume to copy any Bill, or other Pleading whatsoever, before it be duly filed
with the proper Six Clerk, who ought to file the same.

How a Witness to be examined.
For preventing of Perjury, and other Mischiefs often appearing to the Court,
the Examiner is to examine the Deponent to the Interrogatories directed
seriatim, and not permit him to read over, or hear read any other
Interrogatories, until that in hand be fully finished; much less is he to
suffer the Deponent to have the Interrogatories, and pen his own Depositions,
or depart after he has heard an Interrogatory read over, until he has
perfected his Examination thereunto.

And if any Witness shall refuse so to conform himself, the Examiner is thereof
to give notice to the Clerk of the other side, and to proceed no farther in his
Examination, without the Consent of the said Clerk, or Order made in Court to
warrant his so doing.

The Examiner shall not examine any Witnesses, to invalid the Credit of any
other Witness, The Examiner not to examine any Witness to invalidate the Credit
of another Witness.
but by special Order of the Court, which is sparingly to be granted, and upon
Exceptions filed with the Examiner without Fee, and notice thereof given to the
adverse Party or his Clerk, together with a true Copy of the said Exceptions at
the Charge of the Party so examining.

The Examiners (in whom the Court reposeth much Confidence) are themselves in
person to be diligent in Examination of Witnesses, and not entrust the same to
mean and inferior Clerks; and are to take care to hold the Witness to the
point interrogated, and not to run into Extravagancies, and Matters not
pertinent to the Question, thereby wasting Paper for their own Profit, of which
the Court will expect a strict Account.

The Examiners are to take care that they employ under them in their Office,
none but persons of known Integrity and Ability, who shall take an Oath, Not to
deliver or make known, directly or indirectly, to the adverse Party, or any
other, save the Deponent, who comes to be examined in any of the
Interrogatories delivered, to be examined upon any Examination by him taken, or
remaining in the Examiners Office an Extract, Copy or Breviate thereof, before
Publication be thereof passed, and the Copies thereof taken. And if any such
Deputy, Clerk, or person so employed, shall be found faulty in the Premises,
he shall be expulsed the Office; and the Examiner who so employed him, shall be
also answerable to the Court for such Misdemeanor, and to the Party grieved,
for his Costs and Damages sustained thereby: And such Solicitor or other
person, who shall be discovered to have had a hand therein, shall be liable to
such censure for the Offense, as the Court shall find just to inflict upon him.

In examining of Witnesses, the Examiner shall not use any idle Repetitions, or
needless Circumstances, nor set down any Answer to the Question, to which the
Examinant cannot depose, other than thus; To such an Interrogatory this
Examinant cannot depose. And in case such impertinencies be observed by the
Cou^^, the Examiner is to recompense the Charge thereof to the party grieved,
as the Court shall award.

That after Witnesses examined in Court, there shall be two Rules only given
for Publication, viz. an ordinary Rule, and then a day to show Cause why
Publication should not pass, and upon the Return of a Commission, one Rule only
to be given, After Witnesses examined in Court, there shall be two Rules only
given for publication, and upon the return of a Commission, one Rule only.
within which times aforesaid, if the other side do not show unto the Court
good Cause unto the contrary, Publication shall pass accordingly.

All Pleadings, Commissions, Certificates, belonging to the Six Clerks to
receive, shall immediately, upon the bringing in or return thereof into this
Court, be delivered to such Six Clerks own Hands, All Pleadings, etc. to be
delivered into the Six Clerks own hands or his Deputy.
as shall be Attorney in the Cause, or to the Hands of his Deputy in his
absence; and not to be from henceforth in any wise kept back, nor any
Depositions or Answers taken by Commission, or other Commission to be opened by
any of their Under-Clerks, before they be so delivered.

No Bills, Warrants, Pleadings, Commissions, Decrees, Dismissions, or other
Records whatsoever, shall from henceforth be carried to be engrossed, enrolled,
copied, or otherwise used by any of the Under-Clerks to their Chambers, No
Bills, etc. to be carried to be engrossed, enrolled, copied by the Under-Clerks
to their Chambers.
or elsewhere out of the Six Clerks Office, or Lodgings there; and so soon as
any Clerk shall have engrossed, enrolled, copied, or used any such Warrant,
Pleading, Commission, Decree or other Record in the said Office, he shall bring
the Original thereof presently back to such Six Clerk to whom the Custody
thereof does belong, for the more safe keeping and disposing thereof according
to the ancient usage.

Commissions.
WHen a Commission is awarded to examine Witnesses, if by default of him that
has the carriage of the Commission, or by his Commissioners nothing is done,
he shall bear all the Charges ^e who has the carrying of the Commission (if
nothing be done in it) shall bear all the Charges.
that the other side was put unto about that Commission, either for Fees of
Court, bringing or entertaining Commissioners or Witnesses, or otherwise, to be
ascertained by the Oath of the Party, or of him that disbursed the Money for
him, and shall renew the Commission at his own Charges.

When a Commission is awarded to examine Witnesses, and the one side produces
and examineth all his Witnesses, and the other side does not, but prays a new
Commission; if it be granted he shall bear all the Charges If the other side
examines no Witnesses, but prays a new Commission, he shall bear all Charges.
of the renewed Commission, both in Court and in the Country, as well for the
Charge and Entertainment of his own Commissioners, as of the Commissioners on
the other side, and the other side shall be permitted to cross-examin the
Witnesses produced by him that renews the Commission; but if he will examine
any other Witnesses of his own, then he shall bear his own part of the Charge;
the Charges herein mentioned to be ascertained by the Oath of the Party, or of
him that disbursed the Money for him.

He at whose instance a Commission to examine Witnesses after a former
Commission executed and returned, Upon a renewed Commission all the Witnesses
are to be examined.
is once renewed, and he by whose default, or by default of his Commissioners,
a former Commission was not executed, and thereupon it is renewed, shall at his
peril examine all his Witnesses by that renewed Commission, or examine them in
Court by the end of the Term, wherein that renewed Commission is returnable
without any more or farther delay.

That no Commission ad examinandum Testes be executed in London, or within ten
miles thereof, No Commission ad examinand' in London, or within 10 miles.
without special Order first obtained upon Affidavit made of the Parties
Inability to travel, or other good Matter. And that all Depositions taken by
Commission in London, or within ten miles thereof, without special Order as
aforesaid, shall stand superseded and suppressed ipso facto, and not allowed to
be read as Evidence at the hearing of the Cause. And the Parties who shall
cause the same to be executed, shall suffer such punishment for their Contempt
and Irregularity, as the Court shall think fit.

Depositions.
WHere either the Party Plaintiff or Defendant, obtains an Order to use
Depositions of Witnesses taken in another Cause, Order to use Depositions taken
in another Cause.
the adverse Party may likewise use the same without Motion, unless he be, upon
special reason showed to the Court by that Party first desiring the same,
inhibited by the same Order so to do.

No Motion shall be made in Court, or by Petition for suppressing of
Depositions How and when Motion or Petition shall be for suppressing of
Depositions.
as irregularly taken, until the Six Clerks, not toward the Cause, have been
first attended with the Complaint of the Party grieved, and certify the true
state of the Fact to the Court, with their Opinion: If the Attorneys or Clerks
on either side, shall not for the case of their Clients agree before them; for
which purpose a Rule for Attendance of the Six Clerk in such Case shall be
entered of course with the Register at the desire of the Party complaining,
which shall warrant their Proceedings, and Certificate to the Court.

Causes to be set down for hearing.
THe Six Clerks, who are the only Attorneys in this Court, ought to inform
themselves continually of the State and Proceedings of their Clients Causes,
and to give Account to the Clerk as the Attorneys in all other Courts do, and
not to leave the Care and Knowledge thereof upon their Under-Clerks, who attend
not in Court, and the Clients and such as follow their Causes, are to acquaint
their Attorneys for that purpose.

Such as desire to have their Causes set down for hearing, How and when Causes
are to be set down for hearing.
must repair to the Six Clerk that is Attorney in the Cause, at least six days
before the end of the Term, that the Six Clerk may inform himself of the state
of the Cause, of the long or short dependence thereof in Court, of the
Antiquity of the Publication, of the weight or value of the Cause, and all
other circumstances material to inform the Lord Chancellor, Lord Keeper, or
Master of the Rolls, at the time of the setting down of Causes, and the Six
Clerk may not refuse to offer the same to be set down, if he be attended in
such time as aforesaid, nor come unprepared to inform the Lord Chancellor, Lord
Keeper, or the Master of the Rolls, of the Nature and Circumstance of the Cause
aforesaid. And neither he nor any of his Under-Clerks, To be set down without
Fee.
nor any of the Registers, are to take any Fee, Gratuity or Reward for the same.

No Money, or other Reward, shall in any wise be exacted, or taken directly by
any of the Six Clerks, or any of the Registers for, or in their behalf, for the
preferring and setting down of any Cause for hearing; but only such Fees as are
behind, and unpaid of their Termly Fees and Duties, (if any be) and if any
Cause happen to be set down for hearing, wherein they shall not have been
satisfied their due Fees and Duties, they may allege the same in stay of
hearing of the Cause.

Proceedings in hearing Causes.
WHere no Council appears for the Defendant at the hearing, and Process appear
to have been duly served, the Answer of such Defendant shall be read; At the
hearing, if no Counsel appear for the Defendant, his Answer shall be read, and
to proceed afterward.
and if the Court upon such hearing shall find Cause to decree for the
Plaintiff, yet a day shall regularly be given to the Defendant to show Cause
against the same; but before he be admitted thereunto, he shall pay down to the
Plaintiff, or his Attorney in Court, such Costs as the Court upon that hearing
shall assess, and the Order is to be penned by the Register accordingly (viz.)
It is decreed so and so, etc. Unless the Defendant shall by such a day pay to
the Plaintiff, or his Attorney in Court, Costs, and show good Cause to the
contrary; and such Defendant upon his showing Cause, shall first produce a
Certificate from the Plaintiffs Attorney in Court, that he has paid the Costs,
or Affidavit of Tender or Refusal thereof.

Contempts.
ALl Process of Contempt shall be made out into the County where the Party
prosecuted is resident, All Process of Contempt to be made into the County
where the Party is resident.
unless he shall be then in, or about London, in which Case it may be made in
the County where the Party then is. And if any person shall be taken upon
Process otherwise, or irregularly issued, the Party so taken first appearing
unto, and satisfying the Process which did regularly issue against him, shall
be discharged of his Contempt, and have his full Costs to be taxed of course by
the Six Clerk not toward the Cause, for such undue or irregular Prosecution
from the time that the Error first grew, without Motion or other Order.

Every Suitor who prosecuteh a Contempt, shall do his best endeavor to procure
each several Process to be duly served, Each Process to be duly served.
and executed upon the Party prosecuted; and his wilful default therein
appearing to the Court, such person offending shall pay unto the Party grieved
good Costs, and lose the benefit of the Process returned without such Endeavor.

All Attachments in Process shall be discharged upon the Defendants payment, or
tender to the Plaintiffs Clerk, and refusal of the ordinary Costs of the Court,
and filing his Plea, Upon Motion or Petition, all Attachments in Process shall
be discharged upon the Defendants payment of Costs, and filing his Plea, etc.
Answer or Demurrer (as the Case regularly requires) but yet upon Motion in
Court, or Petition in that behalf.

And if after such Conformity and Payment of the Costs, (or tender and refusal
thereof) any farther Prosecution shall be had of the said Contempt, the Party
prosecuted shall be discharged with his Costs.

If after Appearance and Interrogatories exhibited as aforesaid, the Party
appearing shall depart before he be examined The penalty of one appearing, and
after exhibiting of Interrogaties if he depart before he be examined.
(without leave of the Court) he is upon Motion and Certificate from the
Register, of such his departing and not being examined, and of the
Interrogatories exhibited from the Examiner, to stand committed without farther
day given unto him, and is not to be discharged from such his Contempt, until
he has been examined and cleared of his Contempt. And if he shall upon his
Examinations, or by Proofs be found in Contempt, he shall clear such his
Contempt, and pay the Prosecutor his Costs, before he be discharged of his
Imprisonment. And although he be cleared of his said Contempt, yet he shall
have no Costs, in respect of his Disobedience in not being examined without the
Prosecutors Trouble and Charge in moving the Court as aforesaid.

In case of Prosecution of a Contempt for Breach of an Order of Court,
Interrogatories how far to extend or not.
or otherwise grounded upon an Affidavit, the Interrogatories shall not be
extended to any other Matter than what is comprehended in the said Affidavit or
Order. And if any other shall be exhibited, the Party examined may for that
reason demur unto them, or refuse to answer them.

When the Party prosecuted upon a Contempt, has denied it, or the same does
not clearly appear by his Examinations, the Prosecutor may take out a
Commission of course to prove the Contempt; Commission to prove the Contempt.
and in such case the Party prosecuted may name one Commissioner to be present
at the Execution of the Commission, and may henceforth (notwithstanding the
former usage to the contrary) cross examine the Witnesses produced against him
to prove the Contempt; but is not to examine any Witnesses on his part, unless
he shall satisfy the Court touching some Matter of Fact necessary to be proved
for clearing the truth. In which Case the Court, if there be cause, will give
leave to him to examine Witnesses to such particular Points set down, and the
other side may cross examine such Witnesses; but the Interrogatories on both
sides are to be included in the Commission. The Interrogatories to be included
in the Commission.


Where a Contempt is prosecuted against one, who by reason of Age, Sickness, or
other Cause, is not able to travel. Or in case the same be against many persons
who are Servants or Workmen, that live far off, the Court will, upon Motion and
Affidavit thereof, grant a Commission to examine them in the Country; which
Commission shall be sued out and executed at the Charge of the person or
persons desiring it, directed to such indifferent Commissioners, as the
Prosecutors of the Contempt shall name (as in other Cases) and one Commissioner
only at the nomination of the Party prosecuted as aforesaid. Which Commission
shall be executed at such convenient time and place, as the Six Clerks not
toward the Cause upon hearing the Clerks upon both sides shall set down.

Upon every Examination and Proof of a Contempt referred to any of the Masters
of the Court, to certify whether the Contempt be confessed, or proved, or not:
The Master in his Certificate thereof made to the Court, shall likewise assess
and certify the Costs The Master in his Certificate of the Contempt shall
assess Costs.
to either Party as there shall be cause, without other Order or Motion made
for that purpose.

Commitment.
THe Court being tender of the Liberty of men's persons, and to avoid their
Imprisonment upon malicious Affidavits, which are often made by a mean and
ignorant person, and which has heretofore by the course of the Court drawn on
a Commitment, does order, That from henceforth, where Oath shall be made of
Misdemeanor in beating or abusing the Party upon suing the Process or Orders of
the Court, The Party abusing or beating him who serves the Process shall stand
committed upon Motion.
the Party offending shall stand committed upon Motion, and no Examination is
in that Case to be admitted.

And when Affidavit shall be made by two persons of scandalous or contemptuous
Words against the Court, So of contemptuous Words against the Court.
or the Process thereof, the Party offending shall likewise stand committed
upon Motion, without any farther Examination. And a single Affidavit in such
case shall be sufficient to ground an Attachment, whereupon such person shall
be brought in to be examined; and if the Misdemeanor shall be confessed, or
proved against him, he shall stand committed until he satisfy the Court
touching his said Misdemeanor, and pay the Prosecutor his Costs. And if he
shall not be thereof found guilty, save by the Oath of the Party who made such
Affidavit, he shall be discharged, but without any Costs, in respect of the
Oath made against him as aforesaid.

Decrees and Dismissions.
THat all Decrees and Dismissions pronounced upon hearing the Cause in this
Court, be drawn up, signed, and enrolled before the first day after the next
Michaelmas or Easter Term, after the same shall be so pronounced respectively,
and not at any time after, without special leave of the Court.

When the Party is committed, or brought in by a Sergeant at Arms for Breach of
a Decree, he is not to be enlarged until he has performed the Decree in all
things that are to be presently done, and given Security A Party committed for
breach of a Decree, not to be enlarged till he has performed it, or given
Security.
by Recognizance with Sureties, as the Court shall order to perform the other
parts of the Decree (if any be to be performed) at future days and times
appointed by the Decree.

No Decree or Dismission shall be presented by the Register of this Court, or
his Deputy, or any other, to the Lord Chancellor, Lord Keeper, or Master of the
Rolls, to be signed, before it be singned by that Six Clerk Decree or
Dismission to be signed by the Six Clerk before it shall be presented by the
Register.
to whom it belongs, of his proper Hand writing, or by his Deputy in his
absence.

To the intent the Decrees and Dismissions of this Court may be easily found
upon search, the Six Clerks are to keep a public Book for the entering of all
Decrees and Dimissions The Six Clerks to keep a public Book for the enting of
Decrees and Dismissions.
which have been made and signed by the Lord Chancellor since the 29th of May,
1660. and which shall be made and so signed in this Court: And to that end, the
Register shall at the beginning of every Term deliver unto one of the Six
Clerks a List of all Decrees and Dismissions signed by the Lord Chancellor, the
Term and Vacation before.

If a Bill be regularly and justly dismissed of course, or by Order for want of
Prosecution, no Motion shall be admitted for the Retainer thereof, without a
Certificate from the Defendant's Attorney in Court, that the Costs of the
Dismission are paid, No Motion shall be for the Retainer of a Bill dismissed
without a Certificate that the Costs are paid.
to the end unnecessary Charge to the Parties by several Motions for one and
the same Matter, may henceforth be avoided.

Masters.
THat the Masters do not pass any Exemplifications of Depositions How the
Master i^ to pass Exemplifications of Depositions.
taken in Chancery upon a bare sight of the Copies only, without first calling
the Officer or Officers, who have the Custody of the Records or Originals of
such Copies, or some sworn Clerk of his, or their Office, who are to produce
the same before them, to warrant their signing thereof. The Masters are not
upon the Importunity of Counsel (how eminent soever) or their Clients to return
special Certificates to the Court, The Masters not to return special
Certificates to the Court, unless required by the Court.
unless they are required by the Court so to do, or that their own Judgment in
respect of difficulty leads them to it; such kind of Certificates for the
most part occasioning a needless trouble, rather than ease to the Court, and
certain expense to the Suitor.

Their Certificates and Reports are to be drawn How Certificates and Reports of
the Masters are to be drawn.
as succinctly as may be (reserving the Matter clearly for the Judgment of the
Court) and without recital of the several points of the Orders of Reference
(which do sufficiently appear by the Orders themselves) or the several Debates
of Council before them: unless that in case where they are doubtful, they
shortly represent to the Court the reasons which induce them so to be.

The Masters of the Court are to take notice, That when the Court requires to
be satisfied from them, touching any Matter alleged to be confessed, or set
forth in the Defendants Answer; How the Master is to satisfy the Court
touching the Defe^dants Answer.
It is intended, That without farther Order, they should take consideration of
the whole Answer or Answers of the Defendants, and certify not only whether
the Matter be so confessed or set forth, but also any other Matter avoiding
that Confession, or ballancing the same, that the Court may receive a clear and
true Information.

The Masters in taking Affidavits, How the Masters are to take Affidavits.
and administering of Oaths, in Cases duly presented unto them, are to be
circumspect and wary, that the same be reverently and knowingly given and
taken, and are therefore to administer the same themselves to the party; and
where they discern him rash or ignorant, to give some conscionable admonition
of his duty, and be sure he understand the Matter contained in his Affidavit,
and read the some over, or hear it read in his presence, and subscribe his Name
or Mark thereunto, before the same be certified by the Master, who is not to
receive or certify any Affidavit, unless the same be fair and legibly written
without blotting, or interlineation of any word of substance.

In all Matters referred to the Masters of the Court, their Certificate (not
being to ground a Decree) if it be positive, is to stand, and process may be
taken out The Masters Certifi^ate (not being to ground a Dec^ee) i^ it be
positive i^ to ^^and, and P^^cess may be taken out upon it.
to enforce p^rformance thereof without farther Motion, unless the adverse
Party, upon notice given (to his Attorney or Clerk in Court) that such Repo^t
is filed against him, shall within eight days after such notice (if it be given
in Term, or whilst the general Seals for Motion are held, or within four days
of the next Term, if it be given after) obtain some Order in Court to control
or suspend the same, and in case of an insufficient Answer certified by the
Masters, the Plaintiff may immediately take out Process against the Defendant
for his Costs, and to make a better Answer, as has been formerly used.

Where after Certificate or Report made by the Masters of the Court, either
Party shall appeal from the same to the Judgment of the Court, he shall first
file his Exceptions thereunto briefly, with the Register, and deposite with him
40 s. Exceptions to the Maste^s Repo^ts, he that files the Exceptions to
deposite 40 s.
to be paid to the other Party for the Costs, if he prevail not in such Appeal:
And then the Register shall enter such Causes of Appeal in a Paper, in order as
they are brought unto him to be determined by the Court in course, upon days of
Motion, and notice thereof to be given by the Party appealing to the Clerk of
the other side. And also the Registers Paper to be set up in the Office two
days before: And if the Court shall not alter the M^sters Report, then the 40
s. deposited to be paid to the Party defending the same, with such Increase as
the Court shall find cause to impose; otherwise to be restored to the Party
appealing, and both without Charge.

The Masters extraordinary shall not within twenty Miles of London take any
Affidavit, or acknowledgment of Deeds, Masters extraordinary not to take
Affidavits, or acknowledge Deeds within 20 miles of London.
or Recognizances, or do any other Act incident to the place of Master of the
Chancery. And to the end it may appear, whether any Master extraordinary shall
notwithstanding presume so to do, every such Master shall express the Name of
the Town and Country where he shall take any Affidavit, or the acknowledgment
of any Deed or Recognizance; otherwise the same shall not be held authentical,
nor omitted to be filed or enrolled.

Cursitor.
WHereas there is an irregular practice lately introduced of making forth
Original Writs of Clausum fregit, in Trespass, without any other Cause of
Action therein expressed of Returns past, when in truth the proper Cause of
Action is either Debt, Case, Ejectment, or some other Cause of Action; and by
Process thereupon, the Defendant is not only usually arrested, but frequently
proceeded against to the Outlawry, to the great damage of the Subject, and the
loss and diminution not only of the proper Original Writs issuing out of this
Court, but also of his Majesty's Revenue for the casual Fines thereupon due and
payable: It is therefore Ordered,

That no Cursitor of this Court, from and after the first day of Trinity Term
next ensuing, make, or cause to be made any Writs of Clausum fregit, or Clausum
and Domum fregit, within the City of London, without special Warrant from the
Lord Chancellor, or Lord Keeper of the Great Seal of England, or Master of the
Rolls, for the time being, unless it be made appear by Affidavit, or some other
probable Evidence that the same is the true and proper Cause of Action. No
Clausum fregit to be made in London without special warrant from the Lord
Chancellor, etc. or it be made appear that the same is the true cause of Action.


That no Cursitor of any other County do make, or permit to be made within his
respective Division any of the said Writs of Clausum fregit, or Clausum and
Domum fregit, of any other Return, than of the last Return of every respective
Term, unless it be to warrant Arrests, No Writs of Clausum fregit to be made of
any other retu^n than of the last return after every Term, except in two cases.
and Testatum Capias only.

That no Cursitor shall from and after the end of Michaelmas Term next ensuing,
make, Of what returns the Cursitor is to make his Original Writ^.
or permit to be made within his respective Office and Division, any Original
Writ whatsoever of any Return past, unless he shall receive the Instructions
for making thereof within the Term wherein the said Writs are to be returnable;
or at the farthest, on or before the first Essoyn-day of the next succeeding
Term, without special Warrant from the Lord Chancellor, or Keeper of the Great
Seal of England, or Master of the Rolls for the time being, or good Cause to be
allowed of by the Principal and Assistants of the Company of the Cursitors for
the time being, or the major part of them, at their public Meetings, according
as heretofore has been used.

The Cursitors are to take care that they employ under them in their Office
none but persons of known Integrity and Ability; and if any Clerks or Persons
so employed, shall be found faulty in the Premises, he shall be expulsed the
Office, and the Cursitor who so employed him, shall be answerable to the Court
for such Misdemeanors; and such person or persons, who shall be discovered to
do, or proceed otherwise than is before mentioned, shall be liable to such
Censure for his Offenses as the Court shall find just to inflict upon him.

Petitions.
NO Injunction for stay of Suit at Law shall be granted, revived, dissolved or
staid upon Petition; nor any Injunction of any other Nature shall pass by Order
upon Petition, without Notice, and a Copy of the Petition first given to the
other side, Injunction not to be staid, granted or dissolved upon Petition
without notice, and a Copy of it to the other side.
and the Petition filed with the Register, and the Order entered.

No Sequestration, Dismission, Retainers upon Dismissions or final Orders, are
to be granted upon Petition. No Sequestration, dismission, Retainers upon
dismissions to be granted upon Petition.


No former Order made in Court is to be altered or explained upon a Petition,
or Commitment of any person taken upon Process of Contempt, to be discharged,
No former Order of Court to be altered or explained upon a Petition* or
Commitment of any person on Contempt, to be discharged by it.
but upon hearing the adverse Party, his Attorney or Clerk, toward the Cause.

Paupers.
AFter an Admittance in Forma Pauperis, no Fee, Profit or Reward shall be taken
of such Party admitted by any Counselor or Attorney, for the dispatch of the
Paupers Business, during the time it shall depend in Court, No Fee to be taken
during the Paupers business depending in Court, and the Penalty.
and he continued in Forma Pauperis, nor any Contract nor Agreement be made for
any Recompense or Reward afterward. And if any person offending herein shall
be discovered unto the Court, he shall undergo the displeasure of the Court,
and such farther punishment as the Court shall think fit to inflict upon him;
and the Party admitted, who shall give any such Fees or Reward, or make any
such Contract or Agreement, shall be from thenceforth dispaupered, and not be
afterward admitted again in that Suit to prosecute in Forma Pauperis.

Causes of being dispauper'd and dismissed.
If it shall be made appear to the Court, That any person prosecuting in Forma
Pauperis, has sold or contracted for the benefit of the Suit, or any part
thereof, while the same depends, such Cause shall be from henceforth totally
dismissed the Court, and never again retained.

Such Counsel or Attorney as shall be assigned by the Court, to assist the
person in Forma Pauperis, either to prosecute or defend, may not refuse so to
do, unless they satisfy the Lord Chancellor of England, or Lord Keeper, or
Master of the Rolls, who granted the Admittance, with some good reason of their
forbearance.

That the Counselor who shall move any thing to the Court on the behalf of a
person admitted in Forma Pauperis, ought to have the Order of Admittance with
him, The Counsel who moves for a Pauper ought to have the Order of admittance
with him.
and first to move the same before any other Motion. And if the Register shall
find that such person was not admitted in Forma Pauperis, he shall not draw up
any Order upon the second Motion, made by any such Counsel, but he shall lose
the fruit of such second Motion, in respect of his abuse to the Court.

No Process of Contempt shall be made forth, and sent to the Great Seal, at the
Suit of any person prosecuting as Plaintiff in Forma Pauperis, until it be
signed by the Six Clerk, No Process of Contempt to be made at the Suit of a
Pauper till it be signed by the Six Clerk.
who deals for him, and the Six Clerks are to take care that such Process be
not taken out needlessly, or for vexation, but upon just or good grounds, as
they will answer it to the Court, if the contrary shall appear.

And lastly, It is Ordered, That all Masters of the Court of Chancery,
Counselors, and all Officers, Ministers, Clerks and Solicitors in the said
Court, do observe these Orders, which are to continue, until upon farther
consideration and experience, any alterations shall be fit to be made therein.

Clarendon. Har. Grimston.


Mercurii 27 die Feb' Anno Regni Caroli II. Regis 19. 1667.
Touching Examination of Witnesses.
Ordo Curiae.

WHereas the Masters in Chancery, upon References to them upon Hearings for the
ease of the Court in stating of Accounts, and other like matters have of late
been armed with Commissions to Examine Witnesses, and Power to direct
Commissions into the County if they saw cause: Whereupon difference has risen
between the said Masters and the Six Clerks and Examiners of this Court about
the Right of taking and keeping such After-Examinations, and to whom such
Commissions and the Depositions thereby taken, should be returned, kept and
copied; And the Right Honorable the Lord High Chancellor of England being
acquainted therewith, was pleased to appoint this present day for hearing all
the said parties, and accordingly his Lordship being assisted by the Honorable
the Master of the Rolls, and having respectively heard the said Masters, Six
Clerks and Examiners then present touching the same, declared, That such
Commissions and Examinations ought not to be returned to, or taken, or kept by
the said Masters, in regard whilst they are in their hands the same are not any
Records to ground their Reports, and the Judgment of the Court upon, in case
the Cause should afterward come to hearing upon Exceptions to such Reports, or
be otherwise reheard, and that the Client cannot have authentic Copies at any
such Hearing, nor exemplify, or otherwise make use of the same at any Trial at
Law, to be directed by this Court or otherwise: And in regard such Examinations
are in danger to be lost, or not known where to be found upon the death or
removal of such Master who keeps the same, and that Clients will be encouraged
more frequently to neglect or forbear to make their full proofs, although they
ought and might do it before publication, purposely to take advantage of such
later proofs which may occasion the lengthning out of Causes, to the great
charge and delay of the Suitors in this Court. Therefore his Lordship, upon
serious consideration of the whole matter, and preventing such inconveniences
and irregular proceedings as aforesaid, does think fit and so order, That for
the future, all parties concerned do at their perils, as much as in them lies,
After publication, Interrogatories may be exhibited to examine Witnesses.
make their full proof before publication passes in the Cause. But if upon any
such reference the Master shall find any particular points or circumstances
needful to be proved to ground his Report upon, which are not fully proved, nor
could properly be examined to before the hearing of the Cause, he shall then
direct the parties to draw Interrogataries to such Points or Circumstances
only, and examine thereupon in Court by the Examiners, if the Witnesses shall
be or reside within ten Miles of London, as by the Rules of the Court they
ought to do; but if farther off, and the parties desire it, he may direct a
Commission into the Country, Or to direct a Commission into the Country.
which is to be made out by the Six Clerks; which said Commission, and the
Depositions thereby taken, shall be returned unopened to the respective Six
Clerk, which ought to have the keeping thereof, and publication to pass
according to the course of the Court in such Cases; and all other Examinations
in this Court for the future, not taken and kept of Record by the Six Clerk, or
Examiners as aforesaid, are from henceforth declared to be void, and shall not
be admitted to ground any such Report, or otherwise be made use of in any
proceedings in this Court or at Law.

Clarendon, Chanc'.

Sabbati 1 Feb' Anno Regni Caroli II. Regis 20. 1668. Ordo Curiae.

WHereas by an Order made by the Right Honorable Edward, Vide supra 18. July,
1666. Repealed.
Earl of Clarendon, late Lord. High Chancellor of England, and the Honorable
Master of the Rolls, bearing date the 18th day of July, 1666. It was ordered
that all Bills, Answers and other Pleadings thereupon in the Six Clerks Office,
and all Exemplifications, Writs and Copies in the Causes, should be filed, made
and expedited according to the division and allotment of the Letters of the
Alphabet, in the Causes wherein the Plaintiff, or first Plaintiffs Surname
began, as therein is mentioned by the respective Six Clerks therein named, and
their Successors respectively, and by no other; against which several
Complaints have been made to the Lord Keeper by several Suitors, upon
examination whereof and Conference with the Master of the Rolls, his Lordship
held the said Order unfit to be continued, and further put in Practice; and
does therefore order that the said Ordinance be from henceforth discharged, and
that the Method thereby directed be not from henceforth for the future
practiced or observed; but all Clients be at liberty to choose their own
Attorney, Clients to be at liberty to choose their own Clerk or Attorney.
and that the business of the Court from henceforth be dispatched as formerly
was used before the making of the said Ordinance.

Bridgman, C. S.

Lunae 25 May Anno Regni Caroli II. Regis 20. 1668.
Touching the Usher of the Court.
Ordo Curiae.

WHereas by two several Orders, the one of the 8th and the other of the 10th of
April last, made in a Cause wherein John Elliott, Esquire; is Plaintiff, and Jane
Hicham and others Defendants, upon Complaint of the said Plaintiff against Mr.
Joseph Herne, late Usher of this Court, Usher of this Court forfeited his Place
fornon-attendance.
for the Reasons then alleged; it was the said 8th day of April ordered, that
the said Mr. Herne should be called in Court three several times that Day, and
so three times on three several days successively to attend in Court, according
to the duty of his Place: And the said Mr. Herne, being according to the
Command and Direction aforesaid, called by the Crier of this Court three
several times upon three several days, and not appearing upon either of them to
give his attendance, in order to the execution of his Place as Usher of this
Honorable Court; The Right Honorable the Lord Keeper of the Great Seal of
England did the said 10th day of April order, that the said several defaults
should be recorded in the Petty-Bag, to the end such further Order should be
taken as should be just with the said default being accordingly recorded; and
the said Mr. Joseph Herne being again this day, by the command of his Lordship,
called three several times to give his attendance in this Court as aforesaid,
and not appearing, his Lordship declared the said Place to be void, and that
the same was forfeited for his not attendance, and does therefore order, that
the aforesaid several defaults, together with this Order, be also recorded in
the Petty-Bag.

Jovis 18 die Junii Anno Regni Caroli II. Regis 20. 1668.
Touching Under-Clerks and Fees.
Ordo Curiae.

FOr the better regulating of the Office of Six Clerks, and for settling the
differences lately arisen between the Six Clerks, and the Under-Clerks of the
said Office in such manner, as that the inconveniences occasioned by the said
differences, to the hindrance of the dispatch of the business of this Court may
be hereafter avoided, it is this present 18th day of June, in the 20th Year of
the Reign of our Sovereign Lord Charles the Second, etc. by the Right
Honorable Sir Orlando Bridgman, Knight and Baronet, Lord Keeper of the Great
Seal of England, and the Honorable Sir Harbottle Grimstone, Baronet, Master of
the Rolls, and by the Authority of this High and Honorable Court of Chancery,
ordered, ordained and decreed, That on or before the 1st day of November next
ensuing, all the present Under-Clerks of the said Office who now are allowed
and admitted to practice, except such only against whom there is just cause of
exception in the Judgment of the Honorable the Master of the Rolls, shall be
admitted Clerks of this Court, and that as well they the said Under-Clerks so
to be admitted, as every other person hereafter to be admitted to the place of
an Under-Clerk in the said Office, shall at, or before the time of such his
admission, and before his or their entrance upon that Employment, take this
Oath following, (that is to say,) The Oath of the Under-Clerks.
YOU shall swear, that you shall not willingly do, procure or assent unto any
thing, whereby any of the Records, Rolls, Pleadings, Books or Writings of or
belonging unto the Court of Chancery, which shall be under the keeping or
charge of the Master of the Rolls for the time being, or of any of his Clerks
or Ministers, or which shall come to your hands, or whereunto you shall have
recourse, shall be imbezled, falsified, corrupted, rased or defaced, or whereby
any corruption, fraud or deceit may be done thereby, but shall well and truly
entreat and deal with the said Records, Rolls, Pleadings, Books and Writings,
according to your best knowledge and understanding; and that you shall do your
utmost endeavor for the safe and secret keeping of all Examinations and
Depositions of Witnesses that shall be delivered unto you, or shall come to
your hands, without opening, publishing, or disclosing till publication be
granted by the Court, or otherwise by the assent of the Parties, or their
Attorneys, according to the Course of the same Court. So help you God.



And that upon the death, or removal of any of the said Under-Clerks, so to be
admitted and sworn in each respective Six Clerks division, no other person or
persons shall from, and after the time aforesaid be admitted or sworn an
Under-Clerk of the said Office, or be admitted to practice in the place or
places of him or them so dying, or being removed until the number shall be
reduced to ten Under-Clerks in each respective Six Clerks division, that so the
number of the Under-Clerks of the whole Office may be reduced to sixty Clerks
and no more, Sixty Under-Clerks in the Office.
at which number the said Under-Clerks shall, from and after such reducement be
continued, unless this Court shall find it necessary to increase or abridge the
same; and when any vacancy shall happen of any the Under-Clerks places, after
such reducement as aforesaid, none shall be nominated by the Six Clerks
respectively for the place of the said Under-Clerks respectively, unless he and
they have been educated and brought up in the said Office, Under-Clerks to be
such as are brought up in the Office.
and have served seven years at the least as a Clerk under some of the Six
Clerks, or Under Clerks, and shall be of honest and civil behavior, and be
otherwise fitly qualified for the said employment. And it is hereby further
ordered, ordained and decreed, that no person upon any pretense whatsoever
shall be permitted to practice as an Under-Clerk in the said Office, but such
only as shall be sworn and admitted as aforesaid; and that no Under-Clerk so to
be sworn and admitted as aforesaid, shall at any time, on any pretense
whatsoever, be deprived, suspended, or in any ways hindered in, or from the
exercise of his, or their said Employment, but by Judgment or Order of the Lord
Chancellor, Lord Keeper, or Master of the Rolls for the time being only. And
that out of the Fees payable by the Clients, the said Under-Clerks respectively
so to be sworn and admitted as aforesaid, shall, and may have, receive retain,
and keep to their own uses respectively, the several Fees and Allowances
hereafter-mentioned, and shall be accountable to the Six Clerks respectively
for any business to be dispached in the said Office, after the rates and
proportions only herein after set down, and not otherwise, (that is to say,)

Clerks Fees. That the Under-Clerks shall have and receive and retain to their
own uses respectively,
OUt of the Termly Fee of 3 s. 4 d. the sum of, 1 s. 4 d. And for all Copies of
Bills, Answers, Pleas, Demurrers, Replications, Rejoynders, Depositions,
Interrogatories and other Records usually dispatched in the said Office for
four pence a sheet, and the Fee of 6 d. per sheet usually paid for the
transcript of the Bill annexed to the Writ of Dedimus potestatem 4 d. And 12 s.
8 d. per skin for all Exemplifications, 12 s. 8 d. And 2 s. 8 d. for every
Dedimus potestatem, 2 s. 8 d. And 3 s. 2 d. for every Ordinary Commission, and
Rejoyning Commison to examine Witnesses, 3 s. 2 d. And 4 s. for every Commission
of Rebellion, 4 s. And 3 s. 2 d. for every Writ of Execution of an Order, 3 s.
2 d. And 16 s. 4 d. for every Decree and Dismission, 16 s. 4 d. And 13 s. 2 d.
per skin for every Writ of Execution of a Decree, 13 s. 2 d. And 6 s. 8 d. for
every Injunction, 6 s. 8 d. And 1 s. for every Attachment, and Attachment of
Proclamation, 1 s. And a Moiety of oll other Fees for all other Writs usually
dispatched by the Clerks in their Clients Causes Moiety And the Under-Clerks
respectively shall be accountable to the Six Clerks respectively only For 2 s.
residue of the said Termly Fee of 3 s. 4 d. 2 s. And 4 d. per sheet of all
Copies of all Bills, Answers, Pleas, Demurrers, Replications, Rejoynders,
Depositions, Interrogatories, and other Records usually dispatched in the said
Office, 4 d. And 14 s. a skin for every Exemplification, 14 s. And 4 s. for
every Dedimus potestatem, 4 s. And 3 s. 6. for every Commission, and Joining in
Commission to examine Witnesses, 3 s. 6 d. And 6 s. for every Commission of
Rebellion, 6 s. And 3 s. 6. for every Writ of Execution of an Order, 3 s. 6 d.
And 17 s. for every Decree and Dismission, 17 s. And 13 s. 6 s. per skin for
every Writ of Execution of a Decree, 13 s. 6 d. And 6 s. 8 d. for every
Injunction, 6 s. 8 d. And 1 s. for every Attachment with Proclamation, 1 s. And
for a Moiety of all other Fees for all other Writs, usually dispatched by the
Clerks in their Clients Causes, Moiety
And it is further ordered, ordained and decreed by the Authority aforesaid,
That if any of the said Under-Clerks for the time being, after his, or their
receipt of any of the Fees, and sums of Money aforesaid, or after his, or their
delivery out to his Client, or any on his behalf, any Writs, Commissions,
Exemplifications, or other Process, or of any Copies of any Bills, Answers, or
other Pleadings made, written or dispatched in the said Office, and shall not
faithfully and duly account for, and pay what belongs to every Six Clerk to
whom he is accountable, and ought to pay for the same according to the rates
and proportions aforesaid, without any wilful delay or concealment: That in
such case every Under-Clerk so offending, upon complaint and proof thereof made
before the Right Honorable the Lord Chancellor, Lord Keeper, or Master of the
Rolls shall over and besides such remedy as the Six Clerks have legally for the
same, undergo such punishment as the said Lord Chancellor, Lord Keeper, or
Master of the Rolls for the time being shall judge meet to stand with Justice,
and the nature of his demerit, who will be the more careful to see the said Six
Clerks righted therein, in respect they do by the reason of the more sure and
just payment of the residue of their said Fees, abate much of what heretofore
they used to receive. And it is also ordered, ordained and decreed by the
Authority aforesaid, That from henceforth no Commission, Writ or process
usually made or dispatched in the said Office, shall from henceforth be put to
the Seal, nor any Copies of any Pleadings, Commissions, Depositions,
Certificates or other Records usually dispatched in the said Office, No
Commission, Writ or Process shall be put to the Seal, nor any Copies of
Pleadings, Commissions, Depositions, Certificates, etc. to be delivered out of
the Office, until they be first signed by the Six Clerks, etc.
shall be delivered out of the said Office to any Client, until the said
Commissions, Writs, Process and Copies respectively, shall be first signed by
the Six Clerks, to whom the same does, or shall properly belong to his Deputy,
or in his, or their absence by some other of the Six Clerks, not toward the
Cause.

And that all Commissions whereby any Depositions are taken and returned, which
belong to the Six Clerks to receive, shall immediately upon the bringing in, or
return thereof into Court, be delivered to the Six Clerk, to whom the same does
properly belong, or his Deputy, to be safely and securely kept, till
publication be duly passed, and not to be from henceforth in any wise kept back
or broken open by any of the Under-Clerks, or other person, till publication
thereof shall be passed, as aforesaid; for which end and purpose each Six Clerk
is hereby enjoined to have one or more Deputy or Deputies, to be constantly
resident and attendant in the said Office The Six Clerk to have one or more
Deputies to be constantly attendant in the Office.
in the absence of the said Six Clerks, for signing of Writs, Copies, and
receiving Commissions as aforesaid. And it is further ordered and decreed, That
all Rules whatsoever shall from time to time be duly entered in the Common Book,
commonly called the House-Book; All Rules to be duly entered into the
House-Book, and notice thereof to be given to the Under-Clerk of the other Side.
and that upon entering of such Rules, notice shall from time to time be given
to the Under-Clerk on the other Side, that is toward the Cause, to the end the
Client may not be surprised thereby.

And that upon the delivery out of any Copy, the Clerk who copied and delivered
the same, shall bring back and deliver the Record to the Six Clerk, from whom
he received the same, to the end the same may be filed and bundled with the
rest of the Records, in the same Cause; and that all Bills, Answers,
Replications, Rejoinders and other Proceedings, relating to any Suit commenced
in this Honorable Court since the first day of Michaelmas Term last, and now
remaining unfiled in the custody or possession of any Under-Clerk of the said
Office, shall in some convenient time be produced and filed with such Six
Clerk, to whom the same shall properly belong; and that the Under-Clerks
respectively, according to the proportions before mentioned, shall duly
satisfy and pay the Six Clerks respectively, the Fees due for the same as
aforesaid: The Under-Clerk to give to the Six Clerk a Note of the Name and
Place of abode of such their Clients who are in arrears for F es
And in case such Under-Clerk respectively have received all the due Fees for
the same of their Clients respectively, and if not, then they are to give unto
the Six Clerks respectively a Note in writing under his, or their Hands of the
Name or Names, Place or Places of abode, of such Client or Clients who are in
arrear for any Fees due to them, and the quantum of such Fees, to the end the
Six Clerks respectively may take such course for the recovery thereof, as they
shall be advised; and that for so much the said Under-Clerks shall be
discharged, and acquitted from every further demand from them concerning the
same. And lastly, it is ordered, ordained and decreed, That this present Decree
shall be enrolled in the Judgment Rolls of this Court, to be observed for the
future to all intents and purposes, according to the Tenor and true Meaning
thereof.

Orlando Bridgman, C. S Harb. Grimstone, M. Rolls.


Sabbati 31 die Octob' Anno Regni Caroli II. Regis 20. 1668.
Touching Under-Clerks.
Ordo Curiae.

WHereas on the 18th of June last, Supra 18 June 68.
a Decree was made for the Regulating of the Office of Six Clerks, and for
settling of the differences lately arisen between the Six Clerks and the
Under-Clerks of the said Office, by the Right Honorable Sir Orlando Bridgman,
Knight and Baronet, Lord Keeper of the Great Seal of England, and the
Honorable Sir Harbottle Grimstone, Baronet, Master of the Rolls; wherein it is
amongst other things decreed, That on or before the 1st day of November next
ensuing, all the present Under-Clerks of the said Office, who now are allowed
and admitted to practice, except such only against whom there is just cause of
exception in the judgment of the Honorable the Master of the Rolls, should be
admitted Clerks of this Court, and that as well they the said Under-Clerks, so
to be admitted, as every other person hereafter to be admitted to the place of
an Under-Clerk in the said Office should, The time for admitting and swearing
the Under-Clerks enlarged.
at, or before the time of such his admission, and before his and their
entrance upon that employment, take the Oath therein particularly expressed.
Now for as much as the time prefixed by the said Decree is near expired, and
there be many of the said Under-Clerks, who by reason of their remoteness of
dwelling or other accidents, are not as yet come to Town, whereby the said
Decree cannot in strictness be performed; It is this present day ordered by the
Right Honorable the Lord Keeper, etc. and the Honorable the Master of the
Rolls, that the said time be enlarged till the first day of the next Term,
without any prejudice to any absent under-Clerk, who shall not come in to be
admitted and sworn in the mean time.

Mercurii 18 die Novembris Anno Regni Caroli secundi Regis 20. 1668.
Touching Privilege Writs, Pauper Writs, and Renewed Writs.
Ordo Curiae.

FOrasuch as the Right Honorable the Lord Keeper, etc. was this day informed
by Mr. Collings on behalf of several Officers and Clerks of this Court, that
all small Writs that passed the great Seal for privileged Persons, and for
such as are admitted to sue in this Court in Forma Pauperis, and Renewed Writs,
were, and usually have been by ancient course delivered to persons by whom such
Writs have been Sealed, or to their Clerks, without paying any thing therefore;
and that by an Order of this Court, made the 12th of February, 14 Caroli
secundi, Vide supra 12 Feb. 14 Car. 2.
upon information of one Mr. Hutton, a Clerk or Deputy to the Right Honorable
the Lord Newbrough, through whose Office all Writs of that nature do pass,
refuses to deliver the same without Fees for the Seals thereof; It was
thereupon ordered, That all Writs which should be sealed for privileged
Persons, and for Suitors in this Court in Forma Pauperis, and Renewed Writs,
should from henceforth be delivered to the persons for whom the same should be
sealed, or to their Clerk, without paying or giving any thing for the same;
which Order was observed by the said Mr. Hutton during the time he continued
his Employment in the said Office. But one Mr. William Adderly who now Farms
the said Office under the Commissioners of His Majesty's Treasury, refuses to
deliver such Writs aforesaid, without paying Fees for the Seals thereof:
P^iviledge W^its, Pauper Writs, and Renewed W^its, to pay no Fees.
It is ordered by his Lordship, That the said Mr. Adderly do observe and
conform to the Order aforesaid, by delivering all Writs which shall be sealed
for privileged Persons, and for Suitors to this Court in Forma Pauperis, and
Renewed Writs, to the persons for whom the same shall be sealed, or to the
Clerk, without paying or giving any Fees for the same, unless the said Mr.
Adderly, having notice thereof, do on the last day of this Term show cause to
the contrary.

Sabbati 12 die Feb' Anno Regni Caroli II. Regis 22. 1670.
Concerning Exceptions to a Masters Report.
Ordo Curiae.

THe Right Honorable the Lord Keeper taking notice of the trouble and loss of
time to the Court, and expenses and delay to the Suitors, occasioned by putting
in Exceptions to Masters Reports, many of which do prove frivolous and
vexatious, does for the prevention thereof declare and order, That for the
future, from this time, every person that shall put in Exceptions to a Masters
Report, shall besides the 40 s. deposited upon exhibiting the same, pay 10 s.
farther Costs for every Exception or distinct branch of an Exception, which
shall upon the hearing thereof be overruled. He who puts in Excceptions to a
Masters Report, besides 40 s. shall pay 10 s. Cost for every Exception that
shall be over ruled.


Martis 8 die Aprilis, Anno Regni Caroli II. Regis 25. 1673.
At Exeter-house by the Right Honorable the Lord Chancellor. About the
Impositions on Law Proceedings.
Ordo Curiae.

ORdered upon the humble request of the Farmers of his Majesty's Duty arising
by virtue of an Act of Parliament for laying Impositions on Proceedings at Law,
That the Agent or Agents of the said Farmers shall have liberty to attend from
time to time, and view all Copies of Records of the said Court that shall be
offered to be read or made use of in any Motion, or on the hearing of any
Cause, arguing of any Pleas or Demurrers, or exceptions to Reports at the Lord
Chancellors; and also at the hearing of all Causes at the Rolls, to the end it
may be known whether such Copies be signed by the proper Officer appointed for
that purpose by the said Act, and His Majesty's Duty duly answered for the
same. And all Counselors, Clerks, Solicitors, or others in whose Custody any
such Copy shall be, are required to permit the said Agent or Agents on request
in that behalf, Farmers of the Duty of the Law Tax how to manage themselves for
the better collecting thereof.
to view and take an account of the same according to the direction of the said
Act; that the said Agent or Agents shall have liberty to attend at all Public
Seals, from the time of opening the Seals to the shutting up thereof, and shall
put up all Writs and other things that shall be sealed, into a Bag for that
purpose, and go immediately, after the Seal is over, with the Clerk of the
Hanaper or his Deputy to the Hanaper Office, and then take an account of all
the said Writs and other things Sealed, and stamp the same with a Stamp, to be
provided by the said Farmers for that purpose; and if necessity do require that
any Writs or other things Sealed, shall be delivered out immediately after
Sealing, the same, shall be first stamped, and an account taken thereof by the
said Agent or Agents, but neither the Clerk of the Hanaper, nor his Deputy, nor
any other shall presume to deliver out or take away any Writs or other things
whatsoever that shall pass the Seal, until the same be so stamped, that the
said Farmers Agent or Agents giving their due attendance from time to time to
perform the same; that some person whom the Farmers shall for that purpose
appoint, shall attend at all private Seals, and take an account of, and make an
Entry into a Book to be kept by him for that purpose, of all Writs and other
things that shall be Sealed at such private Seal, and shall also write his Name
on the backside of such Writs and other things so Sealed, and see that His
Majesty's Duty be answered for the same.

Shaftsbury, C. Har. Grimstone.


Jovis 8 die Maij, Anno Regni Caroli II. Regis 25. 1673.
At Exeter-house, ad idem.
Ordo Curiae.

THe Right Honorable the Lord High Chancellor, etc. having this day heard the
Farmers of His Majesty's Duties, arising by impositions and proceedings at Law,
and their Counsel, and also the Six Clerks Office in the Court of Chancery, and
the Under-Clerks in the Six Clerks Office to several things offered by the said
Farmers for better collecting the said Duties arising within the said Six
Clerks Office, does order and direct according to the Power and Authority given
him by the said Act.

1. That no Clerk or Solicitor do send, or knowingly permit, or suffer to be
sent any Bill, Answer, Plea, Demurrer, Depositions of Witnesses* or other
Record of the said Court, or any Draught or Copy thereof to any person or
persons to take or make Copies thereof, or use the same, whereby the King's
Majesty, or his Farmers may be defrauded of any of the Duties imposed by the
said Act.

2. That the Clerks of the said Office do duly enter and pay the Duty for all
appearances of persons for whom they have directions to appear, and that
neither the Six Clerks for the Plaintiff, nor his Deputy do deliver any Bill to
a Clerk, or any other for the Defendant, without a Note under the Hands of the
Six Clerks for the Defendant, or his Deputy, testifying that the Appearance is
entered; which Note the said Six Clerk, or his Deputy, who receives the same is
carefully to file up, to the end the Clerk, or the Person, who on delivery
thereof takes away any Bill, may, if occasion requires, be called to return
the said Bill, and charged by the said Six Clerk, or his Deputy, or the Farmers
Agent with the payment of His Majesty's Duty for the Copy thereof.

3. That the Farmers of His Majesty's Duty do provide for every of the said Six
Clerks a Book, and that every of the said Six Clerks, and their Deputies do
take special care, that before any Records or Pleadings whatsoever (Bills
excepted) be taken or delivered out of the Six Clerks Studies or Record-house,
a short entry be made thereof in the Book remaining with the Six Clerks from
whom the same is taken, or to whom the Custody thereof belongs, with the time
when, and the Persons Name by whom the same is taken out, to the end, as
occasion shall require, the said person may be called on to return such Records
and Pleadings, and for payment of His Majesty's Duties for the Copies thereof.

4. That all Bills, Answers, Pleadings and other proceedings in the said Court
be duly filed, and that no Copies be made thereof till the same have been so
filed with a proper Officer for that purpose.

5. That no Copy of any Bill, Answer, Plea, Demurrer, Depositions o^ Witnesses,
or other Records of the said Court shall be delivered or sent to any Client or
Solicitor, or other Person till the same be signed by the proper Officer to
whom they belong, or his Deputy; and that no close Copy whatsoever shall be
made until an Office Copy has been paid for; and that in such case where a
close Copy is made for the same person, by whom, or on whose account an
Office-Copy has been paid for, His Majesty's Duty shall not be required for
such close Copy.

6. That no Copy of any Record of the said Court be offered to be read, or made
use of either in Court, or at the Rolls, or before any Master or elsewhere, or
any Fees taken for the same, which is not under the proper Officer, or his
Deputies Hand, the draughts of Complainants or Defenfendants own Bills, Answers
or other pleadings, which by the ancient Rules of the Court have been permitted
to be made use of by themselves only excepted.

7. That no Commission whatsoever be published but in the presence of one of
the Six Clerks concerned in such Cause or Causes, in which they shall happen to
be published, or one of the Deputies who is to cause the same to be entered in
the said Book, to be provided by the said Farmers, to the end the Clerk
concerned in such Cause or Causes, may be called on to pay His Majesty's Duty
for the Copies of Depositions, as in the cases of Copies of other Pleadings and
Records.

8. That no Subpoena ad audiendum Judicium be made out, until a Certificate
under the hand of the Six Clerk, at whose instance the Cause is set down, be
delivered to the Deputy of the Subpoena-Office, that the Pleadings in the Cause
are filed, which Deputy is hereby required to write thereon the Name of the
Clerk that deals for the Plaintiff, and to deliver over such Certificate to
such person whom the Farmer of the King's Duty shall appoint to receive the
same.

9. That the Six Clerks, or their Deputies, or other Officers of the said
Court, when they sign any Copies, do write thereon the day of the Month when
they are signed, and in words at length the number of Sheets which they
contain, and also subscribe their Names to the same.

10. That the said Six Clerks do give the Names of their Deputies, or such who
in their absence they permit to sign things to the Farmers Agent in writing,
and so of any other they shall permit or appoint for that purpose, and that the
said Six Clerks or their Deputies attend on all Office-days, to dispatch
business, from the hours of nine in the Morning till twelve at Noon, and from
three of the Clock in the Afternoon till Six in the Evening.

11. That all Decrees and Dismissions be signed by the respective Six Clerk by
whom they ought to be signed, and not by their Deputies, but in case of
sickness, or absence out of Town of the Six Clerk; and that the Six Clerks or
their Deputies, when they sign any Decree, do at the same time write thereon
the day of the Month, and the year when they do the same.

Shaftsbury, Chapter

Mercurij 22 die Julij Anno Regni, Caroli II. Regis 26. 1674.
Touching Recognizances.
Ordo Curiae.

WHereas on Complaint made this day to the Right Honorable the Lord Keeper,
Concer' Irrotulament' Recogn' capt' in Cancellaria.
etc. that a Recognizance acknowledged in this Court the 17th of Jan. 1653. of
1000 l. for payment of 507 l. 10 s. the 6th of March then next, was not
enrolled till the 1st day of July 1666. and that by an Administrator, whereby
all the Lands, and Tenements of the Cognizor, at the time of entering into such
Recognizance, and charged in the hands of a Purchasor near thirteen years
after. And his Lordship being informed, that several Recognizances, as well as
this, have in ancient times, as well as lately, have been enrolled, though long
after the time, by Warrant from the Master of the Rolls for the time being,
without prejudice to all Purchasors, between the time such Recognizance ought
to be enrolled, and the time of the actual inrolment thereof. Yet
notwithstanding his Lordship taking into consideration the evil and dangerous
consequences that may happen and arise to the Subject, by suffering
Recognizances to be enrolled long after the time of acknowledgment thereof. And
withal considering, that although there be no certain time appointed by Law
for the inrolment of such Recognizances, as are acknowledged according to the
course of the Common Law; yet all other Courts have appointed the inrolment of
such Recognizances as be acknowledged there, to be before the next continuance
day, or at the farthest, before the end of the Term following. Does think the
usual time of a year and a day, heretofore allowed by this Court for such
inrolment, to be much too long. And therefore in conformity to other Courts as
near as may be, but chiefly to the High Court of Parliament, and in imitation
of that Provision which is made by the Statute made in the 27th year of the
Reign of Queen Elizabeth, whereby it is enacted, That no Recognizance in the
nature of a Statute Staple, shall bind any Purchasor, unless the same be
enrolled within six Months after the acknowledgment thereof: Does hereby
declare and order, That for the future no Recognizance, which after the first
day of September next ensuing, shall be acknowledged in this Court, of what
Nature or Kind soever, shall be enrolled in this Court, unless such inrolment
be within the space of six Months after the acknowledgment thereof. And that
all Officers and Ministers of the Court do for the future observe and take
care, that no such Recognizance be enrolled in the said Court, contrary to this
present Order; Recognizances to be enrolled within 6 months after
acknowledgment.
and all Recognizances heretofore acknowledged in this Court, and not already
enrolled, shall be enrolled within the space of six Months after the 23th day
of October next, and shall not be received nor enrolled after that time; and
because there may be special circumstances, wherein it may be fit to dispense
with these Rules, no Recognizance shall ever be enrolled after the time
prescribed be elapsed, without motion in open Court, Except by Motion in open
Court.
to the end that the Conusor, and all Purchasers, and Tertenants may have due
notice, and the Court may by Special Order, and consent of the Party paying
such inrolment out of due time provided for the indemnity of such Purchasers as
may be otherwise prejudiced thereby; and that all persons concerned may take
notice of this Order, Copies hereof are to be set up and fixed in the several
Offices of the Court concerned herein.

Mercurij 4 die Novembris Anno Regni Caroli II. Regis 26. 1674.
Touching Contempts.
Ordo Curiae.

UPon Complaint made to the Right Honorable the Lord Keeper, Vide infra 13
Julij 85. 17 Maij, 1 Jac. 2.
etc. by the Sergeant at Arms attending the Great Seal, that after Contempts
are prosecuted to a Sergeant at Arms, and a Commitment pronounced, the
Prosecutors will draw up the Order, and never take forth a Warrant thereon, but
make use thereof to force the party prosecuted into some Composition, sometime
for the whole Matter in difference, but usually for the discharge of the
Contempts, whereby the Sergeants Employment is rendered in great part
ineffectual; for prevention whereof his Lordship does thereupon Order, After
any Order for a Sergeant at Arms shall be granted, the Register shall draw up
the same, and deliver the same to the Sergeant, and no other.
That after any Order for a Sergeant at Arms shall be granted by the Court, the
Register shall on request draw up the said Order, and deliver the same to the
Sergeant at Arms or his Deputy, and no other person, they paying for the same,
by which means he shall or may endeavor to apprehend the Party prosecuted, and
bring him into this Court to answer the second Contempt if he can; but if he
cannot, his Lordship does further order, The said Order not to be discharged,
nor the Contempt thereupon without the Sergeants Fees be paid, and Certificate
under his hand testifying the same.
That no Order for a Sergeant at Arms drawn up, and past by the Register, be
discharged, and the Contempt thereupon, without the Sergeants Fees be paid to
him, and a Certificate under his Hand testifying the same; and after the said
Order being so drawn up, and past as aforesaid, no private or other agreement
shall be made between the Party or Parties, or the Person or Persons so
standing in Contempt as aforesaid, or any other person there, or any on their
behalfs, without such satisfaction shall be made, and a Certificate of the same
shall appear to Court.

Veneris 18 die Decembris Anno Regni Caroli II. Regis 26. 1674. Ordo Curiae.
Private.

UPon Complaint made to the Right Honorable the Lord Keeper, etc. on the
behalf of Mr. Thomas Middleton, Solicitor committed to the Feet for an Assault.
a Clerk in the Register's Office, of an Assault made upon him by one James
Bradley, a Solicitor, by striking off his Hat, and beating him over the Head
and Face with a Staff in the Register's Office, whereby his Head and Face are
very much swelled and bruised; which upon the examination of the matter, his
Lordship finding it to be done without any cause or provocation, save the said
Middleton's drawing and expediting an Order against a Client of the said
Bradleys, according to the direction of the Court, his Lordship resenting it to
be a great abuse and misdemeanor against the Court, for Officers or Clerks to
be thus used, especially for discharging the Duty of their Employments; does
order that the said Bradley, for this great misdemeanor, be committed close
Prisoner to the Fleet, there to be kept without Pen and Ink, or any access to
him from without the Fleet, till further Order to the contrary.

Lunae 10 die Aprilis Anno Regni Caroli II. Regis 28. 1676.
Concerning Quakers.
Ordo Curiae.

WHereas diverse persons that go under the Name of Quakers, being sued and
served to answer Bills in this Court, or served with Process to testify their
knowledge in Causes here depending, have used many devises to prevent the
taking of their Oaths to their Answers, and procured themselves to be
personated by others, and yet their Answers have been certified as if they were
really sworn, whereby the Suitors have been hindered from discovery of the
matter charged on them, and the truth is suppressed. And in case of false
swearing, the Persons cannot be proceeded against according to Law. For the
preventing therefore of all abuses of that nature for the future, the Right
Honorable the Lord High Chancellor of England does Order, That such Suitors to
this Court, who demand the Answer, Examination, or Deposition of any person
that goes under the name of, or is reputed a Quaker, he or his Clerk in this
Court, shall duly inform and leave a Note in writing with the Clerk of the
other side thereof. And the Clerk for such Defendant, Respondent, or the Party
on whose behalf such Witnesses is to be examined, Two days notice in writing of
the persons abode and time, and before whom the Defendant is to be sworn.
shall take care that two days notice in writing as aforesaid, be given to the
Plaintiffs Clerk of the place of abode, the time when, and before what Master
such person shall be sworn, either to his Answer or Plea, or to any
Interrogatories, in order to take his Deposition or Examination in this Court,
to the end that some person may if they think fit, be present and receive
satisfaction, that the party is duly and regularly sworn, and is the same
person intended for the Defendants Respondent or Witness; and that every
Defendant shall subscribe his Name or Mark to his respective Plea or Answer,
which the said Master is to certify, and also in whose presence such Answer or
Plea was sworn; and in case any Defendant or Respondent shall put in any
Answer, Plea or Examination, or Witnesses be examined, without such notice
being left as aforesaid, such Defendants or Respondents may be proceeded
against, as if no Answer were put in or Examinations taken, and the Depositions
of such Witness or Witnesses are to stand suppressed. And the Masters of this
Court are to be very circumspect, careful and wary in the Administering of Oaths
to all persons whatsoever, that the same be administered reverently, and
according to Law.

Finch, C.

Term' Paschae, (...) Anno Regni Caroli II. Regis 28. 1676.
Touching farther Answer.
Ordo Curiae.

WHereas all persons summoned to appear in propriis personis, and answer such
Bills as are exhibited against them, ought fully to answer before they depart.
Yet of late Complaints have been made, that Defendants for delay, either put in
frivolous Pleas or Demurrers on insufficient Answers; and such Plea or Demurrer
being overruled, or Answer reported insufficient, new process of Subpoena
issued to make farther Answer, and when Defendants had stood out Process of
Contempt for want of Appearances or Answers in time, and have been discharged
thereof by paying or tender, and refusal of the Costs, new Process of Contempt
were to issue for any subsequent fault, which occasioned not only great delay,
but expense and vexation to the Prosecutor, which the Right Honorable the Lord
High Chancellor of England taking into consideration, for prevention of the
like dilatory proceedings for the time to come, does order and ordain, That in
all such cases where the Defendants are to make farther Answers, The Plaintiff
need not serve the Defendant with a Subpoena to make a further or better
answer, but to give a Rule to the Defendants Clerk, or a copy of the Order.
the Plaintiff shall not be obliged to serve the Defendant with a Subpoena to
make a better Answer, but shall only be obliged to give a Rule to make a better
Answer, if it can be given in T^rm time, or if not, then to give the Defendants
Clerk in Court a Copy of the Order or Report, whereby the Defendant shall be
ruled to make such better answer, during the continuance of the public Seals,
before, or after the Term; and if after such Rule or Notice so given, And if
the Defendant do not in eight days put in a perfect Answer, Process of Contempt.
the Defendant do not in eight days put in a perfect answer, or by order or
consent of the Clerk on both sides, obtain a Commission to answer, and thereby
return a perfect answer at the return thereof, the Process of Contempt shall
issue for want thereof; and in case any former Process of Contempt shall have
issued against such Defendants for want of appearing, or answering, And the
Plaintiff may proceed upon any former Process of Contempt, notwithstanding
Costs paid.
the Plaintiff may resort back to such Process of Contempt, and proceed
thereupon, after such Rule or Notice given as aforesaid, notwithstanding the
Costs of such former Process were paid upon the coming in of such insufficient
or frivolous Answer, Plea or Demurrer; but when the Defendant has put in a
full Answer, such Costs as he had paid for such former Process, shall upon
payment of the rest be deducted and allowed to him.

Finch, C.

Lunae 3 die Julij Anno Regni Caroli II. Regis 28. 1676.
Of sending Records into the Chapel of the Rolls.
Ordo Curiae.

IT is this day ordered by the Right Honorable the Lord High Chancellor of
England, and the Honorable the Master of the Rolls, That the Six Clerks of the
High Court of Chancery, do forthwith send the Inrolments of all Patents, which
they, or any of them, or their respective Clerks have in their, or any of their
Custody, fairly written in Parchment, and carefully examined, into the Petty
Bag Office, to be estreated, together with the Privy Seals and Warrants for the
same, and also all Decrees, with the Docquets thereof, to the Chapel of the
Rolls, The inrolments of Patents to be sent into the Petty Bag to be estreated
together with the Privy Seals and Patents for the same; and the Records of
Deeds, etc into the Chapel of the Rolls.
to remain there. And that the Clerk of the Inrolments do also send the Records
of all Deeds and Recognizances Enrolled, duly examined, to the said Chapel;
and that all Records in the Petty Bag Office, after the same are estreated, be
remitted with their Warrants from thence into the Chapel of the Rolls,
according to the ancient usage heretofore, for sending Records into the said
Chapel (viz.) the Patents after three years, from the time of their
Inrolments, and the Records of Deeds and Recognizances from the Inrolment
Office, after two years, The Patents after three years from the time of the
Inrolment, and the Records, etc. after two years.
from the time of Inrolment, and so from year to year for the future. And that
such Records as are come into the Chapel, and not fit to be received and
continued there by reason of their ill Carracter, bad Parchment, Razures or
Interlineations, be transcribed within the Chapel of the Rolls, at the Charge
of the said Six Clerks, and the Clerk of the Inrollments, to which of them the
said Records did at first properly belong.

Martis 1 die Januarij Anno Regni Caroli II. Regis 29. 1677.
Touching hearing Causes.
Ordo Curiae.

WHereas Complaint has been made to this Court, as well by the Counsel at the
Bar, as others, that there is a great abuse committed, in not timely publishing
of Causes, Pleas, Demurrers, Exceptions to Reports and the like, that are
ordered to be heard, and not setting of them up in a Paper in the Registers
Office in due time, by reason whereof the Counsel are many times surprised, and
cannot be prepared to hear their Clients Causes as they ought to be, to the
great prejudice of the Suitors, and parties that sue in this Court for Justice:
For regulation whereof, A Note of all Causes, Pleas, Demurrers, Exceptions to
Reports, etc. to be set down for hearing, shall be set up by the Registers in
their Office.
it is ordered, That a Note of all Causes, Pleas, Demurrers, Exceptions to
Reports, and the like, that are ordered to be set down for hearing, shall
hereafter from time to time be affixed, and set up by the Registers in their
Office, two days before the same are respectively appointed to be heard. And in
order hereunto all Clerks, Solicitors and others, are hereby required to bring
to the Registers Office, in due time, all Orders for setting down of Causes,
Pleas, Demurrers, Exceptions to Reports and the like, made upon Petitions or
otherwise, that so they may be set up in the Registers Office as aforesaid,
otherwise the said Causes, Pleas, Demurrers, Exceptions to Reports and the
like, shall respectively be put off from hearing for that time, and shall not
come on again to hearing without farther order.

Finch, C.

Venetis 20 die Junij Anno Regni Caroli II. Regis 31. 1679.
Touching filing Exceptions to Reports.
Ordo Curiae.

IT is this day ordered by the Right Honorable the Lord High Chancellor, No
Exception to Reports touching the sufficiency or insufficiency of Answers,
shall be filed in the Registers Office, unless notice given to the Clerk on the
other side.
that from this day no Exceptions whatsoever shall be received by, or filed
with the Register, to Reports touching the sufficiency or insufficiency of any
Defendants Answer, unless such Exceptions shall be brought and filed, and
notice thereof given to the Clerk in Court of the other side. And it is farther
ordered, That this Order be set up and affixed in the public Offices of the
Six Clerks and Registers, ^o the end that all persons concerned may take notice
thereof, and act accordingly.

Jovis 25 die Martij Anno Regni Caroli II. Regis 32. 1680.
Touching Bankrupts. Ex Part Thomae Knatchbal Armigeri.
Ordo Curiae.

THe Right Honorable the Lord High Chancellor of England, being now attended
by Mr. Matthew Petley and his Counsel, in the matter of the pretended Office of
Register upon all Commissions of Bankrupts within the City of London, and
Places adjacent, which pretended Office has formerly been, and now is claimed
by the said Mr. Matthew Petley, under color of some Patent granted by His
Majesty; and several persons who have been usually concerned as Commissioners
in Execution of such Commissions, now also attending with their Counsel,
several Objections were made against the validity of the Grant or Patent, under
which the said Mr. Petley claimed. And that upon a former debate it had been by
his Lordship, upon severel Complaints and Petitions on that occasion declared,
that it would be a very great burden on the Subject: His Lordship on hearing
what was insisted on by all Parties, declared, That although he saw no cause to
give any countenance at all, as to the establishment of any such Office of
Register, as the said Mr. Petley claimed by virtue of the said Patent:
Neverthelss in regard many Complaints and Petitions have been frequently made,
and presented to his Lordship, occasioned by the ill management of Commissions
of Bankrupts, in and about the City of London and Westminster, and the Counties
adjacent, and more particularly of the losing and mislaying of such
Commissions, and Depositions, and Orders thereupon taken, whereby great loss
and prejudice has happened to the Subject: His Lordship thought it necessary and
convenient, That some person should be appointed to attend the said
Commissioners, either by himself, or his sufficient Deputy or Deputies in that
behalf, and should have the Custody of such Commissions and Proceedings, as
should be had before the said Commissioners, and see them to be safely kept in
some public or convenient place, whereof all persons may have notice, to the
end such Creditors as are concerned in the taking out, and prosecution of such
Commissions, may resort thither as occasion requires. And the Commissioners and
Creditors now present, together with their Counsel acknowledging, that it is
most necessary for the safety of both the Commissions and Orders, and also for
the Bankrupts themselves and their Creditors, that the Custody of such
Commissions and Proceedings should be put in some safe and secure hands: His
Lordship is thereupon pleased to order, and does hereby order, That Mr. Tho.
Knachball shall be, and is hereby ordered and appointed to have the inspection
by himself, or his sufficient Deputies, from time to time, of all the
Commissions of Bankrupts, and Proceedings thereupon, that shall at any time or
times hereafter be taken out against any Bankrupts within the City of London
and Westminster, and places adjacent within the Weekly Bills of Mortality as
also of all, such Commissions as shall be taken out against any person or
persons becoming Bankruptor Bankrupts, within the adjacent Counties hereafter
mentioned, A Register of all Commissions of Bankrupts in London, Middlesex,
Essex, Hartfordshire, Kent, Surry, etc.
that is to say, within the Counties of Middlesex, Essex, Hartfordshire, Surry,
Sussex, Buckinghamshire, Berkshire and Kent, to the end he may upon any
Complaints or occasion, be the better enabled to inform his Lordship of the
true state of the Matters, whereof any Complaints shall, or may happen to be
hereafter made. And also that he, or his sufficient Deputy or Deputies shall
have the keeping of all such Commissions and Depositions, and other Orders and
Proceedings thereupon, that the same may at all times be produced, and that the
person concerned may have free resort thereunto as occasion shall require.

Finch, C.

Lunae 29 die Octobris Anno Regni Caroli II. Regis 35. 1683.
Concerning Orders touching Accounts.
Ordo Curiae.

THe Right Honorable the Lord Keeper, etc. taking into his most serious
Consideration, the delays and great expenses that does happen to Suitors by
Exceptions taken to Masters Report made in pursuance of Orders upon hearing,
and especially such whereby Accounts are directed to be taken, which his
Lordship conceives might in a great measure be prevented, if the Master were
informed of the Matter of such Exceptions, before the signing and allowing of
the said Report. A Master to whom an Account is referred, upon the hearing of
the Cause, when he has prepared the Report, shall send out a Summons that both
Parties shall attend him to peruse or take a Copy of it. And if the Party be
dissatisfied, within 4 days to bring in a Note of Exception, and to be heard,
and then and the M^^^er to settle his Report.
His Lordship does therefore order, That every Master of this Court, to whom
any Accounts is referred, or other Matter by any Order, upon the hearing of the
Causes when he has fully heard both parties, and prepared his Report, shall at
the request of either party, give out a Summons, that both parties, or some for
them shall again attend him, who shall have liberty to peruse such his Report,
or take a Copy thereof. And that such person that is dissatisfied therewith, do
in four days, next after such attendance, bring in a Note in Writing of their
Exceptions thereto, and take out a Summons to be heard thereupon, and then the
said Master is to settle and finish his Report, as he shall find Just. And it
is further orderd, That when upon hearing of Exceptions, it shall appear to the
Court, that the party excepting did not offer his Object^ons before the Master,
because he depended upon his Appeal to the Court, and sought delay. In such
Case though the Exception shall be allowed, yet the party for his neglect, and
occasioning trouble to the Court, and charge, and delay to his Adversary, The
Party neglecting to pay Costs.
shall pay such Costs as the Court shall think reasonable. And it is further
ordered, That where by Special Order the Court shall admit Exceptions to any
Report, whereby Money is reported due, If Money be reported due after the time
wherein such Exceptions should have been filed, no proceeding shall be staid
without bringing the Money into Court, or giving security.
after the time wherein such Exceptions should regularly have been filed, no
proceedings upon such Report shall be staid without giving security, or
bringing the Money reported due into the Court, unless the Court shall provide
otherwise by particular Order.

Gilford, C. S.

Sabbati 9 die Maij Anno Regni Jacobi II. Regis 1. 1685.
Touching Witnesses Examined.
Ordo Curiae.

IT is this day ordered by the Right Honorable the Lord Keeper, etc. That when
any Witness shall be brought to any Clerk in Court to be showed, before he be
examined, the party that produces him, shall not only have a Note in writing
of the Name and Title of such Witness, The Clerk that shows a Witness, ought to
have a Note of his Abode and Lodging.
and Parish where he lives: But if such Parish shall happen to be any of the
Parishes within the Bills of Mortality, such Note shall also contain what
Street and House in such Parish such party lives, and whether he be a
Housekeeper or Lodger, to the end such Witness may with more ease be enquired
after, and cross-examined if required; and the Clerks are to take care to see
this Order performed.

Lunae 13 die Julij Anno Regni Jacobi II. Regis 1. 1685.
Touching Clerks.
Ordo Curiae.

IT is this day ordered by the Right Honorable the Lord Keeper, Agreement
between any Clerks and Solicitors to be put in writing.
etc. That no agreement that shall hereafter be made between any of the Clerks
or Solicitors in this Court, relating to any of their Clients Causes, shall be
of any avail, unless such Agreement, or some Note or Memorial thereof be put
into writing, and subscribed by the party that is to be bound thereby.

Lunae 13 die Julij Anno Regni Jacobi II. Regis 1. 1685.
Touching Sergeant at Arms.
Ordo Curiae.

WHereas Complaint was made to the Right Honorable the late Lord Chancellor
Finch by the Sergeant at Arms, attending the Great Seal, Vide supra 13 Julij
85. 4 Nov. 74. Vide infra 19 Maij 1 Jac. 2.
that after Contempts were prosecuted to a Sergeant at Arms, and a Commitment
pronounced, the Prosecutor would draw up the Order, and never take out the
Warrant thereon, but make use thereof to force the party prosecuted into some
Composition, sometimes for the whole Matter in difference, but usually for the
discharge of the Contempts, whereby the Sergeants Employment was rendered in
great part ineffectual. For the prevention whereof his Lordship did thereupon
order, That after an Order for a Sergeant at Arms should be granted by the
Court, the Register should on request draw up the said Order, and deliver the
same to the Sergeant at Arms or his Deputy, and no other person, they paying
for the same, by which means he should, or might endeavor to apprehend the
Party prosecuted, and bring him into the Court to answer the Contempts if he
could; but if he could not, his Lordship does further order, that no Order for
a Sergeant at Arms drawn up, and past by the Register, should be discharged the
Contempts thereupon, No Order or Contempts thereupon to be discharged, unless
the Sergeants Fees be paid.
without the Sergeants Fees be paid to him, and a Certificate made under his
Hand testifying the same; and after the said Order being so drawn up and past
as aforesaid, no private or other Agreement should be made between the Party or
Parties, and the Person or Persons so standing in Contempt as aforesaid, or any
other person on their, or any of their behalfs, without such satisfaction
should be made, and a Certificate of the same should appear to the Court: Now
upon Information made to the Right Honorable the Lord Keeper of the Great Seal
of England by the Sergeant at Arms, that the said Order had not been duly
observed, to his great loss and prejudice, His Lordship does order, that the
said Order be revived, and that all persons concerned do take notice thereof,
and yield obedience thereto accordingly.

Lunae 26 die Octobris Anno Regni Jacobi II. Regis 1. 1685.
Touching Affidavit of Witnesses.
Ordo Curiae.

IT is this day ordered by the Right Honorable the Lord High Chancellor of
England, That where any person, Plaintiff or Defendant shall ground any Motion
or Petition on an Affidavit of material Witnesses to examine, In Affidavit of
material Witnesses to examine the names of the chiefest Witnesses, and the
material points on which they are to be examined, to be inserted.
whereby to gain longer time to examine, such Affidavit shall not only contain
the Names of the chiefest of such Witnesses, but the points on which such
Witnesses are desired to be examined, to the end the Court may see whether such
points be material to be examined, and whether before or after the hearing,
that all delays heretofore occasioned by unnecessary examination may be avoided
for the future.

Mercurij 12 die Maij Anno Regni Jacobi II. Regis 2. 1686.
Touching Rehearing.
Ordo Curiae.

IT is this day ordered by the Right Honorable the Lord High Chancellor, etc.
No Rehearing to be granted, without depositing 5 l. into the hands of the
Register.
That no Rehearing or Appeal shall for the future be granted, but the party
appealing shall deposite in the hands of the Register the sum of 5 l. to
recompense the other party in Costs, on such Rehearing he shall not be
relieved; and when any Rehearing is granted, such Rehearing shall not any way
stop or hinder any proceedings on the Order or Decree appealed from, Decree
appealed from.
without special Order of this Court, but the party in possession of any Order,
shall be at liberty to proceed thereon, as if no Appeal or Rehearing was
granted.

Veneris 30 die Aprilis Anno Regni Jacobi II. Regis 2. 1686.
Touching Exceptions to Reports.
Ordo Curiae. Revived.

WHereas by an Order of the 12th of February, Vide supra 20 Junij 1675.
22 Car. II. It is ordered that every person that should put in Exceptions to a
Masters Report, should besides the 40 s. deposited upon exhibiting the same,
pay 10 s. further Costs for every Exception, and distinct branch of an
Exception, which should upon the hearing thereof be overruled: Which said
Order having not of late been observed, and the Right Honorable the Lord High
Chancellor of England taking notice of the trouble and loss of time to the
Court, and expense and delay to the Suitors, 10 s. to be paid for every
Exception to a Masters Report overruled.
occasioned by putting in Exceptions to Masters Reports, many of which do prove
frivolous and vexatious, does for prevention thereof declare and order, That
the said Order of the 22th of February aforesaid, be revived and duly observed,
and does further Order, That for the future, where any Plaintiff or Plaintiffs
shall take Exceptions to a Defendants Answer, The like as to Exceptions to an
Answer appealed from the Master.
and shall appeal to the Court for their Judgment thereon from the Report of
any Master, such Plaintiff or Plaintiffs shall pay 10 s. for every Exception or
distinct branch of an Exception, which upon the hearing thereof shall be
likewise overruled as frivolous, beyond the Costs, which by the course of the
Court, he or they are to pay.

Veneris 18 die Junij Anno Regni Jacobi II. Regis 2. 1686.
Touching Hearing.
Ordo Curiae.

IT is this present day ordered by the Honorable the Master of the Rolls, That
for the future, when any Cause or Causes shall come to be heard before his
Honor at the Rolls, the Clerk in Court on either side shall attend such
hearing, The Clerks in Court on either side to attend the hearing.
to the end that his Honor may be informed, if occasion require, that such
Cause or Causes are ready for his Honors Judgment, and that the party or
parties for whom they are concerned do appear to hear Judgment gratis, or that
they were regularly served with Process for that purpose, as the Case shall
require.

Mercurij 9 die Junij Anno Regni Jacobi II. Regis 2. 1686.
The Transacting of Records into the Chapel of the Rolls.
Ordo Curiae. Revived.

WHereas by an Order of this Court of 3d of July, Vide 3 Julij 1676.
28 Car. 2. nuper Regis, It was ordered, That the Six Clerks of this Court
should forthwith send the Inrolments of all Patents which they, or any of them,
or their respective Clerks then had in their, or any of their Custodies, fairly
written in Parchment, and carefully examined, into the Petty Bag Office to be
Estreated, together with the Privy Seals and Warrants of the same; and also all
Decrees, with the Docquets thereof, to the Chapel of the Rolls, to remain
there; and that the Clerk of the Inrolments should also send the Records of all
Deeds and Recognizances, duly examined, to the said Chapel, The inrolments of
Patents to be sent into the Petty Bag to be Estreated with the Privy Seals, and
the Records of Deeds into the Chapel of the Rolls.
and that all Records in the Petty Bag Office, after the same were Estreated,
be remitted with their Warrants from thence into the Chapel of the Rolls,
according to the ancient usage heretofore for sending Records into the said
Chapel, viz. the Patents after three years from the time of their Inrolment,
and the Records of Deeds and Recognizances from the Inrolment Office, after two
years from the time of Inrolment, and so from year to year for the future; and
that such Records as were come into the Chapel, and not fit to be received and
continued there by reason of their ill Character, bad Parchment, Razures or
interlineations, be transcribed within the Chapel of the Rolls, The Patents
after 3 years from the time of the Inrolment, and the Records after 2 years.
at the charge of the said Six Clerks, and the Clerk of the Inrolments, to
which of them the said Records did at first properly belong; which Order having
not of late been duly observed, by reason whereof great inconveniences may
happen to arise to the Suitors of this Court in their particular concerns: As
also to diverse others of his Majesty's Subjects, concerned in the Records in
the said respective Offices; the Right Honorable the Lord High Chancellor of
England, and the Honorable the Master of the Rolls taking notice thereof, and
of the great neglects that have been done by the respective Officers of the
particular Offices, in not transmitting the Inrolments of Patents, and Decrees,
and Docquets, Records, Deeds and Recognizances, according to the Direction and
Intent of the said Order, do therefore order, That the said Order be revived,
and a due performance and obedience given thereto by the respective Officers
concerned in their respective Offices and Places they now are, or shall be
concerned in relation to any of the Matters of this Order.

Veneris 6 die Aprilis Anno Regni Jacobi II. Regis 3. 1687.
Touching Decrees.
Ordo Curiae.

WHereas for the preventing of differences that did arise upon Decrees and
Orders pronounced in open Court, the Right Honorable the Lord High Chancellor,
Minutes of Decrees and Order to be ^ead in open Court.
etc. has from time to time caused all Minutes to be read in open Court, that
the Counsel at the Bar, and other persons concerned might take notice of what
did concern their respective Clients, and speak for the rectifying thereof, or
adding thereto, as occasion offered, whilst the Matters were fresh in the
memory of the Court, and have several times given directions, that afterward
none should presume either to petition or move the Court, complaining against
any Order agreeing with the Minutes, except the Minutes should after the
reading thereof be altered, or the Register shall fail in doing his duty
persuant thereto without consent; and yet without due regard thereto, several
Petitions have been since causelessly preferred. His Lordship does therefore
this day order, That due observation be given to the parties concerned, when
any Minutes are read in Court, to the end that no further Complaints may be
made against the Officer, or the Minutes by him taken in Court, except as
aforesaid; and to the end no person may plead ignorance hereof, his Lordship
does direct, That this Order be fixed up in the Offices of the Six Clerks and
Register of this Court, that all due obedience may be given thereto.

Veneris 29 die Aprilis Anno Regni Jacobi II. Regis 3. 1687.
An Examiner suspended.
Ordo Curiae.

IT is this day ordered by the Right Honorable the Lord High Chancellor, etc.
That Richard Burreston, One of the Examiners of the Court suspended.
one of the Examiners Clerks in the Office of William Adderly, Esquire; one of the
Examiners of this Court, (for that the said Richard Burreston did entrust one
Philips, who is no sworn Clerk of the said Office to transcribe part of the
Depositions of a Witness examined by the said Burreston, in a Cause now
depending in this Court, wherein one Woollaston is Plaintiff, and Winford
Defendant, before the said Witness had perfected his Examination or Publication
past in the Cause) be suspended from any further Employment in the said Office,
till further Order.

Lord Chancellor.
Veneris 29 die Aprilis Anno Regni Jacobi II. Regis 3. 1687.
Touching Interrogatories.
Ordo Curiae.

WHereas by Experience, great inconveniences have happened in several Causes, by
the exhibiting Interrogatories, which are impertinently drawn into great
length, whereby the Suitors have been put to great and unnecessary Charges, as
also leading Interrogatories, whereby the Witnesses, by turning the Negative
into the Affirmative, are led to swear to the whole Contents of an
Interrogatory, and oftentimes thereby drawn ignorantly to forswear themselves,
which in all times have been suppressed and deemed great abuses. Now for
prevention thereof for the future, it is this day ordered by the Right
Honorable the Lord High Chancellor, etc. That from, and after the first day of
June next, no Interrogatories shall be exhibited for the examination of any
Witnesses in any Cause depending in this Court, whether in Court, in the
Examinors Office, or by Commission in the Country, before such Interrogatories
shall be either drawn, Interrogatories to examine Winesses to be signed by
Counsel.
or perused by Counsel (after due consideration had of the Pleadings) and
signed by them. But all Counsel are to take care, that no Interrogatories do
slightly pass their hands, contrary to the true intent and meaning thereof,
lest they incur the displeasure of the Court therein; and that all Depositions
taken contrary hereto, shall stand suppressed; and to that end, all the Clerks
and Solicitors of this Court that are concerned in Causes, may not be ignorant
hereof, his Lordship does further order, That this Order be set up and fixed in
some public places in the Offices of the Six Clerks, and Examinors of this
Court, that all due obedience may be given thereto.

Veneris 27 die Maij, Anno Regni Jacobi II. Regis 3. 1687.
Touching Orders on Petitions.
Ordo Curiae.

IT is this day ordered by the Right Honorable the Lord High Chancellor, etc.
That from, and after this day, no Order or Direction made, or given by his
Lordship, or the Honorable Master of the Rolls, upon any Petition (unless the
same be by way of Summons) shall be of any authority or effect, An Order made
upon a Petition to be of no Effect to ground Subpoena's, or other Process,
unless within 3 days in Term time, or within a Week in the Vacation after the
same shall be granted, an Order be entered up with the Register on such Petition.
as to the Proceedings or grounding Subpoena's, or other Process in any Cause
now depending, or which shall hereafter be depending in this Court, unless
within three days in Term time, or in a Week in the Vacation after, the same
shall be granted and signed by his Lordship or his Honor, an Order shall be
drawn up and entered with the Register on such Petition, to the end no person
may be surprised by any Private Order, but that all parties concerned may have
resort, at all times, to see what Orders are from time to time made and
granted, wherein they are concerned; and that no person may be ignorant
thereof, it is further ordered, That this Order be set up in the Public
Offices of the Court concerned therein, that all due obedience may be given
thereto.

Veneris 17 die Junij, Anno Regni Jacobi II. Regis 3. 1687.
Surrender of a Six Clerk to the Master of the Rolls.
Ordo Curiae.

WHereas Arnold Brown, Esquire late one of the Six Clerks of this Court, has
surrendered his Office of Six Clerk in this Court, into the hands of me, the
Master of the Rolls, whereby the said Office is become vacant; and forasmuch as
the business in agitation, and to be transacted in that Office for the benefit
of the King's People, Suitors in this Court, is not to be delayed or obstructed
for want of a fit person to manage the said Office in the vacancy of a Six
Clerk; and whereas I have this present 17th day of June 1687. under my Hand and
Seal, deputed and appointed the said Arnold Brown to Act, Agitate, Negotiate
and Proceed in the business of that Office in my Name; and as my Deputy only,
during my pleasure, and have further authorized and empowered him the said
Arnold Brown so to do and act, and to write to the Great Seal, in my Name
only, and not in the Name of him the said Arnold Brown, and to enter and sign
all Proceedings, Certificates, Copies, and other things belonging to the
Execution of the said Office, in the Name of the said Arnold Brown, but with
the additions of Deputy to me Master of the Rolls, to wit ( Arnold Brown,
Deputy Magr' Rotulor') as to take and receive the Profits thereof, as by the
said Deputation, enrolled in this Court, may and does appear, for the due
Execution of which said Deputation, the said Arnold Brown has been duly
sworn, Arnold Brown on the surrendering his Office as Six Clerk, deput^d to act
during the vacan^y.
his Honor does hereby order, direct and appoint the several respective sworn
Clerks of the said Office, within or belonging to the Division, late of the
said Arnold Brown, late Six Clerk, to apply themselves to the said Arnold
Brown, as my Deputy, as aforesaid, for the Dispatch of the Business of that
Division, and to pay all such Duties and Fees to his said Deputy Arnold Brown
as are due, appertaining, and accustomed to be paid to the Six Clerk of that
Division, and to do, and perform all other Acts, as the respective sworn Clerk
in Chancery ought to do to their respective Six Clerks; and to the end that no
sworn Clerk, or other persons concerned may be ignorant of this Matter, his
Honor does order, that this Order be entered with the Register of this Court,
and put up in the Office of Six Clerks.

J. Trevor.

Mercurij 29 die Februar', Anno Regni Jacobi II. Regis 4. 1688.
Touching Misdemeanors.
Ordo Curiae.

WHereas diverse Complaints have of late been made the to Honorable the Master
of the Rolls, of the outrageous, rude and undecent Demeanors of diverse of the
younger Clerks, Servants and Writers, to and for the sworn Clerk in the said
Six Clerk Office, Penalty on those that misdemean themselves in the Office.
to the great scandal of this Court, and hindrance of business, which has been
most notorious, by their throwing Dirt, Filth, Ink, and many other things, to
the damage and prejudice of the Suitors of this Court, and Masters in the said
Office, and at other times by a rude and violent clapping their Desks, and
making many loud Outcrys and Noises, and by evil treating their Masters in the
said Office with opprobrious Language. All which his Honor having taken into
consideration, it is for the preventing the like Enormities for the future
ordered, That the Messenger attending the Rolls, do take such Servants, Clerk
or Writer into Custody (and by him to be carried to Bridewell) as shall at any
time or times hereafter be guilty of either of the said Enormities, or any
other of the like nature, and there shall continue till further order, and for
the second offense shall be expelled the said Office; and that due notice be
given hereof, and that all persons may take warning, this present Order is
forthwith to be set up in the Six Clerks Office.

Martis 20 die Martij, Anno Regni Jacobi II. Regis 4. 1688.
Touching Regulating the Under-Clerks.
An Ordinance.

Vide supra 18 Junij 20 Car. 2.
WHereas by a Decree heretofore made by the Right Honorable the Lord Keeper,
etc. and the Honorable the Master of the Rolls, bearing date the 18th day of
June, in the 20th year of the Reign of his late Majesty King Charles the Second
of blessed memory, for the better regulating the Six Clerks Office; it was
amongst other things Ordered, Ordained and Decreed, That the Number of the
Under-Clerks to be allowed and admitted to practice as Clerks of this Court in
the said Six Clerks Office, should be reduced and stinted to Sixty Clerks, and
no more, at which number the said Under-Clerks should be continued, unless this
Court should find it necessary to increase or abridge the same; and further,
that as well the Under-Clerks, then to be admitted, as every other person
thereafter to be admitted to the place of an Under-Clerk in the said Office,
should be in the Judgment of the Master of the Rolls, fitly qualified for such
Employment, at or before the time of such his admission, and also before his
and their entrance upon that Employment, should take the Oath thereby directed,
for his honest and faithful behavior, and true dealing with, and toward the
Records, Rolls, Pleadings, Books and Writings of this Court, and the other due
performance of his place. And it was thereby further Ordered, Ordained and
Decreed, That no person upon any pretense whatsoever, should hereafter be
permitted to practice as an Under-Clerk in the said Office, but such only as
should be first sworn, and admitted as aforesaid. And whereas for want of
observance, and due obedience to the said Decree, and other Orders made in
persuance thereof, manifold disorders, and undue practices have crept into the
said Six Clerks Office, amongst the Six Clerks, and the sworn Clerks, and
especially by a liberty that the Six Clerks of this Court have assumed, and
continued to themselves, against the express words of the said Decree, the Duty
of their places, and in Contempt of this Court, to allow, permit and license
several persons to practice in the said Office, without being either allowed,
sworn or admitted by the Master of the Rolls, as the sworn Under-Clerks of this
Court are, and of right ought to be, to the confusion, mislaying, imbezling,
falsifying, razing and defacing, and sometimes to the loss of the Records,
Rolls, Pleadings, Books and Writings of this Court: And also that the sworn
Clerks of this Court have retained more Under-Clerks than one apiece, and have
discharged and turned them off from their Service before they are preferred, to
the undoing, and utter ruin of many, and to the discouragement of the training
up and breeding of industrious and diligent Young Clerks to serve and succeed
in the said Office, which this Court has always taken care of, and contrary to
an Order for that purpose made by the Right Honorable Sir Harbottle Grimstone,
late Master of the Rolls: All which Abuses, Irregularities and Disorders tend
manifestly to the obstruction of Justice, and the orderly proceedings and
dispatch thereof, to the great scandal and dishonor of this High and
Honorable Court, and the irreparable damage to the King and Subject if not
prevented, the Right Honorable George Lord Jeffreys, Lord Chancellor of
England, and the Right Honorable Sir John Trevor, Master of the Rolls taking
the same into their serious consideration, and the ways and means for
redressing and preventing the same for the future, do hereby, and by the
Authority of the High and Honorable Court of Chancery Order, Ordain, and
Decree, That all and every such person and persons, so as aforesaid allowed,
Supernumerary Clerks (except two waiting Clerks to each Six Clerks) not sworn,
discharged from practicing in the said Office.
permitted or licensed by the Six Clerks in their several Divisions and
Offices, called supernumerary* or Licenciary Clerks, not allowed, sworn and
admitted as Under-Clerks, to practice as Clerks of this Court (excepting the
two waiting Clerks allowed to each Six Clerk) be, and are hereby absolutely, to
all intents and purposes discharged and inhibited from practicing in the said
Office, and from sitting and writing in the said Office of Six Clerks, until
they shall be duly qualified, sworn and admitted so to do: And the several Six
Clerks of this Court are hereby required and commanded forthwith, upon the
forfeiture of their respective Offices, to discharge all such person and
persons out of the Office of Six Clerks, from whom as well as from the said
supernumerary Clerks, this Court does expect all due and ready observance and
obedience to this Decree. And to the end that there should not be wanting a
convenient and sufficient number of honest, able and expert Under-Clerks for
the orderly proceeding, carrying on and quiet dispatch of the Suitors, and
business of this Court, his Lordship the Lord High Chancellor, and his Honor
the Master of the Rolls do think it very fit and necessary, and do thereby
Order, Ordain and Decree, Five Under-Clerks to be added to ten sworn
Under-Clerks in every Six Clerks Division.
That five Under-Clerks, such as his Honor, the Master of the Rolls shall in
his Judgment think able, fitly qualified and allow of, shall be forthwith added
to the ten sworn Under Clerks in every Six Clerks Division, and that each of
them shall by the Master of the Rolls be sworn, and admitted Clerks of this
Court, and to practice in the same with all the like advantages, paying the
like Fees, Dues and Duties, as the now sworn Under-Clerks of this Court have
enjoyed and paid, or ought to have, enjoy and pay, all which number, making
fifteen in every Six Clerks Division, the sworn Under-Clerks of this Court
shall continue, unless this Court shall find it necessary to reduce, abridge or
increase the same; and from time to time upon any vacancy by Forfeiture,
Surrender or Death, such only shall be sworn and admitted by the Master of the
Rolls into their respective places, as his Honor in his Judgment shall think
fitly qualified, and allowed of for the said Employment, the nomination of the
Six Clerks being only for his Honors information, and the presence of the Six
Clerks at the swearing and admittance of an Under-Clerk being only, that he the
Six Clerk may take notice of such new Under-Clerk so sworn and admitted: And
further, the said Under-Clerks hereby decreed to be sworn and admitted, are to
have such Seats and Places provided and appointed for them to sit, write and
officiate in, in the Six Clerks Office, as the Master of the Rolls shall think
fit to order and appoint: But no Seat now belonging to any of the sworn Clerks,
shall be hereby altered, removed or abridged without his or their consent. And
for the better putting in execution of this Ordinance and Decree, and the
encouragement of the Young Clerks, now Servants, or which hereafter shall be
Clerks Servants, to the sworn Under-Clerks of this Court; None permitted to
dispatch any business in ^he Office as a Clerk, or have necess to the the
Records, but sworn C^erks and their Servants.
it is hereby Ordered, Ordained and Decreed, That from henceforth none shall be
permitted to sit or write, or dispatch any business as a Clerk in the said
Office of Six Clerks, or have access to, or copy the Records thereof, but only
the Six Clerks, and sworn Under-Clerks, and their Clerks Servants respectively,
which the Six Clerks and sworn Under-Clerks of this Court are hereby severally
strictly required to perform and keep, upon the peril of the forfeiture of
their Places. And it is further Ordained and Decreed, That certain Orders made
by the Honorable Sir Harbottle Grimstone, late Master of the Rolls, for the
better execu^ing of the aforesaid ^ecited Decree, bearing date the 18th of
June, in the 29th year of his late Majesty King Charles the Second, of blessed
memory, for the better regulating the Six Clerks, and for the better
encouragement of the Young Clerks, who have, or shall serve the Six Clerks, or
sworn Under-Clerks of this Court, be hereby ratified and confirmed, subject to
such further additions and alterations as his Honor, the Master of the Rolls
shall think fit to alter and make for the better putting in execution this
present. Ordinance and Decree, and for the true and better preservation of the
Records and Pleadings of this Court, wherein the security of the King, and the
Justice of this Court is so much concerned; the which to preserve from all
frauds and evil practices, is the true aim and end of this present Ordinance
and Decree: It is hereby Ordered Ordained and Decreed, No Master to deliver any
Answer or Pleading to any but a Six Clerk, or sworn Under-Clerk.
That no Master of this Court do deliver, or suffer to be delivered, any Answer
or Pleading of this Court to any person or persons other than to a Six Clerk,
or to one of the sworn Clerks of this Court, and to no other, and that no Six
Clerk of this Court do, upon the peril of his place, deliver any Bill, Answer
or Pleadings of this Court, to any person whatsoever, No Six Clerks to deliver
any Bill, Answer or Pleading to any person, but to a sworn Clerk, or his
waiting Clerk.
other than to a sworn Clerk of this Court, or to their respective waiting
Clerks, for whom they are to be answerable; and that no sworn Clerk of this
Court, upon the peril of his place, do deliver to any person whatsoever, any
Bill, Answer or Pleadings of this Court, other than to his respective Clerks
Servants, for whom he is to answer, except by the Order of the Lord Chancellor,
Master of the Rolls, or of this Court. And lastly, It is Ordered, Ordained and
Decreed, That this present Decree shall be enrolled in the Judgment Rolls of
this Court, to be observed for the future, to all intents and purposes,
according to the tenor and true meaning hereof.

Jeffreys, C. J. Trevor.


Lords Commissioners. Martis 16 die Martij, Anno Regni Regis and Reginae
Gulielmi and Mariae 1. 1689.
Ordo Curiae Private.

IT hereby ordered, That the several Matters which have been by former Orders
referred to Sir William Beversham, Knight, deceased, Matters referred to Sir W.
Beversham deceased to be transmitted to Mr. Keck.
shall either by Motion or Petition (as desired) be transferred to Samuel Keck,
Esquire; one of the Masters of this Court, who is to proceed therein, as the said
Sir William Beversham was to have done; and to that purpose, it is further
ordered, That all the Books, Papers, Deeds, Writings and Accounts that concern
the Causes so referred to the said Sir William Beversham, be transmitted to
Samuel Keck, Esquire; when they shall be demanded. Dated this 16th day of March 168
1/9.

John Maynard, C. S. A. Keck, C. S. W. Rawlinson, C.S.


Martis 29 die Julij, Anno Regni Regis and Reginae Gulielmi and Mariae 1. 1689.
Touching Hearing.
Ordo Curiae.

WHereas Causes are oftentimes brought to a Hearing, and the Pleadings in a
Cause do not appear to be filed, whereby the Causes are put off, and the
Suitors thereby put to great charges and delay; It is this day ordered by the
Right Honorable the Lords Commissioners, No Motion to speed a Cause to hearing
without a Certificate from the Six Clerk, that the Pleadings are filed.
etc. That no Motion shall be made to hasten a Cause to hearing, that is either
Adversary, or by consent, nor Cause entered with the Register for hearing,
notwithstanding any Order, without Certificate first had from the Six Clerk,
that the Pleadings are filed, for which no Fee is to be taken. All Clerks to
enter their Pleas and Demurrers within 8 days after filing, but a Certificate
must be had of the filing.
And it is further ordered, That all Clerks shall enter their Pleas and
Demurrers within eight days after filing, according to the ancient Rule, but
the same are not to be entered without a Certificate first had of the fi^ing of
the Bill, Plea and Demurrer.

Mercurij 23 die Octobris, Anno Regni Regis and Reginae Gulielmi and Mariae 1.
1689.
Touching Rehearing.
Ordo Curiae.

IT is this day ordered by the Right Honorable the Lords Commissioners, etc.
Two days before the Rehearing, the Party Appealing shall attend the Lords
Commissioners with a Copy or Order of the Decree Appealed from, and a true Copy
of a Petition for Rehearing.
That when any Cause shall be appointed to be reheard, the party appearing
shall two days at least before the day appointed for such Rehearing, attend
their Lordships with a true Copy of the Order or Decree Appealed from, as also
with a true Copy of the Petition, upon which such Rehearing was granted, that
their Lordships may upon all Rehearings be apprized of the Order and Decree,
and the Objections against the same.

Lords Commissioners. Veneris 17 die Januarij Anno Regni Regis and Reginae
Gulielmi and Mariae 1. 1689.
Touching Exceptions to Masters Reports.
Ordo Curiae Additional.

Vide supra 12 Feb. 1670.
WHereas the Right Honorable the late Lord Keeper Bridgman, taking notice of
the trouble, loss of time, expense and delay to the Suitors, occasioned by
putting in Exceptions to Masters Reports, many of which did prove frivolous and
vexatious, did by Order of the 12th of February, 22 Car. 2. for the prevention
thereof declare and order, That for the future, every person that should put in
Exceptions to a Masters Report, should besides the 40 s. deposited upon
exhibiting the same, pay 10 s. further Costs for every Exception or distinct
Branch of an Exception, which should upon the hearing thereof be overruled; 20
s. Costs to be paid for every frivolous Exception to a Masters Report, over and
above the 40 s. deposited.
and whereas the Right Honorable the Lords Commissioners, etc. finding the
like inconveniences to continue, by reason the said Order has not been duly
pursued, do for the preventing thereof for the future, Order, That the said
Order made by the said Lord Keeper Bridgman, be revived, with this further,
That for every frivolous and impertinent Exception, or distinct Branch of an
Exception, that shall from time to time be put into any Report, and shall on
arguing be overruled as frivolous and impertinent and so declared, the
Exceptant shall for every such Exception, or Branch of such an Exception, pay
to the other side 20 s. Costs, and for every frivolous Exception, or Branch of
an Exception, though not opened, but waved, the Exceptant in such case shall
pay 10 s. Costs; And 10 s. for every frivolous Exception that is not opened.
which said 20 s. and 10 s. are to be paid over and above the 40 s. deposited
according to the Rule.

A. Keck, C. S. W. Rawlinson, C.S.


Sabbati 14 die Maij, Anno Regni Regis and Reginae Gulielmi and Mariae 4. 1692.
Touching Exceptions to Masters. Reports.
Ordo Curiae.

WHereas it has been by experience found, that Exceptions have been frequently
taken to Masters Reports, which on arguing have appeared very frivolous,
tending only for delay, and whereby the Suitors are put to great charges to
bring on such dilatory Exceptions; It is this day ordered by the Right
Honorable the Lords Commissioners, He who will file Exceptions to a Report,
shall within 8 days after procure a fixed day for the setting down such
Exceptions to be heard, and thereof give notice to the other side.
etc. That when, and as often as any Party, Plaintiff or Defendant shall take
and file Exceptions to a Report, made in any Cause, either now depending in
this Court, or which shall hereafter be depending, the Party so excepting,
shall within eight days after such Exceptions filed, procure a fixed day for the
setting down such Exceptions to be heard, and thereof give due notice to the
Clerk in Court for the other Party, or in default thereof such Exceptions so
filed, shall from, and after the Expiration of the said eight days stand
overruled, and the Party obtaining such Report, Vide infra. This Order
suspended 7 July 93.
shall be at liberty to proceed thereon as if no Exceptions were ever filed.

Sabbati 29 die Octobris, Anno Regni Regis and Reginae Gulielmi and Mariae 4.
1692.
Touching Filing Reports and Certificates.
Ordo Curiae.

WHereas it has been found of late too common a practice for to ground
Contempts, Orders and Decrees, and other Proceedings, on Reports of the Masters
of this Court, before the same be actually filed with the Register of this
Court, where the same ought to be filed, before any proceedings be had thereon.
Now for the prevention thereof, and of the inconveniences that may happen to
the Suituors by such neglects; All Reports or Certificates made or signed by
the Masters, to be filed with the Register within 4 days after such signing.
It is this present day ordered by the Right Honorable the Lords
Commissioners, etc. That all Reports and Certificates that shall be made and
signed by any of the Masters of this Court, (shall by him that sueth forth, or
takes the same from the respective Masters) be filed with the Register of this
Court within four days after the making and signing thereof, The Register to
indorse on the back thereof the day of receiving and filing it.
and that the Register, when any Report or Certificate is brought to be filed,
shall endorse on the back thereof the day of the receiving and filing such
Report and Certificate, and that all Proceedings which shall hereafter be
grounded on any Report or Certificate, not filed as aforesaid, shall be utterly
void and of none effect; and such neglect of filing being made appear to their
Lordships by the Certificate of the Register, shall be good cause for the
discharging of Proceedings thereupon, and also for the incurring such further
Costs as their Lordships shall think fit to inflict on the Party offending
contrary hereto; and that for the better and more public notice of this Order,
fair Copies thereof are forthwith to be made, and put up in the Registers
Office, Masters Office and Six Clerks Office, for all persons concerned to take
notice thereof

Veneris 7 die Julij, Anno Regni Regis and Reginae Gulielmi and Mariae 5. 1693.
Exceptions to Masters Report.
Ordo Curiae.

WHereas by an Order of the 14th May 1692. It was ordered, Vide supan 14 Maij
1692. The said Order of 14 May suspended.
That the Party excepting to any Report, should within eight days after the
filing thereof, procure a fixed day for the hearing thereof, or otherwise such
Exceptions so filed, should be overruled, and the other Party should be at
liberty to proceed, as if no Exceptions had been filed. Now forasmuch as the
said Order, in the execution thereof, has instead of the benefit intended to
the Suitor, thereby proved an inconvenience, the Right Honorable the Lord
Keeper, etc. does order, That the further execution of the said Order be
suspended till further order.

Jovis 7 Decembris, Anno Regni Regis and Reginae Gulielmi and Mariae 5. 1693.
Touching Clerks Misbehaviour.
Ordo Curiae Private.

Clerks misbehaving themselves ordered to attend.
WHereas a Complaint was this day made to the Right Honorable the Master of the
Rolls of the misbehavior of several of the younger Clerks in the Six Clerks
Office; it is ordered that Mr. Watkins, Mr. Mutchell, Mr. Wright, Mr. Raworth,
Mr. Buroughs, Mr. Cook, Mr. Conset, Mr. Talbott, Mr. Lloyd, Mr. Downeing, and
their Clerks, do attend his Honor on Saturday next, at three in the Afternoon,
at which time Mr. Wilkinson, Mr. Bagshawe, Mr. Jaques, Mr. Bridges, and Mr.
Derbysheirs Clerks are also to attend, when such further Order shall be made as
shall be just, and that the Messenger attending this Court do give notice
thereof to the said respective persons.

Sabbati 9 die Decembris, Anno Regni Regis and Reginae Gulielmi and Mariae 5.
1693.
Touching the Six Clerks, and Under-Clerks.
Ordo Curiae.

WHereas Complaints have been made by the Petition of the sworn Clerks of this
Court to the Right Honorable the Master of the Rolls, that diverse of their
Under Clerks have of late behaved themselves after a bold, insolent, rude and
disorderly manner in the Six Clerks Office, as well toward their respective
Masters, as to others the sworn Clerks, and to the Suitors of the Court,
attending the dispatch of their business there, by unmannerly and abusive
language, breaking of Windows, cutting Desks, breaking down Seats, throwing
Stones and other things at the said sworn Clerks, and their Clients, whereby,
and by making rude and undecent Noyses, often forced them to leave the said
Office, and caused the same to be shut up in the most usual time of business,
and when the Court has been sitting, to the great scandal thereof, and damage
of the said sworn Clerks and their Clients, and contrary to the duty of the
said Under-Clerks, and the ancient and laudable usage of the said Office. And
whereas Complaint has been likewise made to his Honor by the Petitions of the
Under-Clerks, that the Six Clerks do take and employ persons to be their
waiting Clerks, who have not been Articled Clerks, or ever educated and
employed in the said Office, and that several of the sworn Clerks have, and do
not only take more than one Articled Clerk, which they by the Rules and Orders
of the said Court, for the Government of the said Office ought not to do; but
do likewise carry the Records out of the said Office, and cause the same to be
copyed at under rates, by persons out of the Office, rather than to allow to
their Under-Clerks their due Fees for Copying thereof: All which proceedings
are not only contrary to the ancient Orders and Rules of the said Office, but
manifestly tend to the discouraging of diligence, industry and Clerkship, and
to the introducing of ignorance. All which matters his Honor taking into his
serious consideration, and being minded to prevent the like and all other
abuses and disturbances in the said Office for the future, and for the time to
come to keep and restrain the said Under-Clerks within such Rules and decent
behavior toward all, and every the sworn Clerks of the said Office and their
Clients, as ought to be practiced and observed amongst the Clerks in so High
and Honorable a Court; does think fit and so order, that none of the said
Under- Clerks do hereafter presume by any of the ways aforesaid, or by any
other means on any pretense whatsoever, to make any such Noise or disturbance,
or commit any disorder in the said Office, or cause or procure the said Office
to be shut up, or endeavor to force or oblige any of the sworn Clerks or their
Clients to depart from, or leave the same; And that the said Office be not for
the future shut up at any times, than only upon such Holy Days as are kept by
the Court in Term time, and such only in Vacation as are or shall be appointed
to be kept by Act of Parliament, or any other public Authority. Rules of
behavior of the Under-Clerks to the sworn Clerks.
And further, That no Under-Clerk in the said Office shall from henceforth,
during the time of his Clerkship, presume to wear any Sword either in or out of
the said Office within the Cities of London or Westminster or the liberties
thereof, or to be covered or wear his Hat in the said Office in the presence of
any one of the sworn Clerks; but that all the said Under-Clerks shall, during
all the time of their respective Clerkships, as well in their Masters Seats, as
elsewhere in the said Office be uncovered, and behave themselves orderly,
soberly, and with respect toward all the sworn Clerks, and the Suitors of the
Court: And in case any of the said Under-Clerks shall be idle in the said
Office, out of their Masters Seats, they shall upon the admonition or command
of any of the sworn Clerks, immediately repair to their Masters Seats, and
quietly sit and attend their business there, from seven of the Clock in the
Morning in Summer, and eight in the Winter till twelve of the Clock at Noon,
and from two of the Clock in the Afternoon until such time as their respective
Masters shall think fit: And in case any of the said Under-Clerks shall be
hereafter guilty of any the aforesaid, or any other abuses, disorders or
indecencies in the said Office, he and they so offending, shall undergo such
punishment, either by expulsion or otherwise, as his Honor (...) the Master of
the Rolls, for the time being, shall think fit to inflict; and for the better
encouragement of the Under-Clerks, and to the end the Rules and Orders for the
Government of the said Office may be the better observed for the future, his
Honor does further order, No Six Clerk to take a waiting Clerk, but such as
has been an Articled Clerk.
That no Six Clerk do for the future take any person to be his waiting Clerk or
Clerks, but such who are, or have been Clerks articled to some one of the sworn
Clerks of the said Office; and that they have not above two waiting Clerks
each, Six Clerks not to have above two waiting Clerks each.
and if any of their future waiting Clerks have not been Articled Clerks, such
waiting Clerks shall be forthwith discharged, and that no sworn Clerk do take
and have more than one Articled Clerk at the same time, No sworn Clerk to have
more than one Articled Clerk at the same time
before his first Articled Clerk be preferred in the said Office, or that the
first Articled Clerk be discharged with the knowledge and approbation of his
Honor, (...) the Master of the Rolls, for the time being: And if any of the
sworn Clerks now have any more than one Articled Clerk, that such sworn Clerk
do discharge his second Articled Clerk from the said Articles, and deliver up
his Articles, with what he has received with him, his Honor declaring, That
if any sworn Clerk have, or shall presume to Article with a second Clerk,
before the first Clerk be preferred in the said Office, or discharged as
aforesaid, such Articles shall be deemed and taken to be ipso facto void and of
none effect. And does further order, No sworn Clerk to carry Records out of the
Office without leave of the Master of the Rolls, nor to employ any to Copy
Records, but such as are Arcicled Clerks.
That no sworn Clerk do presume, being contrary to his Duty, to carry any
Records out of the said Office, without leave first obtained from the Master of
the Rolls, for the time being, nor do employ any person in the Copying of any
Records, but such who are Articled Clerks, unless in case of sickness, or that
the Articled Clerk shall refuse or neglect to Copy the same, whereof Complaint
is immediately to be made to his Honor, to the end the same may be redrest.
And to the end this Order may be the better known, effectually obeyed and duly
observed, his Honor requires and expects the same to be fairly engrossed, and
from henceforth hung up in the said Office in a Frame to be provided for that
purpose.

Sabbati 19 die Januarij, 1694.
Touching Reading Depositions.
Ordo Curiae.

WHereas in former times, as well as lately, Complaints have been made by the
Examiners of this Court, That after Depositions of Witnesses have been taken in
their Office between parties, Plaintiff and Defendant, one of the said Parties,
or some of their Agents, have taken out the Copies of Depositions for his Party
only; and afterward the same Party has for Money or other reward, given or
suffered other Copies to be made out of them, to the adverse Party, his
Solicitor or Agent, who have made use of them on all occasions, as if
authentic: By reason of which said second Copies, so surreptitiously made, the
Court may be misguided; all which doings tend to the great abuse of the Court*
and prejudice of the Clients and their Causes, as well as to the scandal of the
said Office, and the depriving the Officers of their due Fees. And whereas
Orders have been made (as often as grounds for the said Complaints have been
offered) for the redressing thereof; but the directions thereby given have
proved ineffectual, some of them tending rather to put the Party agrieved to a
further charge than to redress the grievances complained of. And whereas the
present Examiners of this Court have by their humble Petition besought the Lord
Keeper of the Great Seal of England for redress in the Premises, and to
prevent the like inconveniences for the future, and his Lordship having taken
their said Petition into his serious consideration, and calling to mind, that
the like matter thereby complained of, happned lately in Court in the Causes of
Wilcox and Doughty, and Doughty and Wilcox, and observing that the last Order
made in such Cases, that the Causes should be put off, and five Pounds paid to
the other side is no redress to the Court, (who is the Party grieved, he being
put to the new charge of another days attendance, and the five Pounds being
never paid) forasmuch as the Clerks and Agents on both Sides are Confederates
in the said practice; wherefore for the prevention of the like Scandal to the
Court, Charge to the Clients, and Fraud to the said Officers for the future,
his Lordship does order, No Deposition to be made use of in any Court, or
before any Master in any Cause, but such as is taken out of the proper Office,
and signed by the Party for whom the same shall be read.
That no Copies of Depositions shall be read or made use of, either in Court,
or before any Master in any Cause, but such as is taken out of the proper
Office, and signed for the Party, for whom the same shall be read: And to the
end this Order may be more strictly persued, his Lordship does further order,
That the said Examiners shall by themselves, or by their Deputy, have liberty
from, and after the 22th day of January instant to attend in Court, at the
hearing of all Causes, to inspect all Books of Depositions which are brought
into Court and read, either for Plaintiff or Defendant, and to see whether they
be duly signed for the Party that does produce the same: And in case the said
Examiners, or either of them, or their Deputy shall discover to the Court any
such fraud or practice committed, that then the Cause or Causes, wherein such
practice or fraud is committed, shall be put off, and the Parties offending
shall stand committed to the Prison of the Fleet until the Officer injured be
agreed with, and paid his due Fees; and until they shall have also paid the sum
of five Pounds into the hands of such person, as his Lordship shall direct, for
the use of the Poor, and until such Client or Clients as shall be prejudiced,
by putting off his or their Cause, shall be reimbursed his Charges in respect
thereof, and until the further Order of this Court: And that no person may
plead ignorance herein, this Order is to be set up in the several Offices
concerned therein, belonging to this Court.

Martis 12 die Junij, 1694.
Touching Sergeant at Arms.
Ordo Curiae. Revived....

Whereas Complaint was made to the late Lord Chancellor Finch by the Sergeant
at Arms attending the Great Seal, Vide supra 4 Nov. 74. 13 Julij 85.
That after Contempts were prosecuted to a Sergeant at Arms, and a Commitment
pronounced, the Prosecutor would draw up the Order, and never take out the
Warrant thereon, but make use thereof to force the Party prosecuted into ome
Composition, sometimes for the whole matter in question; but usually for
discharge of the Contempts, whereby the Sergeants Employment was rendered in
great part ineffectual: For the prevention whereof his Lordship did thereupon
order, That after an Order for a Sergeant at Arms should be granted by the
Court, the Register should, on request, draw up the said Order, and deliver the
same to the Sergeant at Arms, or his Deputy, and to no other person, they
paying for the same, by which means he should, or might endeavor to apprehend
the Party prosecuted, and bring him into the Court to answer the Contempts if
he could; but if he could not, his Lordship did further order, That no Order
for a Sergeant at Arms drawn up, and past by the Register, should be
discharged, and the Contempt thereon, without the Sergeants Fees be paid to
him, and a Certificate made under his Hand, testifying the same; and after the
said Order being so drawn up, and past as aforesaid, no private or other
agreement should be made between the Party and Parties, and the Person and
Persons so standing in Contempt as aforesaid, or any other person, on their, or
any of their behalfs, without such satisfaction should be made, and a
Certificate should appear of the same to the Court. Now upon information made
to the Right Honorable the Lord Keeper of the Great Seal of England by the
Sergeant at Arms, that the said Order had not been duly observed, to his great
loss and prejudice; his Lordship does order, That the said Order be revived;
and does further Order, That when any Motion shall be made for a Sergeant at
Arms, The Counsel moving for a Sergeant at Arms, shall immediately in Court
deliver to the Register the Commission of Rebellion, and tell who is Clerk in
Court.
the Counsel moving for the same, shall immediately in Court deliver unto the
Register the the Commission of Rebellion, and tell who is Clerk in Court, that
the Sergeant at Arms may have an account of him, where the Contemner lives; and
that the Order be drawn up by the Register, and delivered to the Sergeant at
Arms or his Deputy, and to no other person whatsoever, they paying for the
same, to take out a Warrant thereon, whereby the Party or Parties so in
Contempt may be taken into Custody, and be brought into this Court to Answer
the same: And that this Order be hung up in the Registers and Six Clerks Office
of this Court, that all persons may take notice thereof, and yield obedience to
the same accordingly.

Mercurij 28 die Octobris, Anno Regni Regis Gulielmi Tertij 8. 1696. Ordo
Curiae.

IT is this day ordered by the Right Honorable the Lord Keeper of the Great
Seal of England, That where any Reference is now, or shall be directed to any
of the Masters of this Court; and at any time hereafter upon such Reference,
any matter of Fact shall be admitted or agreed to before him the said Master,
he shall take a Memorandum of the Fact so admitted or agreed to in his Book of
Minutes; and the Party so admitting or agreeing, shall subscribe such Minutes,
or the Memorandum in the presence of the Master; which Subscription shall be
binding and conclusive to the Party on whose behalf the same was so subscribed,
so as that the other side shall not be put to any further proof to make good
the same. And it is further ordered, That this Order be hung up in the several
Offices of the Masters, Six Clerks and Registers, that all Parties concerned
may take notice thereof.

Lord Chancellor and Master of the Rolls the 17th of May 1697.
forbidding all Masters Clerks of this Court, and Examiners Clerks to practice
as Solicitors.
Ordo Curiae.

Whereas there have been former Complaints (and the causes thereof have lately
appeared to be still continuing) that the Clerks belonging to some of the
Masters of this Court, and also some Examining and Copying Clerks in the
Examiners Office, have taken upon them the soliciting of Causes depending
between Party and Party in the said Court, so as no person that is a Suitor to
the Court can be safe in his Person or Estate where any such Clerks shall be
retained as Solicitors against him, which practice of theirs has, and may
hereafter tend to the perverting of Justice, to the great Scandal of the Court;
for the prevention whereof, and that the Suitor may be preserved from suffering
by the ill consequences that may happen thereby for the future, the Right
Honorable the Lord High Chancellor of England, with the advice and assistance
of the Honorable the Master of the Rolls, does hereby order, That from
henceforth no Clerk belonging to any of the Masters of this Court, nor any
Clerk belonging to either of the Examiners of this Court, shall take upon him,
either by himself, or any other person under him, the managing or soliciting
any Cause whatsoever, either already commenced, or which shall hereafter be
commenced in this Court. And if any person so related to the said Court, or
which shall hereafter be so related, shall be found to offend against this
Order, they shall not only be suspended their Employments, but for their
Contempts shall stand committed to the Prison of the Fleet; and the Masters of
this Court, as also the Examiners are to take care, that all their Clerks do
give obedience hereto. And that all persons concerned herein may have due
notice hereof, his Lordship does further order, That Copies of this Order be
sent to the Public Officers of the said Masters and Examiners of this Court.

Geo. Edwards Deputy Register.

AN Alphabetical Table of the Principal Matters.
A
Affidavits.
FIling and Registring of Affidavits before they are read, 23 Jan. 1629. 21
June 60, Page 8, 92 And no Process to be grounded upon Affidavit except it be
filed, Page 10 Affidavits to be filed and registered in convenient time, Page 94
How the Masters are to take Affidavits, Page 15 Or certify them, Page 74, 146
Affidavits to be written without Blots or Interlineations, 28 Feb. 1632. Page
18 Affidavits to be filed in due and convenient time after they are sworn,
ibid. and Page 93 Table of Fees of the Affidavit Office, vide Fees, Page 35
Answer, vide Report.
Peers to answer upon Reputation of Honor only, Page 63 Plaintiff need not
serve the Defendant with a Subpoena for a further Answer, 1676. Page 192 If the
Defendant put not in a perfect Answer within four days, then Process of
Contempt, ibid. And the party may proceed on former Pro-Process. Answer how to
be drawn, Page 121 No second Commission to Answer without special Order, ibid.
Of hearing upon Bill and Answer, Page 122 Twenty shillings Costs for amending
an Answer, and if the first Answer be certified insufficient 40 s. Page 123,
124 Of a second Answer, Page 124 So of a third, or fourth, or fifth Answer,
ibid. The Plaintiff need not serve the Defendant with a Subpoena to make a
further or better Answer, but to give a Rule to the Defendants Clerk, or a Copy
of the Order, Page 193 And if the Defendant put not in a perfect Answer in
eight days, proces^ of Contempt, Page 193 No Exception to Reports touching the
sufficiency or insufficiency of the Answers, shall be filed in the Registers
Office, unless notice given to the Clerk on the other side, Page 197
Attachments.
After Attachment with Proclamation is returned, no Commission to Answer, nor
no Plea or Demurrer without notice, Page 121 Register not to enter any
Commission, Rule or Attachment, but by Warrant of the Six Clerk, Page 54
Amendment of Letters Patents, the manner how, 16 November 1635. Page 22 How the
Master is to demean himself when an Account is referred to him, 29 October 83.
Page 201 Attachment for not appearing to a Subpoena, Register not to enter any
Commission, Rule or Attachment, but by Warrant under the Six Clerks hand, 1646.
vide Contempt.
B.
HOw Counsel to demean themselves in drawing Bills, Page 113 Of Scandalous
Bills, Page 114 Bills to be dated the same day they are brought into the
Office, ibid. No Bills to be Engrossed or Copied out of the Office, 1646. Page
55 No Bills, Answers or Pleadings to be Copied till they are duly filed, 1646.
Page 131 Bills to be filed with the Six Clerk, according to their several
dates, 16 May 59. 30 May 59. Page 83, 86 No Bills, etc. or Records to be
carried by the Under-Clerks to be Engrossed in their Chambers, Page 55 Paper
Books called, the Bills and Costs to be brought into Court, Page 80 Register of
Commissions of Bankrupts, Page 201
C.
Clerks.
UNder-Clerks to be allowed Parchment for passing Decrees, 5 June, 11 Car. 1.
Page 23 Differences between the Six Clerks and the Examiners settled, 3 March
36. Page 81 Every Six Clerk, after the end of the Term, to examine their
Titling Books by the Filing-Book, 9 June, 14 Car. 1. Page 43 Every Six Clerk to
be stinted to twelve Under-Clerks, 25 Jac. 63. Page 111, 226 Ordinances for
regulating the Under-Clerks, and augmenting their number, 20 March 88. Page
162, 226 None to have access to the Records, but the sworn Clerks, Page 228
Fine on a Six Clerk for not attending the Hearing, Page 61 Rules of Behavior
of the Six Clerks and Under-Clerks, 9 December 93. Page 160 The Oath of an
Under-Clerk, Page 161 A Six Clerk is to take an Articled Clerk for a waiting
Clerk, and not to have above two waiting Clerks each, ibid. No sworn Clerk to
have more than one Articled Clerk, ibid. The time of admitting the Under-Clerks
enlarged, 31 October 68. Page 171 Division of the business of the Six Clerks
Office, according to the Alphabet, Page 37 Repealed, Page 108
Commissions.
No Commission for examination of Witnesses, to be in or near London, 7 March
1629. not within 20 miles, 15 October 1651. Page 12 Commissioners Names to be
entered in a Book, 1646. Page 56 Upon a renewed Commission, all the Witnesses to
be examined, Page 133 No Commission ad examinand' Testes to be in London, or
within 20 miles, Page 64 Who to bear the Charges of the Commission, Page 132
Certificate, vide Orders, Masters.
The Masters not to return special Certificate to the Court, unless required by
the Court, Page 144 How Certificates and Reports of the Master are to be drawn,
Page 145 The Masters Certificate not being to ground a Decree, is positive,
Page 146
Contempts.
Process of Contempt to be made, not where the party is Resident, 14, 137, and
the precedent Process to be executed. Contempt not to be discharged without the
Sergeant at Arms his Fee be paid 4 Nov. 74. 13 July 85. 19 May, 1 Jac. 2. each
Process of Contempt to be duly served, Page 138 Upon Motion or Petition, all
Attachments in Process shall be discharged upon the Defendants payment of
Costs, and filing of his Plea, etc. ibid. The penalty of one appearing to
Interrogatories, and Departure before Examination, ibid. Of Commission to prove
the Contempt, Page 140 The Interrogatories to be included in such a Commission,
ibid. The Master in his Certificate of the Contempt to assess Costs, Page 141
Of abusing those who serve Process, Page 141, 142 After any Order for a
Sergeant at Arms, the Register shall draw up the same, and deliver it to the
Sergeant, Page 187, 206
Commitment.
The Party abusing him that serves Process, shall stand committed: So of
Contemptuous Words against the Court, Page 127
Copies.
Paper Copies to contain fifteen Lines in a Sheet, 1646. Page 53 No Bills,
Answers or Pleadings to be Copied till they are duly filed, 1646. Page 55 No
Copies to be delivered without the hand of the Six Clerk, 16 May Page 59. 127
No Records to be carried out of the Office to be Copied, ibid. 67, 84. No Copy
to be made till the Original filed, Page 67, 127 Examiner may take out
Subpoena's against such as shall be suspected to deliver undue Copies of
Depositions, Page 76
Court.
Division of Court Business according to the Alphabet, 4 Nov. 37. Car. 1. 25
Jan. 63. 1 Feb. 68. Repealed, Page 157, Usher of the Court forfeited his Place
for non-attendance, 25 May 68. Page 158
D.
Decrees, Dismissions.
A Party committed for breach of a Decree, not to be enlarged till he has
performed it, or given security, Page 143 Decree or Dismission to be signed by
the Six Clerk before it shall be presented by the Register, ibid. No Motion
shall be for the Retainer of a Bill dismissed, without a Certificate that the
Costs are paid, Page 144 No Decree, etc. to be signed by Register, without the
Six Clerks hand, Page 56 Decrees with the assistance of the Judges, 23 June,
1646. Page 48 Within one Term any Cause shall be dismissed by Decree or
Dismission, the same being delivered to the Six Clerk, 1646. Page 56 Decree
dismissed upon Motion, etc. shall be presented to the Register to be signed,
1646. Decrees and Dismissions to be brought over into the Six Clerks Office for
allowance of Parchment to inroll it, Page 24
Demurrer.
Demurrer or Plea in Disability, or Plea to the Jurisdiction of the Court, Page
117 Every Demurrer ought to express the Causes of Demurrer, Page 118 Demurrer
to be entered with the Register within eight days of the firing, ibid. Plea and
Demurrer to be put into the Paper two days before the Hearing, Page 62
Depositions.
How the Master is to pass the Exemplification of D^p^sitions, Page 144 No
Depositions to be opened or copied, till duly filed with the Six Clerk, 1646.
Page 55 Depositions to be signed before the Reading, 19 Jan. 94. Order to use
Depositions taken in another Cause Page 134 How and when Motion or Petition
shall be for the suppressing of Depositions, ibid. No Depositions to be made
use of, but such as are taken out of the proper Office and signed by the
Register, 19 Jan. 94.
E.
Exceptions.
A Fixed day to be set down for hearing Exceptions to a Masters Report, 14 May
92. Page 236 Suspended, 7 July 93. Page 237 Ten shillings Costs for every
Exception overruled, besides 40 s. Costs deposited, 12 Feb 1670. and 20 s.
Costs augmented instead of 10 s. 17 June 89. Page 175, 209, 234 Of Exceptions
to Masters Report on Account, Page 202, 203 No Exception to a Report, touching
an Answer, shall be filed, unless notice be given to the Clerk of the other
side, 20 June 75. 30 April 86. Exception to an Answer how to be drawn, and when
to be filed, Page 123 Exceptions to Masters Reports, he that files the
Exceptions to deposite 40 s. Page 147 He who will file Exceptions to a Report,
shall within eight days after procure a fixed day for the setting down such
Exceptions to be heard, and give notice, Page 236
Examination of Witnesses, vide Interrogatories.
Examination of Witnesses by new Interrogatories at any time before
publication, 7 Nov. 13. Car. 1. Page 39 The Plaintiff may take out more
Commissions than one to examine Witnesses, 27 Feb 67. Page 72 After
publication, Interrogatories in some cases may be administered to examine
Witnesses, 27 Feb. 67. Page 156 Witnesses how to be examined in Court by the
Examiners, Page 126 No new Interrogatories to be put to examine the same
Witnesses, ibid. No Witnesses to be examined in Court after the day of
publication, ibid. The Examiner not to examine any Witness to invalidate the
credit of another Witness, Page 128 The Six Clerks or Under-Clerks not to
execute any Commission ad examinand' Testes, in or near London, Page 12
Examiner may take out Subpoena's against such as deliver undue Copies of
Depositions for the examination of them upon Interrogatories, 17 May 58. Anno
Car. 1. primo, Page 4, 76 Difference between the Six Clerk and Examiner settled,
3 March 36. Page 28
F.
CLerks Fees, Page 164 Fees of the Masters of Chancery in Ordinary, Page 95
Table of Fees of the Affidavit Office for Juries in all the Courts to enquire
the Fees of the Courts, Page 44 Filing, Registring, Copying, Signing and
Certifying any Affidavit, 24 June 37. Page 35 Juries in all Courts to enquire
of the Fees of the Court, and their Oath, Anno 1638. Under-Clerks Fees
Regulated in Chancery 18 June 68. Page 160, 161, 162 Privilege Wrirs, Pauper
Writs, and Renewed Writs, to pay no Fee, 18 Nov. 68. Page 174 Act of Parliament
of 13 Car. 2. for the establishing the Fees of the Masters in Chancery in
Ordinary, Page 95
Filing.
All Clerks to enter Pleas and Demurrers after Filing, 9 July 89. Et sparsim
per totum.
H.
Hearing.
OF Hearing Causes, and speeding Remanets, 25 Nov. 36. Page 50 O^ Hearing upon
Bill and Answer, Page 122 Fine on Six Clerk for non-attending the Hearing, 21
June 50 Page 61 Pleas and Demurrers to be put into the Paper two days before
the Hearing, 17 Feb. 50. Page 63 Certificate to be brought at the Hearing, that
the Bills and Answers are duly filed, 25 June 58. Page 77 A Note of Causes for
Hearing to be set up in the Registers Office, ibid. The Clerk in Court on
either side to attend the Hearing, 18 June 86. 219 No Rehearing to be granted,
without deposning 5 l. into the hands of the Register, 12 May 86. Page 208
Motions to speed a Cause to Hearing, how to be managed, 9 July 89. Page 232 Two
days before the Hearing, the Chancellor to be attended with the Copy of the
Decree, and a Copy of the Petition for Rehearing, 23 Oct. 89. Page 233 How and
when Causes are to be set down for Hearing, Page 135 To be set down without
Fee, ibid. At the Hearing, if no Counsel appear for the Defendant, his Answer
shall be read, Page 136
I.
Vide Title Examinations.
DEeds to be Enrolled within five days after the acknowledgment, 18 June 38. To
be Enrolled within 6 Months, Six Clerks to Inroll all Warrants for Patent
Leases, 20 Aug. 62. Page 101 Writ of Injunction of Course upon a Dedimus
Potestat', 26 Nov. 49. Page 59 Interrogatories to examine Witnesses, to be
signed by Counsel, 29 April 87. Page 217 Interrogatories how far to be
extended, or not, Page 139 Injunction not to be staid, granted or dissolved
upon Petition, without notice of the other side, Page 151 Injunction, vide
Petition. Inrolment of Patents, Page 194, 195
L.
ORder, Affidavit or Certificate touching Idiots, Lunaticks, and Non Compus
Mentis, to be filed with the Clerk of the Custodies, 13 July 55. Page 70
Amendment of Letters Patents, for a mistake in the Privy Seal, and the
Inrolment and Original Bill under His Majesty's Hand, Page 22
M.
THursday to be observed for Motions, 18 June 52. Page 65 Motion to speed a
Cause to Hearing, 9 July 89. Page 232 Masters Extraordinary not to act within
eight Miles of London, 9 Oct. 86. Page 71 How to certify Affidavits, ibid.
Minutes of Decrees, and Orders to be read in open Court, 29 April 87. Page 213
Masters, vide Exceptions, Reports. The Masters not to retorn special
Certificates to the Court, unless required by the Court, Page 144 How the
Master is to satisfy the Court touching the Defendants Answer, Page 145 The
Masters Certificate, not being to ground a Decree, if positive, is to stand,
Page 146 Of Masters Extraordinary, Page 148 Orders, vide per totum, vide
Petition. Of Orders granted on Petitions, 27 May 87. Page 217 Plea of Outlawry,
when good or not, Page 119
P.
Petition.
NO Process of the Court to issue out upon Petition, till such Petition be
first filed, 26 April 47. Page 50 Injunction not to be staid, granted or
dissolved upon Petition, without notice, or Copy of it on the other side, Page
151 No Sequestrations, Dismissions, Retainers upon Dismissions, or final Orders
to be granted upon Petition, Page 151 No former Order of Court to be altered or
explained upon a Petition, or Commitment of any Person upon Contempt, to be
discharged by it, ibid. Petitions to ground Subpoena's when effectual, Page 218
Paper Books called the Bills and Costs to be brought into Court, 30 October. 58.
Page 80 Plea of Outlawry, vide Outlawry, Page 119 Plea to the Jurisdiction,
Page 117 All Pleadings, etc. to be delivered into the Six Clerk's own hand, or
his Deputy, Page 131 Plea depending, a former Suit for the same Matter, Page
120
Privilege.
Privilege Writs, and Pauper Writs to be sealed without Fee, Page 100 Clerk of
the Hanaper, though suspended from his Office, yet allowed privilege, 30 Jan.
36. Page 32 Privilege for known Clerks of the Court, and their Menial Servants
only, Page 6 Writ of Privilege, how and by whom to be allowed, Page 7
Publication.
After Witnesses examined in Court, two Rules shall be given for Publication,
and upon the Retorn of a Certificate, one Rule only, Page 132
Paupers.
No Fee to be taken during the Paupers business depending in Court, and the
penalty, Page 151 Cause of a Paupers Suit being perpetually dismissed, Page 152
The Counsel who moves for a Pauper, ought to have the Copy of the admittance
with him, Page 153 No Process of Contempt to be made at the Suit of a Pauper,
till it be signed by the Six Clerk ibid.
Patents.
Six Clerks to inroll all Warrants for Patent Leases, etc. whereby the
Patent-Leases pass the Great Seal. Page 104 Inrolments of Patents, Page 195,
211, 212 Concerning Quakers, Page 189
R.
REcords transferred over to the Rolls Chapel 8 December 49. 19 July 58. 29
June 54. 30 July 76. 9 June 86. Page 60, 69, 78, 79 Transferring Records to the
Attorney of the other side, 19 June, 14 Car. 1. Page 43 Order for safe keeping
the Records, by being duly filed, 16 Nov. 53. Page 66 Records to be delivered
to a new Register, 21 June 60. Page 91 Report upon a reference of insufficient
Answer, to be filed within one Month after the Date of such Reference, 10
December. 4 Car. 1. Page 5 Reports and Certificates made by the Master, when to
be filed, 27 October. 92. This Order suspended, 7 July 93. Page 237 Of Reports of
the Master on Account, Page 202, 203. Recognizances to be enrolled within six
Months after the acknowledgment, 22 July 74. Page 180, 41, 185, 186
S.
HOw every Subpoena is to be served, Page 115, 116 How a Subpoena ad Audiendum
Judicium is to be served, Page 1, 116 Subpoena ad rejungendum, Page 116, 125
Subpoena ad Audiendum Judicium, Page 116 No Subpoena ad Audiendum Judicium
without a Note under Six Clerk's hand, Page 53 No Subpoena to be returned
immediate, without the special Command of the Lord Chancellor, 23 June 40. Page
47 How a Subpoena for Costs is to be served, Page 116 Replication to be first
filed, before a Subpoena ad Rejungendum shall issue out, 1646. Page 54 What
Writs are to be made by the Clerks of the said Subpoena Office only, 21 Nov.
59. Page 86 Punishment of those that forge Subpoena's, 25 Jan. 63. Page 106
W.
Witnesses, vide Examination.
THe Clerk that shows a Witness, ought to have a Note of his Abode, 9 May 1
Jac. 2. Page 204 In Affidavit of material Witnesses, to examine the chiefest
Witness, and the material Points to which they are to be examined, ought to be
inserted, 26 October. 85. Page 207 How a Witness to be examined, Page 128
Writs, vide Subpoena.
Privilege Writs, Pauper Writs and Renewed Writs to be sealed without Fee, 12
Feb. 62. 18 Nov. 68. Page 100 Of what Retorn the Cursitor o make his original
Writ, Page 149
FINIS.
THE RULES AND ORDERS OF THE COURT OF EXCHEQUER.

LONDON, Printed by the Assigns of Richard and Edward Atkins Esquires, for John
Walthoe, and are to be sold at his Shop, in the Middle Temple Cloisters, School.

ORDERS and RVLES of Proceedings in the Office of His Majesty's Remembrancer of
His Court of Exchequer at Westminster, which the Right Honorable the Lord
Chief Baron, and the other Barons have thought sit at present to Ordain, and
Publish, for the better and more speedy carrying on the Business in that Office.
I. English Bills.
EVery Subpoena to Answer, Rejoin, or hear Judgment, shall be served
Personally, or left at the Defendants Dwelling House, or place of Residence
with one of that Family; or otherwise the same Writ, under Seal, shall be
showed there, to such Person of such Family, and a Ticket thereof left with
such person, containing the effect of the same Writ: And all such Tickets upon
a Subpoena to Answer, shall be written in the Exchequer hand in Parchment.

II. Filing of Bills.
EVery Bill upon a Subpoena retornable immediate, is to be filed before the
said issuing of the said Writ, and upon a Subpoena retornable on a day certain,
the Bill to be filed within two days after the day of the Retorn; and all
others on common Retorns, to be filed within four days after the last day of
such Retorn. If the Defendants do appear according to the respective Retorns of
the Writs: And if the Bill be not Exhibited accordingly, then the Defendant to
be dismissed with four Nobles Costs.

III. The day to be set down of the filing of every Bill, Plea, Demurrer,
Exception, Replication, and Rejoinder.
THe day of Exhibiting of every Bill, and the putting in of all Pleas,
Demurrers, Exceptions, Replications and Rejoinders, to be set upon the same,
and to be then signed by the Attorney that is toward the same; and likewise
the day of every Defendants appearance entered in the Book of Appearances, and
no Bill to be accepted till the same be signed by the Attorney for the
Plaintiff, and allowed by one of the Barons, except at the Suit of His
Majesty's Attorney General.

IV. Times of Appearances upon Subpoena's.
IF the Defendant do not appear on the next day after service of Process
retornable Immediate, or on the second day, on Process retornable on a day
certain, or on the fourth day of every Common Retorn; then upon Oath of due
Service an Attachment is to be awarded; and all Affidavits to be made in London
or Middlesex, and before any of the Barons, be written in Exchequer hand in
Parchment.

V. Touching Contempts.
THat after an Attachment is returned for a Contempt by English Bill, the next
Process shall be an Attachment with Proclamation, and upon the retorn thereof,
a Commission of Rebellion, and upon retorn thereof such other Proceedings as
the Court upon Motion shall direct; and that the Costs be paid by each
Defendant named in every of the said Processes, that is to say, every person in
an Attachment to pay ten shillings, Attachment 10 s.
every person in every Proclamation to pay twenty shillings, Proclamation 20 s.
every person in every Commission of Rebellion to pay two pounds thirteen
shillings and four pence, Commission of Rebellion 2 l. 13 s. 4 d.
and all Costs to be paid either by the Plaintiff or Defendant, or their
respective Attorneys in Court, before any further proceedings be had on their
behalf respectively; and that there be in all Process of Contempt in London and
Middlesex, and within fifteen Miles thereof, six days; 6 days.
and in all other Counties within sixty miles of London, ten days; 10 days.
and for all other Counties, 15 days.
fifteen days between the Test and Retorn of each Process, unless the Court
shall order Process retornable immediate: And in any Case where the Sheriff
shall retorn a Cepi Corpus upon Process of Contempt, after a Rule of four days
given to bring in the Body, and the Body not brought in, then upon a Motion, a
Messenger A Messenger.
to go and bring in such Defendant.

VI. ANSWERS. Time for Defendants to put in their Answers.
EVery Defendant shall put in his Answer within eight days after his
Appearance, and the Bill filed as aforesaid, if the Bill shall be filed in the
Term, or within two days after, in case he does not desire a Commission to
Answer, which is to be entered under his Appearance; and to be retornable the
beginning of the following Term, and no Defendant living within fifteen miles
of London, 15 Miles no Commission.
to have a Commission but by special Order of the Court; and all Defendants
living within fifty miles of London, appearing upon a Process retornable the
first Retorn of Easter or Michaelmas Terms, Defendants to answer the same Term
of the first retorn.
and desiring a Commission to answer, are to retorn such Commission by the end
of the same Term; and every Defendant taking or craving a Commission to answer,
is to Rejoin gratis, Rejoin gratis.
and join in Commission to examine Witnesses, or else the Plaintiff to have a
Commission ex part within a Week after the end of the Term; and in default of
putting in his Answer as aforesaid, an Attachment is to be awarded against him:
Attachment three weeks before Term.
And where a Commission is prayed, but not taken out within three Weeks of the
beginning of the next ensuing Term (except Trinity Term) in such case Process
of Contempt to issue retornable the first day of the said next Term.

VII. Touching Answers: No Demurrer if in Contempt.
EVery Defendant who shall not answer according to the Rule of the Court, but
desires a Commission to take his Answer, on taking forth such a Commission,
shall not put in a Demurrer or Dilatory Plea, but may put in an Answer or Plea
in bar, unless otherwise ordered by Motion in Court.

VIII. Payment of Costs upon Contempts for want of Appearances or Answers.
EVery Defendant that is in Contempt, shall pay his Costs to the Plaintiff, or
his Attorney in Court before his Appearance or Answer be accepted; and no
Defendant in Contempt shall put in a Demurrer or Dilatory Plea.

IX. Times of setting down Demurrers, Pleas, etc.
WHere the Defendant shall put in a Plea or Demurrer, the same is to be set
down by the Defendant by the Saturday sevennight following, or else the Plea
and Demurrer is to stand overruled: And in case the Plea and Demurrer do stand
overruled as aforesaid, or be over ruled at the hearing, the Defendant is
forthwith to pay to the Plaintiff, Plea over ruled 40 s.
or his Attorney in Court, forty shillings Costs, and after his Answer to
rejoin gratis, and join in Commission as aforesaid: And in case the Plea or
Demurrer be orderd to stand good, the Plaintiff to pay to the Defendant, or his
Attorney in Court, thirty shillings Costs; Good, 30 s.
and if the Demurrer be to the whole Bill, If the whole Bill, the Defendant
dismissed. If put in Answer two days, etc.
and be admitted by the Plaintiff, or allowed by the the Court, the Defendant
to stand dimissed with Costs: And if the Defendant will put i^s Answer two days
before the day appointed for the hearing of the said Plea and Demurrer, or
sooner, and give notice thereof to the Plaintiffs Attorney, he is to pay to the
Plaintiff twenty shillings Costs.

X. Pleas of Outlawry.
UPon a plea of Outlawry, in case the same be admitted by the Plaintiff, or
adjudged good, and the Outlawry after Reversed, then the Plaintiff having paid
the Costs on the Plea, New Subpoena,
may take forth a new Subpoena against the Defendant to answer the said Bill.

XI. Admitting of Pleas and Demurrers to be good.
IF the Plaintiff, or his Attorney in Court shall two days before a Plea is
appointed to be heard, or sooner, give notice to the Defendant, or his Attorney
in Court, that he will reply to the same, If reply within a week, or Defendant
dismissed, 30 s.
the said Plaintiff shall then reply thereto within a Week without Costs, or in
default thereof, the Defendant to be dismissed with thirty shillings Costs; and
if the Plaintiff or his Attorney shall two days before a Plea or Demurrer is
set down to be heard, or sooner, give notice to the Defendant, or his Attorney
in Court, that he does admit the Plea or Demurrer to be good, and shall pay to
the Defendant, or his Attorney in Court, twenty shillings Costs, then the
Defendant shall not need to attend his Plea or Demurrer.

XII. If Demurrer on Mistake.
IF the Demurrer be grounded upon some Error, Slip, or Mistake in the Bill, the
Plaintiff shall be permitted of course to amend the same, paying to the
Defendant, or his Attorney in Court, twenty shillings Costs: 20 s. Costs.
But if the Plaintiff shall not within four days, after such Demurrer, put in,
amend, or alter it, and pay the Costs, then the Demurrer shall be determined in
Count. Or determined in Court.


XIII. Pleas of Dependences of a former Suit.
IF the Defendant shall plead the dependency of a former Suit for the same
matter complained of in the Bill, and the Plaintiff shall admit of the said
Plea, that. then the Plaintiff shall forthwith pay to the Defendant, or his
Attorney in Court, 40 s. Costs.
forty shillings Costs: And if the Plaintiff shall not two days before the same
is set down to be heard, or sooner, admit the said Plea, and pay forty
shillings Costs; then the same is to be heard in Court: And if upon hearing it
shall be adjudged a good Plea, then the Plaint^ff to pay three pounds Costs. 3
l. If heard.


XIV. Exceptions.
EVery Plaintiff that shall take Exceptions to the Defendants Answer, shall put
in his Exceptions to the same within four days within the Term next after the
coming in of the Answer, and set down the same to be heard on the Saturday
sevennight following: To be heard.
in case the Defendant will put in his Answer before the time appointed for the
hearing of the same Exceptions, he is to put in the same two days, or sooner,
before the time for the hearing thereof, and he is to pay but twenty Shillings
Costs; If answer, 20 s.
and if upon hearing the Exceptions, the Defendant be ruled to Answer, the
Defendant shall forthwith pay to the Plaintiff, or his Attoney in Court, If
heard, 3 l.
three pounds Costs, and shall put in his Answer within eight days, Answer in 8
days.
unless he desire a Commission to answer; in both which Cases he is to Rejoin
gratis, and join in Commission as aforesaid. And if the Defendants Answer shall
be adjudged good, the Plaintiff shall forthwith pay to the Defendant, or his
Attorney in Court, Answer good, 40 s.
forty shillings Costs. And all Answers coming in after the setting down of
Causes, are to be taken as Answers of the succeeding Term.

XV. Second Insufficient Answer.
THat every Defendant putting in a Second Insufficient Answer, shall pay double
Costs, Double Costs.
as if the first Answer had upon hearing been adjudged insufficient. Every
Defendant putting in a third Insufficient Answer, shall in like manner pay
treble Costs: Third, treble Costs.
And every Defendant putting in a fourth Insufficient Answer, Fourth, as Court
shall order.
shall pay such further Costs, as the Court shall think fit, to the Plaintiff,
or his Attorney in Court, and shall stand committed to the Fleet, and be
examined upon Interrogatories.

XVI. Proceedings upon Process of Contempt upon Insufficient Answers.
EVery person in Contempt, for not appearing, and that shall after clear his
Contempts and appear, but shall incur any other Contempts for not answering
according to the Rules, shall pay the like Costs, and have the Process of
Contempt continued against him till there shall be a sufficient Answer put in,
as if he had not appeared: And the like Rule where persons are in Contempt for
not Answering until they have fully answered; but upon clearing his Contempt,
he is to have an allowance of what Costs he paid upon the former Contempt.

XVII. Plaintiffs dismission of the Bill before Replication.
IF a Plaintiff will dimiss his own Bill before he Reply, he shall pay forty
shillings Costs, unless the Court shall think fit upon Motion to increase the
same.

XVIII. Proceedings on the bringing to the Bar for want of Appearance or
Answers.
IF a Defendant be brought to the Bar by Habeas Corpus for not appearing, his
Appearance shall be then Recorded, and he forthwith charged with the Bill the
first time, and stand committed; and if afterward he do not answer according
to the course of the Court, being brought twice more to the Bar by Habeas
Corpus, or by Rule of Court, and charged with the Bill each time, the Bill
shall be taken pro Confesso Pro Confess.
against him.

XIX. Hearing Causes upon Bill and Answer.
IF the Plaintiff shall set down his Cause to be heard upon Bill and Answer,
and serve the Defendant to hear Judgment; and if upon hearing the Court does
not think fit to make any Decree upon Bill and Answer, and shall permit the
Plaintiff to reply, Plaintiff permitted to reply.
he shall forthwith pay to the Defendant, or his Attorney in Court, 5 l. Costs.
five pounds Costs for his unjust vexation, and Reply within eight days, Reply
in eight days.
or else the Defendant to stand dismissed with the said five pounds Costs; and
if he does Reply, the Defendant is to Rejoyn gratis, and join in Commission,
which Commission shall be taken forth to be executed the next Vacation, except
in the Vacation after Easter Term.

XX. Commissions for want of Replication, or for not proceeding after
Replication.
IF the Plaintiff does not Reply to the Defendants Answer some time the next
Term, after the Answer is put in, the Defendant may the Term following give a
Rule to be dismissed within a Week; and if the Plaintiff shall not within that
time Reply to the Defendants Answer, the Defendant shall be dismissed with five
Marks Costs; but if the Defendant does give a Rule to be dismissed for want of
a Replication, at the coming in of such Replication the Defendant is to Rejoyn
gratis, To Rejoyn gratis.
and join in Commission; and if the Plaintiff does does not the same Term, or
the Term following take forth a Commission to examine Witnesses, the Defendant
may either take forth a Commission, ex part, or else be dismissed with five
pounds Costs: If don't take Commission, Defendant dismissed with 5 l. Costs.
And in Cases where the Defendant shall give a Rule, either for not Replying to
the Defendants Answer, or for not Proceeding after Replication, if there be not
a Week in Term, the Plaintiff to have a day to show Cause till the setting down
of Causes. Time for Rule. Setting down Causes.


XXI. Examination of Witnesses.
IF the Defendant being served with a Subpoena to Rejoyn, or appearing Gratis,
to rejoyn and join in Commission, shall not deliver Commissioners Names to the
Plaintiffs Attorney by the end of that Term, and strike Names within four days
after the end of that Term, Time for Defendants to join in Commission.
the Plaintiff may take a Commission ex part.

XXII. Execution of Commissions to examine Witnesses.
WHen a Commission is taken out, if through the default of the party, having
the carriage of the same, or of his Commissioners, the same be not executed, he
shall pay unto the other party such reasonable Costs as he or his Solicitor
shall, upon Oath, make appear he was put unto by such failure, and shall renew
such Commission at his own charge, wherein the adverse party may join, and
Cross examine such Witnesses, if he think fit; but if he examine any Witnesses
of his own, then he is to pay the Half Fee of the Commission, and the adverse
party may also have a Duplicate of such Commission; and if the party taking out
of such renewed Commission, do not give notice to execute his Commission eight
days before the Retorn thereof, Commission to be eight days before retorn'd.
that then the adverse party, upon four days notice may execute his Commission,
and no second Commission to be awarded without Motion in Court.

XXIII. Renewed Commissions to be Executed.
IF at the instance of a Defendant, a Commission to examine Witnesses is
ordered to be renewed, either for a default by him, or his Commissioners, or
because he did not examine all his Witnesses by the first Commission, he shall
at his peril examine all his Witnesses by such renewed Commission, or in Court
by the Retorn thereof; and no more Commissions to issue, except it be for the
examination of Witnesses beyond the Seas, or by further order of Court: No more
Commissions, except for Witnesses beyond Sea, or order of Court.
And that no Witnesses shall be examined at the hearing of any Cause viva voce,
without special Order of this Court, made before the Hearing of the Cause.

XXIV. No Commission in London.
THat no Commission ad examinandum Testes be exhibited in London, or within ten
miles thereof, without special Order first obtained upon Affidavit made of the
Parties inability to travel, or other good matter: And that all Depositions
taken by Commission in London, or within ten miles thereof, without special
Order as aforesaid, shall stand superseded, and suppressed ipso facto, and not
allowed to be read in Evidence at the hearing of the Cause; and after
Interrogatories are exhibited of either side, neither Party shall add to, or
alter the same, without leave of the Court. No Interrogatories added without
leave of the Court.


XXV. Publication.
PUblication to pass within one Week after every Commission returned, or the
Witnesses examined in Court, if no Cause be showed to the contrary; and where a
Rule for Publication shall be given, there not being not a Week A Week.
in Term, day shall be given to show Cause to the contrary at the setting down
of Causes. Or setting down of Causes.


XXVI. Use of Depositions of Witnesses.
DEpositions of Witnesses in several Causes, which are merely Cross Causes
(that is to say) between the same Parties, and touching the same Matter, may be
used at the hearing of both Causes coming to hearing together, without any
Motion or Order in that behalf.

XXVII. Setting down of Causes in London, or within sixty Miles, in Easter or
Michaelma. Term.
NO Causes shall be put into the General Bill of Causes, to be set down to be
heard, till Publication is past, except it be by special Order of Court; and
when Publication is past, the Cause to be set down for the Term following,
except in Cases where the Parties live in London, or within sixty Miles
thereof; wherein if a Replication be filed in Trinity or Hillary Terms, and
Publication do pass the first Week of Michaelmas or Easter Terms following, If
Publication past the first Week in Term.
such Cause may be set down to be heard the last day of Causes of such
Michaelmas or Easter Terms.

XXVIII. Subpoena'. to hear Judgment.
SVbpoena's to hear Judgment shall be served in London, or within sixty miles
of the City of London, ten days London, 10 days.
before the day of hearing of the said Cause; and in more remote places,
fourteen days Remote 14 days.
before such day of hearing, except in Trinity Term, Defendant, 10 days.
and then the Defendants inhabiting in the more remote Parts, to have but ten
days notice.

XXIX. Hearings.
IF the Defendant shall be served to hear Judgment, and make Default, and has
day given him to show Cause why a Decree should not be made against him, such
Defendant, or his Counsel shall not be heard therein, till he first pay down to
the Plaintiff, or his Attorney in Court, 5 l. Costs; 5 l. Cost if the Defendant
attend not.
and in case the Defendant does attend the Hearing, being duly served, and that
appear to the Court; and if the Plaintiff does not attend, the Cause to be put
out of the Paper, and the Plaintiff to pay to the Defendant 5 l. Costs;
Plaintiff to pay 5 l. before heard.
and the Defendant may set down the Cause to be heard the next Term ad
requisitionem Defend', the Plaintiff to pay the said 5 l. Costs before his
Counsel be heard.

XXX. Rules on Hearing on Motions.
THat the Judgment pronounced on every Hearing, and the Rule given on every
Motion, shall be truly taken, and fairly written by His Majesty's Remembrancer,
Minutes.
or his Deputy, and openly read before another Cause or Motion be begun, to the
end if the same be mistaken, it may be rectified by the Court.

XXXI. Entries of Decrees and Dismissions.
ANd every Decree or Order of Dismissions made by the Court, that is not entered
some time before the last day of the next Term, Next Term.
after the pronouncing thereof, shall not be entered, but upon Motion in open
Court.

XXXII. Decrees and Orders.
EVery Order and Decree to be drawn up as short Short
as with convenience they can be, without reciting the former Orders and
Pleadings at large.

XXXIII. Bills of Review.
WHere a Bill of Review shall be brought, the Plaintiff in such Bill shall pay
the Costs taxed, or due in the former Cause, and enter into a Recognizance Pay
Costs, and enter into a Recognizance.
of such Penalty as the Court shall appoint, to perform the same, in case the
same shall be affirmed, and to pay such further Costs as this Court shall
direct, otherwise the Defendant not to be enforced to give any Answer to such
Bill, or incur any Contempts No Contempts.
for his neglect therein.

XXXIV. Proceedings upon Bills to Examine Witnesses in perpetuam rei memoriam.
WHere a Bill shall be exhibited to examine Witnesses in perpetuam rei
memoriam, and the Defendant being served with Process, does not appear, but
stands in Contempt, the Plaintiff may then upon Motion have a Commission to
examine his Witnesses de been esse; and where the Defendant shall have
appeared, he may join in Commission, if he think fit, and Cross-Examine the
Plaintiffs Witnesses, Defendant cross examined.
he striking Commissioners Names within four days after the making of the Order
for such Commission: And after the Defendant has answered such Bill, the
Plaintiff is then to Reply, Plaintiff to reply.
and re-examine such of his said Witnesses, formerly examined, as shall be then
living; and upon the retorn of the same Commission, and the Depositions thereby
taken, together with the Depositions of such of the Witnesses formerly
examined, Depositions of dead and other, etc.
as were before the Execution of such second Commission dead, are fortwith to
be published.

XXXV. Contempt in not performing Orders and Decrees.
THat no Person shall be in Contempt for not performing any Order or Decree of
the Court, until he shall be served therewith, by delivering a true Copy
thereof, and showing the Decree or Order under the Seal of the Court unto such
person, Under Seal personally, or an Oath.
and if the Party cannot be found to be personally served, upon Oath first made
thereof, and an Order of Court thereupon, the Writ of Execution to be left at
his House, Left at House, or Clerk (...) Court
or place of his last abode, or a Copy thereof with his Clerk in Court, and
that to be good Service to bring him in Contempt.

XXXVI. Times for coming in of Reports, and for filing of Exceptions to Reports.
WHere the Court upon hearing any Cause, shall refer any Matter of Account, or
other Matter to be Reported to the Court, such Report shall be made, and
delivered to the sworn Clerk concerned in the Cause, To come in 6. days.
six days before the time appointed for hearing of the Cause upon such Report,
who is forthwith to give notice to the Clerk on the other side; and if the
adverse Party will take Exceptions to the same, he shall put in such Exceptions
two days Exceptions 2 days.
at least before the hearing of the Cause.

XXXVII. Not performing Decrees.
WHere several things are to be performed by a Decree on the part of the
Defendant, and the Defendant is brought in upon Contempt for not performing
some part of that Decree, he is not to be enlarged until he shall perform that
part of the Decree that is to be presently done, and give security by
Recognizance Recognizance.
with Sureties, as the Court shall order, to perform the other part.

XXXVIII. Examination of Persons in Contempt.
WHere any person appears in Court, upon Process of Contempt, to be examined
upon Interrogatories, he is to stand committed Stand Committed.
to the Fleet, unless he acknowledge a Recognizance Recognizance.
of 100 l. or more (if the Case require it) to appear de die in diem, and not
to depart without license of the Court, and then Interrogatories shall be
exhibited for his Examination within four days after such his appearance;
Interogatories to be exhibited 4 days after appearance, or dismissed.
and in default thereof the party prosecuted shall be dismissed with Costs;
upon which Examination, if the Defendant deny the Contempt, or the same does
not clearly appear, the Prosecutor may upon Motion Examine Witnesses for proof
thereof upon notice given to the Defendant, A Commission on Motion.
or his Attorney in Court, or by Commission, for which he may name a
Commissioner, but is not to examine any Witnesses upon his part, unless he
shall satisfy the Court upon some matter of Fact necessary to be proved for
clearing the truth: In which case the Court, if there be Cause, will give leave
to him to examine Witnesses to such particular Points, so directed by the
Court; and the other side may Cross-Examine the said Witnesses.

XXXIX. Touching the same.
ANd when a Commission is taken out to prove a Contempt, the Party prosecuted
shall have a day to appear upon his said Recognizance till the retorn of the
Commission: And if the Commission be not returned within a Week, after the
retorn thereof, the Party prosecuted shall be discharged of his Contempt with
Costs, and his Recognizance vacated.

XL. Beating or Abusing the Persons serving the Process.
WHere any Oath shall be made of Misdemeanor of Beating or Abusing the Party
upon serving the Process, or Order of the Court, the Party offending shall
stand Committed upon Motion, and no Examination No Examination.
is in that Case to be admitted; and when an Affidavit shall be made by two
Persons of Scandalous and Contemptuous Words Two Persons, Contemptuous Words.
against the Court, or the Process thereof, the Party offending shall likewise
stand Committed upon Motion, without any further Examination; and a single
Affidavit Single Affidavit.
in such Case shall be sufficient to ground an Attachment, whereupon such
Person shall be brought to be examined; and if the Misdemeanor shall be
confessed, or proved against him, he shall stand Committed Stand Committed.
until he satisfy the Court touching his said Misdemeanor, and pay the
Prosecutor his Costs: But if he shall not thereof be found guity, save by the
Oath of the Party that made the Affidavit, he shall be thereof discharged, yet
without any Costs, in respect of the Oath made against him, as aforesaid.

XLI. Injunctions.
THat no Injunction be granted, or day given to show Cause why the same should
not be granted, but upon Motion in open Court, satisfying the Court with such
Matter as may induce the Court in Justice to grant the same, and where there
are Exceptions put in to an Answer, the Plaintiff may move for an Injunction
upon opening of a material Exception to the Court.

XLII. Taxing of Costs.
THat in all Cases where Costs are to be Taxed upon a Bill of Costs in the
Office of His Majesty's Remembrancer, His Majesty's Remembrancer is to Tax the
Costs, but shall not Tax the same without notice given to the Attorneys on both
sides to attend him.

XLIII. Bills of Revivor
IF a Defendant be served with Process upon a Bill of Revivor, and shall not
Answer, or desire a Commission within eight days, Revived 8 days.
the former Proceedings shall stand revived upon Motion.

XLIV. Serving of Sheriffs, or Undersheriffs with Orders.
THat where a Sheriff, or Undersheriff is ordered to perform any thing by the
Order of the Court, serving of the Sheriff, or Undersheriff with a true Copy
of such Order under the Seal Under Seal.
of the Court, and Affidavit made thereof, and Warrant thereupon from one of
the Barons, shall be a sufficient Service to bring the said Sheriff, or
Undersheriff in Contempt if he do not perform the same.

XLV. Sheriff to name Attorneys.
THat all Sheriffs shall have and assign their able and sufficient Attorney and
Deputy in this Court, the same Court setting, which shall attend this Court
from time to time, to receive and retorn the Writs and Commandments of the
same, according to the Statute in that behalf provided; and that every Sheriff
upon the entering into his Recognizance, do declare and deliver unto one of the
sworn Clerks in the Office of His Majesty's Remembrancer, the Name of such
Attorney or Deputy, so by him assigned.

XLVI. Rules to Sheriff to Retorn Process.
ANd where a Sheriff neglects to retorn any Process delivered to him, Rules may
be given the last day of the Term for to retorn such Writs by the Sealing-day,
or to be amerced 40 s. Sealing-day, or amerced 40 s.


XLVII. Paupers.
IF any Person shall petition to be admitted in Forma Pauperis, he shall bring
a Certificate, under his Counsels hand Certificate under Counsels Hand.
upon his Petition, that he has probable Cause of Suit, and make usual Oath
before he be admitted, Affidavit.
and such Counsel to be assigned for one.

XLVIII. Notes of Informations.
THat according to an Order of Court made the second day of July 1686. upon the
making out of any Process upon any Information to be exhibited in the Office of
His Majesty's Remembrancer in this Court for the Seizure Seisures.
of any Goods, there shall be a brief Note or Entry made by one of the sworn
Clerks, in a Book to be prepared for that purpose, of the Name of the Party
that seized the same, and of the Quality of the Goods seized, together with the
day of the Month when the same is Exhibited; and that upon the making out of
any Process upon personal Informations Personal Informations.
upon Penal Statutes, there shall be a brief Note or Entry made by one of the
sworn Clerks, in the said Book, of the Names of the Plaintiffs and Defendants,
together with the Day of the Month when the same is Exhibited, unto which Book
such person as is, or shall be employed on behalf of His said Majesty for the
recovering and getting in His said Majesty's Moiety, or part of such
Forfeitures, may have recourse and free liberty to inspect and peruse the same.
Majesty's Agent to inspect.


XLIX. Records of Recoveries and Fines to be perfected.
THat the Records of the Recovery of all Goods or Merchandises seized for being
prohibited or unaccustomed, and all Fines rated for the same shall be perfected
and finished by the first day of the next Term following the Term of such
Recoveries had, or Fine rated, to the end the same may be drawn down into the
Pipe.

L. Pleadings upon Personal Informations.
EVery Defendant appearing upon an Information, or Quo Warranto, except
Informations of Seizure, is to plead to the same within four days of the next
Term Plead 4 days next Term.
after his appearance to the same, or in default thereof, Judgment by Nihil
Dicit to be entered: And where a Defendant being served with Process to appear
to an Information, shall neglect to appear the same Term, and is taken upon
Process of Contempt, retornable the following Term, he shall then Plead within
four days after his appearance. Four days after appearance on Contempt.


LI. Contempts, etc.
THat after an Attachment is Returned upon any Contempt upon an Information,
the next Process shall be an Attachment with Proclamation, and upon the Retorn
thereof, a Commission of Rebellion, and then upon Motion, a Sergeant at Arms,
Same Costs as by Bill.
and the same Costs are to be paid upon Contempts on Informations, as is
directed before upon prosecution of English Bills.

LII. Joining in Demurrer.
WHen a Demurrer is filed, the Defendant shall Join in Demurrer within six
days, or else Judgment by Nihil Dicit to be entered.

LIII. Informations and other Matters of Law.
WHen a Replication is filed, the Defendant shall Rejoyn within four days, or
else Judgment by Nihil Dicit to be entered.

LIVE. Rules upon Retorns of Scire Facias.
UPon Writs of Scire Facias Returned the last day of the Term, and upon
Inquisitions then Returned, whereon Goods are seized, Rules may be given for
the Defendants to appear upon such Writs of Scire Facias, and to claim the
property of such Goods seized by the Sealing-day after each Term, and in
default thereof, Proceedings to be had in each Case respectively, as where
there are days in Term for giving such Rules.

LV. Notice of Trials.
NOtice of all Trials in London* or Middlesex to be given six days before such
Trials, and of Trials at Assizes, notice to be given within six days after the
the end of the Term.

LVI. Entering Judgment after Trials.
UPon the Retorn of every Postea, Judgment to be entered within four days upon a
Rule given, if nothing be said to the contrary, upon Trials in London and
Middlesex, and within the Term, Judgment to be entered of the same Term; and
upon Trials at the Bar, Judgment to be entered within four days after such
Trial, if there be so many days in Term; and if there be less than four days in
Term, then Judgment to be entered the last day of the Term.

LVII. Irregularities in Pleadings.
THat all differences touching Irregularities in Proceedings, or upon the Rules
of the Court, shall be determined by His Majesty's Remembrancer, or his Deputy,
upon hearing the Attorneys on both sides, who is to settle the same if he can,
and give Costs where he shall find the fault, if not, the Court to determine
the same.

LVIII.
THat His Majesty's Remembrancer or his Deputy, and the sworn Clerks in the
Office, do diligently attend in Court, and do give an Account touching any
Proceedings in Court, as they shall be required.

Some Law Books, lately Printed for J. Walthoe at his Shop in the Middle Temple
Cloisters.
1. NOw Reprinted, The Lord Cokes Reports in French, with References to all the
Ancient and Modern Books of the Law.

2. A View of the Penal Laws concerning Trade and Traffic, wherein is
Collected all the Statutes to the end of the last Session, 1697. 12mo. 3 s.

3. The Country Justice, concerning the Practice of the Justices of the Peace,
in their Sessions, and out of Sessions; gathered for the better help of such
Justices of Peace, as have not been much Conversant in the Study of the Laws of
this Realm, by Mich Dalton, Esquire; Folio, 14 s.

4. Cases Argued and Decreed in the High Court of Chancery, from the 12th year
of King Charles the Second, to the 31st. Folio, 12 s.

5. An Abridgment of all the Statutes of King William and Queen Mary, 8 vo. 4
s.

6. The Method of Pleading by Rule and President: 1. In twelve several Branches
of Abatement, and Judgments thereon. 2. In ten General Bars to the Action. 3.
Special Bars in Case, (viz.) Slander, Assumpsit, Disturbance, Misfeazance,
Negligence, Trover, Deceit, Nuisance, Rescue and Escape; with the Pleading of
Uncore Prist or Adhuc Paratus. 4. Bars in Covenant, with Averments,
Protestations, Traverses and Pleas after the last Continuance; and also many
Special Rules concerning the Bar, Replication, Rejoinder, Surrejoynder, etc.
With particular Cases, Notes and Arguments, relating to the Advantage and
Method in Pleading. Useful for the Clerks and Attorneys of the King's Bench and
Common Pleas, 8 vo. 5 s.

7. Lex Custumaria, or A Treatise of Copyhold-Estates, in respect of the Lord
and Copyholder, wherein the Nature of Customs in general, and of particular
Customs Grants and Surrenders, and their Constructions and Expositions in
reference to the thing granted or surrendered, and the Uses or Limitations of
Estates are clearly illustrated, together with the manner of Declaring and
Pleading, either generally, or as to particular Customs, with Trial and
Evidence of Custom, and of Special Verdicts, etc. 8 vo. 5.

8. Trials per Pais: Or, The Law of England concerning Juries by Nisi Prius,
etc. newly revived and much enlarged, with an Addition of Presidents and Forms
of Challenges, Demurrers upon Evidence, Bills of Exception, Pleas Puis le
Darrein Continuance, etc. The Third Edition corrected and ammended, to which is
now added a farther Treatise of Evidence, etc. 8 vo. 5 s.

9. The Practick Part of the Law; showing the Office of an Attorney, and a
Guide for Solicitors in all the Courts of Westminster, with the true manner of
their Proceedings in any Actions Real, Personal or mixed, from the Original to
the Execution: Now newly set forth by the ablest Practisers of the several
Courts, with an exact Table of the Principal Matters, 8 vo. 5 s.

10. The Law of Obligations and Conditions: wherein is contained the whole
Learning of the Law concerning Bills, Bonds, Conditions, Statutes,
Recognizances and Defeazances; as also Declarations on Special Conditions, and
the Pleadings thereon, Issues, Judgments and Executions, with many other useful
Matters, digested under their proper Titles, etc. 8 vo. 4 s. 6 d.

11. Nomo Lexicon: a Law Dictionary, interpreting such difficult and obscure
Words and Terms as are found either in our Common or Statute, Ancient or Modern
Laws, with References to the several Statutes, Records, Registers, Law Books,
etc. wherein the Words are used. The Second Edition, with the Addition of above
600 Words, by Tho. Blunt of the Inner Temple, Esquire; Folio, 10 s.

12. The Pleading and Aeguments (upon the Quo Warranto against the Charter of
London) of Mr. Finch and Sir Robert Sawyer, the King's Solicitor and Attorney
General, and Sir George Treby, the Recorder of London, and now Lord Justice of
the Common Pleas, and the late Lord Chief Justice Pollixfen, for the said City;
the whole Proceedings faithfully taken from the Records; wherein is comprised
all the Learning of Corporations, whether forfeitable, how, and for what, etc.
Folio. 6 s.

13. The Statutes at Large in Paragraphs and Sections, or Numbers, from Magna
Charta to the end of the last Session of Parliament, May 3. 1695. in the
seventh year of His Majesty King William III. in Two Volumes, 3 l.

FINIS

