A TRVE COPY OF two Letters, the first sent from the Earl of Ormond to the
Honorable Colonel Michael Jones, Commander in chief of the Parliaments
forces in Leinster: AND Governor of the City of Dublin.

With Colonel Jones his Answer, to the Earl of Ormond's said LETTERS.

DUBLIN, Printed by William Bladen, 1649. and now Reprinted.

The Lord of Ormonds Letter, to Collonell Jones.
Sir,
I Have not thus long forborne to invite you, with those under your Command, to
a submission to his Majesty's authority in me, and a Conjunction with me, in
the ways af his service, out of any the least aversion I had to you or any of
them, or out of any disesteeme I had to your Power to advance or impede the
same, but out of a fear that whilst those that have of late usurped power over
the Subjects of England, held forth the least colorable shadow of moderation
in their intentions toward the settlement of Church or State, and that in some
tolerable way with relation to Religion, the intrest of the King and Crown,
the Freedom of Parliaments, and the Liberty of the Subject, any addresses from
me proposing the withdrawing of that Party from those thus professing, ana
from whom they have received some, and expect farther support, would have been
but coldly received, and any determination thereupon deferred in hope and
expection of the fore mentioned settlement, or that if you your self (who
certainly have not wanted a foresight of the sad confusion now covering the
face of England) would have declared with me, the Lord Inchequin, and the
Protestant Army in Munster, in prevention thereof. Yet my fear was, it would
have been as difficult for you to have carried with you the maine body of the
Army under your Command (not so clear sighted as your self) as it would have
been dangerous for you and those with you, well inclined, to have attempted it
without them. But now that the Masque of hypocrisy, by which the Independent
Army has ensnared and enslaved all Estates and degrees of men, is laid aside:
Now that barefaced they evidently appear to be the subvertours of true
Religion, and the protectors and invitors not only of all false ones, but of
irreligion and athisme, now that they have barbarously and inhumainly laid
violent sacrilegious hands upon, and murdered Gods Anointed, and our King;
not as heretofore some Patricides have done, to make room for some usurper,
but in a way plainly manifesting their intentions, to change the Monarchy of
England unto Anarchy, unless their aim be first to Constitute an elective
Kingdom, and Cromwell or some such John of Leyden being elected, then by the
same force by which they have thus far compassed their end, to establish a
perfect Turkish tyranie: now that of three Estates, of King, Lord, and Commons;
whereof in all ages Parliaments have consisted: there romans only a small
number; and they dreggs and (...) of the house of Commons picked and awed by
the Army, a wicked remnant left for no other end, then yet further (if it be
possible) to delude the People* with the name of Parliament, the King being
murdered, and the Lords and the rest of the Commons being by unheard of
violence forced at several times from the house and some imprisoned: and now
that there remains no other Liberty in the Subject, but to profess
blasphemous opinions, to revile and tread under foot Majestracy, to murder
Majestrates, and oppress and undo all that are not like minded with them. Now
I say I cannot doubt, but that you, and all that are with you, or under your
command, will take this opportunity to declare and act, against so monstrous
and unparpalel'd a Rebellion, and that you and they, will cheerfully
acknowledge, and faithfully serve and obey Our gracious King, Charles the
second, undoubted Heir of his Fathers Crown and virtues: under whose right
and conduct we may by Gods assistance restore Protestant Religion to purity,
and therein settle it, Parliaments to a Freedom, good Laws to their force,
and our fellow Subjects to their just Liberty: wherein how blessed and glorious
a thing it will be, to be so considera^ly Inst^umentall as you may now make
your self; I leave to you now to consider, and though I conceive there are not
any Motives relating to Particular interests to be mentioned after these so
weighty Considerations, which are such as the World has not at any time been
furnished with, yet I hold it my part to assure you, that as there is nothing
you can reasonably propose for the safety, satisfaction, or advantage for your
self, or of any that shall adhere to you, in what I desire, that I shall not
to the uttermost of my power provide for, so there is nothing I should or would
more industriously avoid, then those necessities arising from my duty to God
and Man, that may by your rejecting this offer, force me to be a sad
instrument of shedding of English blood, which in such a case must on both
sides happen. If this overture find place with you (as I earnestly wish it
may) let me know with what possible speed you can, and (if you please) by the
bearer in what way you desire it should be drawn on to a Conclusion, for in
that, as well as in the substance you shall find all ready compliance from me
that desires to be,

Carricke the 9. of March 1648. Your affectionate friend to serve you, ORMONDE.

For Colonel Michael Jones, Governor of Dublin.
Colonel Jones, his Answer to the Lord of Ormonds said Letter.
My Lord.
YOur Lodrships of the 9 I received the 12 instant and therein have I your
Lordships Invitation to a Conjunction with your self (I suppose) as Lord
Lieutenant of Ireland, and with others, now united with the Irish, and with the
Irish themselves also. As I understand not how your Lordship should be
invested with that power pretended, So am I very well asured, that it is not in
the power of any, without the Parliament of England to give and assure pardon
to those bloody Rebels, as by the Act, to that end passed, may appear more
fully. I am also well assured, that the Parliament of England, would never
assent to such a Peace (such as is that your Lordships with the Rebels wherein
is little or no Provision made either for the Protestants or the Protestant
Religion, nor can I understand how the Protestant Religion should be settled
and Restored to it is purity by an Army of Papists, or the Protestants intrests
maintained by those very Enemies by whom they have been spoiled, and theirs
slaughtered, and very evident it is, that both the Protestants and Protestant
Religion are in that your Lordships treaty, left as in the Power of the Rebels
to be by them born down and rooted out at Pleasure.

As for that consideration by your Lordship offered of the present and late
Proceedings in England: I see not how it may be a sufficient motive to me,
(or any other in like trust, for the Parliament of England, in the service of
this Kingdom) to join with those Rebels upon any pretenses in that your
Lordships Letter mentioned.

For therein were there a manifest betraying of that trust, reposed in me, In
diserting the service and work committed to me, in joining with those I
should oppose, and in opposing whom I am obliged to serve.

Neither conceive I it any part of my work and care to take notice of any
whatsoever proceedings of State foreign to my charge and trust here,
esp^cially they being found hereunto apparently destructive.

Most certain it is (and former ages have approoved it) that the intermedling
of Governors and Parties in this Kingdom with sideings and Parties in
England, has been the very betraying of this Kingdom to the Irish, whiles the
British forces here had been thereupon called off and the place therein laid
open, and (as it were) given up to the common Enemy.

It is what your Lordship might have observed in your former Treaty with the
Rebels, that upon your Lordships thereupon withdrawing and sending hence into
England, the most considerable part of the English Army, then commanded by you,
thereby was the remaineing British party, not long after, overpowered, and
your quarters by the Irish over run to the gates of Dublin, your self also
reduced to that low condition as to be beseiged in this very City (the
Metropolis and Principal Citadell of the Kingdom) and by those very Rebels
who till then, never could stand before you. And what the end has been of
that party also, so sent by your Lordship into England (although the flower and
strength of the English Army here, both for Officers and Soldiers) has been
very observable.

And how much the Dangers are at present (more then in former ages) of
hazarding the English intrest in this Kingdom by sending any parties hence into
any other Kingdom, upon any pretenses whatsoever is very apparent, as in the
generality of their Rebellion, now more then formerly, so considering your
Lordships present Conclusions with, and Confessions to the Rebels, wherein,
they are allowed the continued possession of all the Cities Forts, and places
of strength, whereof they stood possessed at the time of their Treaty with your
Lordship, and that they are to have a standing Force of fiveteen thousand
Foot, and two thousand five hundred Horse (If I well remember it) all of their
own party, Officers, and Soldiers, and they (with the whole Kingdom) to be
regulated by a Major party of Irish trustees chosen by the Rebels themselves,
as persons for their intrests and ends to be by them confided in, without whom
nothing is to be acted. And herein, I cannot but mind your Lordship, of what
has been sometimes by your self delivered, as your sense in this Particular,
that the English intrest in Ireland must be preserved by the English and not by
Irish; and upon that ground (if I be not deceived) did your Lordship then
Capitulate, with the Parliament of England, from which clear Principle, I am
sorry to see your Lordship now receding.

As to that by your Lordship menaced to us here of blood and force, if
discenting from those your Lordships ways and designs.

For my Particular I shall ( my Lord) much rather choose to suffer in so doing
(for therein shall I do what is becoming and answerable to my Trust) t^e^ to
purchase to my self, in the contrary, the ignominious brand of Perfidy, by any
Alurements of whatsoever advantages offered me.

But very confident I am, that the same divine power which has followed me in
this work, will still follow me, and in that Trust doubt I nothing of thus
giving your Lordship, plainly, this my Resolution in that Particular. So I
remain

My Lord, Dublin March 14. 1648. Your Lordships humble Servant Signed, Mic.
Jones.

For the Lord of Ormond these.
The Lord of Ormondes Letter to Collonell Michael Jones. March the 27. 1649.
Sir,
I Should not trouble you nor yet my self with a Reply to your Letter of the
14 of March answering mine of the ninth, but that I am unwilling to suffer you
to remain in the mistakings you seem to have taken up of my proceedings, or
that any other to whom your said Letter may be communicated should be thereby
misled, and if in what I have to say you find your duty pointed at even in
relation to the trusts reposed in you, you will have the less reason to
believe it impertinent if you reflect upon some parts of your Letter which
mind me of mine. And if you further consider that I have at least as much
title to give such adm^nitions in this Kingdom as you can justly pretend unto,
for it was (as you say you suppose) as Lord Lieutenant of Ireland that I
invited you to a Submission to that his late and his now Majesty's authority
placed in me, and to a conjunction with others both English and Irish that
have Submitted thereunto, and I heartily wish there were no other Arguments
necessary to your satisfaction then such as might prove this Authority to be
derived to me by the same Power that in all ages since the Conquest, has and
only can dispose of the Government of this Kingdom, so that whatsoever your
understanding of the matter may be, you must look for imposters, and bare
pretended Authorities nearer home, whither what you next say and affirm, and
are so very well assured of (namely that it is not in the power of any to give
and assure pardon to those bloody Rebels) be an inference out of your former
mistake, or grounded on the Act you mention, or both, is not much material;
for as I am sufficiently able to justify the Authority I had to treat and
conclude the Peace, so if it were granted that by the said Act his late
Majesty had limited his power of Pardoning till after conviction to the
consent of his two houses of Parliament then sitting by virtue of his writts
and summons, And this I believe (though I be not well read in the Statutes) to
be the uttermost extent of that Act in this Particular, will it therefore follow
that by no means this power can ever revert to the proper fountain whence
(even that act shows) it was, and must be derived, and if by none other
means; yet will it not revert by the dissolution of that Parliament; or if not
by an ordinary dissolution of it, yet by so horrible and execrable dismembring
as that mentioned in my former Letter; is not that Parliament torn asunder and
the power reverted, or can it be thought that the intent of that act (passed
by the free vote of the Lords and Commons and completed by the Royal ^ssent)
was, that a despicable number of the Commons, become slaves or Parazites to a
Rebellious Army, should assume the name or power of Parliament, declare Regal
power unnecessary, nay prejudicial to the Commonwealth, abolish ^oth it and
the House of Peers for ever, and erect in the room of this demolished
ancient, and glorious Fabric, a mishappen Republique, wherein to settle
themselves Revenues and Bloody Governors, and get the Power of pardoning and
making use of his Subjects (evidently invested in and reverted to the king)
against so great unheard of and horrid innovations must not be exercised
without their leave, nor they punished for the Highest Treasons but by their
own consents, and if these men are meant by you under the name of the
Parliament of England, you may be well assured as you say you are, they would
never consent to this or any other Peace thwarting their evil ends, one of the
most monstrous, whereof declaredly is never to have more Parliament to deliver
Judgment in this or any other matter; for the title Bloody Rebels which you
appropriate to those with whom this Peace is concluded. You may know that by an
Article of the Peace all such are excluded from pardon, and therefore I
conceive it is that one father Reyly an active Instrument in crimes of that
nature, is as I here treating for conditions for himself and others, with some
of a like dye, not that you or any with you are hereby any further intended
then as you or they shall abet or adhere to those in England that undeniably
are so. And where you say there is in this Peace little or no provision made
either for the Protestants, or Protestant Religion, you are to understand with
whom the Treaty was, namely with those of another Religion, from whom
propositions for Protestants or Protestant Religion was not to be expected,
nor was it necessary to obtain their consents to any such provision, the
established Laws providing for both, and no part o^ those Laws being by the
Peace to be repealed, they stand in force for their advantage and security;
true it is that the severity of certain Laws against Roman Catholics for the
Exercise of their Religion is to be porvided against by Act of Parliament, but
without prejudice to Protestant Religion, or Protestants whose interests as
fully saved unto them.

Your not understanding how Protestant Religion should be settled and restored
^o its purity by an Army of Papists makes it not impossible, nor I hope
improbable but that that happy work may be effected by the blessing of God
under the conduct of his Majesty that now is, whose Authority a Protestant Army
has acknowledged, and will faithfully obey; and to a conjuction with these
(not excluding any that have good and loyal Affections) you were invited
however you think fit for this work to make me intend only an Army of
Papists, And where you say it is evident that both Protestants and Prostestants
Religion are in that treaty left as in the Power of the Rebels to be by them
borne down and rooted out at pleasure, I must take leave to affirm that the
contrary is indeed very evident, as will appear when the particular powers
left in the Irish afterward mentioned by you as arguments for that assertion
come to be considered of, you are pleased still to mistake the invitation,
which was not as you say to join with Rebels but to forsake the worst of
those that ever deserved that title even in relation to the Parliament of
England, whether taken in the true definition of it when the King was
acknoledged head of that body, or when the two Houses without the King were so
called, which how they have been served by their Servants the Independent Army
has been already sufficietnly spoken of, to manifest that to serve or adheare
to those that have acted such mischeifes by the impulsion or countenance of
that Army is the fowlest breach of trust imaginable, and I am very sorry you so
far resolve your self obleiged to serve them as to think it no part of your
work to endeavor to preserve or restore those by whom you were entrusted, and
that it is not worth your notice or care what destruction falls upon them, but
take it to be a matter Foreign to your charge and trust. I shall readily
acknowledge that the div^sions in England have in former ages been by the
means you mention prejudicial to the English interest in this kingdom, but
you must also acknowledge that the Usurper or wrong Doer in England, was only
guilty of that prejudice; unless you will impose upon all that have Governed
or shall Govern in this Kingdom, a necessity of turning Trust-breakers and
Traitors, when, and as often as it has pleased or shall please God to give
success to any Rebellion in England: Nor should this in my judgment, be a
very pleasing profession to those you are (as you say) obliged ^o serve, since
it amounts to no more then that, whilst they prosper, you will so think and no
longer; which is all I shall say to your Observations, of the consequences of
my sending part of his late Majesty's Army to serve him in England, according
to his Command; which Army came over under his Commission. Now to those
Concessions, which you say are so dangerous to the Protestant and English
Interest in this Kingdom: I shall first answer, that admitting them to be, as
you have mistaken, and set them down, the danger is much more increased by the
division of the English and Protestants; if this be granted, as in reason it
ought to be; the Question then will be who is in fault, that there is not a
conjunction, and in that sense by what you have written, I conceive you will
not believe me a competent Judge, and that for the same reason, I am confident
you are not, it must be left to God, who I am sure is.

Your mistakes in the Concession^ are these: First, you say, they are allowed
the continued possession of all the Cities, Forts, and Places of Strength,
whereof they stood possessed at the time of the Treaty; but you give no limit
to the time they are to continue this Possession, as the Article does; namely,
till settlement by Parliament, nor do you mention that those Places are to be
commanded, ruled, and Governed in Chief, by his Majesty's Chief Governor or
Governors for the time being, as by that Article they are.

Next you say, that they are to have a standing Force of fifteen thousand Foot,
and two thousand five hundred Horse, all of their Party: in the number you are
not mistaken, but you are when you say that they are all to be of their Party,
if you intend by Rebels the late Confederates, for if they be Roman Cotholikes,
that Article is fulfilled, and of them there are many that were not of the
Confederates, but much more mistaken you are, when you affirm that those Forces
and the whole Kingdom, are to be regulated by a major Party of Trustees of the
Irish, there being nothing in their power through the whole Articles, extending
either to the regulating of an Army, or any piece of one, much less of the
whole Kingdom: and even in those powers derived to them by the Articles, which
for the most part are in matters of Levies and Taxes upon their own freehold:
there is a negative power left to the chief Governor for the time being, for
the more equal execution thereof, in case any Protestant, or Protestants
Estate happen to be therein concerned.

I shall not deny (though I do not remember it) but I may have said, that the
English Interest in Ireland, must be preserved by the English, for I avow it is
still my opinon: But then certainly I understood, of no English Interest
separate, from, or Independent of the King and Crown of England; much less
such an English Interest as is now set up; and which you say, you are obliged
to serve, exclusive both to King, Crown and Parliament; nor did I understand my
self, and many others less English, or less concerned in the English
Interest, because of our long continuance in this Kingdom; nor yet was it
exclusive to all of Irish descent, many of whom do now, and have in all Ages
well deserved of the Crown of England.

I shall not deny neither, but that being pressed principally by the Party, for
whom the mentioned Father Reyley is said to be now Treating at Dublin, I made
choice to capitulate with you, and others employed by the two Houses of
Parliament to that end, and into their hands to commit the keeping of the
places, I could no longer hold, then to give them up: or suffer them to be
taken by an Army instigated by a forraigner to the danger of the whole Kingdom,
and the destruction of those I had so long protected; and you may remember the
expressions you were then pleased to make in detestation of any violence to the
Kings person, or the just rights of his Crown, from which loyal expression, I
am sorry to see you now recede.

If you please to look again upon that part of my Letter, which you interpret,
a menace of blood and force, you will retract that part of yours that charges
me with it, or else must give me leave to think you were willing to take a
slender occasion, to manifest your resolution to some other then to me, who am
as ready to submit to Gods good pleasure, in the event of my undertakings, as
you are positive, that he will follow you in your work. I remain

Your Servant ORMOND
Thurles this 27th of March 1649
For Colonel Michael Jones, These
Colonel Michael Jones his return to the Lord of Ormonds Letter of the 27. of
March, 1649.
My Lord,
YOur Lordships of the 27. of March I received this 29th. this being in reply
to mine of the 14. of March, answering your Lordships former of the ninth.

The rectifying of mistakes in me concerning your Lordships proceedings, and
the satisfying of others, that they be not by that my Letter misled, are by
your Lordship declared the reasons moving you to this Reply.

Notwithstanding all which, I do (for my part) profess my self therewithal
nothing satisfied, nor my judgment thereby any way convinced, so, as I should
abate any thing in my former conceptions of your Lordships ways and designs,
from apprehending them to be, to the Protestants here, to the Protestant
Religion, and to the very English Interest in this Kingdom, pernicious
altogether, and apparently destructive, nor can I think any other (not
interessed in those your Lordships ways, or not carried on and biased with
particular respects) will, on view of this your Lordship now offered, pass any
other judgment upon those your proceedings. And herein am I now confirmed more
then formerly, being by that your Lordships Reply called on, and enforced to
look into your Lordships late transactions with the Rebels further, and more
then otherwise, I should have done.

As for the Protestant Religion, I cannot but very much wonder to find your
Lordship still asserting, the possibility and probability of its being by you
restored to its purity, and settled by that Army of Papists.

To pass what may otherwise show it, at least, improbable: Let it be here
considered, that now we look on those Armies of Papists with you, as on them
who have styled themselves Confederates in respect of that Association, and of
those Oaths wherein they stand bound to the setting up of Romish Religion, and
that to the greatest advantage.

And how inconsistent that their solemn Profession is with their restoring the
Protestant Religion to its purity, and for settling it, I leave it to all not
Popishly affected. This I am sure of, That neither before your Lordships late
Treaty with the Rebels, nor since, have their actions given us the least hope
of probability (if in that power by your Lordship still left in them, there be
not a very impossibility) of that by your Lordship herein so confidently
affirmed.

But you say, Yours is not an Army of Papists, pointing to those of the
Protestants in Munster drawn, or rather forced into that Confederacy, with your
self, and the Rebels.

That remnant of Protestants (I speak it plainly, betrayed into the hands of
their mortal enemies, the Enemies of both their Religion and Nation;) that
remnant (I say) is all your Lordship has for countenancing that your
assertion. And what can that handful do, (although of good affections) for
enforcing the predominant, and so the contrary confederate party, to a
restoring and settling Protestant Religion to its purity? If it be not
impossible, sure I am it is improbable. I said, that for the Protestants there
is little or no provision, in that your Lordships peace with the Rebels.

Herein your Lordship now tells me, That it was not necessary the Protestants
should be named in that Treaty, the established Laws of the Kingdom, (no part
of which is to be in those Articles repealed) saving to them their Interests.

Thereunto shall I add what of your Lordships own words are thereunto
preceding, which are these, You are to understand with whom the Treaty was,
namely with those of another Religion, from whom Propositions for Protestants
or Protestant Religion was not to be expected; wherein is enough (I think) to
show a necessity of some express provisions to be made for the Protestants and
Protestant Religion, and that they should not be so cast upon tacit
implications, having to deal with such from whom nothing was to be expected
for good, either to them, or their Religion, (as you so confess.) Herein is
also appearing the possibility and probability of restoring and settling the
Protestant Religion by an Army of Papists.

As for the not repealed Laws by your Lordship mentioned, whereunto the
Protestants are in that case by your Lordship left and referred, I desire
herein to be satisfied concerning the Protestants remedy for satisfaction from
those by whom they have been most unjustly dispoiled and destroyed in their
whole fortunes; are they herein referred to the established laws not repealed
in that your Lordships peace? But those Laws (although not repealed) are by
your Lordship as to this particular, all dashed out at once, in that your 18.
Article, wherein is found an Act of Oblivion, passing over all whatsoever was
done by the Rebels in that kind, and much more, from 23. of October, 1641. And
for the Protestants Estates of land and freehold, I mean in the Plantation of
the Kingdom, since 1. Iacobi, are not all of them shaken in your Lordships 7.
15, and 16. Articles? Thus indeed are the Protestants in your Lordships Treaty
provided for, and (your Lordship thinks) sufficiently.

You say (my Lord) 'I am mistaken in saying that the continued possesion of all
the Cities, Forts, and places of strength, whereof the Rebels stood possessed
at the time of the Treaty, is allowed them in that Treaty.

Under favor (my Lord) I am not therein mistaken, the 29. Article shows it;
it is true indeed, that thereunto is that limitation given by Your Lordship now
mentioned, this to continue till settlement by Parliament: But is not a
continuance till settlement by Parliament a continuance? And of how long a
continuance that may be, I believe Your Lordship cannot at present easily
resolve, nor (by any thing yet appearing) is Your Lordship cert^ine when that
expected Parliament and settlementshall be (if ever it be) whether the Rebels
so possessed of so considerable a part of the Kingdom, and of the standing
power of a confiding Army of fifteen thousand Foot, and two thousand five
hundred Horse, will be willing to to cast off what may assure unto them, that
which is to be so settled to them by that Parliament.

That very Parliament also (by them and in the Articles termed a free
Parliament) is none other then what shall be made up wholly (or more then the
most part) of their own (for more then five parts of six of the Corporations
are wholly theirs;) a fit Parliament for settling the Protestant Religion and
the Protestants Interests.

I have not herein mentioned (your Lordship adds) that those Forts, etc. ars
to be commanded, ruled, and governed in Chief, by his Majesty's chie^e
Governor for the time being, as by that Article they are.

That in the Article concerning this, is in substance, That the said Cities,
Garrisons, Towns, Forts, and Castles, now in the Quarters of the Roman
Catholics are to be commanded by such as shall be approved by the Lord Dillon
Costillagh etc. (naming the Rebels twelve Irish Trustees) or by any seven of
them, the said persons so by them approved, being to be therein authorized by
the Lord Lieutenant, wherein appears that in those Trustees is the approving
power, without whom your Lordship can act nothing as to the persons entrusted
with those Commands. And it is presumed that the persons so approved by those
Trustees, are likely to be such as they confide in so, as no^ to be commanded,
ruled, or governed (I say not by Your Lordship, whom they look on with more
then ordinary respects) but by any other, to the prejudice of their designs;
therefore was not that omission in me (I conceive) so great, as to dese^ve your
Lordships pains in so observing it, or that your Trumpet should post so, and
so far, to mind me of it.

It was said of the Rebels standing Force of fifteen thousand Foot, and 3500.
Horse, That it was to be all of their own party, Officers and Soldiers, and
they with the whole Kingdom to be regulated by a major party of Irish Trustees.

Herein you say, I am not mistaken in the number (to use your Lordships own
words) but when you say they are all of their own party, if you intend by the
Rebels, the late Confederates, for if they be Roman Catholics, that Article is
fulfilled, and of them there are many that were not of the Confederates. So
your Lordship.

In which difference by your Lo: given me, between the Roman Catholics
Confederates (with whom your Lo. so Treated) and the Roman Catholics. I find
my self allowed the liberty of terming the Confederate Roman Catholic
Rebels but not all that are Roman Catholics. I will not say that all that are
of the one, are also of the other. I shall say they are not, if (as not
actually declaring in the Rebellion so) they do not any way abett, aid, or
countenance, those in rebellion so; for such in the eye of the law are looked
on, as in the same guilt equally involved. But how many there be of such Roman
Catholics, I know not, I am certain they are not of that number as to make up
an Army of fifteen thousand foot and two thousand five hundred horse (which
was that intended) and most sure I am that such Roman Catholics would not be
those to be so confided in.

But much more are you mistaken, (so it follows in that your Lordships
Reply) when you affirm, that those forces and the whole Kingdom are to be
Regulated by a Major party of Trustees of the Irish, there being nothing in
their power, through the whole Articles extending either to the Regulating of
an Army or any piece of one, much less of the whole Kingdom. And even in
those powers derived to them by the Articles (which for the most part, are in
the matters of leav^es and taxes upon their ownfreeholds) there is a negative
power left to the Chief Governor for the time being.

Herein I appeal to those your Lordships Articles wherein the power of the
said Trustees appears to be in some things more then in leavies, and Taxes. And
further then what concerns that mentioned army, and that with an negative power
in them also ballancing if not over ballanci^g that in your Lordship.

The power of the Irish Trustees is found to be in Causes Maritine ( Article
24) in naming and approving those, Commanding t^eir Towns, Forts, etc Article
29) to dismiss, or add at their pleasure, to the standing Army of 15000 foot
and 2500 horse, ( Article 9) To approve of those who shall be appointed
Ju^tices of the Peace ( Article 28) To name and approve of persons for the
Judic^tories ( Article 33) To dispose of Estates of all not adhering to their
party ( Article 27) To Leavy money for buying Arms etc. and for entertaining of
Friggots ( ibid) To lay up such arms and ammunition in such Magazeens, etc. (
ibid) To raise many etc. ( ibid) And not to raise money (as your Lo: has it)
on their own freholds only bu^ therein to tax the persons or Estates of any
in the Kingdom (Article 27) So as it is evident that the influence of their
power is not upon the Army alone, but even upon the Kingdom also. As for your
Lordships pretended negative power it is certainly as nothing, while it is not
in your power to act in those things, without them, more then your Lordship
conceives them of no power without you, There being a negative power in both,
and a joint conccu^rence necessary. And if the dispute should at any time be of
the validity of either, their will be found with most advantage being backed up,
and supported with that power and force which will appear theirs wholly. You
except of my tearming the Rebels, bloody Rebels, I wish heartily I had been
mistaken, And very heartily, that it had not been (as now it is) your Lordships
misfortune to plead for them, in that cause of blood, that innocent blood whose
cry, and justice, will undoubtedly pursue to destruction* those murderers, and
their abetters, whosoever they were, or shall be.

Your Lordship tells us, that by an article of that peace, all such are
excluded from pardon: But how (my Lord) the 18 Article shows it in the manner
and Circumstances. As, that there shall be first a singling out, and
particularizing of certain actions there termed barbarous and inhumaine, by
whom? by the Lord Lieutenant, and by the Lord viscount Dillon of Costilah, the
L. Viscount Muskery, the Lord Barron of Athenry, Alexander Mac Donell, Sir
Lucas Dillon, Sir Nicholas Plunket, Sir Richard Barnwall, Ieffrey Brown,
Donough O Callaghan, Tirlagh O Neil, Miles Reily, and Gerrald Fennel, or any
seven or more of them. I know not whether all these are, (I am sure some of
them are) persons chargeable with the same barbarous and inhumaine crimes;
neither know I but that all of them are nearly interessed in such as may be so
charged, But see the trial of these Malefactors* They are not to receive
justice in the ordinary course of Law in such Cases provided; but left they are
to be tried, and adjudged by such indifferent Commissioners as shall be agreed
upon by the Lord Lieutenant, and the said Lord Dillon etc. or any seven or
more of them, neither is this all, for the power also of those very
Comissioners so chosen, is to continue only for two years beginning six
months after the date of the said Articles: dated January 17. 1648. See what
mock Justice is here, And whether in this kind of inquisition for blood, your
Lordship has sufficiently provided for purging the land of that blood, and for
washing off from those Rebels, that their lasting blot of Bloody Rebels. You
tell me (my Lord) of him you call father Reyley (by you said) to be here,
Treating with me: As here he is not, so was his Treating with me, concerning
release of Prisoners; nor am I enabled (neither desire I to be enabled) with
such power of Treating, as is by your Lordship intended; neither conceive I
him, or those of his Party such, as are to be deluded with a Treaty, where is
not power to grant, no not to receive what should be propounded. And if any
thing should have been so by him propounded, it could be no more interpreted a
Treaty, then may this with your Lordship, yet is he your Lordship now
mentions the same, who was with others of that tribe, sometimes by your
Lordship employed for Treating with the Rebels, in the beginning of this
Rebellion: and (if reports fail not) with whom your Lordship would now close,
if you knew how: but that were (it seems) in me a sin, which in your Lordship
were none, Circumstances considered. As for that power remaining in me (which
your Lordship is pleased to question) it is what is derived from the Parliament
of England, in that Act wherein the management of the War of Ireland against
the Rebels, is to all intents and purposes left solely in the Parliament
without further Concurrence. The forces here being to be raised, maintained,
disposed and ordered by the Parliament, as is in the said Act appearing. In
which Act is also provided against any pardon to the said Rebels before
attainder (surely intending much less after) wherein the Parliament of England
is not concurring; I had therefore sufficient grounds for questioning your
Lordships assumed power, both in concluding that your peace with those Rebels
contrary to the said Act, and in what else your Lordship pretends of power
without the Parliament, over the Parliament forces in that Province of
Mounster, or elsewhere in this Kingdom. And how Trivial (give me leave to say
it) is that your Lordships discourse, of the now reverting of that power,
seeing that Act is still in being. Your Lo: again presses the late proceedings
in England, those particularly against the Person of the late King: loath I
was, in my last, to mind your Lo: of what then I might, yet did not but now
must, being by your Lo: thereunto thus enforced, that your Lordship may do
well to lay your hand upon your own heart, and examine there, whether you may
not there find yourself (I say your self,) a principal occasioning that the
Kings suffering. For it is evident, that Your Lordship appearing here, as you
had done, and as you now do, ( the Treaty at Carisbrooke then in being, between
the King and People, and very hopeful proceeding) you gave in your self and
in your actions, occasion to the Kingdom of England to suspect the sinceirty
of that Treaty, which has since occasionally produced what has thereupon
followed. Yet whatsoever that has been, or whatsoever the Changes have been
since as thereupon ensuing, (which your Lordship offers me as an an argument
for changing me in my ways,) I therein continue to express my self (as
formerly I have done) that all those things, (being things without me) are
matters foreign to my work and Trust here. For unto my standing here (where I
am placed) am I principally bound, and for any evils following the neglect of
this my charge, am I accomptable, not for what is elsewhere, and out of my
charge, of what consequence or concernment soever.

Herein therefore declare I my self clearly, that were there neither King nor
Parliament, yet should I stand firm to my principles, and to this my trust,
against those Bloody Rebels, to the best of my power, for preserving the
English interest in Ireland, which is in those your Lo. proceedings plainly
hazarded. In the conclusion of that your Lo: Reply your Lo: Retracts that in
your former of menacing us here, with blood and force, if dissenting from you:
You now say, no such thing is found in that your Letter.

I shall not much trouble my self in a thing I value not, were it so or not; I
shall only refer you therein to your Lordships own words: 'There is nothing
(you say) I should more industriously avoid then those necessities arising from
my duty to God and Man, that may by your rejecting this offer, force me to be a
sad instrument of shedding English blood, which in such case must on both sides
happen. The construction I now leave to your self; this only, on this review
which you give me of it, I cannot but offer to your Lordships very serious
consideration, That as you shall answer it to God, you be tender of that
English blood, there now in your disposing and power, that in the offering up
those principally to the slaughter (a pleasing sacrifice to the Irish Rebels)
you be not after found the betrayer of that part of the Kingdom (a considerable
part of it) to the Common Enemy. And that your Lordship would also seriously
consider, what it shall be, to be that Instrument (as your Lordship says you
must be) of shedding English blood on both sides, so engaging upon each other
those by whom the English Intrest is to be here preserved. I should be sorry to
see your Lo: (of the same blood) to be therein but an instrument, but most of
all, a principal, as in this and such your Lordships proceedings, you must be
necessarily. To that which has passed me in discourse with your Lo: (whereof
you mind me) concerning violence to the Kings Person, It was occasioned on his
removing from Holmby by some of the Army, against whom your Lordship expressing
your self in some bitterness, I said, that no evil or violence, was therein
by the Army intended to his person, but that the securing him from evil was
that principally respected: what since has followed, is what I assure my self
you Lordships proceedings here have very much occasioned. From which discourse,
your Lordship cannot conclude me (as you do) receding from my principles.

All things thus considered, and seeing how little is in that your Lordships
Reply more then in your former, either as to matter or satisfaction (give me
leave to give your Lordship this my sense clearly) I have cause to doubt, your
sending this your Trumpet, (on this slight errand) to be intended for other
ends rather. I therefore desire your Lordship would be pleased for the future,
not in this kind, to trouble your self or me any further; this being a
dispute to be decided by the Sword, not by the Pen. And that your Lordship
would be pleased thus to understand me once for all; That I shall never (by
Gods grace) recede from my just principles, which hitherto I have never done,
howsoever your Lordship is pleased therein to charge me over deeply, and (I
must needs say it) very unjustly. Nor shall I ever seek my self or my private
advantage to the deserting of my trust (as have some others) a Crime not to be
after so easily expiated by a slender or lean Manifest. So I remain,

Dublin, March 31 1649 My Lord, Your Lordships humble Servant Signed Mic: Jones

For the Lord of Ormond, These.
FINIS.

