HISTORICAL MEMOIRES ON THE REIGNS OF QUEEN ELIZABETH, AND KING JAMES.

LONDON: Printed by I. Grismond, and are to be sold by T. Robinson Bookseller
in Oxon. 1658.

THE EPISTLE.
My dear Lucilius,
I Do here leave to your better Education another Daughter of my Brain, that
may not unpossibly pass with the less Scandal, because chaste from any desire
after new and forbidden Discoveries, or of disturbing that huge Trade Antiquity
and Custom drive; the first amongst Scholars, who think it a sufficient excuse
in the justification of a stunted Knowledge, to maintain an impossibility of
transcending the Abilities of former Ages, yet cannot gainsay a visible
improvement in their own; which happily would be greater, were Learning left free
to every ones sense, and not confined to Patterns and old Forms, harder many
times to be imitated or made use of, than new ones found, which being our own,
would appear more natural and adapted to the present understandings, in many
things strangers to the Usances of the Ancients: whereas the second serves as
an universal Chain, by which the generality are led to approve or dislike the
Words, Actions and Gessures of others. Whose judgments, as I have long since
not much valued, so have I a little wondered at Age, to find it so tetchy, when
Younger in years lay any claim to Knowledge: Since the goodness of the Eye, and
advantage of Place, and not a long poring, discovers the Prospect; more of
London being surveyable in a minute from Paul's Steeple, than can be seen in an
age out of Cheapside: There remaining nothing in this world Prescription has a
weaker title to than Wisdom, the legitimate Daughter Experience brings forth
to an able and active Understanding. For though all things are found to own, in
process of time, a public vicissitude, yet for the most part it is too flow
and cunningly carried, to be discerned at any distance (especially in relation
to the present) which way it turns. The ignorant Traveller may see by the
Dial, the Time is in a declension; but, without entering the Church or Court,
shall be never the wiser as to the knowledge of the true and proper Causer of
the Motion. For my self, I confess I am more highly bound to Letters, than any
acquired advantage or natural endowment self-partiality or others indulgence
has hitherto been able to estate me in. Now if some, owners of such parts as I
am conscious of the want of, did prosecute the like study, having a purse and
will to purchase a sight of the Intelligence, Negotiations, Conferences and
Transactions of all those that have resided in Embassy with our Princes, they
might no question be able to compose a more exact Chronicle than this Nation
ever saw of her own: and for Elegancy, it would, like honey, drop out of the
same leaves he gathered his Information from; Epistles being the quintessence
of the Writers judgment, as they are undoubtedly the Elixir of his Rhetoric.
And he that desires a more exemplary manifestation of this infallible (though
for ought I ever observed, seldom practiced) Truth, may find it in that
learned Italian's History of the Council of Trent; a Piece that challenges all
the veneration our partial Modern Readers do or can offer at the Shrines of
Antiqity; a folly sure not so conversant in the world before Printing,
otherwise the most part of New Books from time to time had still been buried in
their Swadling-clouts for want of Transcription, which few or none would now
foul their fingers ends about, as not esteeming it worth the labor, out of
floth or contempt: So far, as the Stationers mere zeal to Gain, rather than any
propensity to the advancement of Learning, did for a while keep Bacon,
Rawleigh, and diverse incomparable Spirits more, from perishing at the bottom
of Oblivion; Good Books (anciently written in the Bark of Trees, and now)
running, in their Progress, so exactly the fate of Acorns that if their chance
be to withstand the Swinish Contamination of their own Age, and trampling into
the dirt of Contempt, they do not seldom afterward become the Gods of the
Nations, and have Temples dedicated to their Worship; As their Authors in this
participate with other good men, who attain not to a state of Glory till after
this Life.

TRADITIONAL MEMOIRES ON THE REIGN OF QUEEN ELIZABETH.

LONDON: Printed for T. Robinson Bookseller in Oxon. 1658.

To the READER.
THough the study of History be an ancient Prescript for the avoiding of
Ignorance, and production of Knowledge, and to this day far more in use than
any other Politic Aphorisms: Yet with reverence to this confessed excellent
Dose of others approved Experiments, I doubt not but Princes and men in Power
might find a readier, if not a more infallible way to Prudence, by being
conversant in all sorts of Letters relating to Ambassadors, and such Spies and
Ministers (of Commonwealths especially) as are employed abroad or at home in
the Transactions of Treaties, where all things appear barefaced and at first
hand, not smutted with Interest, or adulterated by the red and white paint of,
Envy, Fear or Flattery. Nor is the frequent opportuntty of discoursing with
Contemporaries (who having enjoyed a New Light, cannot but have seen more than
those by Time and Birth placed at a remoter distance) any despicable Ingredient
in the Composition of an exact Statesman; of which I find few that deserve (in
my judgment) the title, commonly forfeited to an over-remissness or excess in
Sanctity or Profaneness; or, if you will, to Hypocrisy or Scandal, which at
long running will meet both with the same Inconveniences. To be sure. my self
have as little propensity as sufficiency in this Art; being no less obstructed
through mulcts received from Fortune than Nature; the later of which is as
incapable of Amendment, as the first is unlikely to find it: (For after the
death of a good Father, being driven into a corner of the world by Injuries
received from the nearest of Kindred and remotest of Friends, I was not only
invited by Leisure, but compel d through Necessity to feek these Diversions:
In which if I be mistaken, the Pardon cannot be long in suing out, since I hope
they shall not meet with a severer Judge than my self, for whose Recreation
alone they were intended.) Though the small insight I have had into Affairs did
not seldom gratify my spleen with as much delight, as it may have not
unpossibly affected less sanguine Complexions with fury or disdain, to see the
Valet brought into play, where discretion called for an higher and more exact
Courtier: or to hear the People wrangle and cast about their money, through a
phanatick desire to discard a present Government, not foreseeing, their hopes
may possibly be deluded in the same, if not a worse Stock than they make out
and lay by; often bartering a pack of Fools for a like quantity of Knaves and
Madmen: The giddy multitude being far likelier to be out in their account,
then this advised Adage, Seldom comes a better; especially if no wiser heads
be found in the Election than their own.

Nature has employed three Senses chiefly to wait on the Body, and but two on
the Mind; yet under this advantage, that these last are distinctly double: For
which of them we stand most obliged to Nature, is not yet Passed decision;
since, though in regard of Pleasure, Sight may have the Royalty, yet in respect
of Wisdom, the Prerogative must not be denied to Hearing: It being the far
greater Wonder to find a prudent man Deaf, than Blind; so as some are
recorded to have put out their Eyes, as enemies to Contemplation. It is
ordinarily affirmed, I have seen this or that, when the most of it has arrived
at us from Report. And in this sense I may be said to have seen these, and a
number more, which out of respect to others Fame, or mine own Safety, I
wilfully omit. But lest this Confession might seem to cast a vail of prejudice
over the face of that Truth I here expose to the curious eyes of this Age, as
nakedly as Modesty will give a toleration for, I shall say in behalf of
Tradition, That all Books are her Tenements, and contain little of History,
whatever they may do of Invention, but what they hold from Manner of some
Report or other. Nor has the beginning, to be sure, if possibly the end and
period of any Nation God in his love did establish, or fury destroy, a more
faithful Register than Traditional Reports; not commonly loading its memory
with the exact calculation of Time, which rightly weighed, is but the pedantick
part of History, and so not unlikely the cause we find such differences
arising amongst our Chronologers; the main fons or bottom of her account being
no farther corresponsible, than for a just and even balancing her layings out
with what she has received. To conclude with an Answer to those that may
require some account of the present Undertaking; I think it far on this side
such impudence as ignorance is found to plaster her Libels with against
incomparable Queen Elizabeth, to own a strength able, by rubbing off such dirt
(especially where Defert lies so thick upon her Tomb) to gild her Name, though
the manner of doing it may stain mine own; since the few spots discernable in
her Government are hidden, like those this Ages curio sity has detected in the
Sun, from any farther notice, by the splendour of the rest.

THE Principal HEADS Of the following MEMOIRES On the Reign of QUEEN ELIZABETH.
1. Queen Elizabeth her moderate carriage at first, till exasperated by the
Popes rashness: Why the Infancy of her Reign continued quiet, notwithstanding
so great a shake and turn in Religion --

2. -- To which she was in a manner necessitated.

3. How the Parliament confirmed It and Her.

4. She breaks with Spain, assists the Dutch, makes Leagues abroad, suppresses
Consp. racies at home: Papists prosecuted; The Pope's too late Concession --
being refused -- is seconded with an Interdict, -- which proves fatal to the
Papists, and -- Queen of Scots, -- Her death and the D. of Norfolk's, etc. --
Censured.

5. Q. Eliz. galls the Spaniard: Cales voyage under Essex -- gets him Love and
Envy.

(6. The Queen foments Factions at home, and what use she makes of them, and of
-- her ownInconstanty. The Spanish Armado in 88.)

7. The Queens favor to Essex, -- how often by him hazarded: His quarrel with
Blune -- designed for his Rival.

8. His Enemies restless endeavors to ruin him -- by setting him on high; his
ample Irish commission.

A Character of the Q. Court, Majesty, Thrist: Provisions rated, Exactions of
Purvoyers punished. --

9. -- A witty Example thereof in Kent.

10. Her Houshold-Servants the goodliest of Person, etc. that could be got: --
as

11. -- Her Council the choicest for Prudence: -- apparent in her
Marriage-Treaties with Spain and France.

12. Her Councels Integrity. Offices the reward of Merit. Her exact
Intelligence. B. Bancroft's Art in dividing the Jesuits and Regulars --
afforded him Popish Intelligence: His Character: His endeavors for Uniformity
of Worship -- hindered by the influence of the two clashing Factions at Court
upon the other Bishops, etc.

13. Letters of State writ in a plain Style, -- involving sometimes an obscure
sense, as those about her Marriages with France.

14. Court-Hospitality.

15. Her prudence in receiving Treats from her more ambitious Subjects; how she
diverted their humor of Popularity.

16. She opposes the Declaration of a Successor, and why: Denies the
Parliaments Petition for her Marriage.

17. Contrary Reports about her Concupiscence. Her Art of Government and choice
of Ministers: Why some of less Abilities were taken in afterward: ^. of
Notingham Admiral; his Character. The Queen sparing in giving Honors, or
suffering her Subjects to accept them from Foreign Princes; Examples thereof
in Sir F. Vere, Sir W. Rawley, Sir Mat. Arundel, Sir P. Sidney.

18. Her modesty in point of Augmentation of Empire; refusing the Dutch as
Subjects, though she took their Cautionary Towns; and Havre de Grace -- to
regain Calis. The Spaniard by cutting off the Heads of the Dutch Nobility,
makes way for the springing up of their Hydra of Popular Government.

19. Leicesters hopes of marrying the Queen; his freedom of discourse with her
about It, and otherwise. His Character.

20. In Foreign Injuries she never precipitated Revenge.

21. Parliaments frequent, and consequently moderate: She restrains their
Debates about Succession and Religion: Keeps the church humble, and carries
fair with her Parliament. The Schismatics leave England; how it might have
been (safely) prevented; what hindered it; the fatal inconveniences of those
proceedings.

22. Ireland neglected, and why: The Lord Mountjoy ends the War: The baseness
of the Natives, -- how much Priest-ridden.

23. Essex unfortunate Expedition thither; -- Cecils artifice to fetch him
back, to -- his Death; -- From which, neither the Love of the People, nor of
the Q. his Mistress, could bail him, and -- After which she never joyed; -- The
occasion of her Death -- reported to proceed from the Countess of Notinghams
not delivering the Q. a King, sent her by Essex, (to whom she had formerly
given it as a Pledge of her Affection and his Safety) which the Countess on her
Deathbed discovering to the Queen, was by her sent with curses in stead of
forgiveness, into another world.

24. After Essex death, Cecil being left without control, not only urges the
Q. to declare James her Successor, but uses other endeavor to effect the same.

25. The happy condition Q. Eliz. left England in. No considerable Enemy. How
we stood related to other Nation -- Spain, Ireland, France, Netherlands, etc.

26. How at home, as to Parliaments, Credit, Treasure, Debts, Justice, The
Church.

27. The Conclusion.

Some Traditionall Memorialls on the Reign of Queen Elizabeth.
1. AFter the death of Mary, eldest daughter of Henry the eighth, had delivered
this Nation (for that time) from an imminent danger of becoming Tributary to
the spanish King (who ownes none for a natural Subject, endued with less
Pride and Austerity then may serve to face a Tyranny equal to the Grand
Signior's). And left the Crown to her Sister Elizabeth, not only swept and
washed from all Competition or Claims by the blood of Queen Ieane, but
garnished with the applause and consent of the people; no less amazed at the
huge fires she had daily kindled to devour the enemies of the Court of Rome,
then jealous of the partiality shown to the Priests, whose exactions were
become no less odious in things temporail, then their latin Mumsimus had made
them appear in what related to the worship of God; Edward the sixt's reign
being too short to give them a satiety, or make all the inconveniences appear,
likely to follow so total a defection from a Church reverenced by all
Christian Princes besides. It might be no weak motive to the new Queen, so
fairly to demean her self at first, that though she entertained the
Protestants in hope, no persuasions could tempt her to cast the Papists into
despair, till the Pope (better seen in the Dignity belonging to his
greatness, then the Arts his Predecessors had used in their conduct to it)
did, by denying her Ambassadors a favorable Reception, reduce her to a present
necessity, of renouncing the Roman Miter, or her pretense to that Crown she
had without any considerable opposition so happily possessed: There being no way
so probable to continue her in power, after the Popes so public manifestation
of a blemish in her Birth, as by adhering to a Party which during the Reign of
her Sister, did justify in the flames of a hot persecution, That the Authority
of his Holiness was spurious it self, and the owners of it no better then
Antichrists, which attempt of hers might possibly have worse succeeded, but
for the protection Philip the second afforded during the infancy of her power,
flattered to it in hope of Marriage, no less then compelled out of a fear to
see England possessed by the Scots, a people ever in conjunction with France,
and therefore likely to prove malignant to his affairs. And as these
considerations had made him solicitous of her safety during his Match with her
Sister, they continued still so prevalent as he did not only forbear him
self, but restrained others from making use of that advantage, so total a
defection could not but afford. Nor was the aspect of a Council then sitting
in Trent, (to which she omitted not to send her Ministers) of small consequence
to her design; Because not only this nation, but all Europe were in the
strongest of their labor to produce a Reformation; Though far short of the
pretenses of Luther, to whose memory the Queen had an unappeasable feud, ever
since he upbrayded her Father with the Repudiation of Charles the fifts Sister:
whose birth by this became so unhappy as to be not only disapproved by the
Catholics, but the Founder of that profession she meant to establish. Nor
were the Religious bouses and lands, possessed promiscuously by those of both
tenants, a weak shelter to this new Princess, looked upon by all as the
likeliest and most obliged person to keep them from reverting to their ancient
use; And therefore in hope to be vigorously asserted by the Protestants, and at
worst but weakly opposed by such as had not yet quite relinquished the Roman
yoke.

2. And that the penners of this Story may be as free from the imputation of
malice as Ignorance, though they acknowledge her rather thrown, then of her
self fallen from the obedience of Rome, is deducible from the Ceremonies used
at her Inauguration, all purely Catholic, and the retention of the Ring,
Cross and Surplice, contrary to the grain of her strongest assertors: From
whence her aim may be ghest as not poynting at a greater dissent from the
doctrine of Rome then her Fathers proceedings had chalked her out; Commanding
the Common prayer book (which contains most of the Mass in english) to be
publicly read, And its opposers the Brownists, Anabaptists, Family of Love
with a number of other crawling errors, the unnatural heat of Luthers
difputes had produced like Insects over all Germany, to be restrained under no
slighter penalty then Death or Imprisonment. Nor was she tempted to this out of
a vainer hope then to draw her neighbor Princes to the same resolut on,
already in despair of procuring good from any milder indevours then those of
power (The Roman Courtiers participating so much of the nature of the Mules
they ride on, as they will rather endure through a sullen obstinacy, the last
extremity, then remoove never so little out of their track of honor and
profit; no less manifest through all Ages, then in their carriage toward this
Princess and their later proceedings with the Republique of Venice) From
whence more connivance then love, fell to the share of the Puritans, that
abhorred the lenity of the Queen, in not countenancing such as bent their force
against the Church of Rome (betwixt which and the Court there may be a wider
difference then our grosser disputes will suffer us to discern) from whose
practice, though some desired a Reformation, a far greater part thought it
damnable to reject it quite: few yet acknowledging any Descent or Ordination
but what was derived from the Catholic Church, a term of too great a Latitude
to be concealed for a day, much less for whole ages as many endeavor to
prove. But leaving these disputes to Dr Iuell and the rest of her Divines (at
that time better able to play the Scholars prize, then any amongst the Friars,
were found in their Answers) Her Iuncto, in which she had a choice number
consisting of both Factions, did think it prudence not to stray farther then
the inexorable necessity of the time compeld, from that union of Doctrine which
had a Council to vouch, That no faith was to be held with any but themselves;
which must have rendered all her Leagues void or useless to the very Oaths she
took of her Subjects: yet notwithstanding these Shackles she spunne out a long
and as happy a Reign as ever this Nation did enjoy.

3 The precedent Reasons joining forces with the deplorable condition she lived
in during the Government of her Sister, and meeting with so Fortunate a
Catastrophe, caused a no less consternation in the hearts of the Papists
(already much broken and unsettled in their passage through so many sudden and
unexpected changes) then it produced joy in those of the Reformation, who
apprehending her success as issuing out of the immediate care God had of their
affairs, became so far incouragad and sedulous, that whilst the other party
stood amazed in an expectation which way this new Princess would incline, the
ensuing Parliament was wholly made up of such persons, as had already voted in
their words and actions every thing the Queen could desire to have confirmed
in the House: so as no side but were mistaken in their account, the Protestants
gaining more, and the Catholics less then could be expected, to the taking
the title of head of the Church, and conferring it on her Majesty, which was
thought unsuitable to her Father and Brother, and therefore far more
unbecoming the person of a Woman; the cause a Declaration was not long after
issued out, to show in what senses it was to be understood. And to prove they
more intended the limitation of the Roman power: then to secure themselves from
Tyranny at home, an Act was passed inabling the Queen and Commissioners for
the time being, to alter or bring what Ceremontes or Worship they thought
decent into the service of God, without excepting that formerly exploded:
whereby a return, (likelyest to be made use of) or a farther remoove was left
arbitrary at the will of the Queen: whose successors not being mentioned in
the Act, left room to question, It ought to be no longer in force then her
life. For whose gratification alone her Privy Counsel (that did then and
indeed almost all her time govern Parliaments) had intended it. But King James
and the Bishops finding the Advantage it brought the Crown no less then the
Church, did not only own it amongst the Statutes unrepealled and in force, but
did print it with a Proclamation to strengthen it, at the beginning of the book
of Common Prayer. Neither had the high Commission any better vizard to face the
Tyranny daily practiced by the Clergy, but what the authority this Act did
afford; which may one day tempt the people to a new, if not a more dismal
Reformation, after experience has taught them how pernicious it is to entrust
either Prince or Priest with any power capable of abuse: yet to the honor of
this Princess it may justly be said, that she never made use of her own
liberty to inslave the nation, but repaid or rather exceeded in thanks and
acknowledgments all power they gave her; an Art lost in these latter times or
thought unkingly. But I leave this her wisdom to be justified by the happy
success.

4. After the Queen had in Parliament, cleansed her birth from all the spots
the poison of tongues had aspersed her with, and received for the future from
the Houses in the name of the three Estates a promise of Assistance, together
with an Oath of Obedience, by which she might rest secure from within; her next
endeavor was to line and fortify her out-workes: In the prosecution of which
she was forced through Reason of State upon a deeper ingratitude then I believe
any thing but an impulsive necessity could have cast her into: For after a
firm settlement she became the severest Scourge to Spain, that it ever had,
since emancipated from the Moors. The occasion of which some lay at the haughty
and proud Gate of the Spaniard, who grew implacable after he found he was
deluded of his hope to marry her; others to a nature residing in all Princes,
not to acknowledge any friends or kindred but what are allied to a capacity of
doing them some future good, which Philip the second was not likely to do upon
any remoter occasion then the possession of her person, his ends being intent
upon an absolute Monarchy: which obliged not only England but all the Princes
in Europe to oppose him. Nor could any favor received in the relation of a
private person bind her more to requital, then greater injuries did to
revenge. Therefore since she forgave the latter, when she had power to have
taken it without danger, she seems more excusable in omitting the first, which
could not have been done without loss, and exposing her subjects to a visible
inconvenience, if not a total rume.

Yet this is manifest in the histories on both sides, that the Queen did by
way of mediation, long endeavor for a milder Governing of his Dutch Subjects
(of whose oppression both Heaven and Earth ape witnesses) before a Sword was
drawn in their defense. And for the Treasure taken at Sea, and at first owned
but as borrowed, it was not more then the Faith of England might have been a
sufficient security for, without being made the subject of a wary. Nor did the
Catholic King remain long in a condition able to distress the affairs of
England, his power being diverted through a malecontented party that stood up
for Religion in the Netherlands, at first fomented by France, and after more
cordially assisted by our Queen; who delighted more from her first assumption
to power in raising broils, and making her self an arbitrator of others
differences, then in any quarrel contracted of her own: by which she did not
only keep her self in plight at home, by sparing money (harder parted with by
the English then blood) but gained so much reputation abroad, as no public or
private endeavors of his holiness could stop other nations (already
scandalized at his base and unworthy Iugling in the Council) from confirming or
making new or straighter Leagues with England then formerly they had done:
looking upon her Defection as a president they might one day be forced to
follow, in case the Court of Rome continued still her Contumacy toward
Princes: And therefore likelier to meet her with comfort and assistance, then
any force to oppose her. From whence his Holiness was necessitated, in
vindication of his honor, to employ the Jesuits, his own emissaries, by
Artifice, Poison or the Knife to bring about that his sword was not able to
execute; so as the peace of her Kingdom was at first more interrupted through
privy Conspiracies then open force: which according to the guise of all
unsuccessefull Treasons, turned to the disadvantage of themselves and their
party, the poor Catholics; against whom nothing in relation to the
generality remains upon due proof sufficient to justify the severity of the
Laws daily enacted and put in execution against them; wherewith they were
ground in pieces between the Popes Obstinacy, and a Ielousy these practices
bred in there natural Prince; by whom they were without question prosecuted
rather out of fear then malice: which his Holiness at length perceiving did
offer what he denied; which was to confirm her Title, and ratify the use of
the Common Prayer, with the most of what the Parliament had confirmed upon her;
provided she would receive them as favors from the Apostolical Sea. But after
this his too late compliance had cast him into their condition that have
unadvisedly out stood the Market, he in no shallower Malice then despair, cast
not only the person of the Queen but the whole Nation under a bottomless
Interdict; which was thundered out at Rome, and hung like: squib by one Felton
upon the Bishop of London's Gate, where after the execution of the party that
did it, all other malignancy ceased but what fell upon his own creatures, who
till then were not forbidden to communicate (in public service) with the
Church of England, and so harder to be discovered, then since this open
rupture. Nor was the Queen of Scots (whose Tragical History is to be found
every where written at large) more obliged to her Catholic Father, through
whose inoouragement she was tempted to assume the Title and Arms of England
very unseasonably during her husbands sickness, and before her own Kingdom
was settled, or any considerable force manifested, in her favor: It not
pleasing France it self (of whose King she was after the Relict) to see all
Britanny united under one Crown: and from whence dropped so much of the venom
of Iealousy into the hearts of Elizabeth and her Counsel, as no means was
left unsought likely to distress her, especially by the Puritan party, whose
safety lay in her destruction, and who shunned no undecency carrying any
probability of being isntrumental in her remove; forgetting that the persons
of Princes have been thought by all wise men too sacred to have any hand or
Justice appear in their death but Gods. Now as these studied all ways to
destroy her, so there was as considerable a Faction in the English Court that
desired her preservation, the cause not only that held her long captive (many
wishing her restraint that abhorred her execution) but deterred all who had
either estate or honor to loose, from attempting in their own person, or
conniving at any other likely to be so wicked as to make her away: though our
Queen may be found in many of her Letters intimating so much to such as kept
her, who were so wise as not to understand what was meant, else they might have
fallen into the fortune of Davison, who unadvisedly ventering between the
honor and safety of his Prince, was ground to nothing betwixt the fury of one
party and shame of the other: Thus because no body either would or durst do it
alone, the reproach was intayled upon the whole Nation, by the apparition of a
minicall and counter feit Justice: Reason of State in such nice points as
these, being so contrary to that in the Schools, as it is most safe and
honorable when it has the least Authority to vouch it. And if the Actors of
this Tragedy had not found more security from the long reign of Elizabeth,
then the applause they had from Scotland was able to have afforded them upon
the next change, I believe so many of their race had not sat in the house of
Lords. Nor was the amorous rather then traitorous blood of the Duke of
Norfolk, spilt on the scaffold for her sake, more consonant to Justice or the
affections of her Subjects, though quietly endured, as a number of other
particulars which happened in her time, that were not able to make answer or
give a perfect account, some to Justice, others to Discretion. This proves:
that the common people are like rivers which do seldom grow so impetuous as to
transcend the banks of Obedience, but upon the overflowing of an epidemicall
and illegal Oppression.

5. Not to wade any farther in this, the greatest blur I find objected to her
honor, or prudence of those assisted at the helm, whose miscarriage lay more
in the Ceremony then substance of the thing, no less grateful to the present
affairs of the Protestants in Scotland then England: it being the policy of
those times, as I believe it ought to be of these, to rend^^ Alliance no less
acceptable to friends, then terrible to enemies, through a seasonable supply of
men and money before delay (the betrayer of all confederations) has rendered
affairs desperate: not o^itted by her, who by sea and land ^ade it her
constant practice to an^oy the Spaniard through the con^uct of those Sons of
Neptune, Drake, Furbusher, Cavendish, Sr Walter Rawly etc. and in that
suc^essefull first expedition to Cales under the Command of Essex (a ^an of a
contexture not only suta^le to a Camp but grateful to La^ies) by which the
Catholic King, was so unexpectedly alarmed, as Cardinal D'Ossat ownes it for
the most universal Opinion, that the whole Nation or a great part of it might
have been gained, had he prosecuted his immediate fortune to the extent of
their fears; a number of the Morisco race desiring in that Iuncture to change
their master, for one more Christian, though less Catholic, and under whom no
Inquisition was exercised. This made his coming back so soon thought as
miraculous as his success by those that were strangers to his Commission,
which he exceeded upon the temptation of a present terror his landing caused
in the Inhabitants, who in a confidence of their Castles had removed none of
their goods, which rendered the booty so far considerable as few returned
empty handed, and many by there future living made demonstration of so great an
abundance, that he gained so much love on all sides as his enemies durst not
impute to him for a fault, any direction he had transgressed, in being too
prodigal in exposing himself and the Army to danger; though his abusing that
Article of making knights so apparently, had produced this Libell,

A Gentleman of Wales,
With a Knight at Cales,
And a Lord of the North country,
A yeoman of Kent
Upon a racked Rent
Will buy them out all three.
This happy success did not only estate him in the affections of the Militia
and those addicted to the service of Mars, but put a no less high esteem on
his counsels and endeavors, then it abated the price of his opposers, the
most of whom belonged to the side-robe (not seldom at odds in war, but ever
at enmity with soldiers during peace) who grew jealous that this spark, worn
already in the same place of the Queens affection, from whence Lecester that
terrestrial Lucifer was cast, for abusing his Sovereigns favor to pride and
Murder, might through the Queens mediation or his own arts one day gain the
Crown, to the prejudice of their interest, who had already vowed the uttermost
of their endeavors to the Scottish Title; of whom he had this advantage, that
whereas Lecester was hated by the people for the death of many, and amongst the
rest of the Earl of Essex his Father in Ireland, this abounded in their Love,
no less then in the favor of his Prince, in whose heart his person had made
as deep an impression, as his valor and affable nature had won upon her
Subjects.

6. That she fomented Divisions abroad I hinted before, And now I must tell you
she was not wanting in her endeavors to maintain Factions at home, by which
she attained to the knowledge of all things that happened: so as no suite or
design passed the royal assent, before she understood as much of reason as
enemies or friends could bring for and against it; hearing the judgments of
all, to her very Ladies and ordinary Servants: nor did this freedom of
communication betray her future resolutions to discovery; for through a seeming
unconstancy, or, as others will have it, one more natural, she did so often
vary, as it was not easy to discover where or when she would conclude her
buzzing, and give the blow: by which unsteady carriage she so befooled the
Spies and Pensioners of foreign Princes, as they were at a loss what to
inform their Patrons of, or themselves how to resolve: The cause of the
Spanish Armado in Eighty eight, an attempt held ridiculous by the Flemings and
all acquamted with our seas, and only brought about through the overconfidence
his Holiness had in a Catholic party, which he assured himself would appear
upon the approach of a Navy styled by him invincible. Here may be noted that
counsels grounded upon foreign advice or any thing but a visible experience,
do rarely succeed; for Interest in such as desire a change does not seldom
make them apprehend more advantages then really there are, and cover doubts and
dangers they are privy to, out of a fear to dishearten the Prince they
endeavor to imbark in their defense; as it fell out here, where not one man
appeared in favor of the Spaniard: the very Papist's themselves being no less
unwilling then the rest to see their native country in subjection to the
ordinary cruelty found in Strangers.

7. But to be sure the former mentioned art of dissemb'ing with others had
stamped such a deep impression upon the Queens own Nature and passions, as
she fixed upon nothing with precipitation. The distrust she had of all sides
obliging her to the Justice of equal hearings, which few in Sovereignty will
be at the trouble to afford: And from hence grew the infinite indulgence that
appeared so long in favor of Essex; who becoming wanton from his late
Success, though after moderated by some less happy, he grew into such heats
and insolences toward any his Iealousy had marked for enemies, that the
Queen, to keep even the scales between him and those of the Cecilian party,
not only forbore to pamper him with new favors, but did not seldom frown
upon him; though he had yet so true a friend of her affection, that upon the
least semblance of submission and promise of return to a better temper, it did
mediate for him: Lave, like a bone, becoming more strong by breaches; he being
certain upon every reconciliation to receive from her double the value of that
her anger had cost him; Till these frequent repetitions of his faults and her
forgiveness had swelled him into such a Confidence of his own mediation that
he looked upon all as enemies, that in their words or actions acknowlegded not
his friendship, or, which was very ordinary in respect of his profuse
Liberality, did not wear some badge of his favor. And amongst a number of
these Sr Francis Bacon was one, who in an Apology he printed to vindicate his
fame from the imputation of ingratitude to Essex, confesses him far richer
in obligations then payments; the fate of all that set too high a value upon
friends purchased by any other coin, then what bears the impresse of an
Interest depending upon a future hope; It being the policy of Courtiers, if not
the nature of Love, to conclude where it begins, which is for the most part in
Expectation. Now because the generality of such as desired his ruin might
think that the favor his Mistress showed him proceeded from a nearer
familiarity then I have been informed it did, by such as reported her apter
both in her self and others to kindle the flames of Love, then quench them,
They placed Blunt, a gallant Gentleman, and of an honorable extraction, in the
ball of her eye, hoping by his application to draw from her heart the affection
they thought mortal to them and their designs: but the whole result
concluding in a Duel, did rather inflame then abate the former account she
made of him; The opinion of a Champion being more splendid (in the weak and
Romantic sense of women, that admit of nothing fit to be made the object of a
quarrel but themselves) and far above that of a Captain or General: So as
Sr Edmund Carry, brother to the Lord Hunsden, then Chamberlain and near Kinsman
to the Queen (from whose mouth I have most of this) told me, that though she
chid them both, nothing pleased her better then a conceit she had, that her
beauty (of which her flatterers had bred in her a higher esteem then an
impartial ear or eye can think due from others report or her own pictures)
was the subject of this quarrel; when God knows it grew from the stock of
honor of which then they were very tender, and some mean expressions Essex
used of Blunt, about his being employed in Ireland, and not her amorous
caresses, which age and in a manner an universal distribution of them had by
this time rendered tedious if not loathsome; intimated in a modest expression
uttered in my hearing by Sr Walter Rawley, none of her least respected
Servants, who upon some discourse of the Duke of Buckingham, said to this
purpose, That Minions were not so happy as vulgar judgments thought them, being
frequently commanded to uncomely and sometimes unnatural employments.

8. But his enemies finding all complaints made to his disadvantage, though
true, neglected, or hung upon the file amongst such as she resolved at her
better leisure to inquire into the proofs of, And remaining as obstinate in a
resolution to destroy him as she did yet appear in his preservation; did
endeavor, as a last refuge, to actuate his destruction by accumulating upon
him such high favors and honors as they observed most suitable to his humor,
and fortunes of the Swordmen through whose consells they found him the most
easy to be led, and amongst whom many were placed near his person by
themselves, And from these they received upon all emergencies advice of his
carriage: It faring with him as it does ordinarily betide honest and generous
Natures, that perish oftener through confidence, then distrust. Nor could any
other means have removed this! Court Leviathan (too deeply struck with the
harping-irons of malice), from the ocean of favor he lay: in but so ample A
Commission as might givo his Ambition full power and room to expatiate in, by
which he was most likely to be tug'd a ground; Not wise enough to apprehend
Many things he found inserted in his Patent, as liberty to Pardon or punish the
Irish Rebels suitable to his own will, and power to reward with lands or
honors all he esteemed worthy, were such flowers of the Crown as his enemies
(to the disadvantage of whose friends he might employ them) could not in reason
but have found cause to oppose, had they been picked out for any milder
design, then to deck a Garland for that head they meant to sacrifice to their
malice and revenge. But this being acted (though long before studied) amongst
the last Scenes of her Tragedy, I shall defer the conclusion till some other
time, Endeavoring here (according to my weak fancy; prompted only by Report)
to draw a prospect of her Court: where, all her reign, Majesty and Thrift did
strive for preeminence without incroaching upon any confine either of Baseness
or Prodigality. Nor can this be wondered at by such as know the power she
derived from Law or custom to be furnished with all Provisions at a set price,
By which a heavy Imposition was cut off, found by experience to load
Greatness, seldom admitted to a cheap Market: Sellers recompensing their want
of honor, by the Excise they put on such as own it. And because this was
Arbitrary at the will of the Green cloth (a Court only intending Provision and
Carriages) The Purveyors, upon whom lay the execution, And so by consequence
the envy, were, if guilty, at the mercy of every accuser, being not seldom
hanged or put in the Pillory upon the discovery sometimes of small abuses: Her
Government appearing so full of policy, as she was rarely found to interpose
the power of the Crown in her own cause: Who by turning her face toward the
sins, and countenancing the punishment of such Harpies, did besides stop the
future current of their Corruption; Through which she became not only better
served, but gained an opinion of Justice, and Mercy toward her people: it
being the maladministration, more then badnesse of any Office, I ever knew
during her reign or her Successors, legally erected, that raised murmuring in
the people, the il-boding voice of Sedition; which if heard, is not to be
neglected, but like the Sea stopped by the banks of Justice; for if once it
grows epidemicall, all endeavors do rather inflame then moderate it, as
thought to proceed more from necessity then love.

9. And here I think it not impertinent to insert a Story as it was related by
an eye witness. A A Purveyor having abused the County of Kent, upon her remove
to Green-wich (whether she often resorted, being as I have heard the first air
she breathed, and therefore most likely to agree with her) a Country man
watching the time she went to walk, which was commonly early, and being wise
enough to take his time when she stood unbent and quiet from the ordinary
occasions she was taken up with, placing himself within the reach of her ear,
did after the fashion of his coat, cry aloud which is the Queen? whereupon, as
her manner was, she turned about toward him, and he continuing still his
question, she her self answered I am your Queen, what would thou have with
me? you, replied the Fellow, are one of the rarest Women I ever saw, and can
eat no more then my daughter Madge, who is thought the properest Less in our
Parish, though short of you, but that Queen Elizabeth I look for, devoures so
many of my Hens, Ducks, and Capons, as I am not able to live. The Queen, no
less auspicious to all suits made through the mediation of her comely shape, of
which she held a high esteem after her Looking Glasses (long laid by before
her death) might have confuted her in any good opinion of her Face, then
malignant to all Oppression above her own, inquired who was Purveyer, and as
the story went suffered him to be hanged, after a special order for his
trial, according to a Statute formerly made to prevent abuses in this kind.

10. This Princess, in imitation of her Father Henry the eighth did admit none
about her for Pensioners, Privy-Chamber-then, Squiers of the body, Carvers,
Cup-bearers, Sewers etc. (that were not a few in number) but persons of
stature, strength and birth, refusing to one her consent (demanded before any
could be admitted to the meanest place in her house,) because he wanted a
tooth, yet was never known to desert any for age or other infirmity after once
enrolled, but either continued them, or, upon their discharge, gave them
considerable and well paid pensions. As for her Guard, Ushers, Porters, and all
attending below Stayers, they were of a no less extraordinary size, then
activity for Shooting, throwing the Bar, Weight, Wrestling etc. So that such
as came hither from beyond the seas upon Embasy or curiosity (who calculate the
strength, wisdom and honor of a Nation by the apparitions they behold at
Court) had no other cause but to report at their return, That though a
Feminine Constellation governed the Fate of England, yet there remained little
hope to any foreign Malignity of operating with success; because her
designs were begotten under Mercury, and brought forth by the assistance of
Mars in case of opposition: She owning Soldiers no less able to act, then
Counselors to advise; In whose choice (for the most part) wisdom was solely
looked upon, not putting by Sufficiency though accompanied with a mean Birth,
and Crooked person, as it chanced in a Father and Son of the Cecills, both
incomparable for Prudence. It being sometimes necessary to make wise men Noble,
where Noblemen are too lazy and addicted to pleasure to endeavor to be wise.

11. It is the highest step of advantage a Prince can meet with, To have for
Counsel about him, persons whose fortunes are of the same piece with his own:
The consideration of which may abate the wonder: Queen Elizabeth prospered so
well at the beginning, when incumbered both within and without by such
difficulties, or how she came to out-reach (before scarce able to stand upon
her own legs) so exact a Master in King-craft, as the Spaniard. I confess
her being a woman did render the delay of Marriage more suitable to his patience
and her honor, then otherwise it could have been; But the dexterons management
of this advantage must be attributed to the great wit of her Inncto, amongst
whom her greatest Confidents were of the Augustan Confession and therefore
unlikely to continue in favor, if in being, after such a Conjunction as
Philhip the second desired. Nor could distance of place, the deluder of eyes,
hinder the inspection of that Prince, who having commanded in England some
years under the right of Mary, could not but in probability hear all that was
to be known. And if we may guess at the Queens carriage in this, by her
proceedings in the two Treaties of Marriage after with France, we may presume
she did purchase this delay, (if not buy off the discovery of some Infirmity)
with the Articles of her Opinion contrary to those of Rome, and to which, as
appears by an old letter, the Catholic King was not at that time averse.
Though upon her deluding him, to avoid such a Schism in the lower Germany as
had happened in the upper, he did endeavor to introduce the Inquisition:
Fortune having rendered him so indulgent from the beginning to the Queens
preservation, that he sold the Low-Countryes, the only place able to purchase
her peace, a bargain (as I have heard from the Earl of Lecester the last
English man Governor of Flushing) fomented by those that treated this Match
for her Majesty: which found, Pope Pius darted out the former mentioned
Excommunication, till then restrained through the mediation of Philhip. I shall
not determine whether it was Godly zeal or worldly interest that prompted
their judgments to these accurate counsels, since I find both in some part
gratified by future success: Though I see cause enough in the latter to employ
all the brains, both of the Protestants and Papists in power about her; the
one owning their lives to her well being, and the other Abbey - Lands to the
continuance of it: for though Sr John Parsons told me he had seen a Bull
amongst Mr Seldens Antiquities, by which the Pope confirmed the lands of the
Church in the hands of their present possessours, provided they in other
respects continued under his Obedience, yet whether this might be safely
trusted to, I leave in suspense, and to their consideration that may remember
they were fifty years ago valued much below other Titles and Demeanes.

12. The cause, It may be thought Intererest as much as Love in her Privy
Counsel that till Lecesters days, none are found to have received Pensions
from foreign Princes or to play booty or deal treacherously in his
Employments either at home or abroad: nor were honorable and gainful offices
during her abode at the helm given to men of no larger capacities then were
merely requisite to the execution of the place; But bestowed upon such public
Spirits as were able to advise in the most crabbed affairs, by which the
charge of their support was borne and the Commonweal served with men under a
double Capacity. Now though we must yield to Solomon, that safety is to be
found in a multitude of Counselors, Yet Secrecy is commonly absent in all
Assemblies but where a few resolve: for which and perfect Intelligence from
abroad (the light and director of the bark of Prudence) if any age before, I am
sure none since can be compared with the days of Burgly and Walsingham in this
particular; whose steps Archbishop Bancroft followed so close, as by somenting
a difference between the Jesuits and Regulars, he made a breach in their
Unity, the strongest argument they have to support the Papacy; And, illuminated
by so clear a judgment, did through their clashing make so perfect an
inspection into the secular practices of the Consistory in Rome, as he
prevented many dangers might have other ways fallen upon the Nation: for which
Blackwell, the then Popish Metropolitan, lay under some suspicion from the
contrary Faction, how justly I know not. Yet have heard, that No Priest was
landed any time in England, but the Bishop had a perfect Character of his
temper and relations; The easier brought about by him that (in the estimation
of the Puritans) owned most of their Tenants, being beside no rigid persecuter
of any who had not in his composition the gall of Treason mixed with Religion:
the Regulars being then in a high esteem, because their opposers the Jesuits
were about that time banished France, and their Cells demolished, with a
Pyramid erected to their infamy, for an endeavor to Assassinate Henry the
fourth. And from this Indulgence of the Archbishop grew more security then
danger, because such Priests as were connived at (the most of other Orders)
looked upon the Jesuits as enemies, and all new - comers of their own under a
no milder aspect then intruders on their profit, And therefore the more
inquisitive after their conditions, and if found pragmaticall, it was no hard
matter to purchase their remove by the mediation of one so near the helm as
the Bishop was, who besides the quality of Secrecy remaining so constant to his
promise, as it was more safety then danger for them to rely upon his word. And
that some cunning Seminaries did endeavor the monopolizing amongst themselves
all the profit to be made by the English Catholics, I have a presumption of
mine own from a Priest I ^et with on the other side the water, who told me he
lived far better during the Tyranny (as he was pleased to call it) of Queen
Elizabeth, then since the license afforded under King James, by which diverse
young Scholars of both the Universities were daily tempted into Orders, and
many (restrained before out of love to their safety) did now go over in
shoales, to the great detriment of the old standers. Yet not withstanding the
incomparable diligence of this Prelat, under two Princes, for the preservation
of peace and unity, He was abominated by the preciser sort, the heat of whose
zeal appears the more unnatural, because their mouths were furred with
bitter and unsavory Invectives, which followed him after the hand of Death had
laid him out of the reach of all other favor but what is due to his desert
from Charity and Gratitude, Therefore to be strongly presumed the worst malice
could invent, And inserred by me, according to the Mode of an Historian, whose
plow (for the sake of posterity) I wish I were able to drive; However I am no
ways correspondent for the praise or blame due to any verses found here, such
as these,

Here lies my Lords Grace at six and at seven,
And, if I do not lie, His soul is in Heaven:
I wish with my heart it may be to his leeking,
Since all the world knows it was never his Seeking.
Another,
Bancrost was for Plays,
Lean Lent, and Holy Days,
But now under goes their Doom:
Had English Ladies store,
Yet kept open a Back door
To lot in the Strampet of Rome.
I confess I have heard him Charactered for a Ioviall Doctor, but very Jealous
of the Clergies revenue, no less then his countries safety, which he
endeavored to bring about through a reduction of Britanny into one form of
worship, by the train of Calvine most rigidly opposed: But the two contrary
Factions at Court (one of them thinking all things fit to be destroyed the
other labored to preserve) did, upon the vacancy of every Bishopprick, put one
in suitable to their humors that had the luck to prevail: The cause the
present Incumbent did, like the web of Penelope, unravell what his Predecessor
had with more policy and charity twisted: By which means the Diocesses of
Canterbury and York were at one and the same time of contrary Judgments, And
the best of Clergy men (driven into a medium by the scorching hence of the one
side, and chill indifferency of the other) lost their labor and all hope of
preferment in a vain endeavor for a reconciliation, impossible to be brought
about, the one party being fome^ted by hypocrisy to bear out their Ignorance,
and the other from power and a fear of reverting into the primitive Austerity:
which held so long in this unconstant vicissitude, till what was continued
merely out of policy at Court, did in a short time branch forth in City and
Country into diverse popular differences, suitable to the mold of every head and
the interest of such persons as had the subtilty to fit them to their
occasions: Zele, like Lead, being as ready to drop into bulletts, as to mingle
with a Composition fit for medicine. So as in those days it was unpossible for
men in Power but to be scandalous to one side or other.

13. Dispatches from the Counsel table (of which I have seen Volumes) began
and held on throughout in a plain and the same Style, not seldom admitting of
several constructions, if of any interpretation at all where the business
related to a thing whose consequence could not easily been seen into: As
appears at the beginning of all Treaties, And especially in the two offers of
Marriage with France, which the Queen managed with such dexterity and secrecy,
That wise Walsingham (as appears by his Letters) through whose hands the whole
business passed, did not know certainly whether she was real or no: But in
what was thought proper for Transaction, all things were plain drawn in
Latin: This put together did much facilitate the Office of her Secretaries.

14. Now as wisdom and Secrecy appeared in her Counsel Chamber, So
Hospitality, Charity and Splendour were dilated over the whole Court; where,
upon the least acquaintance, all strangers from the Noble man to the Pesant,
were invited to one Table or other (of which she kept abundance, where ever she
removed from one standing house to another, unless she returned to White Hall
at night) the least considerable suting with three, four, or five hundred
pounds per Annum expense; And for bread, beer and wine (commonly called by the
name of Budge) though the Purveyors that brought it in, were called to strict
accounts, such as issued them out were rarely questioned, but in case they sold
it: And by this Generosity the ordinary sort of people were so indeared, as I
have known some brag of their entertainment at Court twenty years after;
such, like dogs seldom biting those have once fed them, Though with the same
meat they have been at the pains to catch themselves; It coming all out of
the Country man's Barnes or yards, The wine being little when Custom was abated.

15. Yet though she was thus plentifully provided of all things at home, She
did not seldom fetch an Entertainment at such Grandces houses as were
understood to be most popular: By which she removed her Subjects eyes from
intending wholly the influence of these inferior Stars, and fixed them upon a
greater splendour of her own: besides her out-doing them in the art of
Popularity, acting to the life the Pageant of the people (which all Princes
really are, and the wisest the most Gaudy) from whence it is far more
indeering to throw flowers then wildfire: And if this her affability did not
work upon the will, The greatness of their Expense did not fail to render
them less able to hurt: And in case this was not sussicient to moderate their
ambitious thirst after popularity, she found them diversions in foreign
Employments, whither they were sent Ambassadors or Agents, by which their
estates were gelt, and the owners rendered the lesserampant and unable to
maintain their former bewitching humor of Hospitality; so as in Parliaments
they became assertors of the profit of the Crown, in hope to have such debts
refunded as had been contracted by themselves in the service of the State;
whose honor she preserved at the lowest expense that ever Prince did, and not
seldom at their charge who might other wise have employed their revenues in
fomenting Sedition.

16. The Parliament, knowing not where to fix upon a Successor to the Crown
without the hazard of Religion, or danger of a Civil war; the Regent of
Scotland having yet no Child, and being too strongly supported from France to
miscarry under a title so firmly built as the Catholics maintained hers was
to this Nation (if not in present) upon the death of the Queen; did in the
first Petition they made invite her Majesty to take a Husband: In which they
minded more their future, then present felicity, not so likely to result from a
Married as a Single Prince, whose expense cannot choose but swell
proportionable to the offpring produced: And in this they were so moderate as
to pass by all mention of a Successor, ever ungrateful to her ears during
the whole Series of her reign, and not seldom fatal to such as were so hardy
as to move it: So as it cost some dearer, and Pigot and Wentworth their
Liberty, though they proposed it in Parliament; The safety she her self found
in the concealing her intent, outvoting, the danger of a Civil war, which in
all humane reason could not but impend the nation, in case of her death: For
whilst she observed this impartial neutrality, none could pretend cause of
complaint. And in case any one had made ostentation of a Title before the
people, she had the rest ready to asperse it; there remaining none free from
Objections, the most legitimate in appearance passing for an Alien and so
incapable, or an Enemy and so incompetent to govern: It being as impossible to
please, as dangerous to oppose the weakest interest of the Papist, Puritan or
Protestant. But to this request of her great Counsel (which she could not
hinder, being the desire of the Court, as well as the Sense of the Parliament)
she returned a stout, though but an uncertain Answer, as is legible in the
common Chronicles, whose recitalls I profess wilfully to shun, feeding my
pen rather with such scraps as I have picked out of Letters and Discourse, the
store house of Tradition. Not so likely to flatter, if to lie, as the writings
of those mean Contemporaries that for the most part have embarked their pens
in our English affairs; who had still some fear or hope at their elbowes
ready to jog them toward the interest of the present or future Governors:
Confessed by learned Cambden himself, whose lines were directed by King James,
and he lead rather to vindicate the honor and integrity of his Mother, then to
do right for a Mistress, that had from a Schoolmaster raised him to a capacity
of being the first King at Arms.

17. Her Sex did bear out many impertinences in her words and actions, as her
making Latin speeches in the Universities, and professing her self in
public a Muse, then thought something too Theatricall for a virgin Prince,
but especially in her Treaties relating to Marriage. Toward which some thought
her incapable by nature, others too propense, as may be found in the black
relations of the Jesuits, and some French and Spanish Pasquilers That pretend
to be more learned in the Art of Inspection, then wise Henry the fourth their
King, who in a joviall humor told a Scottish Marquis, There were three things
inscrutable to intelligence: 1. Whether Maurice then Prince of Orange (who
never fought battle, as he said) was valiant in his person. 2. What Religion
himself was of. 3. Whether Queen Elizabeth was a maid or no: which may render
all reports dubious that come from meaner Men: yet it may be true that the
Ladies of her bedchamber denied to her body the ceremony of searching and
imbalming, due to dead Monarchs: But that she had a Son bred in the State of
Venice, and a Daughter I know not where nor when, with other strange tales that
went on her, I neglect to insert, as fitter for a Romance, then to mingle with
so much truth and integrity as I profess: In which if I am in any thing
mistaken, let it be laid on mine own want of knowledge, or their Ignorance that
misted me. This I may safely attest, that the smallest chip of that
incomparable Instrument of honor, Peace and Safety to this now unhappy Nation,
would have been then valued by the people of England above the loftiest branch
in the Calydonian Grove. Who as she was the choycest Artist in King-craft that
ever handled the Scepter in this Northern Climate, So she went beyond all her
Ancestors in adapting to her Service the most proper tools, in whose fittest
applications she was seldom mistaken; The only cause can be given why she so
rarely changed her Secret Counsel, Especially those she made privy to any of
her last results, which did not weakly contribute to her safety: Such
resembling Keys, that once lost or misplaced, no future security remains but
in changing the lock. And though this has already fallen under my
consideration, yet I am forced to resume it again in the vindication of the
choice of some Officers about the middle of her Reign, accused since for
Weakness; which if not a Mistake made by envy or for want of an exact
understanding of the parties use; some being placed, after the Counsel grew
numerous, only to tell tales and balance votes she disliked in public,
without the least understanding of what was thought necessary to succeed in
private, a multitude of hands adding dignity to inland affairs, it being
ordinary with the generality to esteem wisdom according to measure, rather
then weight. And amongst these few can be found out of her Kindred or such
Friends as her Fathers Honor or her own C. atitude for kindness showed
during the life of her Sister, kept her from excluding them the lists, though
the stronger heads of others were wholly imployd when her occasions called her
to grapple with any difficulties. Nor was there more then the honor and profit
of Lord high Admiral entrusted with the Earl of Notingham, but executed by a
Commission selected out of the ablest seamen that age did afford; he being
imployd for his, fidelity, known to be impregnable in relation to Corruption:
Neither was there a goodlier man for person in Europe, as my eyes did witness
though they met not with him before he was turned toward the point of 80, no
youth being more celebrated for gallantry and good fortune then his. I confess
that in his age he married a young Lady allied to King James, which set his
wisdom many degrees back in the repute of the world.

But to discharge this cavil from any farther dispute, No Prince then extant
took an exacter estimate of her Subjects Abilities to serve her, or made a
deeper inspection into their Aptitude, Nature and Humors; to which with a rare
dexterity she fitted her favors and their Employments: as may be instanced in
Francis Vere, a man nobly descended, Walter Rawly exactly qualified, with many
others set a part in her Judgment for military services, whose Titles she never
raised above Knighthood; Saying, when importuned to make General Vere a Baron,
that in his proper Sphere and in her estimation he was above it already,
Therefore all could be expected from such an addition, would be the intombing
of the spirit of a brave Soldier in the corpse of a less sightly Courtier, And
by tempting him from his charge, hazard that repute upon a Carpet, his valor
had dearly purchased him in the Field. Nor could she endure to see her Subjects
wear the titles of a foreign Prince, the cause she committed Sr Matthew
Arrondell of Warder in the West, for accepting from the German Caesar the
Dignity of a Count, And denied Sr Philhip Sidny the Crown of Poland.

18. The example of made sty her Soldiers expressed in the Nether-lands rarely
found amongst Auxiliaries, with her refusal to own or impose the name of her
Vassals upon the Dutch, gained her a huge confidence amongst her Neighbors,
that her complexion was pure from the contagion of any more destructive
Ambition, than the preservation of her honor and those Nations her birth no
less than desert had presented her with: which made them unapter to offend
her; none but Catholics, and they for the most part Priests, wishing her
remoove, as not knowing where to find a Prince less offensive and more
debonaire; the cause many Treasons concluded in the loss of their heads that
projected them, or sought to put them in execution. Yet in this her temperament
of desire in relation to augmentation of Empire, her prudence so minded her of
the nations future safety, as That friends under persecution do not seldom
face about upon the approach of Security and power: wherefore she made sure of
Flushing and Brill; which in regard of situation were so full a Content of
their whole strength, As the application of it could not, upon their
miscarriage in relation to the Catholic King, or their own future
Ingratitude, obliterate the advantage England might make of that revolt: Though
the money lent covered it in Reason and Justice from much of the envy it might
have contracted, had she employed force or fraud in their purchase. Nor did the
receiving from the hands of the French Hugonots, Haver de Grace (upon a like
exigency) signify more Ambition than the reduction of Calis; which might have
undoubtedly succeeded, had she not according to her usual custom, starved the
design for want of money and men; a fault the more excusable, because it
relates to the tender care and respect had of her Subjects Lives and Estates.
And here by the way it is worth noting, That the Holanders could not so easily
have attained Freedom, but through the help of the Ministers of Spain, who by
eradicating the ancient Nobility and Gentry reduced them into a Parity, and so
by consequence made them capable of unity, the nource of all Combinations.

19. Amongst all her Minions none (according to report) bad fairer for the
Queens Brid-bed than Lecester, who, finding by the continual high beating of
her heart, that she would never allow of so great an abatement of Sovereignty
as a Match with a foreign Prince, could not but in honor have the sails of
his expectation somewhat sweld therewith. He would in her gayeties (which' till
the death of Essex were very frequent) ask her, If she did not think she had
some Subjects of her own, able (though it must be confessed none worthy) to
make an Heir for the Kingdom of England? Since her Father was known to do it,
yet a Man, and so incapable of any eclipse of honor by the highest Princess?
Neither did his often repeated condescentions in making Subjects his
after-wives breed him that danger that he sustained by the first glorious Match
(according to expectation) that he made with the Sister. of Charles the
Emperor, which all the Prudence he owned could not unravel without strayning
the cords of Government, if not Conscience, by that desperate leap he made
out of the Church of Rome, and separating himself from the union of other
Princes. Nor did Philip the second prove more happy to your Sister for the
present, nor to the future expectation of the Nation that lacked nothing to
intaile servitude upon them but an Heir of her body; which yet had not been
wanting, according to report, but supplied by a Cushion, but that the
generosity of the Spaniard, and the persuasion of a better success from your
embraces (which his hopes flattered him with) did for the present make him to
detest it: The cause it was after voyced to be a false conception. All which I
have heard often, And read some where, though the Author has escaped my
memory: Nor could Lecester render his bed vacant to a more thriving end (as he
is rumor'd to have done) than to make room for the greatest and most fortunate
Princes the Sun ever looked upon without blushing in relation to Oppression or
Blood: This may be allowed upon the score of probability, That his Lordship
would hardly have been so rampant and uncivil without some extraordinary
invitation, as to draw a blow in her presence from an other Privy-Counsellor,
more zealous possibly than discreet, to whom when the Queen said, He had
forfieted his hand; his reply was, he hoped she would suspend that judgment,
till the Traylor had lost his head, who did better deserve it: But this
accident bordering so near the confines of her Honor did admit no farther
debate; it being no other than she in a less sprightfull humor might have
given him her self, none being more flexible to all kind of Iollities than the
minds of Princes when unbent from public affairs. Now, whether these
Amorosities were natural, or merely poetical and personated, I leave to
conjecture, That may ever find employment in the actions of Kings. This I am
sure of, these gaudy gleams of favor shone not long upon any single person,
but were soon eclipsed upon the apparition of a fresh Spark. And here to
conclude any farther discourse of Lecester, he was a man of eminency for
Person, but branded by his enemies (of which he had not a sew) for a defect in
Wisdom or Integrity during his abode in the Nether-lands where with no good
succesle he executed the place of the Queens General.

20. This Princess used never to precipitate a retaltation in reference to
foreign Injuries: by which her Enemies had leisure given them to consider of a
reparation, no less than her self of Revenge in case of Contumacy, and time
to put her strength in the better array; Manifest throughout her whole
expedition into Scotland, where though she had fomented such a party of the
Nobility of that Nation as were able to receive and secure a force of her own,
which upon their intercession she sent, yet was it without any Commission to
fight or take notice of the Crown of France, from whom the Scotch Queen was
immediately assisted, but only against the house of Guise that were merely
isntrumental in behalf of their Sister Mary. Contrary to the most ordinary
practice of our less advised Monarchs, who to gratify the clamor of a few
imbarged Merchants, and to vindicate an honor capable of diminution, but from a
total neglect or visible incapacity of being ever able to right it self, do,
like inconsiderate Bees, in a rash and passionate Distemper, by misimploying
their Stings (all the natural force they have) render themselves (for the
future) weak and contemptible, by an unseasonable demonstration of the worst
they can do; which, till experimented, is for the most part imagined greater
than in truth it is.

21. Her frequent calling Parliaments, and not staying till she was compelled,
kept them in so moderate a temper, as they were more awful to the country than
the Court; where some grievances might be connived at, but never approved, so
the easier accounted for when called to question: nor do I find her concession
granted to any Statute for her peoples good, by way of exchange, but purely out
of grace, and for the most part before it was desired: Wisely projecting, that
when Necessity is the Chapman, the Market does naturally run high. Therefore
being chaste from all other intrusion upon the nations liberty, but what
respected common safety and the honor of the Crown; she was able without
murmer to commit such of the house of Commons as presumed to meddle or enquire
who was most fit or had the best right to succeed her. Neither was she less
tender and jealous of Disputes in Religion, an apple in the eye of Government,
which if once suffered to roll and grow wanton, will render the peoples minds
unsteady betwixt the obedience they owe to God and their Prince: sondly
imagining the first may gratified at the prejudice of the latter. Zeal being
the Flint, and ambition the Steel out of which the sparks of Rebellion have
in our days kindled the most fatal mischiefs; which she kept during her
reign from clashing, by denying the Parliament all farther debate of
Ecclesiastical ceremonies, And showing them their no less injustice than
levity to question what they had so firmly estated in her Person, who was yet
resolved to introduce no more than what was lately confirmed by themsesves, or
their Fathers; so notorious to all, as the Doctrine professed most generally in
England bore in foreign nations the name of Parliament-Faith. Nor was this
her prudent restraint looked upon with any great reluctance by any but
Cartwright and some such adle heads, whose Judgments were trimmed according to
the Mode of Amsterdam; of whose distempered passions the Queen made so much
advantage, as to keep the Church humble and quiet whilst she gelt their Sees
by exchanges, and other mortifications of their power and estates, which during
her life were not suffered to blaze out in their Ecclesiastical offices, as
since they did: which is the only visible cause can be given, why so much worth
as resided in this Princess is so little celebrated. And all this wheeled about
with the less disturbance of the higher Orbs, because few opposers of
Church Discipline were in her days eligible, or so much in favor with the
people, being for the most part oppressors, or indicted of hypocrisy; the most
eminent for Parts, Titles, or Estates (as it falls out in relation to new
schisms) growing weary or full satisfied with the profit already gained by the
great leap themselves, or their Ancestors had made from Rome: Nor were the
poorer sort better apayd when they compared the Present hospitality with that
reported of old before the Religious houses were demolished, the cause I have
not seldom my self heard them wish a return to the Catholic Church under
the title of the old Learning: Not so well pleased with the saving doctrine of
the Protestant profession, as they formerly were under the more liberal
distributions of the Monasteries. Nor was it the guise of thse prudent times to
dissolve Parliaments in discontent (by which a quarrel seemed to be pitcked
with the whole nation) But to adjourne them in Love. Wherefore having to do
with the same men, she was seldom compelled to alter her course; it being
unpossible that a Prince who had her peoples affection in gross, should find
it wanting in their Representative. And it is no less remarkable, that in so
long a reign she never was forced (as I have heard) to make use of her
Negative power; But had still such a party in the house of Lords as were able
to save her that labor. Neither was she ever terrified by fear, to bestow
Office or Honor upon any out of no other reason than to draw them from the
contrary party; unless Seminaries, and of this she grew at last weary, saying
once in public, she would not rasome her self from enemies at the price of
their preferments that loved her. But in case she found any likely to interrupt
her occasions, she did seasonably prevent him by a chargable Employment abroad,
or putting him upon some service at home she knew least grateful to the
people: contrary to a false Maxim, since practiced with far worfe fuccesse, by
such Princes who thought it better husbandry to buy off Enemies, than reward
Friends: which once observed, it tempted some that were ambitious to lay out
the strongest of their endeavors against their Prince only in hope to be
bought off. And for such as desired a farther recoyle from the Pope than was
thought fit to be made, they were not so numerous or well agreed yet, as to
actuat any disturbance, being for the most part poor, and, as all Schismatiks
do at first, glorying more in Suffering, than in any other opposition but what
they are able to raise with their pens or tongues, in which they were no
less lavish than bold and indiscreet: yet meeting from the most in power only
blame and contempt, they sought out new habitations for themselves and vents
for their opinions in Amsterdam, where the Dutch allowed a general Mart for all
Religions (the Papacy excepted) without any nicer limitation than obedience to
the Magistrate in things purely Civil. And by this they did not only draw much
of our coin thither, but our Manifactures of Weaving, Dying, Falling, Spinning
and Dressing of Cloth, Stuff etc: Easy to have been prevented, by affording
them an Amsterdam in England, some small City of Refuge, over which her Majesty
might have set a discreet Governor with a Garrison, whose charge they would
willingly have borne, besides the payment of a large excise for their folly.
Nor was there any danger in this, it being unpossible to make them unanimous:
But the Hierarchy had been so bitten already by the Covetousness of Princes
and the sharp and discerning Learning of the Layity, who uninterested in the
general Controversies might have moderated to their disadvantage or set on
foot a farther and more rigid Reformation (which, though a terror to those in
power, is most delightful to the ears of the people) That they persuaded the
Queen, it was against Prudence and Piety to give them harbor; yet in the mean
time connived at Lecturer and weekly Preaching, through which they let in more
by the Posterne, than they could crowd out at the great Gate. Wherefore, this
found out, wisdom should rather have left the attempt in the hands of Time,
the Moderator of all things disputable, Than rendered them incorrigible through
Opposition, the promoter of Error. I am the larger in this, lest posterity
should be to seek for the foundation of the most destructive Revolution the Sun
ever held light to, which was begun by thousands who never intended it, and
wrought the ruin of that both sides labored to preserve, with an excessive
advantage to such as could neither expect or deserve it.

22. Amongst the greatest things laid to her charge, as cast behind the door of
neglect, was the conduct of the affairs of Ireland; a place lying, all her
Halcion days, under so great a contempt, (before England's less future
felicity had brought it to esteem) that wise Walsingham thought it no Treason
to wish it buried in the Sea, considering the charge it brought: yet she kept
the Pale in good order, not suffering the Spanish party to grow more potent in
the North, than was convenient to consume his forces and divert him from nearer
and more dangerous attempts. It being unpossible for her, without appearing
grievous to her people (a Rock she chiefly studied to avoid) at one time to
maintain so dreadful a Navy at sea, and foment the Dutch and French, toward
whose assistance she was called by a louder Necessity, then to render a Nation
quite desolate: None being willing during her life to exchange the present
Government of a Natural Princess, for the less happy. Tyranny of a Viceroy;
of which the most did study more their respective grandeur by extending the
war, then the ease of the Inhabitants and lessening the Queens expense: Till
the Noble Lord Mountjoy was employed, who had no other design then the
conclusion of the work; which he had not yet so easily brought about but that
the Spaniards found themselves betrayed through the covetousness and cowardice
of the Natives, that for small sums would sell not only such forraigners as
came to help them, but their nearest Relations: Wherefore unlikely to keep
faith with their Prince, being of so false and unconstant a Nature, as by a
continual relapsing into Seditious practices they did with the same breath
demand Pardon, and yet panted to accomplish something worthy of Death. Nor was
it possible to reduce them to more Civility (the inhabitants being of such an
amphibious education) but by curing the Boggs and Fastnesses, or building more
Castles and Garrisons then she could spare Money or Men from her other occasions
to furnish: But that which raised the greatest difficulty in relation to an
absolute subjugation of this Province, was the power the Priests exercised over
the Natives Consciences, who not able to resolve themselves, were implicitly
led by their persuasions to cast off the English yoke and distress the Queen,
who in the Roman dialect was styled Heretic, and in whose favor no compact
could be made, much less kept without Mortal Sin in the performer,
especially upon the offer of any (though but seeming) advantage. Nor was the
defection of Ireland one of the smallest inconveniences that resulted to this
Crown from the Protestant Profession.

23. In this miserable Nation, that wanted not only wisdom and virtue to
purchase her own Freedom, but a competency of patience quietly to submit to
the English Civility, the former mentioned Earl of Essex buried his fortune.
For after his more subtle Enemies, prompted by malice and his own destructive
Ambition, had placed him so far off, it proved no hard matter (working upon
her Majesty's age and parcimonious humor) to distress him, for want of coin
and other necessary provisions for so expensive an expedition: which cast him
upon disadvantagious Treaties with Tyrone, the capital Rebel, And might
occasion the private discourse he had with him alone on horseback in the
midst of a River: which hinted to the Queen the first cause of that fatal
suspicion, He might through the assistance of the Irish and English Army
(already wholly at his devotion) attempt some novelty; a dismal whisper the
contrary Faction did hourly inspire her withal: And to give it a deeper
tincture of probability, Sr Robert Cecill gained leave of the Queen to
advertise Essex, first of her being past hope, and after of her Death, stopping
in the mean time all ships else, but what came laden with this fatal
intelligence: And to secure her person no less then his own, in case he took
the wiser counsel of his friends to land in Wales with all the power he could
raise, the English militia were put in a posture of defense: of which no use
was made; for the Earls composition having always participated more of truth
and loyalty to his Sovereign, with zeal to the Protestant Religion, then
prudence or Reason of State, He, not only contrary to the will of his friends,
but beyond the highest hopes of his Enemies, came over attended with some few
Gentlemen; and in this naked condition finding the report false, he cast
himself habited as a travellor at the feet of his Mistress, whom after he never
met (unless since in heaven) being presently confind; yet to no stricter
prison then his Chamber, and under no other guard but the obedience he owed to
his Sovereigns Commands, who though daily importuned, could not be brought to
sign a warrant for any severer Commitment, till after his passage through the
City, In which he did not only exceed the extent of his own ordinary
rashness, But the highest and most extraordinary plots of his Enemies. And
thus was the Earl snatched out of the arms of his Mistress, and torn from the
hearts of the people that were his Servants, by the subtilty of his Enemies,
and in the sight of both brought to an untimely death: It appearing no less
wonder that Prince and Subject did meet in their affections, Then that they
should both be so quiet spectators of his ruin. But as God showed in his death
the weakness of the arm of flesh, so not long after he declared as plainly
the power of his Justice in a strict account he took from those that were the
principal agents in it: For after the blow given, The Queen, presaging by a
multitude of tears shed for him, the great drouth was likely to appear in the
eyes of her Subjects, when the hand that signed the warrant for it should be
cut off, fell into a deep Melancholy, whereof she died not long after. And
for the Fame that immediatlly followed her (if multitudes were not foully
mistaken) she was more beholding to her successors miscarriages in the general
opinion, then any popular esteem attending her to the grave: her death being
reported to proceed from an occasion that would have been thought ridiculous
in an ordinary Lady, much more in a person of her magnitude: But such as take
Princes for other then Men, show they never saw them in true light: who, like
the Gods of the Heathen, cannot in their actions or speeches during Life be
discerned from ordinary Mortals, but by the worship given them; being so
remote from owning any real Divinity, As with the Crown they put on greater
frailties then they do divest: For during the critical minute of the Queens
strongest affection (which was upon Essex his return from Cales) he had
importuned her for some signal token which might assure him, that in his
absence (to which his own Genius, no less then the respect he bare to the
promotion of her honor, and obedience to her commands did daily prompt him)
his Enemies (of whom he had many about the Chair of State) should not through
their Malice or Subtilty distress him, or render him less or worse deserving
in her esteem: upon this, in a great deal of familiatity, she presented a
Ring to him; which after she had by oaths endued with a power of freeing him
from any danger or distress his future miscarriage, her Anger, or Enemies
malice could cast him into, she gave it him, with a promise, that at the first
sight of it all this and more if possible should be granted. After his
commitment to the Tower he sent this Jewel to Her Majesty, by the then
Countess of Notingham, whom Sr Robert Cecill kept from delivering it: This
made the Queen think her self scorned, a Treason against her Honor, And
therefore not unlikely to be voted by the pride of so great a Lady more
Capital then That pretended against her Person, which power does rarely suffer
to escape unpunished: besides he had been tempted through passion to say, or his
enemies to devise, That she now doted, and owned a mind no less crooked then
her body; A high blasphemy against such a divine Beauty, as Flatterers, the
Idolizers of Princes, had enshrined here in. And from these his misfortunes,
led on by the weakness Iealousy and Age had bred in her, his Maligners took
advantage, so as his Head was off before discretion, love or pity had leisure
to dictate, The Ring might be miscarried and the former relation false. But the
Lady of Notingham coming to her death bed, and finding, by the daily sorrow the
Queen expressed for the loss of Essex, her self a principal agent in his
destruction, could not be at rest till she had discovered all, and humbly
implored mercy from God and forgiveness from her earthly Sovereign: who did
not only refuse to give it, but having shook her as she lay in her bed, sent
her accompanied with most fearful curses to a higher Tribunal. Not long
after the Queens weakness did appear mostall, hastened by the wishes of
many, that could not in reason expect pardon for a fault they found she had so
severely punished in her self, as to take comfort in nothing after. But upon
all occasions of signing Pardons would upbraid the movers for them with the
hasty anticipation of that brave man's end, not to be expiated in relation to
the Nations loss by any future endeavor, much less so unseasonable an
uncharitableness to a dying Lady.

24. After Essex was thus laid by, the total management of State-affaires fell
to Sr Robert Cecill in right of wisdom, who free from competition became bold
enough to inform the Queen, that too many years had been already lapsed,
and the peoples quiet hazarded by her delay, in not fixing upon one certain
Successor: Nothing remaining wanting, but her concession, to free the Nation
from a Civil war, in declaring the King of Scots her lawful Heir, who
besides an immediate right, had the greatest power at hand to quell the hopes
of all contrary pretenders, at that time more then a few; having long been
imboldened either through her Majesty's Indulgence or Prudence, an Artifice
dangerous for her people and not unpossibly now destructive to her self, the
love of whom was by good Government for forty years, so deeply rooted in her
Subjects, as it could be buried in nothing but her grave. Nor did he alone beat
her eats with these sounds, no less terrible to her age at that day, then
they had been formerly ungrateful to her youth: But the generality of all
abouth er; there remaining after Essex remove, no Faction at Court able to
rescue any from the present or future revenge of this man, with whom the most
did comply, for fear of having their hopes blasted by this Northern Sun that
began to rise proportionable to the declension of the Queens health. The truth
of which the most incredulous may find throughout the whole Arraignment of
Cobham, Gray, and Rawly, professed Antagonists to Essex, under whose shelter
they might have been protected in relation to their cause, though by them
imprudently managed. This proves it no great hyperboly to affirm The Queen
did not only bury Affection, but her Power in the Tomb of Essex, who having
the Love of the people would execute without fear any Command, which they
wanting durst not undertake: The cause Cecil thought it more prudence to rely
upon the promise of a Prince his Father had made Motherlesse, than in the
forgivenes of a multitude whose odium he had by many proceedings contracted;
But especially in being isntrumental in the death of Essex, and those hopeful
young Gentelmen that lost their lives and fortunes with him: Amongst whom was
Sr Henry Lee, for only wishing well to the three Earls in the Tower, and an
other executed in Smithfield for writing the news of their Apprehension to his
Father that was out of London. But not to exceed the design of this piece
which was not to asperse any, especially one allied so nearly to my
Grandmother, and a Family now rendered Illustrious by two Earldomes and a
number of glorious Matches; I shall relate only his wise indevours to make
James succeed, by whom he was courted with many Letters, and larger promises
than, as I have heard, were ever performed, and other proposals made, amongst
which was a treaty of peace with Spain, passionatly desired of the Scottish
King, who by this grateful service thought to muzle the mouths of the
Jesuits, and to have his offers of connivance more secretly and succesfully
presented at Rome: and upon the same score, Tyrones pardon was moved to the
Queen, and though at first refused by her with high disdain, yet after
brought about for want of strength and Counsel to oppose it. Nor was an
Inquisition after the Will of Henry the 8th omitted, which a Cursiter did about
that time justify he had enrolled, though then not to be found, having before
been taken off the File by some as small friends to the Scottish title as any
other but their own; Harfords, Huntingtons etc. being then rise in every man's
discourse. But to avoid all semblance of triumph over a Right already under
the weight of the severest misfortune: I shall conclude with the most happy
condition this unparalled Princess left the Kingdom of England in.

25. It had no considerable Enemy besides the Catholic King, And his power so
maimed by the frequent blows received from her Maritime Militia, that he
sought peace in a posture far below the usual pride and Rhodomontado gallantry
of that Nation; apparent in the rich Donatives bestowed on all about King James
who were any way likly to farther or obstruct it. As for the wild Irish (a
term that age bestowed on the Rebels) they were daily found dead in bogs and
woods with grass in their mouths, giving no farther trouble to the English
Soldiers (at her death not numerous, many having quitted the employment out of
grief for their General) than to burn and spoil the Corn and other
provisions of the Natives; far easier done, than they overtaken in their
Fastnesses and Bogs, impassable to our Army. The French were by obligation
wound up at least to a neutrality, if not in Policy bound to assist us in case
the war had gone on with Spain: Henry the fourth's former Defection, though
covered with a late formal Conversion, having yet not so strongly estated him
in the affection of Rome as to make him despise the English Aliance or exchange
it for any in judgment less remote from the Pope: or in case of his death or
forgetfulness she had the Hugonotes to friend, who in all walled Towns prayed
for her in public, owning her for little less than their Princess under the
title of a Protecteress. Though the Dutch were no less hers by Interest than
Gratitude, yet least prosperity should in a resty humor strain these cords,
her hands were strengthened by Cautionary Towns, which did not only bridle
them, but abate much of the danger our Merchants were in from those remaining
under the Crown of Spain; Not so much recruited about this time by the
reduction of Ostend after three years siege, as weakened by the former loss of
Sluice in a far less considerable time. As for Denmark, Sweden and other
Nations that ordinary calculation has seated east of us, she held good
correspondence with them, But lay obnoctious to no other inconveniences from
them, Than what she sustained by the Frost, Snow and tedious weather the
vicinity of their icy coasts uses to infest more happier Climats withal.

26. Nor can she appear less Lovely, wise and Successful at home, to any
that is able to fix his eyes upon so great a Radiancy as did compass the head
of this Princess, without the dark vale of prejudice, not hitherto drawn from
before the face of this nation by the visible endeavors of many. Comparisons
being apt to raise no less Odium at home then envy abroad. For through the
series of her Reign she kept Parliaments, the Pulse of this Nation, in such a
temper as no signs appeard either of Anarchy or Tyrannical Oppression; her
Government having been handed to the people with that sweetness, that it was
esteemed of no less advantage to them, than their obedience brought honor to
her: under whom the Crown remained in such credit, as the Exchequer was
esteemed equal security with the Exchange; The Tellers of that Court being as
ready to issue out moneys, as those that had Debenturs were willing to receive
it. And if any contrary practice since brings the truth of this into suspense,
let the Proverb As sure as Check bail me from the least suspicion of
hyperboly. Her Lands, of which she had a vast proportion, were laden with
Timber fit for all employments, lying ready upon occasion either to raise a
Navy, or Money to pay Soldiers or Mariners. Nor was her Treasury quite empty,
or the Crown burdened with any considerable debts, but what a Parliament would
without murmur have refunded; No cause of Iealousy remaining in relation to an
incroachment upon their liberty or estates, Since she did not extend to the
least general prejudice her own unquestioned interest in the perquisites of
the Crown; So as her Parkes, Forests and Chases were rather a relief than
burden to the Subject, it being then as rare to find a man of quality denied
Venison, as to hear of one (if not too intemperate) punished for stealing it.
And as the Justice in Oyer was moderate in his Courts that related only to the
preservation of Game, So those in Westminster Hall were as careful to
distribute Equity and Right: or, if in her time some Cushions in Chancery,
Chequer, and Court of Wards were taken with the Moth of corruption, it was
after her Inspection failed her, for want of a contrary Faction truly to
inform, and no propensity in her Nature to protect such courses. The ordinary
plea used after, of selling Dear, because they bought so, being void the most
of her days; in which no visible Bribes for Offices were offered or accepted
but what resulted from vour or desert. The Church in her days lay not
disfigured in the filth of profanesse, nor was it dawbed by the varnish of
Hypocrisy: Ceremony and Sabbath (the ordinary pretenses for Sedition) being
decently not rigidly commanded or observed. So as the wall-eyed blanchers at
them were followed more out of reproach than approbation; And might have been
so still, had not the State rendered them more considerable by their notice,
than really they were; fondly imagining the hatred found in succeeding
Parliaments to the Papists resulted from a Puritanicall affection, when it was
for a long time in the most a fear of shaking the titles of Abbry-Lands, or a
desire to free the Laity, in all things temporal and mulctable, out of the
hands of the Church; who about the setting of this glorious Planet became
something more red and severe, than suited with a Calling no better supported:
For though zeal in the Clergy may bias men toward religious duties, yet it
has often been found so much to alter the gate of the Rabble; as they have
quite for saken-the end of all Professions which is Obedience to God and their
Governors, And inclined to more uncouth and distructive Opinions, than an open
and unsuborned temper in Religion was ever yet found guilty of.

27. Thus I may have in part expiated for the neglect if not malice observable
from the most Relations concerning this Lady; No less than vindicated my own
Gratitude, (Whose Grandfather and Father did both enjoy a quiet, happy and
plentiful fortune under her) though in a style and method far below her merit,
As best appears by the Bonfiers and loud acclamations used still by the people
upon the day of her Inauguration: The felicity of which was never since
matched, nor have we had yet any cause to hope it will be, especially during my
Life, which began under this beloved Princess.

FINIS.

