GUZMAN. A COMEDY. Acted at the THEATER ROYAL.

Written by the Right Honorable the Earl of ORRERY.

LONDON: Printed for Francis Saunders at the Blue Anchor in the Lower Walk of
the New-Exchange in the Strand. 1693.

PLAYS Printed for Francis Saunders.

HEnry the Fifth. Mustapha. Black Prince. Tryphon. And Guzman. All Written by
the Earl of Orrery: And are to be had single, or bound together.

With them may likewise be Bound, or Bound by themselves, The Surprizal. The
Committee. The Indian Queen. The Vestal Virgin. And Duke of Lerma. All Written
by the Honorable Sir Robert Howard.

All Mr. Dryden's Plays: In Two Volumes, or single; viz. TRAGEDIES.
All for Love. Aurengezebe. Amboyna. Cleomenes. Don Sebastian. Duke of Guise.
Conquest of Granada. Indian Emperor. Oedipus. Royal Martyr. Rival Ladies.
Troylus and Cressida. And, The Essay on Dramatick Poesy.
COMEDIES.
Amphytrion. King Arthur. Love in a Nunnery. Limberham, or the kind Keeper.
Mock Astrologers. Maiden Queen. Sir Martin Marr-All. Marriage A-la-mode.
Spanish Friar. State of Innocence. Tempest. Wild Gallant.


All Mr. Shadwell's Plays, in one Volume, or single.

Sullen Lovers. Humorists. Royal Shepherdess. Virtuoso. Psychy. Libertine.
Epsom Wells. Timon of Athens. Miser. True Widow. Lancashire Witches. Woman
Captain. Squire of Alsatia. Bury Fair. Amorous Bigot. Scowrers. Volunteers.
Any other Play, single or in Volumes.

GUZMAN. A COMEDY.
ACT I. The First Scene is a Piazza, with Walks of Trees, and Houses round
about it.
Enter Guivarro, Alvares, Maria and Lucia. Guiv. WEEP not, Maria, thy Tears
afflict me more than all the rest of our Misfortunes can.


Alva Dear Lucia! Don not Sigh, since 'twas not by our Crimes, but our Dead
Fathers Prodigality, that we are now reduced to this low Condition.


Maria. I mourn not for my Self, but for our Family, bred up to all the
Pleasures of a great Estate; but knew not of his Debts, till, at his Death all
that he had was Seized on; Why were we waked out of that Charming Dream?


Lucia. And you, our dearest Brothers, reduced to wait upon Two Lords, to whom
you were by Birth to be Companions.


Guiv. Alas, we are not only tied to wait upon their Persons, but their
Humors too, A Servitude which nothing could Engage us in, but to Support you
and your Sisters: But that end makes all ways pleasant which leads to it.


Alva. Prithee forbear, our fortunes are so sad, that rather than lament we
should study how to mend them, though Oviedo and Pyrracco have their Defects,
yet they are liberal Masters, and by their Money, we have furnished for your
Use, that fine Appartment you are now to lodge in, by which we have been able
to lay a Design, so likely to succeed, that the Joy it gives me, has suppressed
my Grief.


Guiv. We do but wear the Names of Servants, and thereby Command their Purses;
as we hope you Two shall soon their Hearts; your Births, your Educations, and
your Beauties, joined with our Contrivances, must restore our withered
Fortunes; Francisco, our Youngest Brother, who was bred up under a great
Astrologer, we have hired a House for, and have already made him famous for
Telling Fortunes, nay for Negromancy; his Conjuring Name you must remember is
Alcanzar.


Alva. You two must cry him up to all the Ladies, and the Gallants, you
converse with. Our Youngest Sister Iulia, we have placed with Leonora, the Rich
Widow, Mother to the Great Heiresses, Antonia and Pastrana.


Guiv. These are the Foundations on which we mean to build, you both must live
after the manner which we shall direct. But you must hastily retire, for I see
Oviedo and Pirracco, with their Two Uncles Salazar and Fernando, coming. Ex.
Mar. and Lucia.


Enter Oviedo, Pirracco, Salazar, and Fernando, with Spectacles on their Noses.
Salaz. Antonia and Pastrana are the most Eminent for Wealth and Beauty; my
Brother, your deceased Father, made it the Business of his Life to Wed you
there.


Fern. And had, before his Death, so far advanced it, as now it rests on you to
perfect what his Care so well began.


Ovi. Uncles, the Old are unfit to choose Wives for the Young.


Pir. Men should look with Eyes, and not with Spectacles in Affairs of Love.


Ovied. Nor would I Wed the Empress of the World, though she were the greatest
Beauty of it, in that dull Method of our grave Forefathers; 'Sfoot, they
married as they purchased Lands, agreed upon the Bargain, then entered and took
Possession.


Pirr. They Wedded Wealth to Wealth, when the chief Benefit of Riches is, to
make Election of what most we like.


Salaz. And if what most you like have Riches too, I hope that makes it not the
Worse.


Ovied. To me it does exceedingly; it gives a Wife too great a Motive to be
proud, when she can upbraid her Husband, that 'twas she (forsooth,) increased
his Fortune, whereas Marrying for Beauty only pleases me, obliges her, and
keeps her humble too.


Fern. These are new Maxims Nephew.


Pirr. And therefore I like them the better; I have seen fo much Mischief
happen by following the Old, that I am resolved to try some fresh Experiments.


Ovied. 'Twould be an Injustice to all Humane Kind, if still the Rich should
only Wed the Rich, the World would then consist only of Usurers and Beggars:
But if Rich Men marry the poor and handsome Women, and the Rich Women the Poor
and handsome Men, the Gifts of Nature, and of Fortune, will be equally
distributed; Delight and Wealth so shared will restore to both the Sexes that
Happiness, which the Old formal Ways of acting have so long deprived them of.


Pirr. Young and handsome is Portion enough to him that needs not any.


Salaz. Notwithstanding these fine Axioms, pray visit them, or at least show us
better Reasons why you will not.


Pirr. Why it is Reason enough, that thus you press us to it, I hate Constraint
in any thing, and in Love above all things.


Fra. Yes, yes, pretty well, but now Guzman, you have discharged let me march
up and give Fire too.


Ovied. Pray, Uncles! press us no more! our Father ruled us whilst, he was
alive, and we'll rule our Selves now he is Dead.


Pirr. Why, this is as bad to us as if he were still living.


Fern. Farewell! we pity you Ex. Salaz. and Fernand.


Ovied. And we our Selves whilst you are with us; But now they are gone; Tell
me my Piracco, why you will not Court Antonia.


Pirr. I will, so you will tell me, Why you will not Court Pastrana.


Ovied. Because, I doubt, should I make her an Address, none would dare to be
my Rival; it is known I love a Duel more than I love a Mistress, and delight to
make my Conquest over Men, my ways to be Victorious over Woman -- Now your
Reason. --


Pirr. I will never marry till I can get a Wife by some Stratagem; She, that I
can take when She is at her own dispose, will never attempt to break from one,
who, she has experimented* has the Master-Wit. And should I now Win Antonia,
our Solemn Uncles would brag they and my Father got her for me: I Scorn to
build on others Men's Foundations. But, Did you ever see Pastrana?


Ovied. No more than you have seen Antonia.


Guiv. These Resolves are pretty; he that has no Brains will get a Wife by a
Stratagem; and that has no Heart will get his Wife by a Duel.


Alva. I doubt they resolve to live Batchelors.


Enter Guzman and Francisco, Muffled in their Cloaks, with Musicians following
'em. Fran. It Is under that Balcony, you must Play and Sing.


Guz. Are you sure it is Antonia and Pastrana's Window?


Fran. Are you sure your Name's Guzman, and mine Francisco?


Ovie. Why, What Is the matter? While the Music is Tuning, Guivar and Alvares
run to Ovied. and Pirr. and bid 'em stand upon their Guards.


Guiv. Do you not see some muffl'd there?


Pirr. Pish! those are Gallants who intend to give a Serenade to some Ladies,
but yet I may Mistake, and they may have some design on us.


Ovied. However, I love to have my Sword in a readiness; when this is in my
hand, let others fear, for I cannot.


Pirr. Prithee let us be gone, I like not Duels in the Dark.


Ovied. What afraid, Pirracco?


Pirr. No, no, only in all things I love Circumspection.


SONG.
OPEN those Casements which Confine
The Brightest Beauties that do shine;
Beauties which such Strong Beams display
As out of Night can form a Day.
A Day which they have power to Crown
With Joy or with despair;
For as they Smile, or as they frown,
So they can make it foul or fair. Ex. Music.
Guzm. Appear, fair Nymphs! and by the Luster of your Eyes
Restore us Day before the Sun does rise.
I hope I rehearsed the Distick right; and by Musaeus I Am sure spoke it
Heroically.

Music but to the Ear does Joy dispense,
But your fair Eyes will Ravish every Sense.
Ladies, the Fame of your Triumphant Beauties has made us take this way to A
Balcony opens, in which Antonia appears dressed in Pink-Colour, and Pastrana in
Sky-colored Gowns. Ovi. and Pirr. seemed surprised and amazed. satisfy our
Curiosities in seeing them.


Anto. Is your Friend a Carthusian, or else a Stranger that does not understand
Guzm. makes many ridiculous Legs and Faces, but does not speak. our Language,
and therefore chooses you to speak for both.


Guzm. No Ladies, I hope ere long to convince you, that I have not forsworn
Flesh, but am studying for the fittest Words to tell you, that I make a Present
of my Heart to you.


Pastra. To which of us?


Fra. Say, To her in the Sky-Colour.


Guzm. I thank you; as if I could not tell better than you which pleases me; I
say, I love her in the Pink best.


Fra. Why, she is my Mistress.


Guzm. That Is pleasant: Since when? Since when? Nay, no studying.


Fra. Since I saw her first.


Guzm. And she is mine just as long a Time: There is not one Moments
difference, between the Births of our two Loves, by Gemini, I think they are
Twins.


Fra. But mines the Elder, and if you will dispute it, the best Sword shall try
the Title.


Guzm. Nay, Sir, if you be so hot, know I wear an Iron Toy as well as you.


Fra. I Will try if you can use it as well as I can mine.


offers to Draw. Guzm. What? draw before a Woman, you show your Breeding; but
if you will be drawing, let it be Lots rather than Swords to determine whose she
shall be.


Fra. I scorn to rely on Fortune, when true valor ought to decide it.


Guzm. You are too hasty, Capt. Hector, since fortune is as blind as Love, she
seems to me the fittest Judge in our Cause; nor will I fight for her, till from
her Self I know she is for me.


Fra. The way to make her for thee, is in her Sight bravely to kill me.


Guzm. And then bravely to be hanged for it, if I were as poor as thou art, I
would not care to suffer Death for any thing, much less for a Mistress, as thou
would order this Intrigue, I must either miss my Love, or not miss the
Gallows.


Fra. Will you not fight then?


Guzm. Not yet, and for to speak the Truth, I like 'em both so well, that which
of them declares for me, I shall love her the best: yet, were I to choose,
little Pink-Colour for my Pallat.


Pastr. Are you yet agreed to which of us you make a Present of your Heart.


Guzm. Even to which of you will first accept it; for your Beauties are equally
so great, that I know not to which of you to give it. But either of you that
have most mind to it may take it, it is at both your Services I assure you.


Pirr. They are Charming Fair.


Ovied. to Guiv. and Alva: Go both of you and learn their Names and Qualities.


Ex. Gui. and Alva. Ovied. Now for a Stratagem, my Pirracco, to get the
Pink-Colour Beauty from those two Rivals.


Pirr. Here you may meet with what you most desire, Beauty and Rivals, why do
you lose time to make your Conquest over Men, the way to be victorious over
Women.


Ovied. Pause a little I mean to dog these Gallants to their Lodgings, to
Night, that I may see them in the Field to morrow.


Pastr. We have had as much dispute, who should accept your Heart, as you have
had to which of us you will give it.


Fra. to Anto. Ah! through my Eyes, Madam, you have Stolen away my Heart,


Anto. I doubt your Courage, Sir, is small, since your Heart can be drawn
through so Strait a Passage.


Fra. Do not believe, because my Passions great, my Courage is but small. Loves
does often admirable things. Your Beauties, I confess, are vast, yet, since
they find a Passage through my Eyes into my Heart, why may not my Heart as well
find a Passage through my Eyes to you: Madam, you may as well condemn your own
Charms, as doubt my Valor on the Score you do


Guzm. hems thrice. BEauty in Pink,
How can thou think
That Guzman's Heart is small,
When thou do see
He dares love thee
And tell it in a Madrigal.

Anto. By this Light a Poet, Sister.


Pastr. He a Poet, alas, good Man! this is only what he has been taught by Rote.


Guzm. Hold thy Peace, Envy: I say this is a Spanker Madrigal, and newly minted
in my Brain.


Pastr. And, I say, Sir Poet Fop, If you can make an Extempore Sonnet, choose
which of us you like the best, and she shall be your Mistress.


Guzm. A Match by Homer. Dear Francisco, thou art a Wit, help me at this Dead
lift, and, by our Mistress 's Virginity, I Will do the as good a Turn.


Fra. Thou that have so strong a fancy, as to Imagine I will help thee to get
my Mistress, have the best Ingredient of a Poet; but, what the Devil set the
thus a Madrigalling?


Guzm. Why, thou know I have still had a Twittering to be a Cottager of
Parnassus, besides, I love the Muses, because they are Wenches, and therefore I
never have an Amorous Fit, but at the same time I have a Poetical One.


Fra. Then thou art in Love, or need'st not my Assistance; but in this Case I
will afford the none.


Pastr. Come, Fumbler, are you ready.


Guzm. Hang your Assistance, I scorn to be beholding to it. If Madam, my muse
cannot walk on her Feet, Even let her Lady-ship fall.


Anto. Is this the Stanza you promise us? It runs as dull as any Prose.


Guzm. 'Slid, she takes what I last spoke to thee for Verses, I see she is not a
Wit: And therefore do not thou think I may pass any thing upon her for a
Madrigal.


Fra. Try, try, Any thing that Rhimes may Serve.


Guzm. Why, there is it; by Cupid, when I would not make Sonnets my fancy will
coin nothing else; and now, that I would make but one, and when my Mistress for
that one does look, I Am duller than a Lover, that is forsook. Why, here is Witch
craft again, Rhyme and Verses when I need it not. But when I most desire in
both to speak
I then find, to my Grief, I am to seek*
Look! by Pegasus, a third effect of Magic.
I am Ovid when I speak to thee, but de Tristibus when I am to speak to her.


Fra. Turn thy Face toward her ever the Poetical Rapture's spent, and imagine
thou speak to me; for if thou have not a stronger Fancy, thou should
despair of being a Poet.


Guzm. I Will try: Now, Lady, listen to my Extempore Stanza.


Pastr. We have so long expected it, that we have reason to believe it is
premeditated.


Guzm. By Virgil, the Fit is spent, there is no Guzm. homs thrice, opens his
Mouth thrice, but says nothing; then angryly and amazedly turns to Francisco.
more Hypocrinian Moisture in my Brain than in the Palm of a Witch's Hand.
Rather Than I will such Affronts endure,
I will for ever Poetry abjure:
By Lucan's Farsalia I am fascinated, and by thee; I can no sooner turn to
thee, but I spit Verses faster than a flux'd Wencher does his Rhume, But when
toward her I do but turn my Nose,
I cannot speak to her in Verse or Prose.
Again, by Hellicon, it is admirable, it is prodigious, it is amazing; Have thou
not given me some Spell? Or, Is my Muse the Needle, and thou the North, that I
must still turn toward thee? Prithee, Francisco, do thou stand under the
Balcony, and look this way, and then, if I do not make a Stanza, I Will take my
leave of Poetry and Love.


Fran. I Will humor thee, for once, though it be against the Interest of my
Love. Fran. goes under the Balcony.


Anto. Well, Sir, I find you are not an Extempore Poet, or you have wirh
Premeditation resolved to refuse us.


Pastr. He a poet! I tell you, Sister, he has an arrant Prose-Look, a Face
which seems to be the Antipodes to Wit; I had rather abjure the Love of all
Men, than have that maukish Mien haunt me with his: Why, he will as soon make a
handsome Man as a handsome Stanza; one is now as much an Impossibility in Nature,
as the other is in his Art.


Guzm. Marry come up, Goody Penthisilea, you hector it with your Tongue,
because you cannot do it with your Eyes; and would have me to quarrel with your
Usage, when my Quarrel is to your Face, you did well to prevent me, else I had
cried Whore first: There Is an Elegy for your Epigram; and having thus conquered
you in Prose, have at you now in Verse. I Love not you
That go in Blue,
If you will I Will take my Oath on it;
But it is your Companion
I love above any one.
And there is an Extempore Sonnet. Anto. and Pastra. laugh.
I Am sure I have pleased them now, for I have made them laugh.


Fra. Yes, but 'twas at thee.


Guzm. How! Dares any laugh at me.


Fra. Yes; any that dares hear thy Verses.


Guzm. Why, Thou did hear them.


Fra. And therefore I could not hold laughing at them.


Guzm. Here Is that shall make thee cry. Draws his Sword, and flings the
Scabbard away.


Fra. Here Is that shall secure me from it. Draws his Sword.


Anto. Though I like your Verses ill, yet perhaps I shall like your Fighting
worse, and therefore I Will not see it.


Pastr. Nay, if you will Duel it, you shall do it without the Seconds.


Pastr. and Anto. shut the Balcony, and retire. Fra. If you will combat, draw
your Sword in a good Cause, you cannot have a worse than this; yet, if you will
be doing, come on, you shall not want Employment. [Aside.] There Is no other way
but this to fright him.


Guzm. Stay! I will consult my Honor.


Pirr. Away, the Beauties are withdrawn, and I see Men with naked Swords coming
toward us; the best Stratagem in this Case is a safe Retreat. Ex. Pirracco.


Ovied. Stay, Pirracco, the Number's equal; but now he is gone, it is not so.
Not Hercules against two.


Ovied. 'Sdeath! What horrid Thrusts As soon as Pirr. is gone, Guzm. puts
himself into a Fencing posture, and makes many Thrusts that way; Ovi. is crying
at every Thrust, Hagh, Hagh that Villain makes, he sees his Odds, and I am so
sensible of it, that I Will stay no longer; yet I Will go off bravely Fighting. Ex.
Oviedo, going out, thrusts his Sword backwards toward Guzm.


Fra. Who is that which makes such have away?


Guzm. Some that I frighted with the deadly Thrusts I made. You see, Francisco,
I can Fence, and give the Mortal Touch.


Fra. It Is safer for you to Fence against the Air than against me.


Guzm. Well! I have considered, and am resolved: It misbecomes a Man of my
Estate and Education to fight by Owl-Light, and in the Streets; we'll defer our
Duel to another time; besides, she before and for whom I would fight has
withdrawn her self; let us put up.


Fra. Content: But do you think the Lady in the Blue will ever put up the Words
you gave her.


Guzm. By Eribus, that is pretty, did she not first begin with me?


Fra. Yes; but you should have considered her Sex.


Guzm. And she should have considered mine; for I Am sure it is fitter for a
Woman to bear ill Language than for a Man to do it. I am so tender in point of
Honor, that if mine were offended, though by a Child of four Years old, yet I
would resent it to the last degree; besides, the Feminine Sex is so paultry a
Sex, as I have no reverence for any one of it, that I am not first in Love
with: But prithee help me, it is my Custom when I draw my Sword to fling away
the Scabbard, and now I cannot find it.


Fra. Was there ever such a vapouring Coward?


Pirr. Oviedo and I left the place only While at one end of the Stage they are
groping for the Scabbard, there enters at the other Pirracco, Guivarro,
Alvares. because they did out-number us.


Guiv. How many were there of 'em, Sir?


Pirr. Just three, that made me call but to you two, for I scorn Odds, now if
they three continue here, our Numbers being alike, we'll make 'em sport; I
could not sleep with any seeming Stain upon my Reputation.


Alva. I see them, and I think there are but Two.


Pirr. There are no more of them now; I wonder where a Duce the Third is fled:
Well, since there are but Two, only you Two shall fall on them; I hate to take
Advantages, no, not by Countenancing my Revenge; if you both return with their
two Swords, as proof of Victory, bring 'em to me, and I Will largely Reward your
Valor and Success. But be sure Oviedo knows nothing of this whole Affair. Ex.
Pirracco.


Alva. Upon my Life there were but Two at first; his Fear made him plot what he
says his Honor makes him do.


Guiv. No matter, since we must be his Bravoes, let us first make his Enemies
pay for it, and then himself. Ho! What are you? And, What is it you are doing
there.


Guzm. What a quarrelsom Voice that Rogue has? Guzm. peeps between his own Legs.


Alv. Are you Mutes?


Guzm. I Am searching for my Scabbard, I wish you would help me to find it; I lost
it even now in a Rencounter I had with the fierce Young Guzman.


Alv. Your Sword then is the readier to fight with me.


Guzm. Franeisco, do thou answer him; for I Am so ticklish in Point of Honor,
as I shall make a Quarrel of it.


Fra. Who are you that thus unprovoked come to offend us; if you come to Fight,
hold up but your little Finger, and you shall need no other Provocation.


Guzm. It Is the Poverty of the Rogue makes him thus Valiant; he has nothing but
a Life to lose, which every day costs him so much trouble to maintain, that
it is more easy to be rid of it.


Guiv. Sure that is Francisco's Voice.


Alv. If it is not his, it is very like it, Francisco.


Fra. Alvares.


Alv. Yes.


Fra. Speak softly: Who Is there besides?


Alv. It Is our Brother Guivarro.


Guiv. What makes you here, Francisco?


Fra. You shall know another time.


Alv. Who is that with you?


Fra. The Rich Guzman, who maintains me better than all my Astrology can.


Guiv. O! if it be he, a little Oratory will persuade him to give us up his
Sword, we must have yours too, it shall bring us Gold.


Fra. My Sword!


Alv. Inquire not, Why we must have it? for the good of the Family.


Fra. Well, what must be, must be; but yet I Will seem as if I fought, and call
him to my help, which is the most Compendious Course to make him run; a Bustle
will make him think I fought bravely, which shall add to our common Stock no
small Sum.


Alv. I Will stop his Flight, for he has already put on a Running Look.


Guzm. By Alexander the Magnificent they mean to make a set Business of it; and
I think this long Parley is but to measure their Swords, which, while they are
doing, I Will measure how many of my largest Strides it is from hence to the next
Sanctuary.


Alv. I know it is me you seek. Guiv. and Fran. make as if they Fight; Guzm.
steals off the Stage, has his Way entercepted by Alvares.


Guzm. Upon my Honor I do not, Sir.


Alv. What! leave your Friend engaged, and in your Quarrel; consider, Sir, your
Reputation.


Guzm. How he mouths that Word; it is his own Quarrel upon my Credit, Sir, as he
began it, let him end it too for me. Fra. flings down Guiv. and disarms him.


Guiv. Help, Friend, I am down.


Alv. to Fran. parting from Guzman. Unhand my Friend, or thou art dead.


Fra. to Alv. I am ready too for you, Sir. They fight.
Courage, Guzman, we shall get Honor here.

Guzman. No, my Fighting Friend, we will get no Honor here; you shall have it
all to your own self, I will not rob you of any part of it; I see you are
strong enough for both, and do not need my help.


Guiv. Stand still, or I Will shoot thee dead.


Guzm. 'Slid, it is a Blunderbuss; Well, While Guzm. is the Second Time stealing
off, Guiv. hastily snatches up Guzman' s Scabbard, which he ilaps to his
Shoulder, and levels at him as if it were a Gun. Sir, I stand as still as a Man
can do, that has a Gun levelled at his Heart.


Guiv. Son of a Bachelor, do not I see ever, Limb of thee stir?


Guzm. My Circumference perhaps may trepidate; but as I am a Cavalier, I am not
moved one hairs breadth from the Center I stood in, when you first condemned me
to it.


Guiv. I doubt thou art a Coward.


Guzm. Had I your Archebuse, a Croche, and you but my simple Sword, perhaps I
should put you into as bad a fit of the Palsy as you have now surpised me
into.


Guiv. I Will try thee; here, give me thy Sword; and I Will give thee my Gun; if I
tremble when thou do level it at me, then call me Coward too.


Guzm, Content. -- Courage Francisco, I am Guz. gives Guiv. first his Sword;
then Gui. gives him his Scabbard. coming to thy help with my Artillery.


Guiv. Present at me now Don Quixot. Guiv. laughs.


Guzm. By Vulcan it is my own Scabbard; had I known this had bin your only
Firearms, I would have made you as active as you have made me fixed: By
Medusa's head I am cheated.


Guiv. Nay, rather than you shall complain, we'll Exchange again; I desire but
the Scabbard at any time to get thy Sword from thee -- here.


Guzm. No Sir, Give a thing and take a thing, I scorn it: Besides, as things
now are handled, I am out of a possibility of committing a Murder on you, and
I hope this Charm -- Flings a Purse. will restrain you from acting one on me.


Guiv. Well Sir, to show you I am liberal too, I present you with any Leather
-- Blunderbuss; it is a Modern Invention may be worth all the Money now in your
Purse, and Exchange you know is no Robbery.


Guzm. Shall I not have my Toledo too?


Guiv. No Sir, I have most need of it; you have now nothing worth defending:
I Have your late Purse to guard. Your Servant Sir, away Friend.


Ex. Guiv. and Alvares. Guzm. A Scabbard and no Purse! Things are discreetly
matched: By Ptolomy, this has been a damnable Intrigue.


Fran. O Guzman! Had thou but played the Man when I had flung down and
disarmed my Antagonist, we had gotten Immortal Fame; but now thou art lost in
Infamy: Thy Sword taken from thee, by him who had only the Scabbard to do it
with!


Guzm. Fie on all Inchanters, say I: I tell thee Francisco, when it was in his
hand it was a Fusee, I saw it Cocked, the Muzzel was bigger than any Blunderbuss
which made me mention to thee Assistance and Artillery; but as soon as it came
into my hand it was Metamorphos'd into that Rascally Scabbard of mine: I tell
thee all this Night's Adventures have been Magical; Those whom thou tookest but
for two Men, and seemed to me no more after the day was lost by us, appeared to
me to be the Cavalry of the great Mogul.


Franc. Did not thy Fear multiply them?


Guzm. Fear! Why I tell thee an Alexander might fear to Fight against such an
Army as those were, had they been but Men; but being all Goblins, as I Will be
sworn they were; by Proserpin it is happy we came off as we did.


Fran. I confess I begin to believe there was some of the black Art in our
Disaster; and I more than doubt the famed Alcanzar has had a hand in it.


Guzm. Who is this Alcanzar?


Franc. The Miracle of this Age: He can tell things to come more perfectly than
old Records declare what is past: He can Inchant, give Charms to make men
Invulnerable, Filters to Engender Love: In a word, what er'e he will, he does.


Guzm. Do thou know him?


Franc. Know him? yes I was bred under him.


Guzm. By Pluto then he gave thee a Charm this Night, that thou have escaped
unwounded: Fie on thee, 'twas that made thee so devilish Valiant: But since he
will sell Safety, I am Rich enough and Wise enough to buy it: Prithee hire his
Art for me, 'Ile pay him liberally.


Franc. Come, let us return to your House; and there we will lay some Plot to Act
Revenge and to recover Honor. Cheer up.

The great Alcanzar I Will Engage for you;
And what his Art has done, it shall undo. Exeunt.

ACT II. The Scene with the Chimny in it.
Enter Guzman and Francisco. with a Paper. Fran. I Came just now from Alcanzar,
and as an Earnest of your future Liberality, assured him of 500 Crowns Two
ready. before Dinner, and at Two in the Afternoon you must attend him alone;
for he will admit of no Witnesses, lest the Knocking prepared. prodigious
Effects of his Art, might by the Ignorant, pass for Magic, and he by two
Testimonies be condemned by the Inquisition.


Guzm. Five hundred Crowns as Earnest! I thought I might have bought for half
that Sum a Thousand Filters and as many Charms; and yet thou call it but an
Earnest of a Future Liberality.


Fran. Nay, if you think the Price too dear, I can yet break off the Bargain:
But then look to your self, for all, which by his Art you might cast upon your
Enemies, they will involve you in; and then in point of Love you will be
rendered so impotent and ridiculous, that Death will be a Happiness, compared to
that dismal Life which you must be condemned to live.


Guzm. Well, I Will consider -- One knocks hastily at the Door, Fran. runs out to
see who it is.

It Is a mighty Price: Had not I better sit down with things as they are, than
be at so Immense a Charge? Five hundred Crowns is pleasanter to me than either
Revenge or Love.


Fran. Nay, Gentlemen! you shall not force into his House, or if you will,
through me you must make Fran. at the Door. your Passage; Guzman is a Man of
Honor, and at his return I Will engage shall receive their Lordships Challenges;
one after the other I mean.


Guiv. Two without fay --


Two. Well Sir, we'll take your Word, and will be with you in the Evening.


Enter Francisco. Guzm. What Is the matter, Francisco? New Enchantments? Guzm.
seems much in disorder when he heard his own Name and a Challenge.


Fran. No, no, these are sad and real Truths: I told you the Affront you cast
upon the Lady in the Blew would be resented by some of her Friends or Gallants;
and these that would have come in to you now with a Challenge, were a couple of
Gentlemen, who say they come from Oviedo and Piracco; unknown the one unto the
other, and meeting here by Accident, found each of them brought a Challenge
from his Friend to you.


Guzm. To me? how could they learn 'twas I that affronted the Sky-Colour?


Fran. Can you ask that question, and know that the famed Alcanzar lives in the
next Street? I wish whilst you are cheapning the Bargain, that they do not clap
it up. If a couple of certain Duels, and perhaps a hundred more to follow (for
only Fate knows where so brisk a beginning will meet an End) be not worth Five
hundred Crowns to get off with Honor and Victory, let your Parsimony and your
Wisdom consider; but I have decreed to abjure your Company, for nothing less
than Charms can secure you or any one that keeps it.


Guzm. Who, a duce, are those two Fellows, Oviedo and Piracco?


Fran. It Is a sign you are not of the fighting Crew of the Town, that ask who
they are. Why, they are Men that can hardly Sleep without a Murder: They have
spent half their Estates only in the many Pardons their Valor has forced them
to take out. In one Word, you had better have a Quarrel with all Salamanca than
with them, and you must fight with them both by Six a Clock, or they will have
killed you before Seven.


Guzm. But there are Laws to restrain them.


Fran. Laws! They no more value Laws than they do their own Souls; one of them
sent a Cartel to a Judge upon a Bench, for not saluting him as he past by, by
accident. Others fear the Laws, but they make the Laws fear them. But having
warned you of your Danger, fare you well.


Guzm. Nay stay, Francisco; though Money be precious, Honor and Life is more:
But how shall I be sure his Charms will hold? for if I should think my self
Invulnerable, and thereby be engaged to fight, and then should be betrayed,
what would become of Guzman?


Fran. Fear not, you shall try the Charms in his Closet, before you prove them
in the Field. But while we are thus talking, I know not if there will be time
enough left for him to prepare for you such efficacious Spells; and if by Six
you are not ready, take what will follow the next Hour. Here Is your Ticket to
him: Now go fetch your Crowns, that I may with them, smooth your Way to him.


Guzm. Well, Honor cannot be too dearly bought by Men of Reputation; when I am
Charmed I Will make those two. Hectors pay for my purchase.


Fran. But stay, I will not betray you, your Charms shall not work upon her in
the Pink; her I reserve for my own self.


Guzm. How Slave! must I give vast Sums and fight Duels, to let others share in
my Amors?


Fran. Nay Sir, if you are at this lock, before you are Charmed we'll decide
the Quarrel: 'Twill be too late for me to do it afterward. Drawn.


Guzm. Well, since I Am sure to have such variety, 'twere ungrateful to deny
thee one.


Fran. This is generous, and now I Will work for you without fear.


Guzm. And I Will go boldly and bring down my Five hundred Crowns; Meet me at the
Great-Gate. Ex. Guzman.


Guzman's ready. Enter Guivarro and Alvares. Guiv. How does it take?


Fran. Even to our wish: This day at Two a Clock I am to Charm him, and at Five
each of you must present your Challenge apart: But I can stay no longer, I am
going to receive my first five hundred Crowns, and to put my self in my
Astrological Clothes and Closet.


Guzm. Francisco, Francisco! Guzman calling within.


Fran. I come, I come; away, away. Ex. severally.


A Table and Two Swords. Enter Oviedo to Piracco in his Chamber. A flat Scene
of a Chamber. Ovie. Piracco, Good Morrow, I hope you have not slept to Night.


Pir. Why not slept to Night?


Ovie. I think your Heart is low, if after leaving me engaged as you did, you
could take any rest till your Honor were restored; You made a very quick
retreat Sir.


Pir. Me thought Yours was not very slow; I watched you.


Ovie. 'Slight, 'twas time to make a Retreat when you fled from me, and a dozen
Bravoes fell on me.


Pir. A dozen Bravoes?


Ovie. Bravoes did I say? I meant Furies, they laid about them so; especially
one that made Alonges above thirty Foot; I Parried fifty times, and if ever I
dealt like a Cavalier of Honor, 'twas in that Occasion.


Pir. Bless me! were you not hurt?


Ovie. Some Scratches I had, Marks rather of Honor than of Danger; which with
my Sympathetick Powder I have cured this Night: But I have sent a File of them
into the Elizian Shades, and had I not been afraid of drawing more Blood upon
my Soul, I would have dispatched the rest: Fear of doing, not receiving hurt,
made me retire.


Pir. Well, though one of your Antagonists made an Alonge of Thirty Foot with
his Sword; yet you have made a longer with your Tongue; for there were but two
in all, and I have disarmed them by a Stratagem; look, here are both their
Swords: Show me such Trophies of your Valor, as I have showed you my Policy.


Ovie. Two Swords? by my left Mustachio, these two Swords belong unto some of
those Six that I sent Post to Charon. These are but the Gleanings of my
Valor's Harvest.


Pir. And by my right Mustachio, these are all the Swords were in your dozen
Furies hands, which by my Contrivance I forced from them; talk what you please,
this is the naked Truth.


Ovie. Nature is yet the strongest, but if thou provokest me farther, the Tie
of Blood shall soon be Sacrificed to the Resentments of my Honor.


Leon. Pastra. Anton. No more, I say: But does your Inteligence jump with mine?


Pir. As to what?


Ovie. Why, that the two Beauties we saw last Night, are Pastrana and Antonia,
whom before we slighted.


Pir. For certain.


Ovie. It has raised in me a greater Conflict than that I had last Night with
the two half dozen of Bravoes; for should we make Addresses there, the Grave
Solomon's, our Uncles, would so domineer over us, that we had better be Slaves
at Tituan, than endure their Tyranny; and if I make not my Addresses there, I
must decline both what my Honor and my Inclination leads me to, for there I
meet with Charming Beauties, and with certainty of fighting Rivals: Two things
my very Soul is tickled with.


Pir. I must confess, she in the Pink Charms me, as much as she in the Blew
does you; but leave it to my Policy to manage our Addresses there, without
their knowledge, for I also fear their insulting more than you.


Ovie. Well, on things of Valor thou shall rely on me, as I on things of
Policy on thee; but lose no Opportunity.

Each Minutes loss of Time seems twenty days
To him, who longs for Myrtle and for Bays. Ex.

Enter Leonara, Pastrana and Antonia. The Q. of Hungary's Chamber. Leon. It Is a
strange Fame that runs of this Alcanzar: The secretest Thoughts which are
concealed within the darkest corner of the Heart, they say are visible to him
as Objects are to Sight; I must confess, I could not but employ my Iulia to him
to get a private Audience from him, there to ask a thousand Questions; most of
them concern you, my dearest Daughters:


Pastr. Anto. Me Madam?


Leon. Yes, both: For many of our young Gallants solicit my Consent to make
you their Addresses, but I have been longest, and most assiduously courted to
admit Oviedo and Piracco, Men of Noble Births and Fortunes; their Father, when
he lived, half gained my liking; and since his Death Salazar and Fernando have
renewed the Assault: On the other side, Guzman, prodigiously Rich, but neither
over-stout nor wise, as I am informed, has by his Friends this day begged my
Consent, that he my Court you; and from Alcanzar's Art I Will be resolved.


Pastr. This is not your Guzman, the Poet, I hope. Whispers to her Sister.


Anto. By the Character it should; for he is Rich, and neither Wise, nor
Valiant.


Enter Julia. Iulia. Madam, I have been these four Hours ever I could get
Admittance to the Great Alcanzar; The Chamber before his Astrological Cabinet,
is thronged more than a Hive of Bees. But at last I got Admittance to him, and
at Four this Evening Maria, Lucia, Sala. Ferd. precisely he will admit you
privately, and disintangle himself out of all other Company, for one half hour,
to Entertain you: He pressed me to know who the great Lady was I came from, but I
told him, I would die before I would reveal it; at which he Frowned, and said,
'Twould cost him a quarter of an Hour's Trouble to employ his Art, to learn
your Name, and all you would ask before you came; but if you fail, Madam, one
Moment of an Hour, never expect to employ his Skill again.


Leon. Thank thee, dear Iulia: Since he is so Punctual, it is fit I should
retire; for ever I can prepare those Queries, which he must resolve, put on my
Disguise and have gotten thither, the appointed Hour will have stolen on us:
Come Daughters, go along with me, to learn your Fate and mine. Ex. Omnes.


A little Bell ready. Guzm. ready.


The new Black Scene. The Scene opens, and Francisco appears in a Magical Habit
Flashes of Fire ready. (with his Closet painted about with Mathematical
Instruments and Crotesque Figures) with a Laurel on his Head, Tripos. and a
White-Wan in his Hand, Knocks with his Foot, and four Boys appear within the
Scene. Fran. My Spirits appear: You four, when I strike with my Foot, must
enter like Hob-goblins, making terrible Noises and Hums; and all offering to
Seize upon the Man that I shall set in that Chair, yet touch him not, but in
the Way I have directed; and use all other Arts, which formerly you have
practiced in the like Occasion. Bell Rings here.

O, one of you run, and open the Door, and bring the Person in.


Guzm. Would Francisco were with me: I Smell so much Saltpeter, Niter, and
Brimstone, that I must One runs and opens the Door invisibly to Guzman, shuts
it after him, and then they all four go out. be near the Habitation of the
Devil; I wish I had given my Five hundred Crowns I had not come: Is there no
way back? 'slid all the Doors are shut. Nor can I Pray: I cannot speak an Ave
in Latin, no more than in Arabic: Has not the Rogue, Francisco, sent me hither
to destroy me, being his Rival? When Fran. rises flashes of Fire.


Guzm. Quarter, Quarter, Sir; Francisco rises up with his Wan on a sudden, at
which Guzman starts back, and falls over, Crying. I beseech you.


Fran. Mortal Wight, that had the Heart,
To see the Negromantick Art;
Approach, approach and thou shall view,
Things so strange, and things so new,
That thy Soul in Rapture shall
Only on Alcanzar call:
Here are Spirits of the Air,
Others of the Stygian-Lake.
Those are Gay and Bright, and Fair;
These than Hell it self more black.

Guzm. By Statius, a Poetical Conjurer; what would I give to answer him in his
own Dialect? But Fear now, as Love last Night, has levelled my Parnassus as
flat as a Pancake.


Fran. Mortal! Why keep'st thou aloof? Waving his Wan.
Beat it hither on the Hoof,
Else though thou were twice as Rich,
Fiends would catch thee by the Breech,
And drag thee to Grim Charon's Cave,
Where my Art no power will have;
Thy hasty Motion now begin,
I hear the Furies coming in.

Guzm, Great Master of the Magic Art, I did not come to speak with thee, but
with the famed Alcanzar, to whom I beg thee now convey me from the Fiends, thou
say, and I too plainly hear, are coming in, for I have gotten such a Surfeit
of the Stanch, which does arise out of the Stygian-Lake, -- As I am able to do
nothing else but quake. Hush! Thou impertinent Muse, is this a time, and be
hanged, for thee to be perking up? By Tasso, he will think I Mock him, and then
Beelzebub will swallow me quick.


Fran. I am Alcanzar, and since thy Fear
Hinders thee to fly
From Sphinx's, that are nigh:
I Will take a Care
To set thee in my Chair.

Guzm. A thousand Thanks to Great Alcanzar; but you must drag me thither, Sir;
for I have yet such a Load of Sulphur in my Mouth, that my Limbs are not able
to bear me.


Fran. While in this Chair, and in this Circle you Fran. drags him till he puts
him in his own Chair, then making a Circle about him, says. are confined,
nothing can hurt you; but if you stir out of it, your Death be upon your own
Head.


Guzm. Pray, Sir, may I not shake in it without danger?


Fran. Yes, but be sure you let not your Teeth Chatter, for that would be
Music to the Fiends, who all would come and Dance about you.


Guzm. Pray, Sir, a Gag then for fear of the worst, for I have lately had a
Quartan, and I Would be loath the Fiends should Dance to the Tune of my Disease,
especially in my sight.


Fran. Think not the worse Sir, of your self for this Disorder you are in; I
have seen Noble Souls tremble at what you now must undergo, and yet were never
the worse Men, when my Operation had ended.


Guzm. I hope so -- Here Is Francisco's Ticket, and now you know my Business; I
doubt not he has paid you the Five hundred Crowns.


Fran. Yes Sir, I have received those Trifles, I shall deserve five times more
ever yet be long: You desire to be Invulnerable; from what Weapon, Sword or Gun?


Guzm. Both, I beseech you, Sir.


Fran. Why, he has paid me but for one; I received only Five hundred Crowns,
and my lowest Price for one of them is that Sum; nor have I prepared for any
more than one.


Guzm. It Is very dear; yet pray, Sir, which would you advise me to?


Fran. Why Sir, this Evening, or else my Stars deceive me; (which they seldom
do) you will receive two Cartels: Now in regard I would make your Valor
famous, I would not have you fight the ordinary way with Swords, but Pistols
(for they sending the Challenge, you may choose the Weapon) This they will
dread, and therefore I would have you Shot-free. When you will be made
Invulnerable against the Sword, you know the Price, to which you must add two
Hours Warning.


Guzm. I like the Advice extremely; pray proceed, I will so smoke the Rogues;
I Will teach 'em to send Challenges to Guzman.


Fran. Then sit firm, and start not at what ever you see or hear; but beware of
Chattering.


Guzm. Good, Sir, give me the Gag.


Fran. Away, away; I would not have so mean a Thing done by a Gentleman.


Guzman, However I Will Muzzel my Natural, for fear of the to himself. worst --
Holds his Thumbs under his Chops.


Fran. Ye black and dismal Spirits, which keep Waves his Wan*
Your Mansions, underneath the Deep,
Delighting most in those Aboads,
Which are assigned to Frogs and Toads:
Appear, and 'bout this Mortal run,
And Charm him from the Shot of Gun;
Let neither Pistol, Musket, Fusee,
Have power to make his Flesh less jucy;
But let his Skin be tuff as Wall,
And Resist the Leaden Ball --

Guzm. Help, help. Stamps with his Foot, the Boys appear at several Doors in
hideous Dresses, making great Noises and Hums, dancing about Guzman, and
offering to lay Hands on him at last.


Fran. Hold; what is the matter?


Boys. The Mortal's Teeth begin to Chatter.


Fran. How? does your Teeth Chatter?


Guzm. No Sir, it is my Bones smite one against the other, which makes a Noise
somewhat like it, and that makes their Mistake; I have kept my Teeth as close
as a dead Man's, that has been set a Week: So close, that I fear I shall never
get'em asunder again; me thinks I begin to find them grow together; however,
pray Sir, for fear of the worst, remove this Diabolical Company, as soon as you
can: In Brief, a Man is but a Man, and I find it is, in this Occasion, a harder
thing to Command one's Teeth than one's Tongue.


Fran. Infernal Spirits, which delight to Lie, Fran. stretching out his Wan.
Be gone, but first your Charm apply. Dance here.

They Dance about Guzm. one of them clapping him on the Back and Breast, they
all Cry. Boys -- Our Magic Charm being done,
Mortal! be free from Shot or Gun.

Ex. Dancing and making Mouths at Guzman. Guzm. Are they gone?


Fran. Yes.


Guzm. The Devil go with them; for I do not think a Gun, though I were not
Charmed, could fright me half so much as these Incubusses did.


Fran. O Sir! A Gun is a terrible Weapon.


Guzm. Why, I tell you Sir; I had within these twelve Hours a Blunderbuss
levelled at me, laden with Case-shot; and yet my Teeth did not Chatter.


Fran. Why then, they chatter'd now.


Guzm. Give the Devils their due, they were in the right; never did the cold
Fit of an Ague make make a Man's Grinders move nimbler than the fright of those
Succubusses made mine: I was in a devilish Jaw-quake, all the strength of both
my Hands, though supported by the Arms of that Chair, could not gag me: But
Sir, do not you think me a bold Man, that could thus outface four Belzebubs in
a Lie?


Fran. Nay, to do it while your Teeth were Chattering too?


Guzm. By Hercules, judge what I can do when out of a Fright, that could
atchieve so bold a thing, though in one.


Fran. Well, now you are Charmed, fight against whom you will, with Firearms;
and at their utmost Peril be it.


Guzm. But all this while, how do I know I am Shot-free? Though you are a
famous Man, yet I would be loath to take your bare Word for it, when my Life,
and what is a thousand times more precious to me, my Reputation in a Duel is at
stake.


Fran. If you will not believe me, believe your own Charges the Pistol. Eyes,
Come Sir, here is a Pistol, Powder and Bullets; I Will instantly Charge and show
you the Experiment.


Guzm. On whom will you make this Experiment?


Fran. On you.


Guzm. On me?


Fran. Yes, on you, my Life on it.


Guzm. Nay, 'twill be my Life on it then.


Fran. Why, you know I shall be hanged if I Kill you.


Guzm. How shall I know that, when I am killed? or if I could, 'twould be but a
sorry Satisfaction: Besides, for ought I know, by your Charms you may make your
self Halter-proof.


Fran. Come Sir, do not doubt, I Will soon let you see Offers the Pistol at him.
your Error.


Guzm. Hold, hold, you say you have given me a Charm to make me Shot-free, pray
Sir, cannot you give me another to make me Fear-free? Then I may try without
trouble.


Fran. Away with such fond Scruples; here, take you the Pistol, and Shoot it at
me; I Charmed my self before you came with the same Spell. Gives him the Pistol.


Guzm. This is by much the better way of trying; Have at you, Sir.


Fran. I stand you firm as a Bastian.


Guzm. But stay! What if your Charm should not be good, and I should Kill you;
that would be death to me at Second-hand; unless you have a Spell to make me
Law-proof too.


Fran. My Death be on my self, if you be questioned, say I was my own
Murderer; no Body can contradict you.


Guzm. It Is worth telling a Lie to be satisfied Guzm. Shoots, and Fran. let us
fall a Bullet at his own Feet, which he hastily takes up and shows to Guz. who
is amazed at the Shot. in this so needful a Doubt: Have at you --


Fran. Here Is the Bullet, and I am well.


Guzman viewing the Bullet, Wonders. Great Master of the Magick-Art, I beg thy
Pardon for my Doubts; and now I go to fight (I mean with Firearms) with any
from Sixteen to Sixty. Let Oviedo's and Piracco's come by dozens, I scorn them
-- For now, who ever my Fury does provoke,
Shall find his Destiny in Fire and Smoke.



Ex. Strutting. Fran. If he were as well Charmed as he is Fooled; he would be
Invulnerable indeed. Ex.


ACT III. The Scene is Alcanzar's Astrological Cabinet.
A little Bell read. Flashes of Fire ready. Alcanzar in his Conjuring-habit,
with Maria and Lucia, dressed like good Spirits. Leonora, Anto. Pastra. Iul.
Fran. JUlia has assured me, that Leonora and her two Fair Daughters, the Rich
Heiresses, will be here by Four a Clock; they cannot long be absent; she has
informed me too of all the Secrets of the Family. Maria, you know your Part:
After you and Lucia, with your Maids, have danced, you must mount on yonder
Tripos, and distinctly Pronounce the first Oracle; and perform all those other
things I have already directed.


Mar. Well, if ever Delphian Virgin ever declared Oracle with more Authentic
Gravity than I, (bating the Convulsion of the Eyes, and twisting of the Neck)
never take my Word again.


Fran. And you, Lucia, must speak the second Oracle, I gave you, with the
Gravity of a Sybil.


Luci. If you can give me, Mr. Conjurer, but a Spell to prevent Laughing, doubt
not but they shall take me at least for Sybilla Cumea.


Fran. 'Slight, if you Laugh, we are all undone.


Luci. I hope, I shall have the Retentive Faculty for once, to contain; I must
pinch my self worse than the Fairies do the drowsy Maids. Bell Rings here.


Fran. Iulia has so finely fooled them; that whatever they hear from from me,
will be believed as zealously as an old dying Turk does the Alcoran. I hear
them; away, away -- Ex. Mar. Lucia.


Enter Leonora, Antonia, Pastrana and Julia. ( all veiled but Julia.) Iul.
Madam, I Will be your Guide; this is the Astrological Cabinet; and I see the
Great Alcanzar in his Chair.


Fran. rising. Ladies, why do you thus come in Masquerade? Can you believe that
I can tell Future Events, and yet think a little Crape can hide things present
from my knowledge? Though your scrupulous Maid would not tell me who you were,
yet by my Art, I know you are the Beautiful Leonora, Mother to the fair Antonia
and Pastrana, who attend you now to learn your Fates, from my all-knowing
Skill: Come, Unvail, unvail -- They all Unvail.


Leon. We find, Sir, it is in vain to hide ourselves, for you know who we are,
and what we come to learn: But Sir, I beseech you, be not offended at Iulia,
she did but Obey my Orders.


Fran. He, who commands the Spirits of the Air, and those black Fiends which
dwell in Flames of Sulphur; must not be trifled with; I never received Affront,
but I re-paid it with a quick Revenge.


Iulia, Kneeling. -- O, Sir! Forgive me.


Leon. Great Alcanzar, I beg you for her.


Anton. Pastra. We both join in the same Request.


Fran. For your sakes Ladies, her Penance shall be short and slight, but some
she needs must undergo; my Spirits would rebel should they see a Mortal injure
me, and I not resent it. Flashes of Fire here. This Fright will make them
supple as a Glove. Aside.

Thou dull and drowsy Fiend awake, Fran. waves his Wan thrice, great flashes
of Fire, at which Leon. Anto. and Pastra. shrike and tremble; Iulia seems to do
the like.
Which dwell near the Sulfurous Lake,
I charge thee by the Stars and Moon,
Assume the shape of a Baboon --

Enter a Boy, dressed like a Baboon. Boy -- What Commands thou wilt on me lay,
Behold I Am ready to Obey.

Fran. -- There Is a Mortal that did fear
To tell me what I asked of her;
Three Circles round about her make,
Pinch her till her Flesh does ache;
And when with my Foot I stamp,
Strait infect her with the Cramp.

The Boy does what Fran. orders, making Mouths and Antic Postures; and Jul.
when the third Circle is made, and the Boy pinches her, seems all over to
tremble, and then to be in great Pains with Cramps. Boy -- I Will teach thee,
Mortal, how to Answer,
When thou art questioned by Alcanzar.

Iul. O! I dye.


Leon. For Heaven's sake pity her, and us, that suffer in her Torments.


Fran. Hold Fiend! do thou not see my Wan I have? Boy vanishes, and Fran.
strokes Iulia all over.
rising. High thee to thy Brimstone Cave --
Cramps and Shakings I Command
To vanish where I placed my Hand,
Never more Assault the Maid,
For she has for her Folly paid.
Rise boldly, for all thy Pains are gone.


Iulia jumping up. They are indeed, and in the twinkling of an Eye; let me
adore thee, Master of so great an Art: Here I swear never to deny to tell you
what ever you ask me.


Fran. I am glad you have learnt Wisdom by Experience: It Is a Jewel which
cannot be too dearly bought.


Leon. Sir, we are all obliged to you, for having shortened your Revenge.


Fran. 'Twas for your sakes I did it: Now, Madam, while your Daughters, and my
late Patient, entertain themselves at the farther end of this my Magic
Cabinet, let me hear your particular Desires; for though you come in Company,
yet I know you have something to enquire, which you would blush to tell, though
but your Daughters only were the Witnesses.


Leon. Truly, you make me blush; I had something to say, Pulling down her Vail.
which though armed with a Vail, my Modesty will not let me tell; You see, Sir,
I do not deny to answer your Questions.


Fran. You both deny and answer it at once: But come, have you not had Thoughts
of a second Husband?


Leon. The Heavens forbid.


Fran. Madam, take heed, run not into a worse Fault, than your Woman was so
lately guilty of; she but refused to tell me the Truth, but you tell me an
Untruth: I know you are on the right-side of Forty, that you are Rich and Fair,
and carry so much Trampling. Youth about you, that could you meet with one you
liked, you could receive a second Wedding Ring: Is not all this true?


Leon. Alas! Sir, it is in vain to deny it.


Fran. And you now come to know, whom Heaven designs to supply the place of the
Dead; for you are yet not Pre-engag'd.


Leon. I see you know my Heart; and I beseech you Sir, let not my Daughters nor
Iulia --


Fra. You desire also to know what the Destinies decree for your two Daughters.


Leon. O Sir, by any means, for they are Marriageable, and it is good to pluck
the Fruit as soon as it is Ripe.


Fran. Call 'em then.


Leon. Daughters.


Fran. Ladies, within this Circle stand, and what e`er you see and hear, on
your Lives, stir not out of it: Your Woman too must enter into this little
Circle, lest some Mischance befall her.


Leon. I beseech you, let us learn our Dooms, without seeing fearful
Apparitions; the sight of 'em will make us Die.


Fran. Be not afraid, you shall see nothing to Terrify you. What Noise is
that? Some real Devils rise to Revenge A Trampling without. my making use of
Counterfeit ones: Ladies, Vail your selves, and turn your Backs on me; and what
ever happens, look not this way till I bid you.


Enter Guzman hastily. A Purse. Fran. What the Devil does this Fop here now?


Guzm. Great Alcanzar, I Am resolved to fight with Seconds, and my Friend
Francisco shall be mine, for whom I come in haste, to buy the like Charm for
him, which I have purchased for my self; there is your Price. Flings down a
Purse.


Fran. Curse on the Rogue; what a time has he chosen, and what an Errand is he
come about! But I Will ferret him way.

Mortal, which art grown so Rude, Maria, Lucia.
Without Leave, thus to Intrude; Julia.
If one Moment thou delay,
To switch and Spur thy self away,
Such Spirits I Will set upon thy Back,
As shall pinch thee Blew and Black.

Guzm. What the Devil ayls our Mephestopholous? He Is damnably out of Humor;
Had 'slid, I see now what the matter is; he has monopoliz'd four Women to
himself: Sure, he must be a devilish Wencher that can entertain so many at one
time; I hope, I may buy a Charm from him, to be four Women proof at once. If I
do, 'twill be a better and a rarer thing, than to be Shot-free.


Fran. Mortal, since thou do delay Boy ready.
Alcanzar's Orders to Obey.
I will from the lowest Hell,
Call up Spirits by a Spell;
Which thy Body hence shall throw
Swift as Arrow out of Bow. None here.
Quickly, quickly, void the Room,
Do thou not hear? They come, they come.

Guzm. By Heliogabolus, they'are coming; tho I am Maria and Lucia, make a great
Noise within the Soon. Shot-proof, yet I am not Devil-proof: However, by your
Conjurership's leave, I Will make bold to take up my Purse again: No Charm, no
Money. Fran. puts his Foot on the Purse.


Fran. Mortal, to me belongs the Purse;
Get thee packing with a Curse:
This Oblation I Will receive,
For thy Entrance without leave.
Thy Pardon for it I will grant,
If thou instantly avaunt. More and louder Noise within the Scene.

Guzm. I see, Conjurers like other Mortals, will not be interrupted in their
Love-divertisements, nor restore what they can keep.

I must needs go A Boy dressed like a Devil appears, Frisking and Dancing; the
three Ladies Shreik and Julia too. The Boy with a long Scourge, whips Guzman,
who roaring out, runs away. when the Devil Fran. beckens to the Boy to retire;
takes up the Purse. Drives.


Fran. Had not my Sisters Conjured too, I had lost the Purse, and been longer
troubled with that Owl. Now, Ladies, the requisite preliminaries to the knowing
your Fate is over, you may Unvail, and turn your Faces this way again. They
turn about


Leon. O Sir! if we see that horrid Fiend again, we are all Dead.


Fran. 'Twas well you kept within your Circle when he appeared.


Anto. 'Twas impossible I could have done otherwise, for I was not able to stir
out of it.


Pastra. Well Antonia, now I know there is such a thing as a Devil, I will be a
better Christian than ever I intended to be.


Iul. One glimps of this Fury, has more Humbled me, than all the Lents I ever
kept.


Fran. The worst is past; stand fast within your Circles: And now what Fate
decrees the mildest Spirits shall declare.


Leon. A good Husband gracious Fate.


Francisco waves his Wan seven times, and says, Fran. Ye gentle Spirits of the
Air,
Which are the Genii of the Fair;
And when good Fate is to ensue,
At once both know and make it too:
By the Power I over you bear,
I charge you instantly appear,
And these Mortals Ears and Sight,
With Dances and with Songs Delight:
Then acquaint those Beauteous three
Song here. What for them their Stars Decree. Maria and Lucia, and their two
Maids, at the end of the 6 Verse, appear in glitering Habits, and at the end of
the last, they Sing and Dance. Leon. Anto. Pastra. and Julia, seem ravished
with Delight. When they have done, Alcanzar waves his Wan, and Maria Ascends
the Tripos, and looking to Leon. says,

Then Dance. Maria. Do not from Fortune look for good,
Soft Music here. Whilst you keep your Widow-hood:
For e're long, (if Stars speak true)
Some will attempt to Ravish you;
Yet you may when the ill is near,
Be Rescued by a Cavaleer;
Who if he takes you for his Wife,
You Will thenceforth lead a happy Life.
But if you slight his first Address,
Farewell all your Happiness. She Descends.

Fran. Madam, you are beholding to the Oracle; it foretells you at once, and
with unusual Clearness, of your Danger, of your Deliverance, and of your future
Happiness; did you hear it well?


Leon. Truly Sir, I heard it so well, that I can say it as perfectly as my
Credo; and not to Lie to you, I believe it as absolutely. Now, if my Daughters
have the like good Fortune as plainly Foretold them how happy shall we be!


Fra. Listen Madam, for the Vestal Virgin is Ascending the Tripos to speak to
them. Fran. waves his Wan, Lucia gets up, then turning her self to Leon. Anton.
and Pastrana says,


Luci. Two Gentlemen of good degree,
By Fate brought to Distress,
Must by your Daughters Married be,
To make their Happiness:
But nothing them from Ruin can redeem,
If rich Fools, or Cowards Marry them.

Lucia Descends, and the four go out Dancing. Fran. Madam, this Oracle is not
Obscure, for you see what they must do, and what they must avoid.


Leon. But yet to speak the Truth, I do not like their being confined from
Marrying of Rich Fools; for Sir, to de Born to Petticoats, Maria, Lucia ready.
and yet to wear Embroidered Breeches, is a pleasant thing: I speak Sir, what I
have Experienced.


Fran. Madam, I see, you are not so well pleased with their Oracle, as with
your own; but let us apart, reason the Point, and I dare say, I shall convince
you.


Leon. I would you could, Sir.


Anton. I think Sister, the Sign is in Gemini, for we are all to be Married.


Pastra. I confess, I am a little troubled, that my Mother should be threatened
to be Ravished, and not we, who are Eighteen Years younger, and by this Light,
at least Twenty Years Handsomer. Whatever some think of Whining, Sighing and
Weeping, as Evidences of Men's Passions; yet, I believe Tarquin gave greater
proof of his loving Lucretia, than ever Collatin did.


Iul. And perhaps she only Killed her self, having found that she had got the
least Amorous Person for her Husband.


Leon. Well Sir, your Reasons have half Converted me.


Fran. And the decree of Fate will act the other half.


Leon. Be pleased Sir, to accept this small Present, as an Earnest of our
greater Acknowledgment. Offers him a Purse.


Fran. It Is not my custom to sell my Art; I am happy that I served you by it
Guzman.


Leon. I must not be refused; nor shall I have the confidence to make you a
second Address (if there be cause) unless you will receive this slight
acknowledgement of my Gratitude for the first; it is only Sir, 400 Crowns, to
buy you Books and Instruments: I Will leave 'em at your Feet, and beg your
Secrecy in all things past. Come Daughters.


Ex. Lucia, Antonia, Pastra. and Iulia. Mar. Maria and Lucia peeping through
the Scene.
Are they gone?


Fran. Yes, but their Mony's here, which I make a Present to you both.


Luc. We deserve it; for if we had not Conjured for you at a dead lift, Guzman
had spoiled the Farse. Servant.


Fran. It Is therefore I reward you; but I could hardly hold Laughing, to see
how I whipped away his Purse, as your little Devil did his Person: However,
I Will be just to him, and for the 500 Crowns he left, I Will Charm Francisco his
Second, as well as I Charmed the Principal.


Maria. I understand not this.


Lucia. Nor I, why you made us deliver such Oracles.


Fran. Time shall make you wiser shortly: What a Clock is it?


Lucia. It Is past Five.


Fran. Past Five! how the time runs away; farewell, I have many Irons in the
Fire, and I must let none of 'em Cool.


Mar. Since you work so well, it is pity to disturb you; farewell Brother
Conjurer.


Fran. Farewell, Sister Sybils. Ex. several ways.


Enter Guzman. Solus. A Flat Scene of a Chamber. Guz. By Ieronimo, I have been
Coursely used; this comes of showing Friendship: Well, it is the first act of it
I was ever guilty of; and by Solomon the Magnificent, it shall be the last. My
only comfort is, that if I catch my Negromancer in a good humor, I may incline
him to give me the Quadruple Spell, in lieu of my Purse he took; and then
Women, have at you by double Couples. A great rapping at the Door.


Enter a Servant. Serve. Sir, there are two roaring Boys without, that say they
will speak to you, they talk Dagger out of Sheath.


Guzm. And I Will talk Pistol out of Holster too; Bid 'em advance.

Exit Servant. I wonder Francisco is not yet come: This is the hour he promised
without fail to be with me. I cannot choose but Laugh to think how I shall Gun
the Oviedo's and Piracco's Two Letters.


Enter Guivarro and Alvares. Guzm. Your Business Blades?


Guiv. This Letter I present you from Don When de Oviedo.


Alva. And this from Don Ibarra de Piracco.


Guz. Are you to be their Seconds?


Guiv. Do you know the Contents of their Letters, ever you read them?


Guzm. Poor Man, I see you are Ignorant; this is not the hundredth Curtell that
I have received; and we of the Blade, observe one Mode in making up our
invitations to the Field: So that the Learned need but see the outside, to
know what the inside does contain.


Alv. You have Instructed me I confess Sir.


Guzm. I shall instruct your two Principals also ever long; come, I Will read
what they have presumed to write. Opens one Letter.

LETTER.
Hum, hum, hum. The Lady in Skie-colour, hum, hum, Satisfaction of a Gentleman,
with your Sword in your Hand, behind the Nunnery this Evening at Seven,

I Kiss your Hands, and Rest, Don When de Oviedo.




I take it for granted, this Sealed Letter is of the same Tenure, and to both
the Premises. I Answer, that I have Vowed to fight but one Duel a day,
especially when the first is to be begun after Seven in the Evening: In brief,
for I long to be at it, I Will give one his Supper, and the other his Breakfast;
and that is fare: But I thought by the fold of their Epistles, they had
understood the Punctillio's of Duels; and yet they are so Ignorant as to send
the Challenge and appoint the Weapons; that belongs to me: Not but that I would
have Named Swords, had they had the Knowledge, or good Manners to have left it
to my Choice: But now I will not so much as have a Sword in the Field, only to
thwart them; I am resolved to fight with any Firearms, from the Pocket Pistol
to the Cannon of Eight: The time I like well, it being in the Cool of the Day;
for I shall make prodigious hot work of it.


Alva. With Canons of Eight, Sir?


Guzm. Yes, Sir, with Canons of Eight, I say.


Guiv. It Is a new way of Duelling.


Guzm. And therefore, Sir, I choose it: A famous Monsieur of Gallia Celtica,
brought up the Mode of fighting Duels with single Rapier, which ever since has
borne his Name, and has been called by the Cartelists a la Bouteville: And I
who have fought ten times more Duels than he, will introduce fighting with
great Guns, which shall hereafter be called Duels a la Guzman; on their
battered Carcasses I Will raise my self a Name.


Alva. For all your Rodomontade, our Principals shall fight with you with any
Arms, even from a Pin to one of the largest Basilisquets, that the Mahometans
pelted Scodra with.


Guzm. I say, the bigger, the better.


Guiv. But pray, Sir, consider your Duel at these Weapons cannot be fought this
Evening, nor indeed this six Weeks: All Battering-Cannon are the King's, and we
shall scarce borrow Sala Fern. Maria and Luc. a couple out of the Arsenal to
fight a Duel with: So that you must get Metal and Founders of your own.


Alva. He tells you right.


Guzm. Well, rather than protract my Sport, (for such Duels are to me) I am
content, for this time, to fight but with a Case of Pistols, and neither Sword
nor Dagger shall be in the Field; when this Evening I have killed Oviedo, (for
it is natural the Eldest Brother to dye first) if to morrow Morning Piracco has
a mind to the like Fate; I shall look to hear from him again: And then let him
expect Leaden-Pill to purge away his Mortality -- You have your Answers.


Alva. My Friend shall meet you at the Hour and Place, and only armed with
Pistols.


Guzm. You may assure your Friend he shall have the Honor to be the next killed
by my own hand; for by Tamberlain, I will neither give or take Quarter.


Guiv. Well, Sir, these Bravadoes are fitter to be answered in the Field, than
in your Chamber, in which we'll leave you to make your Will, and say your
Prayers.


Guzm. Hang Wills and Testaments; and for Praying, let those look to it that
are doomed to dye; go and get Confessors for your Friends, it is the last and
the best Office you can do them -- Ex. several ways


The Scence the Piazzo. The new flat Scene. Enter Salazar and Fernando, with
Spectacles on their Noses; and Maria and Lucia. Fran. LAdies, we come to offer
you our Hearts.


Mar. And is your Business Love?


Sala. It Is the Business of the World.


Luc. I rather thought by your Wrinkled Faces, your Quadruple Eyes, and your
Grizl'd Heads, that you came to read us a Theological Lecture of Abstinence and
Repentance.


Mar. What Saints should we turn, were our Hearts as much mortified as those
December-Lovers-Looks.


Fern. Since Love's a Fire, it must sooner burn in the dry Woods than in the
Green.


Luc. Well, Sister; I shall have a terrible ill Opinion of our Beauties, since
they could make no better Conquests.


Salaz. You should value them the more, that can turn Ages-Ashes into a Flame.


Mar. Hy-da! Why they have got the Young-Men's Dialect, and talk of Fires and
Flames: Pray how many Jubilees are there since you were first in Love?


Fern. 'Twas Yesterday; for then I first beheld you: Though we have seen a
thousand whom the World calls Beauties, yet till we saw you, we never could
learn what that word did mean.


Luc. Alas! Good Gentlemen, you begin to learn somewhat late, yet if you live
to it, you may make pretty Scholars; for I find you have Inclinations. But pray
how did Love enter you?


Fern. As a Conqueror, it came not in at the Gate, but threw down the Walls of
the Fortress to have the nobler Passage.


Mar. Why then, there is hopes he may soon get out again; the breach being so
large.


Lucia to Salazar. Pray, let me Catechize you too: How how does Love deal with
you now he is the Victor, and by what signs do you know you are in Love?


Salaz. He uses me like a Tyrant; for he would not let me sleep all last Night.


Luc. By my Troth, Sir, and that perhaps has made you a little Lightheaded to
day.


Mar. By my Troth, Sister, they begin to incline me to try them for a while,
that the World may know what Love Ovie. Pirac. can do at Eighty.


Luc. But what is it that you would be at?


Salaz. Marriage, Madam, Marriage, our Passions have an honorable End.


Mar. And a wise Beginning! but what would you do if you were married?


Fern. The best we could to please you; we would settle Joyntures upon you,
give you fine Clothes, rich Coaches, and and Caetera.


Luc. Et Caetera! What Is that?


Salaz. It Is a very Aenigmatical Word, and cannot be opened till the
Marriage-knot is tied.


Mar. Well, if I were sure that your Et Caetera were as good as what you have
expressed, 'twould operate strangely one me: But would you not grow Melancholy,
and Sighing, say, You had not so much need of a Wife, the day after Wedlock, as
you Guz. and Fran. ready. thought you had the day before.


Pir. I have gained Iulia, who has promised us Admittance; but we must not lose
one Moment of our time.


Ovie. Now thou deservest the name of a Politician.


Fern. 'Slid! it is our Nephews, I would not Oviedo and Piracco passing over the
Stage, as talking to one another. for the World, that they should see us in
this Company.


Salaz. It Is they, Ladies, we beg your Pardons; but to morrow we'll perfect
what this day we have so happily begun.


Fern. Beautiful Lucia! I Kiss your Fair Hands.


Mar. What made those two Ghosts vanish so suddenly? They go out hastily at one
Door, and Ovie. and Pirac. pass out at the other.


Luc. Why, you put them a Question that they could not in Conscience deny, and
yet were ashamed to confess: But I think those two Gentlemen which walked by,
did Alarm them.


Maria. What Legs the Old Goats made! Well, I dare Prophecy, without the help
of a Tripos, That I shall live to see them as like those Beasts in their Horns
as they are in their Faces and Beards. But yet we need not wish them a worse
Condition than that they flung themselves into.

For nothing can a greater Torment prove,
Than in Old Age, to endure the Qualms of Love. Exeunt.

The Scene a Field with Trees. The Forest. Enter Guzman and Francisco, each
with a pair of Pistols. Fran. THus much of the Honor of the Day is ours
already; though we are the Challenged, yet we are the first in the Field.


Guzm. By Barbarossa; I think the Rogues dare not come, the Noise of Fighting
with Firearms has terrified them: Let me tell you, Francisco, I my self should
be somewhat Squeamish at a Pistol, were I not Charmed, I say I my own self
would be so; then judge what an ordinary Cavaliero must be; well, it is a most
delicious thing to shoot at one's Enemy, and to be Shot-free one's self; it is a
kind of Fowling at Men. Clapping his Pistol to his Shoulder like a
Fowling-piece.


Fran. And yet you scrupled to give Five hundren Crowns to possess this Noble
Privilege.


Guzm. Friend mine! I would not for Five thousand Pound but enjoy it; I find it
has given me a new Heart: By Muleasses of Morocco, were I not afraid of the
Law, I could every day commit a Massacre. But take heed they put not slur on
me, and send Counterfeits to fight their Quarrel, for I never saw Oviedo and
Piracco, and therefore know their Faces no more than I know my Catechism:
Francisco, will thou keep a Secret if I trust thee with it?


Fran. Keep it close as a Confessor.


Guzm. Know then, that Alcanzar, (I hope none of his Spirits hear me, if they
do I renounce all I say) is a most Avaritious Negromancer: I carried him Five
hundred Crowns to Charm thee too, since thou were to be my Second, and he
conjured me out of them: were it not that I had some Wenching Ends on him, and
that he is thy Friend, By Prester John I would Pistol him, for now that is my
Weapon of Execution; I confess, I broke in somewhat abruptly on him, when he
was so Solace himself with four Doxies: But why, a Devil, should he therefore
take his Wages, and not do my Work?


Fran. I am glad you minded me of this, for he sent for me as soon as you were
gone, and has Charmed me just as you were; which was the Cause I was so long
absent from you.


Guzm. Oh, has he so! This mitigates the Seething of my Blood: By Rosinante,
had he not done me Right in this, though there had been no more Conjurers in
Europe, Asia, Africa, and America, I would have shot his Soul to his own
Hobgoblins. Trampling ready.


Fran. Now we shall have Sport, I hear them coming -- Prepare, prepare; It must
be they, I see two Fran. looks through the Scene. Cavaliers Galloping this way
with Pistols in their Hands, longer than Carbines.


Guzm. Would they were in their Hearts: 'Death my Teeth begin to Chatter again;
I shall not have Strength enough to shoot at him; what a dull Scoundril was I,
that I did not till now remember to have bought another Spell, to have confined
them to their House? Messenger.


Fran. coming to Guzm. Fie on them, it is not they, but a couple of young Cubs,
that rid by with Pistols in their Hands Fooling with one another.


Guzm. By Don Quinot's Lance, I feared so; yet you see I was prepared for them;
but since they are not come, I Will uncock my Heart and Pistol, for I had made
both ready to give Fire: Come, let us be gone, 'twill be in vain to expect them
longer.


Fran. Be gone! not for the World, let us stay till it be so late that we cannot
see the length of our Pistols, and then we may retreat with Honor.


Guzm. I understand not but that I have already done what my Reputation calls
me to in the Field; and now I long to do what my Resentment calls me to in the
Town, that is, to Post them up for Cowards: Why, I tell thee, I would not have
waited so long for a Mistress, and yet thou would have me wait longer for an
Enemy, it is unconscionable; By Albumazar I Will be gone. Trampling without.


Fran. Hold, hold; they are coming now in good earnest.


Guzm. And I, without jesting, will be going: Hang 'em they dare not come; but
if they should, it is so late I cannot see to level my Pistol, we must defer it
till to morrow Morning. Guzm. walking off.


Enter Messenger. Mess. Where is Don Guzman?


Guzm. It Is they indeed, I would Francisco, and his Punctilio's of Honor were
in the bottom of Mare Caspium; else I had been half way to Salamanca, at least
out of Sight, and then I am sure I would have be out of call too; I was
bewitched to take a Second.


Fran. What have you to say to Guzman? there he is.


Guzm. The Rogue Francisco, has Cat's Eyes: I can scarce see the length of my
Nose, and he can see Ten Yards off; for I am sure I have got so much nearer the
Town than he is.


Mess. I have a Message to him from Don Oviedo.


Guzm. Nay, if it be but a Message, by the Queen of Sheba, I Will boldly face
about and receive it; what Message have thou for me, my Friend? I am Don Guzman.


Mess. Sir, 'twas my Fortune, coming even now from the City, to find a
Gentleman lying in the Highway with his Leg broken, who desired me to come to
this place, and tell Don Guzman his Diaster: he bid me tell you too, That as
soon as he was able he would perform to you what by this Misfortune he was now
disabled to do; he had a Gentleman with him, who went to get a Coach to carry
him to Salamanca. Having now discharged my Engagement to him: I humbly take my
leave of you. Ex. Mess.


Guzm. By Otho, Galba and Vitellius, I doubt the Rascal broke his Leg on
purpose to avoid fighting with me: Let Us run, Francisco, and Pistol him where
he lies; was this a time, and be hanged to him, to crack his Shankbone in?
Death, I hate such trifling.


Fran. Nay, now you Rave; what would you have him do in such a Misfortune more
than he has done?


Guzm. Rave! do you call it? Why, I tell you what I would have had him done: I
would have had him fought on his stump rather than have disappointed such a
Cavaliero as I am, Men fire Pistols with their Hands, and not with their Legs,
and since the Fighting limb was Sound, he should not have shunned the Duel,
because the Running limb was hurt: The Poltroon shows by this, that he trusted
more to his Feet than to his Hands. Call Mar. Lucia.


Fran. Be patient yet.


Guzm. Patient! Why, would thou not Rage and Fume and Fret, if in the very
moment thou were ready to enjoy thy Landa bri-des, thou should be defeated?
By Mount Caucasus this is a Million of times worse to me; why I tell thee, my
Stomach was set to fight.


Fran. It Is but making it wait till to morrow Morning, then you may break your
Fast on Piracco.


Guzm. What! can thou think, since the elder Brother broke one Leg to avoid
fighting with me, that the Younger will not break both his Arms to shun the
Encounter? Why, I tell thee, that is the lowest Price he can buy his Safety at:
Cowardice runs in a Blood. But though he should challenge me, yet ever I come
into the Field to meet him; I will have a Public Notary to certify he is
there, Sound of Wind and Limb, ever I will vouchsafe to take such another Walk
to kill any of his House: When one of a Family has played me Tricks, I may
justly be jealous of all the rest.


Fran. Do not be so Suspicious; I dare say Piracco will meet you here to morrow.


Guzm. What* with a broken Limb? But to prevent those gross Cheats, do you take
Care to bring him hither in a Litter; and I Will take a Care to send him home in
a Coffin.


Fran. Leave the first part to me; but lest we should break our own Limbs let
us return ever it be quite dark; for the Dew already falls.


Guzm. I am glad it does, for nothing on Earth could quench the heat that I am
in: Besides, I have an Assignment at Eight, where I would not fail for all the
World; but ever I sleep, by Vulcan I Will make Oviedo's Honor lamer than his
pretended Fall has made his Leg.

By Boys he shall be pelted at and hist,
This is decreed by me the Duelist. Ex.

ACT IV. The New Flat Scene.
Enter Maria and Lucia. Mar. ARe they dressed as they should be?


Luc. So well, that our Antiquaries Spectacles will not discover the Fallacy:
In one word, our Methusalem Gallants are not liker Coxcombs, than our two Maids
are dressed like us. Ovie. Pastra. Pir. Anto. Iul.


Mar. But I fear their Discourses will be as dull as the Persons to whom must
be made.


Luc. No, Tireletta is a merry Lass, she often reads Comedies; and when she
wants Invention, she will make use of Memory, which is an ordinary thing now a
days, and in Persons of greater Quality.


Mar. However, we have given them the Plot, and must trust them to word the
Play; but be sure they keep their Masks on; for though the Dotards Eyes are as
old as their Years; yet by the help of their Multiplying-glasses, they will see
less Ill than they hear.


Luc. Now you have given me this Hint, on my Conscience, I begin to think 'twas
those Spectacles made them so in love with us: For since by them a small Print
seems a big one; our Beauties must show the larger through those Optics. And
as the Beauty is magnified, so the Love is; would their Nephews had their
bought Eyes to contemplate us with.


Mar. Desires in Young Men, Lucia, are the best Spectacles they can look
through on handsome Women: if we can kindle those in Oviedo and Piracco, I dare
undertake, within one Month after Matrimony, they will be as willing to see
their Uncles, as those Fops are now to see us: But since they will be in the
Walk suddenly, let us employ the little time left us to make our Aunts, that
they shall be perfect in their Parts.


Luc. You advise well! Come, let us about our Work. Exeunt.


Enter Oviedo leading Pastrana, and Piracco, Antonia: Julia following them. Q.
of Hungary? Chamber. Call Julia. Ovie. Madam, I can truly call this Hour, the
happiest I ever enjoyed, since in it I declare my self your Slave.


Pastra. Happiness and Slavery, Sir, rarely go hand in hand.


Ovie. That shows your fair Eyes Power the more, which can unite such
Contraries: Yet, Madam, I have cause to repine at my Destiny, that makes me aim
at so glorious and End, and has not strewn my way to it with Rivals; for the
Victims made by Valor, are the fittest Sacrifices to be offered up to Beauty.


Pastra. Take heed, Sir, perhaps you complain without Cause, for many solicit
my Mother for her leave, to make us Addresses; though you two are the first
admitted.


Ovie. Since we are the first admitted, that will deter all others from
treading on our steps; next to your Favor, what I am most ambitious, is, That
any Man would dare to visit you as my Rival.


Pastra. If you are so Jealous Sir, when I am not yours, what would you be if I
were?


Ovie. Madam, while a Client's Cause is in Suspense, he is suspicious of every
Antagonist: But when the Judge has pronounced Sentence for him, all these
Jealousies Vanish.


Anton. Iulia, See who is that who Knocks so hard? Sure A loud rapping at the
Door. he has some pressing Business.


Julia goes off. Pirac. Would it might please the Stars this were any Man that
durst pretend to you.


Enter Julia. Iulia. Madam, it is a Gentleman that looks as if he would eat one
up; he has a Tuck and a Poniard, each a Foot longer than those which usually
are worn; and says he must speak with you, and by your Mother's leave.


Antonia to Piracco. Since it is by Mothers leave, you must Oviedo and Piracco
seem Disordered. admit him. Methinks Sir, you appear something Altered.


Pastra. to Oviedo. And you Sir, seem to be in some Disorder.


Oviedo. My Blood rises, in hope he is a Rival.


Piracco. I Am troubled any Man so Late, should come to Visit you, and by
Leonora's Permission.


Enter Guzman Strutting. Guz. Ladies, I beg your Pardon that I come thus Late;
but a Rascally Duel, and posting up the Cavaleer that did not meet me in the
Field, was the cause of it.


Anto. A Duel Sir, with whom I pray?


Guzm. With a huffing Fellow that past for a Hector, till I handled him, and
then he chose to break his Leg rather than Fight with me, and he was Wise in
doing So


Pastra. I beseech you Sir, his Name.


Guzm. This Morning his Name was Don Oviedo; but having behaved himself so
short of my Expectation, I have therefore thought fit this Evening, to Curtel
it, and call him Don Ove. Women Laugh.


Pastra. This is a new way of Revenge.


Guzm. And by Presepolis, the fitter, for as he bob'd me, so I have bob'd his
Name.


Ovie. Where does this Don Oviedo Live?


Guzm. Oviedo said you? 'Death, I tell you his Name is Ove, and by no other
Name I Will have him called. But are your the Domine of the Parish, that you
would Catechize me thus? If these Fair Ladies would know any thing, I am ready
to answer, but for others, thus I reply.


He Caldezes them. Ovie. Were it not in our Mistresses Chamber, I Would Ovie. Goes
to Piracco, and Whispers him. cut this Rascals Throat.


Anto. Will you for my sake, tell me where this Don Ove Lives?


Guz. to Oviedo. You Mr. Examinator, come hither quickly and learn Manners.
This Beautiful Lady calls my Godson right, that is to say Don Ove; for till he
recovers his long Name in Combat, he shall wear my short one. By the Great Cham
of Tartary he shall. And let me see who dares say me nay. -- Now Madam, to
Answer you; He puts his Arms a Kembo. I declare, this Don Ove is one of the
Roaring Boys of Salamanca; his younger Brother is called Piracco, who was to
Fight with me to Morrow Morning; but I have certain Intelligence he means to
break both his Arms to avoid it: And therefore by way of Prophecy, I have
Christened him by the name of Piracco the SelfMaim'd.


Anto. But suppose Piracco should Fight with you to Morrow Morning, what will
you call him then?


Guzm. I Will call him then what he shall be then, Piracco the Defunct; so bad a
Name, that if he has Discretion, he will rather choose that of the Self-Maim'd.
But Madam, who are those two Fellows that dare stay in this Room, while I come
to Court you in it?


Anto. One is called Don Ove, and thee other Don Piracoo, the Self-Maim'd, or
the Defunct that shall be; I wonder you do not know your own God sons.


Guzm. 'Death, I wish this Christning does not cause my Burial.


Anto. Methinks Sir, you seem Supriz'd.


Guzm. By Titus Vespasian, you cannot blame me, to see one that had broken his
Leg but an Hour ago, walk so soundly on it: Is he not a Conjurer?


Anto. If he be, he is the Youngest that ever was; why you know he was
Christn'd not a quarter of an hour ago.


Guzm. Let me consider how this Mystery could be brought about.


Past. to Oviedo. You were wishing even now, for your way strewn with Rivals.
I confess, it appears not so thick laid as you desired: But here is no little
Earnest that the Fates will grant your Request in time; methinks you should
Cultivate so hopeful a beginning.


Ovie. I beseech you Madam, what is the Name of this Brother of yours?


Pastra. I assure you Sir, he is neither Brother nor Kinsman, nor hardly
Acquaintance of Mine; but his Name is Don Guzman.


Oviedo. to Piracco. Courage Piracco, do but stick to me now, and we will
Recover all again; for this Guzman is at once the greatest Ranter and the
greatest Coward in Nature.


Piracco. I would I were as certain of the latter as of the former; but I must
stick to thee, it is the only way left me.


Oviedo. to Pastrana. By my Honor Madam, I took him for a Brother of yours, and
therefore I forbore to fall on him; but now you disown any such Relation, were
it not in your Chamber, --


Pastra. Nay, Sir, my Chamber is no Sanctuary for any Gentleman that affronts
another in it: I give you full Liberty.


Oviedo. to Piracco. Now back me my Piracco, and the Field is ours yet. Ho! you
that break Men's Legs with your Tongue, and Curtel their Names too; know I am
called Don When de Oviedo: I will not bate thee a Syllable: Nay, I will add
five to it to Affront thee, and call my self by way of addition, Vic-to-rio-so.
And as for my Leg, thy Posteriors shall feel it is Sound, by the future Black
and Blew, which Putting his Arms a kembo, and cocking his Hat. I will Color
them with: I shall, I shall, and let me see who dares say me nay?


Guzm What a thunderclap is ready to fall on me! Would Trembling. I were
Disintangl'd from this Intrigue, only by having my Posteriors clad in that
rusul colored Livery he mentioned.


Piracc. By this Light he Trembles! nay, then have at him too; Ho! you Guz. for
I Will be a Godfather too in my turn, and retrench half thy Name. Know thou
Scoundrel of Salamanca, that Man shall be no more left in thy Name than it is in
thy Nature, as this fatal Steel shall instantly demonstrate. Oviedo and Piracco
both Draw.


Ovie. We'll Drill thee as fast as thou art wont to Lie, and that is Expedition
enough of all Conscience.


Guzm. In a Lady's Chamber, and two at once; nay then it is time to take
Sanctuary against such base Advantages.


Ovie. Talk thou of Advantages, thou Son of any Guzman runs behind Antonia;
they both thrust at him, and he leaps first on the one side then on the other.
Father but thy Mothers Husband; art thou not double Weapon'd; have thou not as
much Steel about thee, as we both?


Pir. Hold! lest our blind Furies may injure our Fair Mistress; let us not use
our Swords; do thou maul him with thy Foot, as I will with both my Fists, to
show him my Arms are not broken, nor thy Leg; the Affront will be the greater.
Leon ready within.


Ovie. Content; and as thou gav'st him a short Name, so I will give him a long
one, and call him Don Guz, the Kicked and the Cuffed.


Guzm. If my Wits assist me not, I Am Lost; help, Oviedo and Piracco turn about,
in the mean time, Guzman flies away; Ovied. and Piracco run after him. help,
Pastrana's fallen into a Swoon.


Pastra. Was there ever such a Triumvirate of Cowards?


Anton. Had they been dressed in Red, an ordinary Turky-Cock would have beaten
them all three. I would not for all Salamanca his Person had shook my Heart, as
much as his Fear did my Body. The Oracle begins to work; I am for those
Gallants I know not, for the Servants we know, have turned my Stomach; the
smell of a Coward, is worse than the Snuff of a Tallow-Candle.


The Scene is Francisco 's House. The Chamber with the Chimney in it. Enter
Guivaro, Alvares, and Francisco in his Night Gown. Guiv. 'TWs a pleasant Duel
indeed.


Fran. Had you but seen the Qualms he was in when I told him they were coming;
and his Exultations, when my Messenger brought word of the broken Leg, you
would have said none but a Conjurer could have refrained bursting with Laughter.


Alva. The belief that he is Shot-free, and that Oviedo broke his Leg to shun
the Duel, I dare foretell (without the help of your Magic) will cost Guzman
some Bastenado's at least. But to our Business. I wonder Iulia is not yet come;
she promised at this Hour, to assist at this our General Council.


Fran. To Morrow early, she and her Lady are to walk in the Nunnery-Grove; you
know your Parts in that Play, and I warrant you, Iulia and I will act ours to
the Life: When I am in possession of the Widow, that and my Oracle to the two
Daughters, shall soon enable me to make your Fortunes too. But, are you not
unconscionable Brothers, to give me, who labor for you all, the worst Wife of
the three?


Guiv. Prithee no more, a Widow is by destiny, the Portion of the youngest
Brother.


Alv. She is monstrous Rich, and not Forty; consider how many younger Sons of
good Families would leap to Marry Wealth; tho the Mistress of it were Sixty.
Thy Stars have been kinder to thee by Twenty Years, than they use to be to
those of thy Order: But methinks the unexpected Dotings of our two Sage
Senators on Maria and Lucia, might be improved to the common Benefit.


Guiv. Leave that to my Management; I have laid so probable a Plot in that
Affair, that if it Succeed not, I will not only call Fortune a Whore, but a
Blind one too.


Enter Julia Laughing. Iulia. Hold my Sides, or I shall Split.


Fran. Why, what is the matter?


Iulia. Nay, I have not time to tell you now, for Guzman is Hobling hither as
fast as a Man can, that had within this quarter of an hour, a Steel Tent in
each Hanch, at least six Inches long.


Fran. Methinks thou should pity the poor Man; for ought you know, he may be
your Husband.


Iulia. My Husband! what Marry a Coward? By this Light, if you do not Conjure
for me better, I Will abjure your Art.


Fran. Better why what can be better than to have a Husband of 5000 Pistols
Rent, and to be able to beat him out of Four of it annually when thou will?


Iulia. I beg your Pardon Brother Negromancer; I confess I did not think on
that; I will leave all my Fortune to your Art.


Fran. It shall not fail I warrant thee. One Knocks.


Iulia. 'Slid it is he; let us retire and hear his own Relation to Francisco;
'twill be worth the while, or never Credit me.


One knocks very loud: They all retire but Fran. who goes to the Door: Enter
Guzman. Fran. Who Is that Knocks so Rudely?


Guzm. One that has been rudelier Knocked himself; yet I am Heartwhole still,
tho by Heraclites, Francisco, never poor Mortal met with so doleful an
Adventure; my Curse on the Damned Alcanzar (if he hears me not) that advised me
to be Shot-free, when he should have made me Tuckfree; I have received a couple
of Toledo Glisters here.


Fran. Who did Administer them?


Guzm. By Esculapius, Gallen, and Hypocrates, two of the most Pagan
Apothecaries in all Salamanca: By Van Helmont, I thought since my Skin was
Bullet-Proof a fortiori (as the Learned Phrase it) 'twould have been Tuck-proof.


Fran. Where are you hurt?


Guzm. In each of my Natural Cushions.


Fran. Nay then my Wonder ceases, if at least you were Charmed sitting in a
Chair, as I was; for no part was Invulnerable but where the Spirits clapped,
and while you were sitting, they could not clap you there.


Guzm. Fie on 'em, why did they not tell me so? My Posteriors they know were at
their Services: But I see there is no honesty in the Devil.


Fran. Why, who would think, that a Man who was Charmed for a Duel, would ever
turn his Breech upon his Enemies? But who is he thus Larded you?


Guzm. Why by Ianus's two Faces I Will tell thee, there were too He Is, and those
assisted with six Lacais's of Fretum Magelanicum; for by Goliath, they were of
the Gygantick Brood that did it: Could thou think that I would turn my Rump
to any he that Breaths? But that which is most Stupendous is, that one of
these Eight was Oviedo, and with both his Legs as Sound as the great Bell of
Roan: Do thou not think Alcanzar plays double with us?


Fran. In the name of Wonder, how came you into Oviedo's Company since I left
you?


Guzm. The Rage of being disappointed of my Duel, so heated my Blood, that I
could not hold from visiting Antonia and Pastrana; for thou know when our
Veins are warmed, we love to fool a little with our Mistresses, with whom I
found Oviedo and Piracco, whose Faces I no more knew than I do Judas Iscariot's.


Fran. You were well enough served, to visit my Mistress, and by stealth.


Guzm. By Procris, that is pretty; why, though she were thy Wise, I hope I might
visit her: But to the Point, the Ladies found Anger written in my Looks in
Text-hand, and having pressed me often to know the Cause, I at last told them it,
when suddenly behind my back, Oviedo and Piracco both drew on me, and had not
Antonia's Kindness and Shrieks given me notice of their Treachery, I had been
spitted; but instantly fetching a Pyrowet on my Heel, and whipping out my
Rapier and my Poniard, I did, with them, break both their Thrusts at once.


Fran. 'Twas brave and quick.


Guzm. Then I pressed the nearest with my Dagger, and the farthest with my Tuck,
so furiously, that I made the Ladies run Squeaking out of the Chamber, and my
two Antagonists retire toward the Door, through which I forced both of them
with a double Stockada. (An Art I learned of a famed Morisco Fencer, and which,
in Crowds, has often stood me in good stead) But then, By Hannibal of Carthage,
I fell into the Golian Ambush I told thee of.


Fran. Bless me! how came you out of it?


Guzm. As I came out of many the like Dangers formerly, by my mere Valor,
Francisco; there I laid about me like lightning, Cut, Thrust, Slashed, Hacked,
Hewed, Kicked, Bit, Struck, and all at once; and by my Point and Edge, pushed
and hewed my Passage, as the one Eyed African did his way through the Alps; but
all my Agility, Skill and Courage, could not defend my Crupper, which two
Neopolitans of Bergamo made a couple of Breaches in, and so the Battle ended:
But by Sodom and Gomorrah only Revenge shall be the Word, till I have acted it
to the Hilts: I am Plotting of it.


Fran. It seems, then 'twas Antonia's Kindness and Shrieks, which saved you
first, was it not?


Guzm. By Juno, thou art jealous.


Fran. I scorn so low a Passion; no, from this Moment I resign her to thee; the
Honor thou have achieved in that brave Fight thou made before her, makes
thee best deserve her; besides, I find she likes thee most* and one may as soon
stop the flowing of the Sea, as a Woman's Inclination.


Guzm. Art thou in Earnest, my Francisco?


Fran. In as much Earnest as an Anchorite prays when he is giving up the Ghost.


Guzm. What! quit thy Mistress, and not do it in a Hirrican?


Fran. I must confess I should not do it so calmly, were it not for two
Reasons. The first is, I prepared my self sometime since for this Misfortune,
foreseeing your Merit would carry her, or I must lose your Friendship. The
Second is -- But this upon your Life you must keep Secret -- Alva. Guiv. Iul.


Guzm. By these Hilts I will. Kisses his Hilts.


Fran. A Kins-woman of mine, this Evening, brought me to a young Miracle for
Beauty, and a Peru for Wealth, who being by her Father left to the Guardianship
of her Uncle; he, Faithless Man, would have married her to his Son, one more
crooked than old Age; and as Ill-natured as a Storm; she, to avoid this, fled
to my Cozen, who has undertook to get her for me: This living Martyr, is as
fair as Innocence, bright as Light unclouded, sweet as Incence, virtuous as
Penelope, Sings like Philomela: In one word, she her self is not a greater
Wonder, than it would be to see her and not adore her: Alcanzar is my Friend,
and my Cozen has persuaded her to consult his Art alone to morrow about Two in
the Afternoon, and I have some Grounds to hope my Stars will be my Friends;
nay, I Will trust you with her Name too, it is Iulia.


Guzm. Now am I such an Errant Rogue, as on his bear Description of aside. his
Mistress to be more in love with her, than my own; methinks she is too good a
Bit for such a Mouth as Francisco's: I may Conjure for my self as well as he
hopes Alcanzar will for him.


Fran. Methinks you are troubled at my good Fortune.


Guzm. No, I rejoice monstrously at it, and am as sensible of your Resignation:
But by Saturn all Thoughts that now come into my Heart, except those of
Revenge, are but Usurpers; those only ought to reign: Therefore, dear
Francisco, get me access to Alcanzar to morrow before your Mistress comes, (for
by Boreas I dare not visit his Astrological Cabinet without leave) that I may
be made Tuck-proof: And then I Will invade my Rivals with Fire and Sword: In the
mean time I Will make use of a Manmender; I doubt the Traitors assaulted me with
poisoned Weapons, for by Ixion I am on the rack with Pain, but in a greater
Torment till I be more than quit with them: Remember Revenge is the Word, and
remember too, you get me leave to wait on our Astrologer.


Fran. I dare assure you of it -- Ex. Guzman.


Enter Alvares, Guivarro and Julia. Iul. The Devil a word of all that he has
told you, is true; but the whole History of this Kistril you shall have in
Folio at better leisure.


Guiv. 'Death, if this be so our Plot is quite defeated.


Iul. Why?


Alva. I Will tell you; We knew our two Lords would be beaten by one resolute
Pigmy, and we hoped that Guzman thinking himself Charmed, would have frighted
them away from Pastrana and Antonia, whom they Courted contrary to their own
Resolutions and our Belief, and had they been driven from thence by a Rival
that had affronted them; that had hugely prepared our way, to have inclined
them to make Addresses to Maria and Lucia: 'Twas strangely ill done of you,
Francisco, to leave him.


Fran. Hang him, 'twas he left me: and when he did, he swore Top-Gallant High:
'Twas to post up Oviedo; which had he done, our main Plot could not have
failed: we must quickly cast about, or our Cake will be Dough.


Guiv. I have a Plot just now come into my head, that may recover all again.


Fran. What is it?


Guiv. Cannot you by your Black Art tell it? Soft, Sir, it is yet but newly on
the Anvil, and I will polish it ere I expose it to your view: But this I Will
say; if you trust it to Alvares and me, hang us both if it does not succeed.


Alva. Pray Hang him single, if it do not; I Will not bet so deep at a Game I
know not.


Fran. What ever it is, you must be sure that it be so pat with my Oracle, as
if your Design had been fitted to it.


Alva. Else all were spoiled, I know.


Iul. Well, I see it is a good thing to have Two Conjurers in one Family; but
it is almost break of day, so I hasten to attend Leonora to the Nunnery Grove.


Guiv. Yet we must not sleep till we have our Plot past being disappointed.

The Wise more active grow by being Crossed,
Since Art has often restored what Fortune lost. Exeunt.

The New Flat Scene. Enter Salazar and Fernando. Salaz. We are bound in Honor
and Justice to acquaint Leonora, that our Nephews will not Court her Daughters.


Fern. We are, they may reject many good Husbands, depending upon those who
slight them; and since at our requests all others were forbid, it is but fit we
should tell her the naked Truth, that she may otherwise provide for them; but
having thus determined this affair, Now to our greatest Business -- I fear they
will fail to meet us at the place assigned.


Salaz. True Love is still accompanied with Fear: But yet when I consider, that
though at first they jeered us egregiously, yet at last, when we often vowed to
marry them, they grew more pliant: And in the close appointed us, to meet them
them at a private House, Vowing they would bring a Priest with them; nay,
accepted the Diamond-Rings we gave them. I cannot doubt their good Intentions,
and our blessed Success.


Fern. But why would they not unmask, though we so earnestly desired it? I
apprehend they will not grant us the great Request, when they denied us such a
Trifle?


Salaz. That denial pleased me most, for 'twas a Proof they meant to grant us,
what they would blush at when they did it, that they so covered their Faces.
Besides, I have enquired of their Deportments and Quality of some of their
Neighbors, and find their Carriage is most strict and virtuous, and that they
are Daughters to a Gentleman of a good Family, who died a Beggar: So that to
marry Men of our Estates and Degree, is a Happiness they could scarcely hope;
but we are Rich enough, and they are prodigiously Handsome, and their Gay-humor
pleases me as much as their Beauties.


Fern. You have satisfied my Scruples, as Lucia, I hope, will my Passion all
this Night.


Salaz. One hour of it will do that Work, never fear it.


Fern. Hugh! Thou do not know how fierce a Creature an old Bachelor is.


Salaz. Let me hear you say so, and truly too, to morrow Morning: But then I
bar Cantarrides.


Fern. Do thou not intend to use them that thus suspectest me? The Daughter
that was searched for, and found by the Mother in an Oven; from thence
concluded she had first been heated there her self: But we had best sit all
things for the Reception of our Mistresses, as becomes Men of Action.


Salaz. Come, let us about it then -- Exeunt.


The Scene a Grove of Trees. The Forest. Enter Guivarro and Alvares, Dressed like
Ruffians, and Francisco like a Cavaleer of Quality, in rich Clothes. Guiv. BUt
what if your designed Wife should deceive us, and be willing to be Ravished?


Alv. For Opportunity has often made a Thief; and many a Discreet Woman that
would scruple to be forced by one, would delight to be it by two: How few are
there that double Wages will not invite to Work?


Fran. By this Light, at your Perils, should it prove so; for if you two get my
Mistress, it is but equal that I Single should get both yours.


Giv. The Widow then would have much the better end of the Staff. Fran. looks
into the Scene.


Fran. I see them, and they are at hand: Let Us away to our several Stations.
Ex. several ways.


Enter Leonora and Julia. Leon. I confess to thee my Iulia, since I received
the Oracle, it has so employed my thoughts, that I have never Slept for
thinking on it.


Iulia. I wonder Madam, if you credit what it said, you dare venture in so
Unfrequented a Place, without some Men to defend you, left the Ravishers should
attempt your Person.


Leon. If the Oracle speaks truth, I am as certain of my Deliverance, as of my
Danger: Besides, this is my usual Place to walk in, and this Grove is Sacred
too.


Enter Guivarro and Alvares. Iulia. So are Women's Chastities; but such as will
commit one Sacrilege, will not scruple to commit another. -- Bless me! I begin
to Tremble.


Leon. At what?


Iulia. Do you not see a couple of Ruffian-like Men walk toward us? I have a
thousand times fancied Tarquin in my Dreams; and those Fellows look so like
him, Madam, let us Fly.


Leon. By no means, that will make them follow us; rather let us go Undauntedly
to meet them.


Guiv. Good Morrow Ladies.


Alva. What Melancholy thoughts have brought you into these Shades?


Leon. We come to enjoy the coolness of the Morning.


Guiv. That Is a sign you are hot, and therefore the fitter for us, and we for
you. Guiv. catches Leon. and Alv. Julia.


Leon. Villains! what do you mean?


Iulia. Thou Lustful Goat, unhand me.


Alv. Do not we know that ye are She Merchant-Adventurers, by your Trading
where the He ones Cruse?


Leon. Ruffians! do you mean to Ravish us?


Guiv. 'Slid, they are so 'fraid we should forget it, that they mind us of it:
A pretty symptom that they will not Kill themselves after we have done it.


Leon. No, I Will Kill my self to prevent it.


Iulia. Madam, I Will follow such a brave Example.


Alv. Come, we'll make you happier than you Julia breaks from Alvares; he
follows her. would be.

At once so Nimble, and so Dull; it is Miraculous! Leon having Struggled in vain
to do the like, Kneels.


Leon. Sir, take Pity on me; spare my Honor, and here solemnly I Vow, I will
not only conceal your attempt, but where you will appoint, I will this day send
you 2000 Crowns.


Guiv. Nay, if you will give me so much not to serve you, you will give me more
to do it, or rather after I have done it.


Enter Alvares as out of Breath. Alva. 'Death, I think a Cunny fell to my lot
instead of a Wench; she ran so fast at hand, I have lost sight of her: Hey day!
what is the Storm turned to a Siege? Come, I Will first help you, and then her;
since I have lost my Breakfast, I will take share of yours; there is enough for
us both.


Leon. Alas! is there then no Pity left?


Guiv. We'll take more Pity of you, than you would of your self; let us carry
her into that dark Thicket.


Leon. Help, help, help!


Enter Francisco and Julia. Iulia. These Sir, are my Lady's Cry's: You never
can employ your Valor in a juster Cause; Look Sir, I see them Dragging her
away.


Fran. Villains! unhand the Lady, or you Die. Fran. Draws.


Guiv. Fool, go you about your Business, and leave us to ours, or you shall
repent it.


Fran. My business is to rescue Innocence.


Leon. Propitious Heavens, Guard my Deliverer! O Divine Alcanzar!


Fran. I have let out some of your Lustful Blood; but I find, I must take all
away to Cure you fully.


Guiv. 'Death, he is Invulnerable, let us Fly, for it is in vain to Fight.


Run away. Fran. How Cowardly is Guilt!


Leon. Sir, I owe you more than I have power Then wiping his Sword, and putting
it up, he goes with great respect to Leonora, who rises to meet him. to
Satisfy; but if all I have can show my Gratitude, I shall esteem my self as
happy in that Payment, as in being freed from the Danger your Generosity has
plucked me out of.


Fran. To serve a Person of your Quality and Beauty too, is at once my Duty and
Reward.


Iulia. Madam, in my Flight, by accident I met this Gallant Cavaleer, who as
soon as I had acquainted who you were, and with your Danger, he flew with the
Wings of Honor to your Rescue. Now I Whispers Leon. my self, begin to believe
the Oracle. Fran Sighs.


Leon. I hope the Villains have not hurt you Sir.


Fran. No Madam, it is not they have hurt me.


Leon. Why do you Sigh then Sir?


Fran. Ah Madam, can you ask that question of him who looks on such fair Eyes
as yours?


Leon. I see Sir, you would convince me, that you are a Courtier, as well as a
Soldier.


Fran. Madam, you need but look in your Glass to convince you of the truth of
my Professions; I am not used to Counterfeit a Flame; for by your self I Swear
you are the first to whom I ever offered up my Heart.


Iulia. whispers to Leon. Remember Madam, the words of the Oracle, But if you
slight his first Address,
Farewell to all your Happiness.



Leon. to Iulia. Ah my Iulia! I remember them, but methinks it is ill to accept
him at first word.


Iul. But worse to lose your Happiness for ever; be not ashamed of what the
Stars Decree. Leonora Sighs.


Fran. But Madam, may I obtain your Pardon, if I ask why you did Sigh? Are you
grieved I make you an Address? If you be, I Will Kill my self to expiate my
Offense: but if you will admit of it, by all that is most Sacred amongst
Virtuous Men, the study of my Life shall be to please you; and that moment that
I entertain a contrary thought, may it be my last.


Iul. Madam, tell him the whole truth, and that will save your Blushes.


Leon. Sir, if you will walk with me to my House, I Will convince you, that I do
not slight your Love, and show why I have so suddenly accepted it; then you
will perhaps excuse the seeming Immodesty of such a hasty Bargain.


Fran. Let me seal my Blessing on that fair Hand: Kneels and Kisses it. My Ioys
are like the Luster of your Eyes,
For neither of them now can higher rise.



The Scene a Garden. The Garden in Tryphon as a Back Scene. Enter Pastrana and
Antonia. Anton. MY Mother and Iulia went out betimes this Morning; sure 'twas
to perform some Devotions.


Pastra. I should think so too, had it not been so early; for most People rise
later when only their Zeals do actuate them: For my part, I believe the Oracle,
that told you of a seeming Rape, and of a real Husband, gives her no rest.


Anton. I wonder we have no news of our Husbands, for I am resolved Oviedo and
Piracco are not designed for us; and besides them, and Poet Guzman, we have yet
no Suitors.


Enter Oviedo and Piracco. Oviedo. to Pastra. Madam, I watch all Opportunities
to enjoy the Blessing to wait on you.


Piracco. to Antonia. I heard your Mother, Madam, was gone Abroad, and lest we
should a Second time be interrupted by her, I am come this Morning to renew my
Vows.


Ovie. The truth is we had been earlier here, but that both of us waited till
now, to know which of us Guzman would send a Challenge to; but he peaceful Don
as he is, has only a mind to Cure the Wounds we gave him.


Pastra. Be not mistaken, I know him well, and therefore bid you be confident
as soon as he is Cured, he will play the Devil with you both; I hear he means to
figth with Pistols; for he has heard how Excellent you are at Single-Rapier.


Ovie. I am famous alike at both, for I have fought as many Duels with the
latter, as with the former.


Pastra. to Anton. On my Conscience I believe him.


Pirraco. So he durst fight with me, I desire only a Battoon against his Case
of Pistols.


Ovie. Would we had each of us a generous Rival in this Garden, what Sport we'd
make you!


Pir. Ah! especially if it be with a Rival, and a Mistress looking on.


Pastra. How I hate such Vapouring Puppies.


Anto. Who are these? Enter Guivarro and Alvares, disguised and in rich Clothes.


Pastra. Some, I hope to afford them the pleasant Pastime they say they are so
fond of: If I can Loo these Strangers on them, on my Maiden head, I Will do it.


Ovie. Put up Piracco quickly, I don't like these Fellows Looks; they are
Bravoes. Oviedo Sheaths hastily.


Pir. My beating Heart seems to tell me, their coming boads us no good.


Guiv. How now Gentlemen? Drawing on these fair Ladies.


Alv. Your Weapons should be to Serve, and not to Fright 'em.


Ovie. By my troth Sir, we are only a little Airing our Swords this fine
Sunshine Morning.


Pastr. And by my troth Gentlemen, they were wishing for two Rivals, that on
them they might show us their Valor: I protest I Will allow you to be so, rather
than they should lose their Longing.


Guiv. Madam, they are like to have their Wishes, for the truth is, we heard,
that these two Airers of their Swords, did wish for some to Court you with them.


Alv. Nay, we were told that they repined against their Fate, that they met
with not resistance in their Loves; as if their Stars had not Smiled enough
upon them, in preferring them to be your Adorers.


Ovie. Piracco, these are no Guzmans!


Pir. The best is, the Garden Door is open, remember Oviedo whispers Piracco.
that.


Pastra. This was the substance of their Discourse I confess, but otherwise
Phras'd; for to use their own words, they wished, That their way to us were
strewn with Rivals.


Anton. to Pastrana. Fie Sister, you will set these four a Fighting.


Pastra. No, but I will set two of 'em a running; and methinks I see them
heaving at it already.


Ovie. Gentlemen, we'll take a fitter time and Place for our Revenge; but
Madam, as for you who delight to make Quarrels --


Pastr. What, Reproach me for driving on your Wishes for you?


Guiv. A fitter time and Place! Why would you wish a fitter by Daylight, in a
smooth Garden, and a Mistress present, before whom, a Coward would forget his
Fear?


Pastr. to Pir. Ah, how pleasant a Duel is! especially when a Mistress does
look on; I Will be bound Antonia shall do you that favor.


Enter Guzman hastily, looking back. Guzm. In the Garden, said you, and alone?
Guzman seeing Oviedo and Piracco, fetches a Pirowet on his Toes, and is running
out again.


Pastr. Stay, stay, Don Guzman, here are some of your Brother Poets to
entertain you.


Guzm. By Mercury, Madam, I beg your Pardon, I mistook my way.


Anto. I know you were studying Revenge, that made you mistake.


Guzm. Yes by Grim Saturn was I, and they shall have it home, but it is not ripe
yet.


Anton. Stay but a while, and you shall see it acted to your Hand.


Guzm. By Athelanta, you mean to Trepan me: Why what can one do against four?


Anto. On my honest Word, I do not; two of them are for you, and have so
frighted Don Ove and Piracco the self-maim'd, that if 'twere not in a Garden,
your Nose might be my Witness.


Guzm. Nay then, by my Grandam's Ghost I Will add my Auxiliary Arms to theirs,
and yet therein I give them fairer play than they gave me, for two to one is
greater odds than Strutting and putting his Arms a Kembo, walks by Oviedo.
three to two -- Fagh -- What an unsavory Smell assaults my Nose?


Guiv. Come, Gentlemen, draw; and let us show these fair Ladies sport, perhaps
they long for it as much as you.


Ovie. What if I will not fight for any Bodies pleasure?


Alva. What if we make you Air your Swords in Earnest?


Guzm. Who Is that will not fight for any Bodies pleasure? Let my Toledo know
him.


Guiv. What are you, Sir? we do not need your help.


Guzm. But by your good leaves I need yours, for they two fell both on me at
once last Night, and Coward-like, assaulted me in the Rear; but my Van they
durst not look on.


Pir. Gentlemen, this is Love; Three to Two?


Guzm. By Terra Australis Incognita, not so low as you broached me last Night,
you can Preach Honor: Now it is to save your own Skin, but forgot to practice
it, when 'twas to pink mine.


Pir. Well! I Will make a fair Proposal, my Brother and I will draw Lots which of
us shall fight single with Don Guz. (for I have sworn never to call him Man)
then when by his Death our Numbers are equal, if the Victor's Wounds do not
disable him, we'll instantly fight with both of you -- How do thou like this
Plot, my Oviedo? Whips Oviedo.


Ovie. Rarely well contrived; I like my generous Brother's offer.


Guzm. 'Death! what damnable Stratagem is this against me?


Guiv. How say you, Sir?


Guzm. By Hecuba that is fine: I have been Conjunctim affronted by both, and
divisim I must be revenged but on one.


Alva. The truth of it is, 'twas an unreasonable Motion, for why should we two
stand idle whilst another less concerned is employed?


Guiv. We were the first entered the List, our Numbers too are equal; and we
hope the Entreaties of these two Fair Ladies, will a while Muzzel this fierce
Cavalier.


Pastra. Sir, We beseech you, suspend your Revenge.


Anto. We beg you do it for our sakes.


Guzm. How! my Honor will be out of Countenance to be a tame Spectator, while
others fight in my Quarrel. But your Commands, Ladies, shall Charm me for a
while.


Pir. But how if he should break his Charm while we are in our Duel?


Guzm. On the Reputation of a Cavalier of Honor, I scorn it; my Word being
past, I Am stronger bound than were I so by Magic; provided, if either of my
Foes survive, I may exchange a Passado with him.


Alva. Gentlemen, there is no Excuse now left; Come, let us begin.


Ovie. Now, my Piracco, for another Stratagem. Alva and Guiv. draw.


Pir. Nay, do you find one out; it is your turn, I Am sure.


Guiv. What do you Pause at?


Ovie. I do not like that Guzman's Frown, he looks as if he would Assault us in
our Rears.


Guzm. Dastards! do my Looks fright you? By Mars then Judge, what my Toledo
would. --


Guiv. Faith, Gentlemen, you had best confess the Truth; and plainly say you
have no Maw to fight.


Alva. If you have not, this way alone is left to save you: Declare before your
Mistresses, that you resign them up to us*


Guzm. Pray, Madam, get a Clause in this Contract, to save my Right to you. To
Antonia.


Ovie. Resign our Mistresses! we'll sooner much resign our Lives.


Guiv. Then all thoughts of Peace are vanished.


Alva. Since you will not lead, we'll make you drive.


Ovie. We must yield, at present, to your Numbers.


Ovie. and Pir. go off hastily. Guzm. 'Death, ye Hares, and Aspin-Leaves, do
you think thus to defraud me of the Reversion of my Duel? -- He draws his Sword
and runs after them.


Enter Leon. Francisco leading her, and Julia following. Leon. What Noise was
this, my Daughters?


Pastra, Madam, you call it right, for 'twas nothing else.


Anto. These two brave Strangers have so humbled the Ranting Oviedo and his
Brother, that they are fled before the single Guzman.


Guiv. Madam, they were unworthy our persuit, especially when to have followed
them we must so long have lost the Honor of Waiting upon you.


Enter Guzman out of Breath, and wiping his Tuck. Guzm. By the Emperor of
Trapezond, an Arrow out of a Parthian Bow, was but a Snail compared to them;
yet I broached the Fugitives at the wrong End, and 'twas but Lex Talionis, both
of them had a Fierk at each of my Haunches, and I have had a Fierk at each of
theirs. Ha! are these two Knights of the Sun here Still? 'Slid, and a Third
joined with them: Nay then, Ladies, your servant -- These paultry two legged
Race-Horses have so long detained me from My more Important Affairs --


Ex. Guzman. Francisco, ( having a while gazed on Guivarro and Alvares) runs
and Embraces them. Fran. My generous Friends, how happy am I to hold you in my
Arms again? there wanted this alone to perfect all my Joys.


Guiv. Brave Francisco! what favorable Planet reigns, that we are now united
after a Twelve-Months Separation?


Alva. Ah, dear Friend, we heard you were Cast away as you returned from the
Wars of Flanders; and wept for you more than a Hermit for his Sins.


Fran. I have mourned for you no less; for I was assured you both were killed
at the Siege of the Busse.


Leon. Pray, my best Friend, who are these two Gentlemen?


Fran. Two the bravest Youths that ever were born in Spain; but brought to
great Distress by the ill Fate of their Father, which made them follow the
Wars, where they have got Immortal Fame. Their good Meens you see; I assure
you, Madam, their Valors, Civilities, Friendships and Good-natures, are more
than equal to it.


Pastra. Now Oracle, or never.


Anto. If these be those designed us, I Will believe Alcanzar is a good Angel,
not a Conjurer; these are Men indeed.


Guiv. Are you acquainted with these Ladies?


Fran. No, my worthy Friend, but I am with their Mother, and doubt not soon to
be the like with them.


Leon. aside to Past. and Anto. Daughters, Iulia shall tell you all has befell
me on this happy Day, while I entertain these Gentlemen.


Iul. One of which is your Father-in-law.


Pastra. Our Father in Law?


Iul. Yes, and deserves to be; Alcanzar is a most admirable Man -- I Will tell
you all. Talk together.


Leon. to Guiv. and Alva. Don Francisco, Gentlemen, he has given me such a high
Character of you, that you may Command my House as freely as my self.


Alva. He is still too Partial to his Friends.


Guiv. He told you, Madam, what he Wishes we were; not what we are.


Fran. to Leon. Oh, Madam, had these two Gentlemen Estates answerable to their
Merits, how happy would your two Daughters be to have such Husbands: for they
are now the Objects of my Care as much as yours.


Leon. Let me, Sir, acquaint you with their Oracle apart.


Pastra. to Iul. You amaze me, 'twas a generous Act.


Anton. to Iul. And such a one as does deserve her, though the Oracle had not
foretold it.


Guiv. To Pastra. Madam, I do not wish for a Rival, especially such a one as he
I met with. But should your Beauty raise me a thousand; I would with all of
them dispute the Glory who should serve you most.


Pastra. The only Reason that induces me to believe it, is because you say it.
Guiv. Courts Pastra. privately.


Alva. I wonder, Madam, that Piracco, who had the Courage to be your Servant,
could want it so fight for you; would you admit me to that Noble Title, he that
took it from me should take my Life with it.


Fran. to Anto. Madam, if you dare take my Word, I know not any Gentleman, who
would be less unworthy of it.


Anto. Sir, I dare take your Word for any thing; but since I am at my Mother's
disposal, I must not admit of any Address but by her Consent.


Fran. If I procure it, may my Friend then hope for that Happiness?


Anto. I have always been obedient to her.


Alva. And I by this Fair-hand will ever be to you. Kneels and kisses it.


Leon. This Night I beg you there to be my Guests; till then I ask your Pardons.


Fran. At Five this Evening I Will bring the Holy Man to Ratify our mutual Vows.
Whisper's to Leon.


Leon. I shall then be ready in my own Chapel to perform my Promise; and I
hope by them to give you Assurances, that your Concernments for your Friends
have been trusted to a Successful Advocate: But it is high time I were pleading
of their Causes.


Fran. Therefore we'll all retire. Ex. Guiv. Fran. and Alva. Saluting the
Ladies.


Leon. What think you now, Daughters, of Alcanzar's Oracles?


Pastra. Ours forbid us rich Fools and Cowards; so that Oviedo, Piracco and
Guzman, are quite blotted out of our Calendar.


Leon. But if the two generous Strangers be meant by the Oracle, sure you must
have some Inclinations for them at first sight; I am by Nature your Confessor:
Come, tell me.

Nay, I Will ask no more, your Blushes have answered Pastra. and Anto. Cover
their Faces with their Fans. me; Well, leave your Fortunes to my Management.


Pastra. We cannot better trust them.


Anto. I always did what you command me now.


Leon. What a Miracle this Alcanzar is?


Iul. Dear, Madam, I beg your leave this day to go to him; I confess, at first,
I feared he had been an Impostor, as almost every Conjurer is, but since he has
so admirably told every one of you your Fates, it has raised in me a kind of
Longing (tho I protest I am not with child) to learn from him mine; though, I
doubt, I was born under some niggardly Planet.


Leon. Well! Iulia, till Five this Afternoon, I make you Mistress of your self.
-- It Is time for us to walk in. Pastrana, you will order my Steward to prepare a
Feast.


Pastra. Madam, I will.


Leon. And you, Antonia, must send to have the Music.


Anto. I will not fail.


Iul. to Pastra. If I should get a Husband too, 'twould make you laugh.


Pastra. to Iul. Perhaps 'twould be more than he would have Cause to do. Exeunt.

Since Marriage is a Lottery for Life,
H' had better draw a Blank than such a Wife.

The Scene the Piazzo. The New Flat Scene Enter Oviedo and Piracco. Pir.
They Will never see us more.


Ovie. Hang them, if they would, I would never see them again; set Bravoes on
us! Yet nothing vexes me so much, but that under the Countenance of two Men of
War, that Cock-boat* Guz. should offer to board us; had I not thought it had
been the two Frigates which gave us chase, I would have tacked about, and
boar'd him through the Beak, as last Night I did through the Poop.


Pir. I could not choose but laugh, mauger our Disaster, to see what a Caracole
he made when you faced about, (which made him do the like) and saw he was not
seconded: For then Ill news never flew so fast as he. But we may with ease
digest the loss of these Mistresses, having seen those fresher Beauties, which
our Faithful Guivarro and Alvares brought us acquainted with.


Ovie. Yes, my Piracco, those are Miracles of Beauty, and their Humors too are
full as Captivating; besides, they are of Noble Birth and Poor, all the
Ingredients to compose fit Wives for us.


Pir. Nay, more! They have promised us to assist in our Revenges on our Uncles.


Ovie. To that their own Resentments oblige them: For it is an Affront to Beauty
to have Age Court it. But this is the Hour and Place our Confidents promised to
bring them out to walk; and that their Sister, Tireletta, should instruct us
how to be prosperous -- Oh, here they come.


Enter Maria, Lucia, Tireletta and Tirelesa; with Guivarro and Alvares. Mar.
Are all things ready?


Tireles. Yes, Madam, and the Priest too: You never saw so Snug a young
Theologian in your life, I wish they prove not jealous of him.


Tir. He has the Matrimonial-Spell by Heart, and is as ready at it as I am for
a good Husband.


Mar. You both must then march off: The hour of your assigned Rendezvous draws
nigh; observe punctually all we have ordered you.


Tir. We'll but run in, and take our Ghostly Father with us --


Ex. Tirelet. and Tirelesa. Alva. They are yours, my Sister Vows, if you pursue
your Point immediately, else all is lost, for the two Rich Husbands I told you
of will be offered 'em within this hour. Alv. whispers Ovie. and Pirac.


Ovie. Happiest of all News: Madam, here are now before you two, who from your
Lips expect their Lives or Deaths.


Pir. Two that take delight to live, but in hopes to be yours.


Guiv. What can your Ladyships more expect in Husbands than you shall meet with
in these two Lords?


Alva. I know my Sister has often told your Ladyships their Merits, brave
Descent, and mighty Wealth; and now they swear their Loves to you in Looks and
Accents above Art to imitate: What then can make the stop?


Mar. But what if they should Love elsewhere? There are such Persons as
Pastrana and Antonia in the World.


Ovie. Will instant Marriage satisfy you that those Tales are groundless?


Pir. Madam, Sure you should believe a Demonstration more than idle Talk.


Guiv. Now, Madam, if you refuse, it must be from Aversion only.


Mar. That I dare abjure, both for my Sister and my self -- But such hasty
Marriages --


Luc. Yes, yes; it is that which now sticks most with me.


Ovie. What pretty Nicities does Modesty consist of? Delay, where Love is real,
is the greatest Curse in it.


Pir. It Is for State-marriages to be long in Treaty, where Solemnities are by
the People looked on as Essentials; but the Progress which true Love does make,
is quick and active as his Flames.


Mar. Sister! what shall we say to this?


Luc. I think, Silence is our best Answer.


Ovie. And the happiest we can wish for, that is Consent, which thus low we
humbly thank you for.


Pir. Now let us Wait on you to your Lodgings, and there put our selves past
the power of Misery.


Ovie. to Guiv. Send for a Priest immediately.


Guiv. I will, and when you are Wed, go both with your fair Ladies, and Triumph
over Pastrana and Antonia.


Pir. We will; thank you for minding us of it.


Alva. We'll attend you there, to prevent what their Anger at it may dictate to
them -- Exeunt.


The Scene the Astrological Cabinet. The new black Scene. Rapping ready.
Francisco in it, in his Conjuring habit, and Julia richly dressed. Fran. SO, I am
glad you have brought the Priest; where have you quartered him?


Iul. Even where he desired to be, in your Library of Ribadavia Bottles.


Fran. Take heed he does not turn over so many of those Volumes, as may make
his Head giddy when we need him.


Iul. No, no, he is a very regular Student, he never dozes himself with that
sort of Reading, until it be Bedtime: But what if Guzman should not come?


Fran. No Hawk that is sharp set will be more coming than he, having flung out
such a Lure to him as I have done. -- Rapping at the Door. Away, that is he, I
warrant you; send the Boy to open the Door, then let him act his part behind
it* as I directed. -- If I Conjure well, Iulia retires. This last time, I shall
need no longer to follow the Trade. Door is opened.


Enter Guzman hastily. Guzm. Great Alcanzar, you little think that I am
studying Magic: But by the Celestial Globe I am; and I can give you pregnant
Proofs of it.


Fran. Strong Proofs, I believe, you look so like a Conjurer.


Guzm. Come, come; no dissembling with one of your own Fraternity -- Are not
you to have a very fair and rich young Gentlewoman this day come hither to
consult your Art; The first Letter of whose Name is Iulia?


Fran. You amaze me.


Guzm. No, no, alas! I do not look like a Conjurer -- but to amaze you worse;
are not you to give a favorable Oracle to her, in Francisco's behalf? Ha! what
think you now? Do not I deserve to be your youngest Brother, at least, in the
Black-Art? These Truths make you Speechless.


Fran. No; But since Francisco has betrayed himself, and belied me; I Will use
him as he deserves, and prove my self an honest Man: Yes, the Lady you speak of
is now here, but so Fair and Rich, that did my Profession allow of Wedlock, I
my self would marry her; it is true, he got her to come hither, and would have
bribed me to have feigned an Oracle to his Advantage: But what my Justice made
me Scorn to do for him, my Revenge provokes me to do for you.


Guzm. By the Antartick Pole, you are the best of Conjurers; that you now so
worthily offer me, is, what I came about; though I made that Coxcomb,
Francisco, get me your leave to wait on you, under a Pretense of being made
Tuck-proof, as well as Shot-proof; which latter, (by the way) had I chose at
first, these poor Haunches of mine had not been so miserably carbinado'd as
they are.


Fran. But we must lose no time, for Francisco will be instantly running hither
to learn the Event of his Hopes: Yet ever I go about acting yours, you shall
faithfully promise before a Priest, That you will settle on her a Thousand
Pistols a Year Jointure, in return of Which, I Will engage after you are Wed, to
get her Friend's Approbation for you.


Guzm. By Hymen's Saffron-Coat, I will; but where shall I get a Priest to
depose me?


Fran. I have one, nearer than you imagine; for to conceal nothing from you,
Francisco has sent one hither, that if he meets with Success, he may clap up a
Marriage. You must think so much Beauty and Wealth cannot be long hid, nor he be
without Throngs of Rivals.


Guzm. By the Great Mufty, has the Rogue, Francisco, got a little Sacerdos cut
and dried for his turn? This must be some Hireling Joiner of Hands; and
therefore will serve me for larger pay, which by Midas I Will give him, and so
Plow with his own Ox: But dear Alcanzar give me a Spell to preserve my Sides,
when I shall see how like Rapping ready. an Ass he will look to find that of his
two Mistresses, I have got one by Resignation, and the other by Art: yet in
mere pity I Will return him the first, and leave him the Reversion of his own
Chaplain, that by his help, he may make sure of my Leavings.


Fran. This Jest will make him be laughed out of his Country.


Guzm. By Cabo bona Speranza, I hope so; else I would be loath to play him such
a Slur; for he is a desperate Rogue.


Fran. But, Sir, take heed he does not Surprise us ere we have put things
beyond his Recovery: Therefore do you walk there within sight, in the
melancholy'st Postures you can fancy, while I call in the bright She that must
make your Happiness; for whom I will invent an Oracle, for she is a Stranger,
and will take what I shall speak, to be as Authentic, as if it had been
pronounced from the Tripos by the Inspired Virgin. Then when I call you, make
your Approaches and your Compliments to her, and leave me to perfect the rest.


Guzm. By Venus's blind Son, this shall be worth thee a Thousand Crowns; well,
thus I put my self into my Saturnine March -- Guzman walks in Ridiculous
Mourning Postures. Then Francisco waves his Wan. Beauteous Maid, which come
to hear
What thy Stars decree, appear.



Enter Julia. Guzman Glouts at her, Sighs, and folds his Arms and says, Guzm.
Ah, she makes my Teeth Water as fast as the Thespian Spring: By Gallileus, were
I not afraid of Alcanzar, I would make a Circle about her with these Arms. A
loud rapping at the Door.


Fran. It Is Francisco sure.


Guzm. Good Alcanzar, hide me in a Cloud till this Runs to Alcanzar. Storm is
over.


Fran. What out of your sad Posture already?


Guzm. I know not what posture I am out of, but I am sure my Heart is in a sad
one; you may feel how the poor thing Labors.


Fran. 'Slid, if your Mistress see you such a Coward, a true Oracle will not
persuade her to take you; go and Court her, while I endeavor to persuade, or
fright away Francisco: Why do you not go?


Guzm. I do not find I am in a Courting Humor now; but were Francisco gone --


Fran. Go I say, the influence of her Eyes will thaw the Ice about thy Heart.


Guzm. Think you so? By the Torrid Zone, I Will try then.


He approaches Iulia, Francisco goes toward the Door. Guzm. Fair Lady, I
believe you are come hither to consult the Oracle: I am come on the same Errand
too; but I find you can pronounce a happier one for me than the Famed Alcanzar
can; for would you accept me for your Servant, By Mount Atlas 'twere past the
power of Fate to shake me; my Negromancer told me true, my Qualm is vanished.


Fran. Who are you that you so loudly Knock? Rapping.


Boy. I am Francisco, Great Alcanzar, let me in.


Guzm. It Is he, and I am Ruined. Trembles.


Iulia. What ayls you Sir, you Tremble?


Guzm. Only the Relics of an Ague Madam, that gives me now and then such
Shiverings: I have sometimes twenty of them in thirty Minutes.


Fran. I Am Busy now, but an Hour hence I will admit you; let that suffice.


Boy. False Negromancer, thou think I do not know thee; Treachecherous Guzman
is now Courting my Fair Iulia: Let me in, or I Will force my way, and quench my
Anger in his Frozen Blood.


Guzm. Ah, what a mortal Fit assaults me now!


Iulia. Help, help, help, he Dies!


Fran. Then with this Magic Wan I Charm thee hence. I wish he be not Dead
indeed: Rub his Temples Fran. runs to Guzm. well, and bow his Body: So he
begins to Breath: How do ye Noble Sir?


Guzm. Is he gone?


Fran. Yes yes, I sent him packing with my Magic Wan.


Guzm. But are you sure of it, and that the Door is well Bolted; I mean tripple
Barred?


Fran. All is safe as Art can make it. Guzman skips up, runs and puts himself
into the same Melancholy he was in before.


Guzm. Proceed Oraculous Alcanzar, taking all that has past, for a Parenthesis.


Fran. Was there ever such a Proteus? How often he changes Shapes, and in a trice?


Julia. Sir, a Lady whom I Reverence as my Mother, has sent me to you to learn
my Fate; and I Am engaged by vow, to follow what ever you shall direct me.


Guzm. This was that Rogue Francisco's Plot for himself, but I Will catch her
with his own Noose.


Fran. See thou there that Mortal Wight, Fran. stretching forth his Wan.
With looks more Sable than the Night;
Those Hands with which his Breast he strikes;
Those Legs which he does Trail like Pikes;
Those Cheeks which so puffed up appear,
As if a German Sigh were stifling there;
That long lean Visage void of Red,
Which shows so like a dead Horse-head?
All these and more than thou do see
The' Effects are of his Love for thee.
Thy Stars do therefore with one Voice,
Appoint thee to make him thy Choice:
Which if this Hour thou do not do,
Death after will on both ensue.
Madam, nothing can be more clear than this Oracle.


Iulia. And nothing shall be more punctual than my Obedience to it.


Guzm. Ah! my pretty Mistress given me by the Planets! how I long --


Runs to Julia. Fran. Soft Sir! you shall not touch her till the promised
Jointure be Sworn to before the Priest and me; and till by Sacred Wedlock he
has joined your Hands: Nor in troth till I have my Bond for my thousand Crowns.


Guzm. Well since I am restrained a while from doing, I Will ferk it with
thinking; but if the Domne should Stutter and thereby lengthen the words which
must unite us, by Caput Allgol, I Will cut out his Neats Tongue for it.


Fran. Come, let us hasten to him, and fear not; for you will find he has a most
compendious way of clapping up Matrimony.


Ex. Guzman, leading Julia, and all the way kissing her Hand. ACT V. The New
Flat Scene.
Enter Salazar, leading Tireletta, and Fernando, leading Tirelesa; both Veiled,
and a Priest following them. Salazar to Tere. NOw you believe me a Man of my
Word; you shall still find me no Trifler.


Fern. to Tirel. I hope the reality of my Intentions, are now Confirmed to you
by the Holy Priest.


Priest. Reverend Sirs --


Salazar. What, call Bride-grooms Reverend?


Fern. Keep Reverend for those of your own Coat.


Priest. Forgive me, I pray, I meant not to Offend; 'twas an Appellation I
thought suitable to Men of your ripe Years: But all that I had to say, was to
renew my humble Thanks for the Pardons you gave me, that I staid till it was an
hour in the Night, tho 'twas for two Licenses to Marry you, which I could not
get; as also to remember you, that as it was by your Command that I Married you
without License, so I hope you will keep your words in standing betwixt me and
the Thunder of the Church.


Sal. Have we not said we would?


Fern. Your Ordinary is a Reverend Friend of ours; and when we assure him 'twas
not done in Contempt, nor Schismatically, we know his goodness will forgive it.


Priest. I am sensible 'twas a most irregular Action, and therefore must
shelter my self under your Wings till I have my Absolution.


Sal. I am considering which is the shortest cut to our Houses.


Fern. It Is by that Range of the Piazza that Leonora's House stands in, and at
least a quarter of a Mile the nearest way, which this Night it is good Husbandry
to save.


Salaz. Since you are sure of it, pray be our Guide.


Fern. Follow me then. Ex.


Enter Oviedo, leading Maria, and Piracco Lucia. Maria. Pray Sir Excuse us from
that Visit.


Ovie. Not for all Salamanca. What have you so soon forgot your Vow in the
Chapel, of Serving and Obeying?


Lucia. But on the Wedding Day the Husbands should wait.


Pir. So we will on you to Leonora's; we would not lose our Triumphs over
Pastrana and Antonia for half our Fortunes; that Affront too, will cure all the
Relics of your Jealousies, if any should be left.


Ovie. When they see what lovely Wives we have got, 'twill make 'em so pine
away with Envy, that they will lose all their Servants.


Mar. Therefore I would not go, I hate to be Malicious.


Ovie. But you should love to Embrace your Husbands Concernments as your own;
and we owe them an ill Turn for intending to hire Bravo's to Affront us.


Pir. And this is the lowest we can pay them for it.


Lucia. Sister, Let Us Struggle then no more, but by our Obedience even on the
Wedding Day, teach Wives new Modes to please their Husbands.


Mar. But alas, how many will Curse us for Infringing such old Prerogatives?
yet since you will go, I Will follow your Example.


Ovie. Now you Conquer us with Kindness.


Pir. While you are putting on your Veils, I Will order your Coaches to be made
ready.


Mar. I hope by that time we return, our two new Aunts will have played the
Comedy we taught 'em.


Ovie. How I long to be certain of it! Exeunt


Queen of Hungary 's Chamber. A Periwig for Francisco. A Paper like a Bond.
Enter Francisco, Leading Leonora, Guivarro Pastran. and Alvar. Antonia. Leon. I
Protest, my dearest Friend, I Am as much satisfied that I have pleased you in
Marrying my Daughters to your two Noble Friends, as that I have disposed of
them as the Oracle Directed.


Fran. Madam, as you give me new causes of Gratitude, would you would give me
too new means to evidence the greatness of mine: But, Madam, now that the Holy
Priest has tied the Sacred Tripple Knot, which the hand of Death alone can
loose, I must Conceal nothing from you nor my fair Daughters in Law.


Pastra. What does our new Father-in-Law mean?


Anto. I cannot imagine.


Guiv. We could tell you as well as he, but we'll not Usurp his Province.


Fran. The Truth is Madam, these two Gentlemen you call my Friends, are my two
Elder Brothers.


Leon. Your Elder Brothers!


Fran. And Iulia, your Favourite-Maid, is our Sister.


Leon. Stranger yet!


Fran. Nay, you shall have all out; by my troth, Madam, I am Alcanzar.


Leon. Alcanzar!


Pastra. Alcanzar!


Anton. Alcanzar!


Fran. Yes, and by this Light, a better Conjurer than ever Salamanca bred; none
of those pretend to more than to tell you what is to come; but I told you that,
and acted it too: It Is a new Art, and far exceeds all ordinary Magic. The
Vestal Virgins which from the Tripos did Pronounce my Oracles, were my two
Sisters, Maria and Lucia, dressed like good Spirits: The two Ruffians, which made
as if they would have Ravished you, were your two new Sons-in-Law; and the
Knight Errant which so valiantly Rescued the Lady in Distress, is your kind
Husband Francisco. All Start.


Leon. O Heavens! are we Cheated then?


Fran. Finely Cheated, since it is into good Husbands: For such by all that is
good, you shall still find us; you wanted Honest Proper Men, and we wanted Rich
and Handsome Wives: Consider then, what in all Conscience could both Parties
desire better than what my Astrology has brought about.


Leon. To speak the truth, there is nothing troubles me, but that I should be
defrauded into what I like.


Fran. Those Wives are happy that are not Defrauded after they are Married.


Pastra. to Guiv. And did you join in this Conspiracy?


Guiv. Join in it? Yes, my pretty half of my self, and contrived my part of it
too.


Anto. to Alva. I thought I had taken him to whom my Stars designed me.


Alv. Thou have done better, pretty Flesh of my Flesh, thou have taken him that
Heaven designed for thee, for their Marriages thou know are made: Stars, are
wandering things, never mind 'em.


Leon. But I hope you are Gentlemen by Birth.


Fran. Yes, on my Life, we are.


Leon. This revies me to know you are so Nobly Born and Bred; so that I am
fully Satisfied.


Pastra. And I.


Anto. And I.


Alv. Nay, if you are satisfied already, judge what you will be by to Morrow
Morning.


Leon. But what is become of Iulia? the hour for her return is long since out.


Fran. I must beg her Pardon for a while; but I Am sure she will be here
immediately, and her Husband too.


Leon. Her Husband! who is that?


Fran. Even Don Guzman his own sweet self; but I was forced to be Alcanzar
again, and Conjure to get her for him: That History is pleasant, but now too
long to be Related; you shall hear it at large in some more seasonable Hour.


Guiv. We were the two Gentlemen brought to Distress, which were to make your
Happiness; you shall within these few Hours, find the Oracle most True.


Alv. We should be the basest Rogues in Nature, if we did not make good our own
Prophecies.


Enter Guzman Leading Julia. Guzm. Now we are come hither, keep thy word, and
tell me, my pretty little Conqueress, why thou did tie me to this Visit, for
by Aedipus, I cannot of my self Unriddle it.


Iul. Only to bring you Acquainted with your new Kindred; these three Gentlemen
are my Brothers, and these three Ladies are my Sisters in Law. The three Ladies
run to Julia, Embrace and Kiss her.


Guzm. Hey day! by Hocus pocus, the small Perecranium of my little Spouse, is
Cracked; the joy of being Married to me, has turned topsy turvy all the Pap in
her Skull: Why, by Gog and Magog, these three are Leonora, Pastrana and
Antonia, and those the two St. George's that were my Seconds against Don Edo.
(For since he turned his Breech upon me, I will call him by the Rear of his
Name:) And Don Piracco the Defunct, for so I Will make him: But who this third
Knight of glittering Clothes is, by Sagittarius and Aquarius too, I know not.
Fran. Embraces Guzm.


Fran. Sir, since you call the Lady you Lead, your Wife, you must give me leave
to call you my Brother, for she is my Sister.


Guzm. By Ursa Major, I begin to imagine this is a Second Astrological Cabinet;
your Name I pray Sir?


Fran. My Names are Don Francisco de Alcanzar.


Guzm. Are you any thing of kin to Alcanzar the Famed Astrologer? Methinks by
your Surname you should be.


Fran. So near akin as he is to himself, which you would soon acknowledge were
this my Conjuring Perewig on, my Gown girt draws out of his Pocket a black
Perewig. about me, and my Magical Wan in my hand, with which I made you
Shot-free for 500 Crowns, and my self too for the like Sum, the better to serve
you as your Second, against Don Ove, that broke his Leg, yet an Hour after,
outrun you, and Tucked you, you know where. Do you know me by all these Signs?
By the Zodiac, methinks you should.


Guz. By the Bucentaur of Venice, Francisco and Alcanzar are Incorporated; it was
not my small Spouse that was Mad, but I Well, I am Gulled, yet I Will bravely
bear it; by Agamemnon, I will. But Brother Francisco de Alcanzar, I hope your
Sister has been Chaster than she is Rich; that is, that she is a Maid.


Fran. I dare swear she is as good a one as your Father and your Mother were
ever they lay together.


Guzm. Is she not a better? For I know not what Pranks they played, ever they
Danced in one pair of Sheets.


Fran. Nay, on my Conscience, they were both Maids when they were Married, else
they could not have got so wise a Son: But I beg your Pardon, I must be gone.


Guzm. Whether in such haste?


Fran. I must run to Alcanzar to buy a Spell to keep my Sides together, to see
how like an Ass Guzman will look, when he finds I have Plowed with his Ox.


Guzm. Nay, by Caligula, this is down right Tyranny, abuse thy Brother; come
give me a Portion, and by Damian and Pythias, we will be Friends.


Fran. A Portion! why thou have a double one; Beauty and Maidenhead.


Guzm. Make me but as sure of the last as I am of the first, and hang Portion,
I need it not.


Iulia to Guzm. By Alcanzar's Astrological Cabinet, if you doubt my Virginity
I Will make Aries and Capricorn the Ascendant Signs of thy Forehead; by the Great
Cham of Tartaria, I will, and let me see who dares say me nay. Puts her Arms a
Kembo.


Guzm. How now my little Amazonian Thelestris, in Arms already? by Semiramis, I
have gotten a Virago in Petticoats.


Fran. Now judge if she were like to commit Fornication with any Body, that is
so ready to buffet no less than her Husband but for naming of it.


Guzm. Come, my Artemizia of Hely-carnassus, by Jove's Lady I Will never be
Jealous of thee.


Iul. If you be, I Will Cure you of it, by Taurus.


Fran. Since Peace is thus concluded, though I cannot give you a Portion of a
thousand Crowns; yet I forgive you a Debt of that Sum: There Is your Bond. --
Flings his Bond to him.


Guzm. Content to receive a Thousand Crowns with a Wife, or to be paid a
Thousand by one, is as broad as long.


Enter Oviedo leading Maria, and Piracco Lucia, (Piracco starts) Ovie. Why do
you start?


Pir. Do not you see the two Bravoes there?


Ovie. No matter, Guivarro and Alvares promised to meet us here, and they never
break their Words: Should our Antagonists begin a Quarrel, we deserved to be
beaten, if we cannot hinder it from Extremity, till our Auxiliaries come, and
then we may safely bear up to 'em -- Ladies we come to bring our Wives to be
acquainted with you.


Pastra. We wish you Joy of them.


Pir. That Wish is needless, their Beauties give us it.


Guzm. Stick to me bravely, and then by Tomumbeius Guzm. draws, Fran. Gui.
Alva. hastily aside. of Egypt, have at them. Will none of you Assist me? None
of you dare Second (Guz. draws, and makes as if he would run at them, but stirs
not (crying) me? --


Fran. seises on Guz. Sword. Fran. What do you mean? Sure you do not know them?


Gu. and Alva. to Pir and Ovie. saluting them; they talk together. Guzm. Not
know them! By Numa Pompilius, these are my two Back-biters.


Fran. I thought how well you knew them, I say they are your Brothers-in-Law.


Guzm. By Naso's Metamorphosis, this is admirable.


Fran. Do you not see your Lady and their two Wives kiss and embrace like
Sisters? Separate your self a little from the Company, and I Will acquaint you
with all.


Ovie. to Guiv. You tell me Wonders, Guiv. and Alva. are married to Pastrana
and Antonia? and our two Wives, your two Sisters?


Guiv. It Is most certain!


Alva. When we had the good Fortune to save you from the four Bravoes, your
Gratitudes invited us by large Pensions to be your Attendants; and though our
Wants made us comply, yet we are, at least, of equal Birth to yours, though the
Frowns of Chance robbed us of all our Fortunes; but we dare say, bating what
the World calls Portions, you are not unequally married. Clashing of Swords
ready.


Guiv. The Ambition of being allied to you, engaged us in all those Arts, which
we have practiced to attain it.


Ovie. For my part, I rejoice that we are married to the Sisters of those whose
Brothers saved our lives.


Pir. Portions are but the Invention of Gown-men: a mere Trick to inhance the
price of Drawing, and of Engrossing Settlements. I could never see a Reason why
a Man should pay Money to lie with a dishonest Woman, and receive Money to lie
with an honest One.


Ovie. I would fain hear the most Learned of all the Long-Robe answer what
Piracco now has said.


Guiv. Believed, it is unanswerable: But, Sir, I have an humble Suit to you;
it is that you two and Don Guzman will be friends: there is Reason for it now,
since you are Brothers-in-Law.


Pir. How so?


Alva. He Is married to our younger Sister, Iulia.


Ovie. Nay, then it must be: For since Women can quench Love, it is but just
they should also quench Hate.


Fran. Come, they wait for your advance; the'll meet you above half way. Alv.
Gui. beckon Fran.


Guzm. Else, by Lucifer, I will not stir one foot. All four advance toward
Guzman.


Fran. You see they are coming.


Guzm. Nay then, by the Pleiades, I cannot be Ill-natured on my Wedding Day. --
Embrace.


Guiv. In that Embrace, let all past Quarrels be forgiven and forgotten.


Guzm. Forgiven, If you will; but by Lethe, they cannot be forgotten, till the
two Fontenels they have made me here are siccatriz'd.


Noise with Swords. Enter a Servant. A great Noise without. Leon. What Noise is
that?


Serve. Oh, Madam, a couple of old Gentlemen with Spectacles on their Noses,
leading home their Daughters and attended only by their Chaplain, are assaulted
at the Door by three drunken Students, and there are none to rescue them. --
Ex. Servant.


Guiv. Alvares and Francisco, let us three go and help them. It Is an affront to
the House to have such Violence offered under the Walls of it.


Fran. Away, away; lose no time. These three draw, and run out hastily.


Ovie. to Pir. What if these should be our two Reverend Uncles coming from
Matrimony?


Pir. Nay, it is three to one they are they, with their two Wives and their
Priest.


Guzm. What does Reverend Age do abroad at this hour of the Night, especially
with Wenches? 'Death, they deserve not to be rescued; for my part, I abjure the
doing of it.


Pir. When they come in, let us upbraid them for Whoring.


Ovie. Content, and let us engage Pastrana, Antonia and Guzman, to reprove them
severely for it; 'twil heighten the Farse.


Pir. I Will go and persuade them to second us, and do you make our Wives cover
their Faces, till they have the Watchword.


Ovie. Leave me to my part, and go about your own.


Mar. Well! we will Vail our selves; if it be Ov. goes to Mar. Pir. to Pastra.
( and Guzman Whispering.) they, until we have our Cue given us.


Luc. I am glad of it, else, though they had been our Fathers, we should have
burst out a Laughing in their Faces.


Enter Guiv. Alva. Fran. leading in Salaz. Fern. Tirelesa, Tireletta, (both
Masked) the Priest following. Guiv. The Rascals fled as soon as they but saw
our Swords.


Salaz. Gentlemen, we owe you our Lives, and these Ladies their Honors


Ovie. By this Light our two Uncles!


Pir. Ah, Uncles! I little thought you would turn Wenchers, and be Rambling at
this unseasonable hour of the Night, to follow your Game.


Ovie. Fie, why should you, to save Charges, be your own Caterers? were you
never so Cock-a-hoop, you might have had an old She Adjutant in a Minute, to
have brought to your own Houses these natural Julips.


Guzm. By Hyems, this is a strange sinful Age, that old Men, which have each of
'em one Foot in the Grave, should be running on both Feet, and in Cemerian
Darkness too, after their Fornication; you that by your Age, wrizl'd Faces, and
Silver Hair, should be Solon's and Lycurgus's, to turn Aratin's and Agrepina's;
I am ashamed of it.


Salaz. Are you all Mad? These two are not our Wenches, but our Wives. All seem
amazed.


Fern. Why do you stare thus?


Ovie. Alas, Uncles! this way of Lying is worse than to do it with Wenches.


Pastra. Indeed, Sir, the Excuse is as bad as the Fault: Men of your Years to
marry Girls, it is two to one they give you an incurable Headache.


Anton. Married! it is impossible? Alas, what have your Nephews done to affront
you, that you should thus choose to disinherit them, only to make your Wives
Children your Heirs?


Ovie. Married, said you? to whom?


Salaz. I am to Maria.


Fern. And I to Lucia; and this is the holy Priest, that not an hour since did
Join our Hands.


Ovie. Maria and Lucia! Why, those are the Names of our Wives.


Salaz. A hundred several Women, may have one Name, but these two are our
Wives; nor are we ashamed to show you their Faces: Pray take off your Masks.


Fern. We own them for your Aunts. Tirel. Tirelesa unmask, Salaz. Fern. step
back holding up their Hands.


Salaz. What Is this? Fernando we are betrayed and cheated.


Fern. I am turned a Statue -- All Laugh; Mar. and Luc. unvail.


Salaz. In the Name of Wonder, what are ye?


Tirel. Your Donship's Ladies, as well can testify this faithful little Levite.


Tirelesa. Our Names are Tireletta and Tirelesa, we were Maids to Maria and
Lucia; but now for want of better, their Ladyships Aunts.


Fran. goes and gazes at the Priest. Guzm. By Copernicus, Conjuring Names, and
Juggling Faces; this comes of making Love with Spectacles; by Cassandra's
Prophesies, considering how Ante-Eagle-Ey'd these Old Fellows are, 'twas well
they light upon two of the right Sex; and not upon two Patriarchs, with fork'd
Swallow-tail'dBeards, that reached to their Navels; for if they had, this
Ambulatory young Elder, would, for double pay, have married them as cheerfully
to those Magi -- and to these two Cockatrices.


Salaz. Undone for ever, and past hope too, of Redemption.


Fern. Ah, Salazar! To live till Eighty, in the repute of wise and honest Men,
and then to act this Folly; I hope the Grief of it will fling me in my Grave.


Salaz. That Is the only hope that is left me too.


Guzm. By Actaeon, you have reason; for it is better to be six Foot lower than
the Surface of the Earth, than six Foot higher than the Crown of your Heads:
For so tall I Prophecy they will graft your Noddles.


Fran. Make room for me, I cannot see two Uncles to my Sisters in such torment,
and not give 'em ease; tell me, Gentlemen! would your being unmarried cure your
Griefs?


Salaz. O, Sir! Do not you mock us too?


Fern. Heap not Scorn on Affliction!


Fran. By my Life, I am in earnest. Will you give your present Wives Five
hundred Crowns apiece to get other Husbands with, and their Household Chaplain a
Hundred more, to buy Books, a Cassock, and a Gown, if I make good what I have
spoken?


Salaz. Would we? Yes, as willing as Sick Men would be well.


Fern. Alas! you talk of Impossibilities.


Fran. Bind your selves by Vow before all this Company, and I Will instantly
perform what I have said.


Salaz. Fern. We Vow it, before all these Witnesses.


Fran. Then thus I make your Marriages Null. Fran. pulls off the Perewig, and
her Woman's Hair falls about her Ears. I gest this was my Sister's Laundress.


Priest. I only mumbl'd over some few words, which I made them take for
Matrimony.


Salaz. You have relieved us Sir, from Pains, which would have killed us in two
Hours.


Fern. Our Debts to them we'll pay to night, as we have promised; but those we
owe you, can never be satisfied.


Guzm. By Craesus, what a Mass of Money might be raised among the Husbands of a
Years standing, could Francisco enable them to prove, that every one of them
had been so married?


Iul. Take heed you do not in six Months wish he could do it for you too.


Leon. Since all our storms are thus happily over-blown, it is fit we now should
rest; this Night ye are all my Guests.


Guzm. By Hercules's Labors, who ever but names the world Rest among so many
Brides and Bride-Grooms, Affronts the Company. Why, the two grave Uncles
yonder, had they not been divorced, would by way of Indignation, have spit in
the very Face of that dull Mono-syllable.

Who thinks of Rest the day he Wed's a Wise,
Deserves to be deprived of it for Life.

FINIS.
TO The Right Honorable LIONEL EARL OF ORRERY, Baron of BROGHILL, etc.
MY LORD,
UPON my Perusal of Guzman in Manuscript, I thought it a piece of Justice to
the World, as well as to the Memory of your Lordships Honorable Grandfather,
the most Ingenious and Accomplished Earl of Orrery, to see it Published with
the Volume of his other Plays. I was surprised to find, that the Author of the
Black Prince, Harry the Fifth, and Mustapha, should have a Genius for Comedy,
when he condescended to that Task. The Tale of Guzman appears to have been a
Spanish Design, and therefore naturally grave; but the Spirit of my Lord
Orrery's Wit was sufficient to quicken the Mass, to enliven and beautify it to
that degree as renders it an Entertainment for an English Reader. The Intriegue
is carried on with Variety of Accidents and Pleasant Circumstances, and (which
is the Life and Perfection of Comedy,) wound up into a natural and surprising
Conclusion. I have very seldom seen so many Characters of Persons and separate
Interests managed with so much Conduct, as not to perplex the Tale, but every
Thing serviceable to the Progress of the main Design. The Reputation of
Mustapha has been established by the Approbation of all sorts of Spectators,
and will continue a just Model of Tragedy, as long as the Stage shall last. The
Story is magnificent, the Characters and Persons of the Noblest Rank, which are
all maintained to their Dignity, and preserved in their proper Colors; The
Business of greatest Importance; The Expression and Sentiments Just and Noble;
The Passion and Distress wrought up to such a Height, as commands our Attention
and Affections.

The Noble Author of the ensuing Comedy was furnished within himself for any
Performance of Wit, forasmuch as no Man of his Time better understood Men and
Things. He was not only an Example of Ingenuity Himself, but a great Encourager
of it in Others. Indeed there was no sort of Merit that escaped his Patronage.
Poetry was but one of his Accomplishments. As for his other Qualifications,
derived to him from his Predecessors, those he supported in his own Person and
Character, and transmitted them with Advantage to your Lordships Honorable
Father, who has again resigned them as Hereditary to your Lordship. That
Sweetness of Temper, that Principle of Justice and Generosity, which are
already conspicuous in your Lordship, give sure Promises, that you will
maintain the Honor and Reputation of your Predecessors. The World and Time are
yet before you, and you have already obtained so great an Interest in Mankind,
as to have every Body's good Wishes. For my own part I am obliged, not only
upon the promising Hopes I have conceived of your Lordship, but likewise upon
the Alliance you have to our most Honorable English Maecenas, to whom the
Acknowledgments of the Muses are eternally devoted, neither will it ever be
determined, whether he is more a Favorer of them, or their Favorite. I have
already acquainted your Lordship with the Occasion of this Address, and cannot
despair of your Lordship's Acceptance of the following Piece in Print, which (I
question not) will be favorably received by the World. I would only farther beg
leave to say, that I am, with all Respect and Sincerity,

MY LORD, Your LORDSHIPS most Devoted Humble SERVANT N. TATE.

Dramatis Personae.
GUzman. An Old Covetous, Rich, Amorous, Cowardly Buffoon. Francisco. Guivarro.
Alvares. Three Brothers, Gentlemen of decayed Fortunes, left to shift by their
Wits. Oviedo. Piracco. Two Young Foppish Dons, of plentiful Fortunes,
Pretenders to Antonia and Pastrana. Salazar. Ferdinando. Uncles and Guardians
to Oviedo and Piracco, who, in stead of Discharging their Trust, are themselves
practiced upon. Maria. Lucia. Sisters to Guivarro, Francisco, Alvares, and
Confederates in their Design. Leonora. A Rich Widow. Antonia. Pastrana. Her
Daughters, great Fortunes, all Three practiced upon by the forementioned
Alvares and his Brothers. Julia. Leonora's Woman, Youngest Sister to Maria and
Lucia. Tireletta. Tirelesa. Maidservants formerly to Maria and Lucia. Boy
dressed like a Spirit.
Scene Salamanca.


