I Do Appoint Thomas Parkhurst, Dorman Newman, Thomas Cockerill, and Thomas
Simmons, to Print this Book, Entitled, The POPES WAREHOUSE, or the
MERCHANDISE of the WHORE of ROME.

July 24. 1679. TITUS OATS.

THE Popes Warehouse, OR THE MERCHANDISE OF THE WHORE OF ROME.

Published for Common Good.

By TITUS OATS, D. D.

LONDON, Printed for Tho. Parkhurst, Dorman Newman, Thomas Cockerill, and Tho.
Simmons, 1679.

To the Right Honorable ANTHONY EARL of SHAFTSBURY, Baron Ashly of Wimbourne
St. Gyles; Lord Cooper of Pawlet; Lord President of His Majesty's most
Honorable Privy Council.
The Publishers affectionate good Friend, and singular good Lord.
My Lord,
THE greatness of Your Lordships favors conferred on me since the first of
your Honors acquaintance with my poor self, has obliged me from time to time
to consider of some return; and upon due consideration I find, that it is next
to an impossibility for me to perform that to Your Lordship, to which the Laws
of Duty and Respect oblige me; yet, My Lord, I thought it my Duty, (although my
Returns will appear inconsiderable) not to omit any opportunity of making my
Just acknowledgments. All good men have highly resented Your Lordships Favor
to me in this Great Affair: And the whole Kingdom judges it self engaged to
Your Lordship for standing by its Evidence and Cause; to the great Confusion of
the Romish Beast, and those that wonder after it: from all which I conclude,
that it becomes me to make to your good Lordship some Expression of my
Gratitude: And although, My Lord, it be in me a great boldness to make this
Address to your good Lordship, yet for all that, since I have Your Lordships
Countenance, I pray your Favor and your Patronage for this poor Piece: In the
Publication of which, by many Reviews and Remarks, I have been at some pains;
and now, My Lord, it is upon the Travel, Your Lordships Countenance may beget
the Countenances of many more Persons of Honor; so that I may not to all
intents and purposes be discouraged in this War that I have vowed to make
against the Whore and Dragon of Rome, and all her Votaries, as long as I have a
day to live; and will, to the utmost of my power, discover her Cheats and
Villainies.

My Lord, this Tract is a Catalogue of the Romish Lies and Cheats, many of
which are, to mine own knowledge, maintained and practiced to this day in the
Romish Synagogue, to the great Dishonor of God, and Contempt of Christian
Religion; great occasion being given by such inordinate practices, to the
Enemies (both Jews and Turks) of Jesus Christ, to Blaspheme our Holy
Profession; so that if Your Lordship shall persevere in this good work of
opposing this Devilish Interest of Rome, to its ruin, you may be an happy
Instrument, under God, to preserve this Kingdom from its Superstition, Idolatry
and Tyranny: And Your Lordship may remember what pains Your Honor has taken,
whilst in place, to suppress it, and the growing Greatness of that French
Tyrant; for the which, Your Lordship has abundantly drank of the Cup of
Afflictions, which you may assure your self has redounded highly to your
Honor in this your Country: Therefore may it please Your Lordship to continue
your Care and Zeal for the securing of the Protestant and English Interest, to
the Honor of God, the Safety, Welfare and Advantage of our King and His
Kingdoms, then Your Lordship may assure your self of a lasting Repute in this
Life, and of Peace at your Death, and a joyful Resurrection to the World to
come. As for Apostates and Traitors, though they flatter themselves; and for
their own Applause, suffer Parasites and Hypocrites to do the like, yet they
are the Objects of good men's Scorn and Contempt; and will certainly, without
true Repentance, of which, God knows, there is but little hope, suffer the
Vengeance of God upon them and their Posterities in this Life, and Eternal
Vengeance in the next; and though Your Lordship has not had one Popish Mass
said for the preservation, either of your Body or your Soul, or both, yet it is
not to be questioned, but that Your Lordship will grow as great in the Esteem
of your Country, and in the Favor of your God; and greater than he, who for
the Safety of his Person, has had above One Hundred Thousand: And though Your
Lordship, I believe, never bestowed one Farthing for a small quantity of Romish
Relics, I question not, but your Name and Fame will endure to the end of the
World, when his, that gave 600 l. to Endow and Adorn an Altar with stores of
such stuff, shall Perish: Yet this fowl Monster goes for a Protestant; and I
suppose, and verily believe, he is permitted so to do by a 'Dispensation from
those Dogs, whom he has suffered to devour the Childrens bread. My Lord, I
crave Your Lordships Pardon for this my boldness, which I protest, is out of
the sincerity of my heart to Your Lordship, and it is because I do earnestly
desire your Honors welfare; and in order to this, I will not cease my humble
Addresses to Heaven in the behalf of Your Lordship and Family; and so
concluding, I humbly take leave to subscribe my self,

My Lord, Your Lordships very humble Servant, TITUS OATS.

To all that profess the Protestant Religion within this Kingdom of England,
Grace, Mercy, and Peace.
Dearly beloved brethren,
ALthough the Impieties of this Kingdom have caused many Judgments to fall upon
it and its Inhabitants; yet there has not been any one like unto that of ^^e
want of the knowledge of God, and his Word (or, if I may presume to use the
expression of the Holy Ghost, the removing of the Candlestick): For although
rumors of Wars, Pestilence, and Civil Commotions, be very unpleasant to the
sense of Mankind; yet as they are punishments which only affect the body and
its senses, they are the effects many times of Gods Fatherly love to a Kingdom
and people, and are so received and judged by good ^en. But when God deals
with a people as he dealt with the Seven Churches of Asia, and depriveth a
Kingdom and people of his Word and Ordinances, and delivers it up to strange
Diabolical deluders and delusions, then nothing can be judged to be the cause
of all this, but the fierce anger and wrath of God, and its effects and
consequents, to be eternal vengeance and ruin; and as the soul exceeds the
body, and is much to be valued above it, and preferred before it, in respect of
its worth and quality; so it is certain, and admits of no debate in any
consideration whatever, That those Judgments which are spiritual, and the very
Harbingers of an Eternal ruin, must needs surmount those which are only
corporal, and perhaps sent in order to prevent this fiery wrath and indignation
of the Most High God. Afflictions that are temporal, may well be compared to
whips; but this Judgment of removing the Candlestick, deserves to be compared
to a fiery Scorpion.

Under this dismal burden did this our native Country for some Hundreds of
years groan; for when God in his anger for its sin, had removed the Candlestick
from it, what Plagues attended this dealing of Almighty God with out
forefathers, I shall not need, my Brethren, to report to you; for I question
not your care and zeal, and therefore I humbly conceive that you do at your
leisure consult and will enquire into those Memoirs left upon Record in order
to your more ample satisfaction in this particular; and besides all this, the
experience of those sober men who have and do still converse in those Countries
and Kingdoms where the true Gospel of our Lord Christ is still opposed and
persecuted, and in its place trifling Ceremonies, unworthy Cheats, and
Devilish Idolatries, are used and practiced, might be a suffient testimony in
this case; yet for your sakes, my Brethren, I did think it not at all
inconvenient to expose to public view the great vanity and unspeakable
delusion to which God has given up the Synagogue of Rome, even to believe a
lie, so that her dissembling Votaries might be damned for not receiving the
truth of Gods word in the love thereof.

I confess, my Brethren, God has raised up his Servants, who have been very
vigilant in the discovering of the Intrigues of the Whore of Rome, both in
respect of her profession and practices, who by their pains and skill have
exploded her pretended Miracles, and have in a lively manner painted her
Phanaticism, and exposed her abominable Cheats to the world. Of these labors
and services of good men we have enjoyed the benefits; and as ^^^se have had
the happiness and opportunity of doing Gods Church very eminent services, by
improving their parts and learning for her advantage; I thought it my duty to
employ some spare hours for your service, in reviewing her old Trade of
Merchandising, and to revive the memory of the great advantage she has made of
her Mock-Indulgences, and Mock Pardons, and Mock-Miracles, Cheats and
Villainies, so that the consideration of these things may stir you up to hate
this abominable Strumpet, and burn her flesh with sire.

Of this Trash and Trumpery you have an exact Catalogue in this Book; an
incredible gain of which, has been made to their Popes, Bishops, and Clergy,
both Secular and Regular; to the latter especially, who to mine own knowledge
have judged their Relics and Indulgences more advantageous to their
Monasteries and Convents, than the enjoyments of Lands and Tenements are to
those that are of the Laity; for a testimony of which, the consideration of the
vast Treasure that was found in their Dens when these Foxes were un^^ennell'd
by Henry the 8th, is proof sufficient; and to this very day the English
Regulars (so called) have gotten, and do still get yearly Four thousands of
pounds sterling out of England from their Votaries, to the great damage of this
our Native Country, against which they are sworn Enemies; nay, some that would
have the honor of being called Protestants, have been highly guilty of an
underhand contribution to their Devilish Idolatry, and Abominable Cheats, to
the great dishonor of Almighty God, and of Protestant Religion, to the
disparagement of their Prince and Country, to whose Laws they pretend to pay
all manner of obedience, and when at home can swear their Prince into a belief
of their loyalty and fidelity. I will not name that person in whom his Prince
and Country have reposed great Trust, witness the Employ he has had for some
years; for whose sake, to mine own knowledge, many thousands of Masses have been
said for the health of his soul, for the preservation of his body, and for the
rectifying of his unstable Judgment, and all this at their privileged Altars,
endowed with stores of Indulgences, and with a goodly crop of their Relics
and Trumpery. But I shall leave him (as I fear God has done) to believe the
lies and cheats of those sons of Antichrist whom he has most heartily
entertained at his Table, tho Traitors to his Prince and Country, haters of
Almighty God, and of all his Servants.

So that (my dear Brethren) you may perceive, that by means of these Relics
and Merchandise, and of their pretended power of conferring grace, holiness,
and eternal life, many professing the same holy Faith with us, have fell away
by the subtilty of the crafty sons of the Synagogue of Rome, whom they have
perverted from paying their duty to Almighty God, and from the profession and
practice of Gods true Religion; and some of these have become either monstrous
Monks, chattering Channons, flattering Friars, heretical Hermites,
Antichristian Anchorites, superstitious Nuns, railing Recluses, Limbs of
Antichrist, nay of the Devil himself; and have denied the Lord that bought them
with no less price than with his own blood, and have been led into a deplorable
state of Captivity by these Votaries of that filthy and abominable Strumpet,
and detestable Dragon of Rome; who have set up and continued the Trade of
making Merchandise of our fellow subjects and brethren, and have devoured the
Houses of our Widows by their pretended zeal and devotion to and for this
trash, and of which in this Book you have a fair account; and they have privily
for well near an hundred years, acted this part, till these twenty years last
past, in which they have had more countenance and indulgence; yet their
ingratitude is such, that they have returned evil for the good will of our
Magistrates, one of whom you know they have wickedly murdered, our City of
London they fired, and several Rapes and Cheats they have with that impudence
acted, so that it is next to an impossibility for us to be safe whilst they
subsist; for our Peace they have disturbed, our Interest, Property, and
Liberty, they have endeavored to betray into the hands of a French Devilish
Power, and have attempted once more to bring us under the Roman yoke, which
yoke we nor our Fathers were ever able to bear. Yea, they have endeavored the
death of our Prince, and to overthrow the Government and Laws by which we
subsist and live, and without which we must of necessity run into confusion,
did not God appear in mercy to prevent our Ruin and their Malice. But I do not
much admire their Impiety, because I well know their damnable and wicked
Principles, of which their Practices are necessary Consequences; of which I
shall here give you a short account.

I. They say, That to comply with Protestants in obedience to Laws and
Government, would be an act unreasonable, irreligious and damnable. Now what
security can we have from such unreasonable and irreligious Miscreants and
Cutthroats? that (my Brethren) I shall leave to your gravest judgments and
considerations.

II. That the Protestant Ministry is false and intruded, and with it they ought
not upon pain of damnation to communicate: This Proposition being by them
believed as an Article necessary to salvation; I suppose it will be by all wise
and considerate persons concluded, That all means, methods, and stratagems
shall be by them used and contrived for the rooting out and overthrowing of the
established Government of the Protestant Church and Churches, seeing their
Ministry is by them believed and asserted to be false and intruded.

III. They say, That Protestants have not the preaching of the word of God:
This they have asserted, to render the Reformed Churches vile and contemptible,
and the Worship of God amongst us, and our Brethren in the Gospel, of no value;
by which means many of our Religion have been seduced to follow their
fopperies, and to worship their trash, and to wonder after this foul Dragon of
Rome: Therefore we may easily conclude, That they who thus revile us, and our
Religion, and especially in this material part, to wit, the Ministry of Gods
Word, which they have villanously denied us to have and enjoy, would soon
destroy us, and that with their hands, (could they find opportunity) since
their impudence has been such as to revile us, and it, with their tongues.

IV. That Protestants want the due Administration of Sacraments. If the
Ministry of the Protestant Churches be false, intruded, and usurped, this then,
I confess, will undoubtedly follow. But in this we may, my dear Brethren,
easily see what Calumnies they lay upon that holy Faith, for the profession of
which, many of our Forefathers lost their dear Lives by these cursed Locusts:
and this they would continue to this day, if they were again Lords over us; for
if the Religion which we profess, upon which most of the good Laws under which
we live are founded and established, lies under such notorious Censures; then
there is no man living that will exercise the reason God has given him, but
will judge that these Vipers will endeavor and contrive the Subversion of such
Laws, and consequently the Government of our Prince will be also attempted and
struck at.

V. That the Protestant Church is not the true Church of God. This being
Preached, many of the more ignorant Protestants have been wounded in their
Consciences, perverted in their Principles, corrupted in their Judgments, and
are brought to Question, and at last to oppose the Jurisdiction of the King in
things Ecclesiastical; by which dismal change, the more excellent part of the
Government is by them endeavored to be made and declared to be null and void.
And by means of this strange perversion, those who before were quiet in their
several Stations, and subject to Laws, are become heady and high-minded
Traitors, without the least spark of Obedience and Love to their Prince and
Country, to the great damage of our Country in which we live.

VI. That the Protestants are notorious Heretics. Upon which position and
principle they establish those wicked and diabolical practices, of Fires,
Rapes, Thefts, Murders, Felonies, Treasons, to the great confusion of our
Country, and disquiet of professors of Religion. Have they not, I say, burnt
the Bodies of our Forefathers, because they would not debauch their Souls and
Consciences in their Idolatrous Communion, and all because they judged them
Heretics? Upon which principle they depose Kings, and then say it is no
Treason to Murder them, because they are Heretics, if they do only
countenance, and not practice their Religion.

Yet we find them very brisk in the denial of all their wicked Attempts upon
this Nation, even to their deaths, as appears by the Five Speeches of the Five
Jesuits, Traitors, lately Executed for Conspiring the Death of the King, and
Subversion of the Protestant Religion and Government? Who indeed would not deny
all those things, that were in their circumstances? For should they have
confessed, What would have become of their zealous Votaries, the conduct of
whose souls they had been entrusted withal, who would not have continued this
trust in such hands, if they had known their inclinations to such Treasons?
What would become of the Plot, which certainly goerh on still against us and
our Liberties, as fast and as fierce as ever? The conscious, of whom we have
not yet a certain intelligence, would much abate in their courage, and would
not be in that capacity to serve the Interest of the Romish Dragon, if that
these Martyrs (or indeed Malefactors) had confessed. How those considerable
Traitors now in hold would have been damnified, should they have confessed, I
leave to you, my Brethren, to judge, and how the whole Interest of the Romish
Synagogue must have sunk and perished to all intents and purposes, had they
spoken that which their Consciences knew to be true. Moreover, they had an Oath
of Secrecy, a branch of which was to enjoin them, if discovered, to deny the
design to the last breath; and not only a dispensation, but also a command from
the Pope to do the same, and damnation threatened if they had not denied the
fact to the last. But that which is above all, their cunning way of absolving
one another, just before the Cart was drawn from under them. So that had not
these considerations been inducements, nor the dispensation of the Pope judged
by them to be authentic, nor his command safe; yet behold a Plaster of
Absolution is applied to this disease of theirs, which certainly must be owned
by them to be very effectual for the cure of a Lie; and what if the Hangman had
debarred them of this opportunity? it would have been cured by a few
Twelvepenny Masses; and after a little frying in Purgatory, they would have had
Heaven for their pains; and who would not endure a little heating in Purgatory,
for the advantage of their Mother the Church, which lay at stake upon the
discovery of their Villainy plotted and contrived against our Prince, Religion,
Lives, and Liberties.

And now, Brethren, let this short reflection suffice from me, seeing it is
done to all intents and purposes by far better hands; and it being not to the
purpose here, I say no more to that. Yet I shall bless the Most High God,
before whose Judgment Seat I must one day stand, That though they have made a
pretended denial, yet my comfort is, I have that within me which teaches me to
laugh the Censorious and Malicious to scorn; and it further obliges me to go
on with Courage in my Evidence against these obstinate and lying Cutthroats,
and I hope the Charity of my Brethrens credit will be sooner extended to their
Friends that are living, than to those implacable and forsworn Enemies that by
the just hand of vengeance are now dead; and God knowing that I speak the
truth, I am sure will justify me in this management of his own Cause and my
Countries.

But now, Brethren, I commend you to God and the Word of his Grace, which is
able to build you up, and give you an inheritance among them that are
sanctified. So, my Brethren, I bid you heartily farewell in the Lord, and
remain for ever

Whitehall, July 12. 1679. Your affectionate Brother in the Gospel of our Lord
and Savior Jesus Christ, TITUS OATS.

The Monstrous and Abominable CHEATS OF THE Romish-PEDLARS.
OF RELIQVES.
The Introduction.
AS the Holy Prophets of old made it their business to show the vanity and
folly of the Apostate Church of the Jews, and wherein they had gone away from
God, to the foolish inventions of idolatrous and superstitious men: So our late
zealous Reformers labored to discover the madness and folly of them which did
abide still in the Communion of the Popish Religion, by showing wherein the
people were cheated by the superstitious pretenses, feigned miracles, and
useless relics with which the seducing Priests, Friars, Monks, and
Antichristian Popes of Rome had deceived the poor sons and daughters of men:
And herein the faithful Servants of God, in the days of Queen Mary and Queen
Elizabeth, have labored, and have discovered the fanaticism of the Church of
Rome in many instances, and shown what horrid Fanatics the Popes and their
followers have been: And because the Papists are to my own knowledge still such
Fanatics, and will not be reclaimed, I have thought it my duty, for the Honor
of God, and the preventing the good Christian people of this Generation from
being any longer deceived by them, to revive and recover out of oblivion the
old observations and collections of the Servants of Christ, which time has
buried in forgetfulness; which, together with my own Observations, I have
transcribed and caused to be published, that so the madness and folly in which
they persist, may be known to all men: that so as St. Paul says of the
Fanatics of his time, they may proceed no further, read 2 Timothy 3.8, 9. And I
think it but reason, if the disease be still the same, the means of curing
should be continued: and of this I am sure, that they do still cheat the people
with their pretended Miracles, and Relics of pretended Saints; and amongst
the rest, with the Fanatical pretenses of Pardons and Indulgences, by going to
such a Saints Shrine or Sepulcher, and of being healed of diseases by the touch
of a Relic of a pretended Saint.

And because you shall see that I do not impose new fictions of my own brain,
but do follow the wise example of them, who to undeceive the people, and
recover them out of the Fanaticism of the Church of Rome, did discover her
^ollies and frauds to all men: I have not only followed their methods, but
transcribed their very Collections, which I doubt not but will be as useful in
the present recovery of the English Christians, as in the the days past.

And as the Prophets of old used no other means to reduce men, but bringing
them back to the Law and Testimony, showing them the folly and madness of their
forefathers, and of them that would, or did mislead the people in the days in
which they prophesied; so ought the Servants of God in this day, and I doubt
not but the same method will have the same good effect.

AT Rome in times past (as St. Sylvester the Pope writes in his Chronicle)
there were One thousand five hundred and five Churches, whereof the greater
part at this present is destroyed: But among those that remain, there are Seven
principal Churches, which (as they say) Query, Who endued these Churches? I am
sure not Christ, for he bestows spiritual Gifts on persons, not Places.
are endued with greater and more singular privileges than the rest are; yea,
and that for the grace, holiness and dignity which is found in them, passing
all other Churches All are but Stone and Timber, and dead matter, and not
capable of any holiness one more than other.
. In those Seven principal Churches there are many, yea almost innumerable
Indulgences, Pardons, Privileges, etc. and Relics also, as they fain. And
first I will rehearse the names of all such Relics as be at Rome, not only in
those Seven Principal Churches, but in the residue also; and afterward
rehearse the Indulgences, Pardons, Privileges, etc. that appertain unto the
same. And because no man shall think that I invent these things of my own head,
I here truly and faithfully confess, that whatsoever in this Treatise is
written of Rome, is translated out of a Book Printed in Latin at Rome, by Mr.
Stephen Plank of Patavia, in the year of our Lord 1489, the 7th. of November,
the sixth year of Pope Innocent the Eighth. And whatsoever is added, is
declared out of what Books they were taken, and the judgment of all these
things left to the indifferent Reader. But first of all we will go in hand with
such Relics as be in the Churches at Rome; and begin with the Seven Principal
Churches, whereof the Church of Lateran is the first.

Of the Church of Lateran, and of the Relics contained in the same.
THE Church of Lateran was dedicated of St. Sylvester the Pope, in honor of
St. Savior, St. John Baptist, and St. John the Evangelist.

In the Relique-House of this Church there is the Altar of St. John Baptist
which he had in the Wilderness.

It is a likely matter they should have the Altar of St. John Baptist, who had
no Altar there, nor had he use for one. A blessed company.
Why did they not tell us what he offered upon that Altar? And besides this,
the Altar of which they boast, is in eight or nine several places.

Also in a certain Chapel at the end of the said Church, Ark.
there is the Ark of the Lord which Moses made at the Commandment of God in the
Desert, after the Children of Israel were delivered out of Egypt.

They that will believe this story, must needs be ignorant, and willing to
believe lies; seeing the Prophet Esdras, 2 book chapter 10. v. 22, says it was
spoiled by the Babylonians, which any man will believe sooner than the Pope.
But to put it out of doubt that they do wickedly, read Jer. 3.16.

There is also the Table whereupon our Lord Jesus Christ did eat his supper
with his Disciples when he ordained the Sacrament of his Body and Blood. The
Table.


I have seen a great part of this Table, so called, in Spain and Flanders, and
it is of excellent virtue, if we may believe the holy Fathers of the Society of
Jesus.

Item, The Rod of Moses and Aaron, which being cast on the ground, Rod.
became a Serpent; wherewith also many and notable Miracles were wrought by the
power of God.

It is strange to hear that they should have that stick or rod of Moses which
was 2000 years before Christ in the wilderness, of which the Scripture makes no
mention after Moses smote the Rock with it, Numb. 20.11. and one of the Jesuits
forgetting that it was said to be at Rome, preached this Doctrine, that Moses
broke it when he smote upon the Rock.

All these things aforesaid did Vespastanus and Titus bring unto Rome from
Jerusalem, Padre Antonio de Laudayada on the Feast of St. Alban, June 21. 1677.
with four Pillars of Brass, which are set up and stand about the high Altar of
the said Church.

If we have but folly enough to believe all before said, we may believe this
into the bargain; but believe it for all this, because that Vespasianus and
Titus were admirers of those Pillars for the sanctity that was in them, and
certainly did intend them to be for Relics, and may be as precious as the
Virgin Mary's Chamber Pot, which the Friars of the Order of Augustine at Burgos
are said to have, and keep it as a very precious Relic; but if they have the
Chamber Pot, I wonder who had her Close-stool.

Upon the said high Altar there stand the heads of the holy Apostles Peter and
Paul; and whenever those are showed to the people, Peter's head. Paul's head.

there are so many Indulgences and Pardons granted, as there are when the
Napkin of the Lord is showed at St. Peter's Church.

Quaery; Who granted these Pardons? Not Christ, I am sure, at either or both
the shows; but here the Church of Rome shows her self to be like her Father the
Devil, that was a liar from the beginning.

The Friars of Augustine's Order in Bilbao, say they have a great piece of St.
Peter's skull; and the Franciscans of St. Paul's.

In this Church also is the head of St. Pancras, out of which head, Pancras
head.
when this Church was set on fire by a sort of Heretics, issued and followed
out great plenty of blood by the space of three days and three nights. This
Head, with diverse other Relics, is showed on Easter Day after dinner.

That this is a bloody lie, a weak eye may perceive. It Is a wonder they did not
save some of that blood to show amongst the rest of the Relics.

Under the high Altar of the aforesaid Church, Oratory.
is that Oratory of St. John the Evangelist, where he prayed when he went in
and out, and was prisoner at Rome. This is said also to be at Genoua now, and
also at Rome, and several pieces at St. Diego in Spain.

Item, In a certain Tabernacle which is upon the Altar of Mary Magdalen, these
Relics are hid that follow.
1. Diadem.
THE Imperial Diadem wherewith St. Sylvester the Pope was crowned by
Constantine the Emperor.

Whether or no that ever Sylvester the Pope wore an Imperial Diadem, I will not
in this Book contend; but the Diadem the Popes after him challenged, has been
a vexation to many good Princes.

2. The head of St. Zachary the Priest, Father to St. John Baptist.

Zachary dyed in Palestina, 2000 miles from Rome; and how should his head be
shown at Rome so many hundred years after? for it was some hundreds of years
after Zachary's death, before the Church of Rome was so filthy as to invent
such lies.

3. Diverse Relics of St. Mary Magdalen. Which are called as he that shows
them pleases.

4. Shoulder-plate.
The shoulder-plate of St. Lawrence Martyr.

It is a wonder if they which roasted him, did not burn his bones; and the
wonder is greater, because that his Ashes and Urn were presented to the
Cathedral Church at Sevill in Spain.

5. A Tooth.
One of the teeth of St. Peter the Apostle.

6. Cup.
The cup wherein St. John drank the poison, and yet it did not hurt him.

How could that be known so many hundred years after, seeing that no less than
four Churches in Rome pretend to have this cup, to the certain knowledge of the
Publisher?

7. Chain.
The chain wherewith St. John the Evangelist was bound when he was led from
Ephesus to Rome.

How is it possible that the chain should be perceived or known to be the same,
if it lasted so long, 600 years? yea, all the people being dead, and neither
Pagan- Rome nor Christian Rome had got the art of showing those tricks, till
Rome grew Antichristian.

8. Petticoat.
The Petticoat of St. John the Evangelist, (rather of Pope Joan) which was laid
upon the three dead men, and they straightway rose up from death to life.

That St. John should wear Petticoats is strange; but that this Petticoat
should last 800 years, is more strange: but that any body should be such
Fanatics as to believe this, is to be admired!

9. Ashes. Coat.
Part of St. John Baptists Ashes, and his Coat made of hair, which he did wear
in the Wilderness.

There could be no Ashes of his, for he was not burnt, but his body buried by
his Disciples, Mat. 14.12. And that he had a Coat is uncertain; but that his
Coat should be shown six or seven hundred years after, is incredible: and it is
a wonder they had not the confidence to show the Tailor that made it.

10. Milk.
Part of our Ladies Milk, Hair, and Garments.

Good Reader observe this Tale well, and compute the time when the Virgin Mary
gave Milk, and the time when the World were such fools to believe, and you will
find it about 800 year; and that a Woman's Milk should last till this year 1679,
is incredible.

Item, Shirt.
The Shirt which the Virgin Mary made with her own hands for Christ; which
Shirt is of such virtue, that Devils themselves are driven out (by whole
Legions) of persons possessed, if you will believe this abominable Harlot and
Impostor of Rome: But I pray then how are Jesuits in the East Indies possessors
of this Shirt, if it be at Rome?

Item, Towel.
The Towel or Linen Cloth wherewith Christ wiped his Apostles feet.

This is another lie; for the Publisher has seen as many pieces of this Towel
as will fill an ordinary bag; and half a yard at least was showed him at St.
Barlines Abbey in St. Omers, and yet Rome challenges the whole Towel.

Item, The Reed wherewith Christ was stricken. Reed.


And the hand that struck him. I hope the one is as true as the other, and may
prove as good a Relic. It seems that the Reed, as the Papists say, is of such
efficacy and force, that several persons have been delivered from great pains
of body that have kissed the same. The Spanish Jesuits at Madrid, having also
the said Reed, say so, therefore it must needs be true.

Item. Garment.
The Garment of Purple which was dyed with the drops of blood from Christ.

This is an unworthy and filthy lie; for there are so many pieces of this
Garment said to be in Spain, Portugal, Flanders, France and Germany, There is
scarce a Conventicle in all these places but challenge a good piece of this
Garment.
as is able to make Ten such Garments as Christ wore when mocked by the Jews.

Item, The Vail of the blessed Virgin Mary, Vail.
which she put about the privy-Members of Christ when he hanged on the Cross.

This Veil is seen in a dozen places, and works wonderful things in Spain; for
in one day it begot such a devotion in the people of Vallidolyd, that the
Franciscan-Fryars got above a Thousand pieces of Eight, besides Gold, for the
sight thereof.

Item, The Napkin which was laid upon Christ's face. Napkin.


The Jesuits at St. Omers, have a good piece in the English Seminary; And how
then can it be all at Rome? And in the Reliquary of St. Ignatius-Colledg, I
have seen half a yard of Linen which the Jesuits have, and call it a piece of
that Napkin that was laid upon Christ's face; and surely we may believe them.

Item, That part of our Lord Jesus which was cut away when he was circumcised.
Skin.


That a little bit of skin cut off a Babes Yard when Eight days old, should
last and look like such 1500 or 1600 years, none but the Father of lies, and
his Children, can be the countenancers of it. And it is very unlikely it should
be at Rome, when as the Monks of the Order of St. Jerome, near Vallidolyd in
Spain, pretend to have it also.

Item, That Water and Blood which flowed out of Christ's side when he hanged on
the Cross.

Note that one drop of this was never saved. A Tun would not hold all, if this
blood and water were in one place, it is of such an increasing quality.
And how can it be shown 1600 year after? If it were, Who saved it? and who
required it to be kept? and to whom was the keeping of it committed? and why do
the Fathers of the English College at Vallidolyd challenge a Glass full of it,
containing at least half a Pint?

Item, A large piece of Christ's Cross, with many other Relics which are there
showed on Easter Day after Dinner.

That we are delivered from such intolerable cheats, is a great mercy; but to
think the people well in their wits that believe such Lies, were to create
another wonder. But to conclude, the pretenders to these things are doubtless
the greatest deceivers in the world; which will appear if we consider the
circumstance of time: And certainly we may expect to find the whole Cross in
time, if the Papists will but stand to their tackling in this case, as they
would seem to do in other cases that refer to Relics.

Of the second Principal Church, and of the Relics contained in the same.
THE second Principal Church is at St. Peter's in the Golden-Hill, in which
Church also are many Relics.

When the Pope, his Whores and Bastards, (otherwise wrapping it in clean
linen, his Nephews and Neeces) are there, then I say, there may be a jolly
company of Relics.

1. Half the bodies of Peter and Paul.
The half part of the bodies of the holy Apostles Peter and Paul rest in the
aforesaid Church under the high Altar. And the other half lies at St. Paul's.

How incredible this is, If the Publishers memory fails him not, he see an Arm
and a Leg of St. Paul in Valladolid.
that bodies thus divided, should be shown 1600 years after, makes me remember
St. Paul's words, 2 These. 2.7, 8, 9, 10, 11, 12, which I pray read. But what
have we to do with what St. Paul says, since St. Peter's successor says it?
Therefore let us not question it, for the Pope is an excellent divider.

Also in the aforesaid Church rest the bodies of the Holy Apostles Simon and
Jude: Simon and Jude's bodies. And Parnel.
and also the body of St. Parnel the Virgin, who was the Daughter of St. Peter
the Apostle.

Item, The Head of St. Andrew the Apostle, which is showed in his Feast, and on
that day when it was brought and conveyed unto Rome.

This Head is shown also in no less than Nine or Ten places in Spain and
Flanders, A wonderful multiplication.
and great sums of Money are received by the Clergy both Regular, and Secular,
for the sight thereof.

Item, Luke.
The Head of St. Luke the Evangelist. The Head of St. Sebastian the Martyr;
James's Head.
the Head of St. James; the bodies of the Saints Processus and Martinianus, and
many other bodies: with diverse Relics of holy Martyrs, Confessors and Virgins.

How James's Head who was 1600 years before slain by Herod at Jerusalem, and
the bodies of men slain so many thousands of Miles off, should after so many
hundreds of years be lodged in the City of Rome, is credible by none but them
that are, as St. Paul says, given up to believe Lies.

Item, Vernicle or Face-cloath this is judged by the sober Papists themselves
to be a cheat, as the Author of Onus Ecclesiae, says.
The Vernicle, or the holy Face-cloath of our Lord Jesus Christ remains in
the aforesaid Church, and is many times showed in the Holyweek, and on
Ascension-day, and the next Sunday, both before and after the Feast of St.
Anthony the Abbot. At the showing whereof, the Romans that come unto it have
3000 years of pardon. And they that dwell about Rome, and come unto it, have
6000 years of pardon. But they that come unto it through Mountains, Valleys and
Hills, they have 12000 years of Pardon, and as many Lents, and remission of the
third part of all their sins.

This of Pardon of sins by going to see such sights is a damnable Lie, and does
shamefully derogate from the merits of Christ; and the promoters must be stark
mad, and in a far greater guilt than the fallen Angels: For certainly it must
be by faith in his blood, and not by the sight of the Facecloth, that men must
get pardon of sin; but seeing the Pope has said to the contrary, let Papists
believe the Pope and not Christ, but I must believe Christ and not the Pope.

Item, In the aforesaid Church is the chair in which St. Peter did sit when he
was Bishop at Antioch; and gallantly decked and trimmed. Chair.
This chair at every Feast that is called Cathedra Sancti Petri, is set before
the Quiredoor with great solemnity, where all the people according to their
devotion may come and touch it.

In stead of worshipping God, and honoring him, they worship and honor
Relics; and instead of trusting in God through Christ, they trust in old
rotten rags, and worm-eaten chairs: But stay, it is like it was an Iron chair.

Also in the same Church there is a pillar, 12. Pillars.
upon the which our Lord Jesus was wont to lean, both when he preached to the
people, and when he prayed unto his heavenly Father in the Temple of Solomon.
This pillar is of so great virtue and power, that it drives out Devils, and
makes them whole that were before vexed with unclean spirits; and it works
daily many miracles. This pillar with eleven more were brought from Jerusalem
out of Solomon's Temple, for the garnishing and setting out of this aforesaid
Church.

When Titus Vespasian burnt the Temple, it is unlikely these twelve pillars
escaped, and as unlikely that Devils should be driven out by them: You may see
that Church is not the pillar of Truth, that upholds such lies and such horrid
Fanaticisms and Impostors, Popes, Priests, and Papists. I am amazed at one
thing, That the Pope had not the manners to Canonize Titus that great Hero for
a Saint, seeing he procured for holy Church such Devil-expelling Relics; for
sure it is, that no Saint of the Pope's Canonizing ever deserved more from the
Pope than this brave Prince did.

Of the third principal Church, and of the Relics contained in the same.
THE third principal Church is at St. Paul's, in the which are these Relics.

1. The Arm of St. Ann, our Lady's Mother. Arm of St. Ann.
2. One of the chains wherewith St. Paul was bound; and many other more without
number.
That our Lady's Mothers name was St. Ann, is unknown; but this I know, that
all these are inventions of them who are his followers, that is, the Father of
Lies; for the good Saint is returned to her dust long before this Lie was
invented. But be it so, if they have St. Paul's chain, I pray the next time they
open shop, let us see the virtue of the holy Relic.

Item, Half the bodies of Peter and Paul. The Popish party are wonderful exact
in dividing Saints bodies.
Under the high Altar is the other half of the bodies of the holy Apostles
Peter and Paul. Also the body of St. Timothy, who was St. Paul's Disciple. And
infinite number of the Relics of Saints, whose souls are merry and joyful in
Heaven.

But the wonder is, where they found the body of St. Timothy. But what need
that, since they have the happy opportunity of having so many bodies at one
time of him in several places? and certain it is, that they may turn any body
into the body of St. Timothy, when they can turn a piece of bread into the body
of God.

In this Church also is a devout Image of the Cross, That the Cross spoke.
which spoke to Saint Briget, because she prayed so many times, and so devoutly
before it.

That a Wooden Cross should speak, none but a brazen-faced Popish Priest dare
affirm; I am certain that the best of St. Brigets revelations are very
suspicious; and never yet is there the least mention of this story. I confess
in her Lise the Papists take notice of such a passage, but never any Church
received it but the Whore of Rome.

Of the fourth principal Church, and of the Relics contained in the same.
THE fourth principal Church is at St. Mary's the greater; in which are these
Relics following:

1. Body of St. Matthew and others.
The body of St. Matthew the Apostle lies under the high Altar. Also the head
of the said St. Matthew rests in the said Church

Item, The Body of St. Jerome, who is one of the Doctors of holy Church.

Item, The Bodies of St. Ramula, and St. Redempta.

Here is a crowd of Saints pretended by such a crew of Impostors, as are not
found amongst the heathen.

In the same Church is,

2. A little clout in which Mary the Virgin wrapped her Son Christ when he lay
in the Manger at Bethlem, being newly born.

O horrid and great lie! that a little clout should last such a great while as
1600 years, and be brought from Bethlem to Rome, which is I believe nigh 2000
miles!

3. St. Jerome's Stole.
St. Jerome's stole. The arm of St. Matthew the Apostle and Evangelist. The arm
of St. Luke the Evangelist. The arm of Thomas Becket Archbishop of Canterbury.
The hand and arm of St. Vibian Virgin and Martyr.

Certainly these Saints had wonderful effects shown upon their bodies after
they were dead; for eight of St. Mathews arms are to be seen in Flanders,
Spain, and France. I have seen three of St. Lukes; but of Beckets there is no
end.

4. Manger. The Popish Shavelings tell us the virtue of this Manger, and how
many of them ye have
The Manger wherein Christ lay at Bethlem, when the shepherds came unto him.

That a Wooden Manger should be brought from Bethlem to Rome, which is nigh
2000 miles, and last to be seen there 1600 years after Christ's birth, can be
credited by none but them that love to make lies, whose doom you may read Rev.
21.27. cap. 21.15.

Besides these, there are many other Relics both of he-Saints and she-Saints,
whose souls rejoice in heaven; and these Relics are showed to the people upon
Easter Day about Even-song time.

That so holy a time should be profaned by such shows, shows the unholiness
of Popish Priests.

Of the Fifth Principal Church, and of the Relics comained in the same.
THE Fifth Principal Church is at St. Laurences without the Walls, The Stone on
which Laurence laid.
in which, besides other, is this Relic, viz. the Stone upon which blessed
Laurence was laid after that he was roasted and dead.

I think it would almost make a Stone bleed to hear of the horrid forgery of
the Church of Rome: This Stone has an excellent faculty at casting out Devils,
as Father Anderton wrote when he sent a piece of it to St. Omers, in a Letter
dated March 10, 1678. And the Dog at St. Omers being not well, this piecee of
Stone was hanged about his neck in a Bag to cure him of madness, what effects
it wrought I cannot tell, but this Stone and a good breakfast filled the Curs
Belly.

Of the Sixth Principal Church, and of the Relics contained in the same.
THE Sixth Principal Church is at St. Fabian and St. Sebastian, in the which,
besides other innumerable, are these Relics, that is to say, the body of
blessed Sebastian the Martyr. The body of Fabian Pope and Martyr. The body of
blessed Stephen Pope and Martyr. The body of St. Lucy the Virgin, etc.

It Is a grievous thing that the bodies of the good Saints may not rest in their
Graves, but must be dragged out to be made a Market on by a company of covetous
Paplings. But it is Money that makes the Mare to go. And if we consider the
vast treasures that the Clergy of the Church of Rome have acquired, we shall
not need much to wonder: But I hope that the Princes of Christendom will be
wiser than to believe them for time to come.

Of the seventh principal Church, and of the Relics contained in the same.
THE seventh principal Church is of the Holy Cross in Jerusalem, in which are
these Relics following:

1. Two Cups, of which, one is full of the blood of Christ, Blood of Christ.
Milk of Mary.
and the other is full of the Milk of the blessed Virgin Mary.

She gives a jolly deal; of that we had a Glass full before, and now we have
got a Cup full.

But I pray, how came they by a Cup full of Christ's blood? Sure the Jews saved
it not, and the Disciples were all fled, Mat. 26.56.

And that this Milk and Blood should not be dried up all this time, looks like
one of their lying wonders.

2. The Sponge, which being full of Vinegar and Gall, the Jews reached unto
Christ hanging on the Cross a little before his death.

This is like the rest, as if the Jews had reserved that Sponge: it is a wonder
they do not lie, and say they have the Reed also.

3. A good large piece of the Holy-Cross.

Some-time they have the whole Cross, as in the Three principle Churches, Piece
of the Cross.
and then it could speak, and now here is a piece of it: Cannot that speak also?

4. Two Thorns.
Two Thorns of Christ's Crown.

Who saved these? the Disciples? How came it at Rome? But it is not a Thorn
matter how they Romance. But I should be glad to know when they will have an
end of their Thorns, for they have at least a Bushel of them, as diverse will
justify when it is necessary.

5. One Nail A noble increase.
One of the Nails wherewith Christ was fastued to the Cross.

There was but Three, have they got one? And the Publisher has seen four that
are so called, one at Burgos, one at Vallidolyd, two in Flanders.

6. A piece of the Cross of that Thief which did hang on Christ's right hand,
and turned unto Christ before his death.

Is a Thiefs Cross become a Sacred Rellique? I fear they are Thieves themselves
that made it so. Yet why should we fear that, of which the Princes and people
of Europe have been so long convinced.

The Relics that are in other Churches at Rome.
IN the Church of St. Chrysogone are these Relics: Arm of St. James.
Shoulderplate of St. Andrew.
An Arm of St. James. The Shoulder plate of St. Andrew the Apostle. And the
Head of the aforesaid St. Chysogone.

Abundance of Saints without Heads: I doubt the Priests cut them off to make
merchandise! More wonders yet; St. James put to death in Palestine by Heroes
Sword, and yet his Arm at Rome!

In the Church of St. Cecily these Relics are contained: Maximianus.
The body of St. Cecily.

Item, The bodies of Tyburtius, of Valerianus, of Lucius the Pope, the first of
that name; of Maximianus, which all lie buried under the high-Altar. There are
many other Relics in the said Church.

In this Church we cannot find any Relics worth the noting; If the Reader
does not apprehend the meaning of this passage, let him inform himself at the
Rainbow Coffee-house in Fleetstreet.
and if the Reader will not believe them to be in this Church, let him go to
Rome to disprove the Pope: But now I think on it, it is further thither than it
is to St. Albans, and therefore he had better believe it and stay at home.

In the Church of Bartholomew, Body of Bartholomew.
there is the body of St. Bartholomew the Apostle, in a certain Tabernacle
which is set upon the high Altar. There is also the body of St. Pauline, of St.
Albert, of St. Marcell, and of St. Superante. Besides, there are many other
Relics, which with those aforesaid, are showed on St. Bartholomew-day, and on
Palm Sunday.

In what proportions these bodies appear, I know not; but if in their full
proportions, they have very roomly Altars; and that these bodies are not rotten
ere now, would be a wonder, nay a great one: But that the world has been
taught to believe, A Power that our Lord Christ did not give to his Apostles.
Rib of St. Matthew. Hand of St. Nicholas.
that Mr. Popes Holiness has an infallible way of saving bodies from
putrefaction, and has been so kind to the General of the Jesuits, as that in
the year 1668, to give this power to him, and to the Generals of some other
Orders.

In the Church of St. Nicholas, there is a Rib of St. Matthew the Apostle and
Evangelist. There is also an Hand of St. Nicholas, and an arm of St. Alexius.

Truly it is to be believed, What matter is it since we get money by it? Our
Ladies Milk I believe this poor Church was endowed when our Ladies Wardrobe was
plundered: but Clouts rather than nothing.
that Thieves and Robbers have had better quarter with Papists, for if they do
not be-lye themselves, the bodies of the Saints have had little or no rest in
their graves.

In the Church of St. George are these Relics; part of our Ladies milk:
certain pieces also of her Garments. There is also the banner, spear, and head
of St. George.

That there was such a St. George, is as great a question as that of our Ladies
Milk is a Lie; but if they have any part of St. George, how came it to pass
they did not get part of his horse, and of the Dragon he killed? they would
have made excellent Relics.

In the Church of St. Anastasins is the pillar whereupon the blessed Apostle
St. Paul was beheaded. The Pillar on which St. Paul was beheaded. But alas!
there is no Sword to be found that did it: and this is most miserable ill
fortune.


And of this Pillar there are so many pieces in the world, insomuch that if
there were a collection made of them, they would make ten pillars. But I pray,
have they not the arm of the man, and the sword that cut off his head? it would
do well if they were produced.

In the Church of the blessed Virgin Mary, is the Altar which is called Scala
Coeli: Upon this Altar all they that sing Mass, or cause Masses to be sung for
the souls that are in Purgatory, through the Merits of the same blessed Virgin,
Scala Coeli.
the said souls are delivered out of hand from the bitter pains of Purgatory,
and brought unto the everlasting joys of Heaven. Moreove whatsoever is devoutly
asked in that place, it is without all doubt granted. In the same Church are
hidden also the bones of ten thousand Martyrs, all which are most precious
Relics.

It Is ten thousand to one if this be not all found false; and that it may
appear so, do but call to mind what St. Peter said, Acts 4.12. with 1 Timothy 2.5.
which shows the Virgins Mediatorship, and her Altars virtue, to be a cheat to
bring grist to the Pope's Mill.

And it is to be noted, that he that invented Purgatory, contrived the way out
of it, that he might bring money into his own pocket.

In the Church of St. Gregory there are, besides diverse other, these two
principal Relics: 1. The arm of St. Gregory the Pope. 2. The thigh of St.
Panthaleon.


Note how these Cannibals pull the Saints in pieces that they may not eat their
bones, but by showing their bones may eat up the people.

In the Church which is called Sancta Maria (...), is the Image of our Lady,
Luke the Painter. Good employment for an Angel to turn Image carrier
which St. Luke painted at Troas a City, (...). This Image an Angel brought
into the aforesaid Church. The (...) this Image is so great, that when all the
Church was burnt, yet this Image had no harm A very considerable Miracle.
Pieces of Fragments. I suppose they increase as well as the rest; but I pray
tell me the virtues of these relics.
.

Cursed be the Image and the Image-maker, says the Scripture; and therefore if
any Angel, it must be one of the fallen Angels, who also taught the priests to
put such a Lie upon St. Luke.

Moreover in the aforenamed Church there are kept as Relics, certain pieces
of the fragments which remained of the five barley Loaves and two fishes, when
Christ in the Wilderness fed so miraculously five thousand people. There are
diverse others Relics which were brought out of the churchyard of St. Calixt.

But whether fragments of the bread or of the fishes, or both, we will not
contend; and he that is minded to fish for lies let him cast his nets into the
Roman Ocean, which Sea is certainly stored with such fish. As for the bread of
life I am sure they have none; and as for their nameless Relics I suppose we
may give as much credit to them as to the fragments, and we may look upon them
with as much veneration, but any thing good Mr. Pope! to fill our Treasures,
and maintain our pride and tyranny.

In the Church of the holy Apostles are these Relics following: The Bodies of
Philip and Jacob. Bodies of St. Philip and Jacob. St. Thomas his Cloak.
The Body of Sabinus the Martyr. The Cloak of St. Thomas the Apostle. The Foot
of St. Philip. The Arm of St. James. A Rib of St. Lawrence. The Shoulder-plate
and the Arm of St. Blase.

We have but their bare word for all this; and they which we have taken in so
many lies already, how shall we give them credit in this? Arm of Saint Matthew.


In the Church of St. Marcellus is the Arm of St. Matthew the Apostle and
Evangelist.

In the Church of St. Sylvester is the Head of St. John Baptist, Head of St.
John Baptist. Hands and Feet of S. Lawrence.
the Hands and Feet of St. Lawrence, and a piece of St. Francis Cowle, and many
other Relics which are showed on the Feasts of St. John the Baptist, and of
St. Sylvester.

This looks as like a cheat as all the rest; for can any wise man think that
Herod preserved it? and in four days it would stink as bad as any dead flesh:
therefore this untruth accuses it self; and as for the Cowle of St. Francis,
he being a notorious thief, is as miraculous as the Cross of the Thief which
they say is preserved.

In the Church of St. Lawrence are these Relics following: The Blood, the
Fat, the Clout, the Gridiron.
Two Flagons full of the Fat and Blood of St. Lawrence. Also a Vessel full of
the roasted flesh of blessed Lawrence. The Clout wherewith the Angel did wipe
the Body of St. Lawrence. Item, the Cridiron whereupon St. Lawrence was roasted.

That St. Lawrence was roasted is true; but first, Saints did not use to be
very fat. 2ly, His fat dropped into the fire, so did his flesh. 3. How could they
separate his fat from his blood as it dropped through the Gridiron? and that the
Tormentors should give the Christians his flesh, is as uncredible as that they
have vessels full of it; and that the Angel stood in need of a clout to wipe
his body, is as likely as that they have the Clout or Gridiron.

In the Church of St. Julian there is a certain kind of holy water, whose
virtue and power is so great that it easily heals all them that be diseased
of the Ague. It cures also all other infirmities and diseases, so that they
which will be made whole, take that holy water fasting, and say three Pater
Nosters, and as many Ave Mary's in the honor of Almighty God, and of the
glorious Virgin (...), and also of St. Julian and St. Albert, or else cause one
Mass to (...) in the honor of the aforenamed Saint Albert.

I wonder so many Papists die of the Pox, and that the old Priest was so long
in a Doctors hands that kept an Apothecaries shop in St. Giles Parish, if there
be such healing virtue in their holy water? But one thing I note, that the
Virgin and the Saints have honor, but Christ is forgotten; and how the Popes
themselves have not been cured of those foul diseases by which they have
perished, if they have had such excellent and infallible Remedies!

In the Church of St. Vitus there is a Marble stone set about with Iron, Stone
on which a 1000 poor Saints was slain.
upon which were slain more than a thousand bodies of holy Martyrs. In this
Church there is so great virtue and grace through the merits of those holy
Martyrs Vitus, Modestus, and Crescentia, that if so be any man be bitten with a
mad Dog, or of any other beast, and take a piece of bread, and dip it in the
Oil of St. Vitus, and so eat it, he shall straightway be made whole.

All their healing is ascribed to the Virgin, or to Saints, not to Christ. And
if they were not all bit with some Beast or another, they would not set Saints
of their own coining above the Son of God, Jesus, whom God has made to all a
means of spiritual health and eternal salvation. But of this Oil of St. Vitus I
find not one word but at Rome; and its virtues are not there mentioned.

In the Church of St. Braxed there is a Chapel which is called Libera nos a
penis inferni, and Ortus Paradisi, in the which is a Pillar whereunto our Lord
Jesus Christ was bound in his passion.

But our comfort is, That we are not bound to believe it.

In the midst of this Church there is a round stone enclosed with Iron; under
this stone is the blood of many holy Martyrs which blessed St. Braxed gathered
up with a certain Sponge, and put it in a pit, laying that round stone upon it.

They that tell these lies, will be in a pit one day, in which there is no
water to cool their tongues, Luke 16.24.

In this Church also there is an Altar upon the which Pope Pascalis said five
Masses for a certain soul departed. Which Masses being once finished, he saw
the blessed Virgin Mary take that soul out of Purgatory, and carry it into the
bosom of Almighty God, as ye may see it plainly painted upon the wall of the
said Church. When Pope Pascalis had seen this miracle, he granted by his
Apostolic Authority, That whosoever did either sing mass, or cause mass to be
sung on that Altar, he should deliver for every time so doing, one foul out of
the bitter pains of Purgatory

That this looks, as the rest do, like a piece of Forgery from top to the
bottom; for the Virgin never came near any other place but where Gods blessed
presence is, since she left this World; her spirit went to God that gave it,
and thence it did never stir.

In the Church of St. Potentiana, is the Altar upon which St. Peter did sing
his first mass. Also a Pit, in which lies hid the blood of three thousand
martyrs.

It is as scandalous to fasten saying mass upon St. Peter, as upon St. Paul,
who knew that your Massing-trick never came into the heart of Christ or any of
his sincere followers, if St. Paul himself say true, Acts 20. ver. 20, comp.
with ver. 27. and if the Popes Massing had been Gods counsel, it would have
been Paul's Doctrine.

In another Church of St. Laurence there are these Relics: A piece of the
Gridiron on which they roasted him. One Arm of St. Laurence. Certain of his
bones.
A piece of St. Laurence's Gridiron upon which he was roasted. One Arm of St.
Laurence. Also in a glass of Crystal there are certain coals which all men may
clearly and plainly see, wherewith blessed Laurence was roasted. There are also
certain of his bones.

What coals are kept in glasses, I know not; but of this I am sure, that the
inventors of these things are firebrands of hell, and such for which coals
hotter than coals of Juniper, is prepared. But let her alone till that day
come, as long as the good Angels appear upon the sight of these Relics.

In the Church of St. Peter ad Vincula, there be the bonds of Iron wherewith
St. Peter was bound at Jerusalem, under King Herod. There are also the chains
wherewith he was bound at Rome under Nero the Emperor. These chains be of so
great virtue, that great and wonderful miracles are daily wrought by them, as
they say.

In this Church there is so great virtue and grace, Away to Rome ye Papists,
and get your Pardon from the Pope, for you must never look to have it from God.
that whosoever devoutly comes unto it, although never so sinful, he shall
depart and go his way, delivered and free from all his sins.

Many other Relics there are in the foresaid Church, as you may see in a
certain Table that hangs on the Wall.

There I perceive a notable trick, that to draw the people where there is not
many feigned Relics, there is high pretenses of Pardon and healing, and all
to catch money; and I do believe that more money has been drawn to the Popes
Coffers, than tongue can express; and sure I am, to this day poor England is
much exhausted by these devilish cheats of the Romish Synagogue.

In the Church of St. Mary, More of Lukes Painting! I suppose this scarlet
whore has gotten more money by Luke's Painting, than ever he did himself.
called Ara Coeli, is the Sepulcher of St. Helen the mother of Constantine.
Also an Image of our Lady which St. Luke painted even after such form and
fashion as she was in when she stood by the cross of our Lord Jesus Christ
weeping and lamenting. This Image is full of virtue, and works daily many
miracles.

To detect this Lie, we need no more but to remember, Luke was not then
converted, nor on the place where Christ dyed, and was a Physician; yet if the
Whore tells truth he did paint; and some Monks that live in the English
Monastry of Benedictines, who love painting, have preached this Doctrine that
Luke was bound Apprentice to a Painter. Father Howard, Father Hitchcock when in
England in August last. Ladies Hair.
But they talked like English Monks, and their credit is not very good with us
at this time.

In the Church of our Lady called Sancta Maria super Minervam, are these
Relics: The hair of our Lady, and certain pieces of her Garments. Item,
Diverse parts of the three Patriarchs, Abraham, Isaac, and Jacob, and also of
Daniel the Prophet.

This looks like plain Forgery, and tricking, to deceive the poor people; for
all the parts of the Patriarchs were turned to ashes long before, and so was
Daniel, who dyed in Babylon in all likelihood. But because all Churches must
have some Relics, this is content with a little hair, and a few tatters of
old clothes.

In the Church of St. Eustache are these Relics: More of the Cross. More of
Christ's blood. A piece of the Crown. Parcels of Christ's Apparel.
Part of the holy cross, a good quantity of Christ's bloods, a piece of the
crown of thorns, parcels of Christ's apparel, the rib of St. Andrew, certain of
the coals wherewith St. Laurence was roasted.

I perceive a carnal Church rejoice in carnal things, as blood, old clouts and
bones of men, or any thing to keep the heart off from good, and below Christ in
its meditation; but the first Christians gloried in no such relics of blood
and bones, and coals and clouts; there was then no such cheats.

In the Church of St. Martinellus is part of that garment and coat which our
Lady did knit and make with her own hands, and gave it to her Son Jesus Christ,
which coat did grow even as he grew.

That there was knitting in those times, I know not; but I doubt they that
invented this story, are ignorant of Christ and his mother, and his coat also;
and if the pretenders were put to prove, they would prove nothing but that
themselves are a company of cheats.

In the Church of St. Barbara, are these Relics: Ladies Kirtle. Bartholomew's
Cloak.
The head and the vail of St. Barbara. Our Ladies Kirtle. St. Bartholomews
Cloak. The Deacons apparel of St. Laurence. The Hair of Mary Magdalen: and
diverse other Relics of St. Margaret, Felix Lotitius, Christopher, Sebastian,
Alexius, Martha, etc.

I confess it were worth the while for a Tailor to go to that Church, as they
do here in England, to see what fashion the Lady's Kirtles, and Bartholomew's
Cloak are of, and if they like the fashion of our Lady's Kirtle, and his Cloak,
to let us have the fashion that they used, for sure they were a virtuous
people; but for the rest of the Trumpery, I would not go over the Gutter to see
them.

In the Church of St. Laurence there is a great Bottle of glass, of the which
on St. Damasus day men use to drink in the honor and worship of the aforenamed
St. Damasus. The virtue of this Bottle is so great, that as many as drink of
it, believe faithfully they shall be delivered from all Agues, and other
grievous infirmities.

They would do well to bring us some of those Bottles hither, for I believe
they are full quarts, and our folk cheat us with pint and a half. But now I
remember, it will hinder the trade of our learned Doctors, and nimble
Apothecaries; and I know when Popery comes in, their Trade will go out, by
reason of the many Miracles that will be done.

In the Church of St. Blase de Panneta, is a large piece of the holy Cross. A
large piece of the Cross. More Cross still!
There are also certain pieces of the Garments of our Lady of St. Andrew, St.
Blase, St. Doria, Creisant, etc.

This was some poor Church that could get naught but a good log of the Cross,
and a few shreds of our Lady's old Petticoat, I am very sorry this Church could
not get one small piece of Mary Magdalens Noli me tangere; it would have been
an excellent ornament to her.
and some rags of the other Saints which had no virtue that we hear of. I fear
therefore, that this Church was as one born out of due time; therefore being
the least of all the Churches, was content with the rags: But the mischief on it
is, the poor Rag merchants have been abominably put to it, to lose so good a
quantity of Rags; but St. Blase Church has them, and so much good may do her
with them: I suppose that some little two-penny miracles have been wrought with
them

In the Church of St. Mary Transpontin there are this day the two Pillars
whereunto the holy Apostle Peter and Paul were bound, and so afterward whipped
and scourged; the which Pillar all men according to their devotion may daily
come unto and touch.

Did God ever appoint, or did it ever come into his heart to appoint such
Devotion? He may well say, Who required these things at your hands, to go in
devotion to Wooden Pillars?

In the Church of St. James is the stone of that Altar upon which Christ was
offered in the Temple, when Simeon took him in his arms, The Stone on which
Christ was offered.
embraced him, and said, Now let thou thy servant depart in peace according
to thy word, etc.

Titus Vespasian had burnt the Temple many hundred years before; Note.
and how could the Priests when they began to show such tricks, find such stone
or stones? and Rome being 2000 miles off, how got they the stone? and if they
had it, what good can be expected from it, but to set fools a gazing?

In the Church of St. Katharine is part of the Oil which flowed out of the
Sepulcher of the aforenamed St. Katharine. There is also of the Milk, Catharine
Milk and Blood.
which instead of Blood, flowed out of her holy body when she was beheaded.

How credible this is, I will leave the Reader to judge; but must boldly say,
that the tricks the Priests of Rome have to get money, are both many and
strange.

In the Church of the Holy Ghost is the Arm of St. Andrew, Andrews Arm. Kates
Finger.
the Finger of St. Katharine, and many other Relics.

I perceive the Holy Ghost is in no great credit with them; for his church is
but poorly endowed, that is, only furnished with an Arm and a Finger. As for
the many Relics oft-times named, I perceive they are of no great value.

A Register of such Relics as I have found in reading Chronicles and
Histories.
POPE Leo the third bearing rule, there were given to Carolus Magnus, King of
France, for the good service he did to Mother holy Church, these Relics
following: A Crown of Thorns. A Nail. A large piece of the Cross The Napkin he
wiped his face with The Lady's Smock. The Swaddling Clouts. Simeons Arm.
First of all, the crown of thorns wherewith Christ was crowned. 2. One of the
Nails wherewith Christ was fastened to the cross. 3. A large piece of the Tree
whereon Christ was hanged when he suffered his Passion. 4. Christ's Napkin
wherewith he used commonly to wipe his face. 5. The Smock of our blessed Lady,
which she had on when she brought forth Christ. 6. The Swadling-clouts wherein
Christ was wrapped when he lay in the Manger. 7. Old Simeons Arm wherewith he
embraced Christ in the Temple of Solomon, when he broke out into these words,
Nunc dimittis, etc.

One may see by this Paragraph, the fountain of all the Popish cheats, is the
Pope himself; and that he endoweth persons and places with what of those
Relics he pleases; and if he say, This is the Ladies Smock, it is believed
to be so; and truly, it may by some be thought rational, because that Mr. Pope
is a very honest Gentleman, and never told a lie in plain downright English in
all his life.

The Head of St. John Baptist is affirmed of some to be in a certain Monastry
which King Pipinus built in France. Head of St. John Baptist.
Some say it is at Constantinople; some hold that it is apud Castrum Nogenti;
some maintain that it is at Rome in the church of Sylvester; but I believe it
is consumed to dust according to Gods Ordinance upon all flesh.

This his head St. John himself did reveal to two Monks which came to
Jerusalem on Pilgrimage.

That St. John Baptist had more heads than one; Note.
for in the church of St. Sylvester, as before, you find his head. But it
seems by this Paragraph, they cannot agree where it is; by which you may see
the folly of these men and their followers, who are so fond of devised fables,
that they will believe contradictions.

Yet by the way we are to consider, that the Pope can turn what he pleases
into John Baptists Head; and can say to his Relics, Increase and multiply.

Pope Urban the second bearing rule, St. Andrew appeared to a Husbandman, The
Spear that pierced Christ.
which at that present was one of the Army which went to conquer the Holy Land,
and to win Christ's Sepulcher out of the Infidels hands, and said unto him,
Come, I will show thee where the spear is that pierced Christ's heart when he
hanged on the cross; for it lay hid in the ground, The Tale of the Spear. His
apparel was not hurt, because he had none on; but his body was so scorched that
it cost him his life.
being buried at St. Peter's Church at Antioch. This Soldier, at the
commandment of St. Andrew, went unto the place appointed, and dug out the
Spear, which was so virtuous, noble, and precious a Relic, and of so great
power, that a certain man called Bartholomew, caused a great fire to be made of
thirteen foot in length; and he having the Spear in his hand, went through the
fire, and was not hurt, neither in himself, nor in his apparel.

Moreover, through the virtue of this Spear, I wonder they would stay so long
from victuals till almost starved, when they had such a miraculous Spear about
them. I would wish the Saracens to have a care of this Spearl
when the Army of the Christians were so pined away with hunger, that they were
almost compelled one to eat another, this Famine ceased, and plenty of all
things was ministered unto them; yea, through the virtue of this Spear, they
overcame their Enemies, and had most glorious victories. By the virtue also of
this Spear, a certain man called Boemundus, flew in one battle an hundred
thousand Saracens; and besides many other notable spoils, he got Fifteen
thousand Camels, wherewith the Christians were greatly comforted after so great
labors taken for the recovery of the Holy Land, and of Christ's Sepulcher.

It would pierce any Christians heart to hear such invented lies imposed on the
pretenders to Christianity: But what is it that the Father of lies, and Mother
of abominations cannot invent? I will be bold to say, that in the Kingdom of
Spain this Spear is to be seen in forty places; nay, they have pretended to
have obtained great Victories against the Moors: nay, they have attributed much
of their expelling the Moors out of the Kingdom of Spain, to these Spears; and
every one of them is the very Spear that pierced the side of our Lord Christ
when upon the cross.

Balduinus, Emperor of Constantinople, gave unto Lewis King of France, The
Crown of Thorns. More great pieces of the Cross! The Sponge that the vinegar
was given in.
for most precious Relics, and things of incomparable virtue, the Crown of
thorns that Christ did wear upon his head, and a great part of the cross
whereon Christ dyed, with the Sponge wherewith they gave Christ vinegar and
gall to drink, and the iron of the spear wherewith Christ was thrust to the
heart on the cross.

O the Frauds of Rome! we had the spear given before by Urban, and the great
Wonders it did without its head; What would it have done if the head had been
on it? We have before found a piece of the crown, and the whole crown, and
behold it is here again! sure they that can make a Wafer Christ, can make Christ
many crowns.

Pope Gregory the first, being Bishop of Rome, Christ's coat which had no seam,
was found (as they say), and brought unto Jerusalem, and laid up by the cross
of Christ as a most precious and healthful Relic.

Thus they ascribed the power of healing to the old coat which they pretend to
have found, which they would not have done if they had not lost the right faith
of Christ.

St. Sibel, the Daughter of Fuleo King of Jerusalem, and Wife to Theodoricus,
by whom she had many goodly children, afterward by the consent of her Husband,
returned unto Jerusalem, and became a Religious woman, where she found (as they
write) a good quantity of Christ's blood, which Nicodemus and Joseph of
Arimathea got out of the wounds of Christ when they washed his body, and she
sent it to her Husband. Which blood (as they say) is at this day kept at
Bruges, and is showed every year to the people on the third day of the Month of
May.

These men are gone from the virtue of Christ's blood to the matter; Note.
and that Christ's blood can be saved 1600 years, is incredible! but that the
people should make a piece of Pageantry of it, set it out to show for money on
such a day in the year, is profaneness.

Pope Eusebius the first, The Cross again!
being Bishop of Rome, the cross whereupon Christ died, was found at Jerusalem
by Helena, Mother to Constantine the Emperor, and kept for a noble and precious
Relic.

Of this Cross there have been cut out for Relics so many pieces since that
time, that if they were gathered together, they would come to a greater
quantity than five of the greatest Oaks in Italy.

And to increase the honor of this cross, the aforesaid Pope Eusebius ordained
the Feast of the Invention of the cross, and commanded it to be kept holy for
ever after.

The use of the cross is an invention of foolish men. Note.
This is not the cross St. Paul gloried in, as the Papists do.

The aforesaid Helena found at Jerusalem the three Nails wherewith Christ was
fastened to the cross, and brought them with her to Constantinople with great
reverence and honor, and gave them unto her Son Constantine, who took one of
them, and put it upon his bridle, which he used always when he went to the
Wars, and at no other time, that by virtue thereof he might have good success
against his Enemies. This Nail is at this day kept at Mediolanum, and had there
in great reverence.

The second Nail he put upon his Helmet, which he used in the time of Wars,
that by virtue thereof he might the sooner get the victory over his Adversaries.

The third Nail he threvv into the Sea, called Mare Adriaticum, to repress,
mitigate, appease, and assuage the cruel storms and nerce compests of that
cruel and raging Sea.

Thus you see the three Nails disposed of; Note.
and these lying Priests do feign to have them as Monuments in other churches
in Rome, as you heard before.

The said Helena brought with her also a good part of the holy cross from
Jerusalem to Constantinople, Here is now a good part of the Cross again.
which she caused to be sumptuously garnished, and gallantly trimmed, with a
case of silver and precrous stones.

And this part of the cross thus decked and adorned, she brought afterward to
Rome with great reverence, worship, and honor, and placed it in that church
which is now called The church of St. Cross.

Thus these men that have forgot to reverence Christ, Note.
do adore and adorn the cross.

Pope Gregory the first reigning, Here is the Coat again.
Christ's coat that was without seam, which the blessed Virgin Mary made
with her own hands for him, was found not far from Jerusalem, in a Town
called Saphat, of these three Bishops, Gregory of Antioch, Thomas of Jerusalem,
and John of Conslantinople.

This coat was laid up in a fair Marble chest, and was found very fair,
without breach, and incorrupt.

The three aforesaid Bishops taking this coat of Christ out of the chest,
brought it unto Jerusalem, and laid it up very devoutly in a chest of Ivory,
and with great honor as a most precious Relic. This is that coat for which
the Soldiers did cast lots when Christ hanged on the cross.

And yet these liars pretend to have it as a Relic in other places. Liars had
need have good memories. It Is a like matter the Roman Soldiers should part with
a coat, that wanted clothes, as most Soldiers do.

Egelvotus Archbishop of Canterbury, found at Papia in Italy, one of St.
Austins arms, and gave for it an hundred Talents of silver, and one of gold,
and brought it with him into England with great reverence, and placed it as a
most precious Relic in the City of Venturia.

You may see that they will be at great charge to maintain their superstition:
Note.
But how can they say this was his Arm? one man's Arm may be like another.

The Dish which was set before Christ with the Paschal Lamb that night wherein
he instituted the Sacrament of his body and blood, was afterward found by the
Genoueses at Caesarea, and brought home into their own City with great joy, and
is now there kept as a most precious Relic.

As the fool thinks, so the bell clinks. How came Christ's dish at Caesarea?
Note.
And how, 1500 years after, could they know that from another dish?

The aforesaid Genoueses have also the ashes of John the Baptist, which they
brought with them from Mirea unto their own City, and keep them as most
precious and blessed Relics, as by whose virtue they have gotten most
triumphant victories, and most victorious triumphs.

John the Baptist was not burnt, but buried by his Disciples, Mat. 14.12. Note.
which was a 1000 years before the Genoneses were a people.

The Head of St. George is kept of the Venetians even at this day as a most
precious Relic.

This is a Fiction like the story of his killing the Dragon.

The Head of St. Vrsula was translated from Cales unto Bergomo in Italy, Note.
where it is now kept in the Monastry of the Austin-Friers, as a most holy
Relic, and had in great reverence of the people.

Her Body, with the Bodies of the other 11000 Virgins which suffered with her,
lie buried in Colon a City of Germany.

You may see every place will pretend some holy Relic to invite people to
gaze. Note.


The Body of St. Mark the Evangelist, was brought by a certain Merchant from
Alexandria unto Venice, where it know kept and had in great reverence; the
Venetians taking St. Mark for their chief Patron.

When men turn Papists, they go from God to creatures, and instead of Gods
protection, put themselves under the Patronage of dead creatures, Note.
instead of the living God.

Thomas Paleologus, graciously escaping out of the hands of the Turkish
Emperor, brought with him out of Achaia, the head of St. Andrew the Apostle
unto Rome, and with great humility gave it unto Pope Pius, who garnishing it
most sumptuously, placed it with great honor and high reverence in the Church
of St. Peter at Rome, as we have heretofore heard.

How the Heads and Members of their Saints are halled about to make a show of!
Note.


The Black Friars gave to King Henery the third for a most precious Relic, a
white Marble-stone wherein was the print of a man's foot, making the King
believe that it was that stone whereupon Christ stood, when he leaving this
world, ascended into the Kingdom of his Father; and that it was the print,
length, and breadth of Christ's foot; left here in the earth for a worthy
remembrance of his wonderful ascension.

The Gray Friars gave to the aforesaid King the blood of Christ.

The White Monks presented unto him our Ladies Milk, with most humble
supplications unto his Grace that he would be good and gracious, favorable and
liberal to his poor Beads-men and daily Orators.

The great quantities of Christ's Blood, Note.
and our Ladies Milk, show the cheat, as well as the length of time that they
pretend to have kept it.

But I confess, they that can turn Wine into the Blood of Christ, may find
great store.

The Bones of Samuel the Prophet were translated from Rome unto Constantinople,
and there placed as Relics of great virtue.

To confute this Lie, Note.
take notice, Samuel was turned to his dust hundreds of years before the
Papists began to show these tricks; and therefore this is feigned any man may
see.

There has been an old and long contention between the French men and Italians
concerning the Bodies of St. Benet the Monk, and of St. Scolastica his Sister.
The French men say plainly, that without all fail they have those bodies, and
that they were translated from Mount Cassine unto the Monastry Floriacens, and
there they are kept and honored as most precious Relics. The Italians
stoutly deny this matter, (...) that their bodies remain still in Mount
Cassine; so that whosoever (...) worship them, they must come thither, and
there make their oblation.

When these Fops agree, Note.
I shall begin to enquire into this matter, but never shall believe it.

The Body of St. Dionise is so holy and precious, that, as it is reported,
Clodoveus King of France became mad and utterly out of his wits, because he
unreverently discovered the foresaid body, broke off one of his arms, and
privily carried it away with him.

And sure no man that is in his wits will believe this story. Note.


When the Body of Boniface Archbishop of Mentz was brought unto Fuldes Monastry
to be buried, all the Bells in the Country rung in most goodly and comely
order, yea, and that without any help of man's hand, only by the power of God,
to testify what a noble and precious Relic was brought unto them.

O the blasphemy of these people, Note.
that will entitle the Holy and Wise God to be a countenance of (...) Follies
and Fanaticisms!

At Aquisgranum there was so great a company of Relics brought thither by
Charles King of France that there was a very solemn Pilgrimage appointed unto
them, which endured the space of seven years.

Among all these Relics the Crown of thorns was, Here is the Crown of thorns
again!
which was put on Christ's head; this they say had so great virtue in it, that
the King holding it in his hand, it flourished and gave out leaves.

The aforesaid King brought it from Constantinople unto Paris, and there placed
it among the other Relics.

I cannot but pity these people, Note.
where the King joins with the Clergy to seduce or mislead them; for woeful
exp^^^^^ce shows, that people for the most part will follow the Religion and
Manners of their Kings. All the Idolatry that the Jews were guilty of, they
were led into it by their Kings and Priests: what they believe and do, people
think it is right.

Aaron King of the Persians, sent to Charles King of France the bodies of St.
Cyprian and Spiratus, with the head of St. Panthaleon, for most precious
Relics.

What the Pagan Prince sent, Note.
might have been refused by the pretender to Christianity, if he had not been
as great a fool as the other. It Is not the name, but the power of Christianity,
or Spirit of it, that makes men wise.

The head of St. Gregory the Pope, and the arm of St. Leo, were translated by
Pope John unto the Church Sinonse, and there placed as holy Relics.

Relics they might be, but not holy, if the Limbs of Popes. Note.


The body of St. Martin was so holy a Relic, that after it was translated (as
they write) it cleansed the Leper of his Leprosy, it healed a man diseased of
the Palsy, and restored a blind man to his sight, and made all the Trees in
the Country to bring forth such leaves, as far passed the course of nature.

If it had ever such a power, when did it leave or lose it? Note.
it is a wonder it do not so still; but it may be a Lie, for all it flourished
so with leaves. The Popish Miracles are but tricks of art, and tales to please
fools.

St. Bruno Bishop of Colen, brought with him from Rome St. Peter's staff, and
placed it at the City of Colen in Germany, as in holy and precious Relic.

If the Papists did own St. Peter's golden doctrine, Note.
they would not much admire his wooden stick: but any thing will serve wooden
Christians!

Rainoldus Archbishop of Colen, translated the bodies of the three Kings that
came to worship Christ, from Maediolanum unto Colen. These bodies were before
taken away by Helen, Constantine's Mother, out of India, and brought unto
Constantinople. Afterward they were translated by Bishop Eustorgius from thence
unto Mediolanum, and so from that place unto Colen, where they now remain as
most worthy Relics, and work great Miracles, as they say.

Is it not a shame that Christians should be so bewitched, Note.
as to think that the dead bodies of three Pagan Kings, which doubtless were
hundreds of years before turned to dust, should be set up as Relics of
Saints! And could Helen fetch them from the remote parts of India, where she
never was? But I see every place must have some foppery or other to invite
fools, and to enrich Priests.

The holy and religious Monk St. Bernard, after that he was canonized and made
a Saint by Pope Alexander, did so abound in working Miracles in the place where
his body lay, by reason thereof great confluence of people resorted to the
Abbey, that the Abbot of the place forbad him to work any more miracles. And
blessed St. Bernard meekly and reverently obeyed Father Abbots commandment, and
so for ever he took his ease, and wrought no more miracles.

This obedience was showed, St. Bernard being dead.

A man would stand amazed at the confidence these people have in telling of
lies, yea, contradictions; but if true and consistent, Note.
then doubtless the Abbot was an ill-natured fellow, that he would hinder the
good that cost him nothing. And had St. Bernard been set at work by the liberal
God, he would not have been subject to a covetous Abbot, that had so much of
his meat and drink devoured by poor people. But this sounds like the rest.

In a certain Monastery of St. Gabriel is a great stone that fell down from
Heaven, having in it the sign of the holy Cross, and a very lively Image of
Christ, and written upon it with Golden Letters these words, Jesus Nazarenus
Rex Judeorum. This great stone, as they say, is a great precious Relic, and
works great Miracles in the great Monastry of great Saint Gabriel.

We may see what takes people off from holy Scripture, Note.
from God, from Christ; they have laden all people, and filled all places with
such lies, cheats, and hocus-pocus tricks, that they have no room left in their
hearts for truth.

Hugo the Monk at the desire of Monk William, Abbot of Hirsangia, sent unto him
the hair of St. Peter, which was received with great reverence, and placed in
the aforesaid Abbey as a true precious Relic, not without great honor daily
done unto it.

They honor any thing but Christ and God. Note.


Norbertus came unto Toline to seek Saints Relics; and after that he and his
Company had given themselves to fasting and prayer certain days, one of the
number of the nine thousand Virgins appeared unto him, and showed him her name
and the place where she lay. The next day after, the aforesaid Norbertus with
his Company took her up with great reverence and solemnity, and placed her very
devoutly, with many other Relics, in the Monastry Premonstratense.

Thus people when they have forsaken the living God, Note.
seek dead stinking Carcases to adore and worship; and sure if Lazarus stank in
four days, this Woman could not be sweet after many years; but to make it a
Miracle they must pretend a Vision.

In Norfolk there was a certain Monastry called Bromholm-Abbey, in the which
was an holy Cross brought thither by a certain Priest. This Cross was so
precious a Relic and of so great virtue, that it raised up unto life
thirty-nine dead persons, restored to their sight nineteen blind men, and
wrought many other notable Miracles.

The people in Norfolk use to be more ingenuous than to be so cheated; Note.
but when Priests have once made men blind, they may lead them whither they
list, out of one error into another.

In Winfarthing, a little Village in Norfolk, there was a certain Sword called
the Sword of Winfarthing. This Sword was counted so precious a Relic, and of
so great virtue, that there was a solemn Pilgrimage used unto it, with large
gifts and offerings, with Vow-makings, Crouchings and Kissings. This Sword was
visited and sought far and near for many and sundry purposes, but specially for
things that were lost, and for Horses stolen or run astray. It helped also
greatly to shorten a married man's life, if the Wife weary of her Husband would
set a Candle before that Sword every Sunday, for the space of one whole year,
no Sunday excepted, for then all was in vain, whatsoever was done before.

I have many times heard when I was a child, of diverse ancient men and women,
That this Sword was the Sword of a certain Thief which took Sanctuary in that
Churchyard, and afterward through the negligence of the Watchmen escaped and
left his Sword behind him, which being found and laid up in a certain old
Chest, was afterward through the subtilty of the Parson and the Clerk of the
same Parish, made a precious Relic full of virtue, able to do much, but
especially to enrich the Box, and to make fat the Parsons pouch.

I shall leave the Reader to weigh this Story, Note.
and by putting both ends together, he may see there is no end of the Romish
cheats, and the peoples folly.

In Thetford, a Town in Norfolk, there was a Parish Church, which is now
destroyed, called St. Audrice: In this Church, among other Relics was the
Smock of St. Audrice, which was there kept as a great jewel, and precious
Relic. The virtue of this Smock was mighty and manifold, but especially in
putting away the Toothache, and the swelling of the Throat; so that the Patient
were first of all shriven, and heard Mass, and did such Oblations as the Priest
of the Church enjoined.

All was governed by the Priest, and the Priest by his covetousness, Note.
of which there is no end.

In the Monastry of St. Edmundsbury, besides many other almost innumerable
Relics; there was one, a modest, singular, and precious Relic, called St.
Edmunds Girdle: The virtue of this Relic was, That if any woman being with
Child, came devoutly on Pilgrimage to sweet St. Edmund, and were girded about
with that holy Relic by some Monk, and so kneeling down before St. Edmund's
shrine, said certain Pater Nosters, certain Ave Mary's, and a Creed in the
Worship of God, and of our Lady, and sweet St. Edmund, and paid the accustomed
offering, she should not perish of that Child, but have good and lucky
deliverance.

This was an easy medicine, but like all the rest, chargeable: Note.
They wrought all their Miracles for money, by which it appears they were none
of Christ's Disciples, who as they received freely, gave freely, but Antichrists
merchandise was always of more cost than value.

In the same Monastry there was also another holy Relic, which was called the
pardon bowl; whosoever drunk of this Bowl in the Worship of God, and St.
Edmund, he had 500 days of pardon, toties quoties.

How some for cure, some for pardon, Note.
all were made to bring Grist to the Popes Mill.

The Coat of St. John the Evangelist was so holy a Relic, and of so great
virtue, that by touching thereof, such as were diseased, were cured; the sick
were made whole, the blind were restored to their sight, the Lepers were
cleansed, and Devils were cast out of men.

These are such incredible Stories, that they need nothing to confute them,
Note.
but the serious reading and weighing them.

In Geneva was a certain Relic, called St. Peter's Brain, and was esteemed for
a precious treasure among all the people of the Country, and had in great
worship. But after that it pleased God to reveal the truth of his holy Word to
the Inhabitants of the City, and the crafty juggling of the Papists began to be
espied, and search made, it was found to be not St. Peter's Brain, but a
Marble-stone.

When people came to exercise their own brains, Note.
they soon found the cheat, and so may men now.

At Pise, at Ravenna, at Clugny, at Angers, at St. Saeviours in Spain, Note.
These Pots are found in diverse places, and none but they that are drunk with
the Popes Wine, will believe it.
etc. are the Cruses or Water-pots which they call Hidries, wherein the Water
was that Jesus Christ changed into Wine at the marriage of Cana in Galilee, and
are taken for great Relics.

And as in the aforesaid places they have the Cruses, or Water-pots; so they of
Orleans affirm and say, That they have among them at this present, part of the
Wine which Christ miraculously turned from Water unto Wine at the aforesaid
marriage, and kept it among them devoutly as an holy and worthy Relic. This
custom also have they among them: Once a year, so many as will religiously and
devoutly come on Pilgrimage unto the aforesaid Relic, and offer something for
the relief of our Mother-holy-Church, they shall not only see it, but also
taste of it, by licking the end of a Spoon, which is dipped into it. And they
make the simple people believe, that it is part of the same Wine which Christ
at the marriage of Cana in Galilee turned from Water into Wine. They add
moreover, that the tasting of the Wine is not only profitable to expel all
sorrows and cares, and to make them the more merry and joyful all the year
after, but also very medicinable against diverse and sundry diseases. And the
virtue thereof is so great and mavelous, that although never so many taste of
it, yet the quantity thereof abides always one, and diminishes nothing at
all. Is not this a mavelous Relic!

This is a thing which requires great store of Ignorance to make it go down;
Note.
and I hope the people of England will never be so drunk with the Wine of the
Cup that the Whore of Rome fills out, as to believe any of the Wine Christ made
by a Miracle, is to be licked in Spain from the end of a Spoon.

The Knife wherewith the Paschal Lamb was cut up at the Supper which Christ
made with his Disciples the night before he was crucified, is, as they say, at
Trier, and there kept for a precious Jewel, with no small devotion and
reverence.

At how small rates these Papists deceive the people! Note.
here is a Knife forsooth had in great reverence, because the Lord used it at
the Paschal Supper; but that the Good Man of the house where they eat, did not
call for his Knives and other things, but that his Dish and Knife was carried
away by the Disciples, is to make them thieves like Popish Priests in Spain:
this is like the rest of their lies, and I hope will cut them to the heart.

Part also of the Bread which was at that Supper, is to be seen at St.
Saeviour's in Spain.

This is Bread of Sixteen hundred years old, Note.
if they say true; but they are such old liars that there is no wise man will
believe them.

The Platter also wherein the Paschal Lamb was put, The Platter.
is found to be in diverse places, as at Rome, at Geves, at Earls, etc.

This Platter it seems is in many places, Note.
so that a wise man will judge it is not at all, except they can multiply
Platter as they can do bodies of Christ, which they say may be in many places
at the same time; much alike.

The Cup wherein Christ gave the Sacrament of his blood to his Apostles to
drink, is showed at our Lady of the Isle near to Lions, and also at Allegeios
in a certain Covent of Austin-Friers, and in both places kept as a most
precious Relic. How this may be (good Reader) make no inquisition, except
thou will repay unto them that lately have brought in the Doctrine of the
Ubiquity of Christ's body. But if they can persuade thee that one and the same
Cup, being a dead thing, may be in diverse places at once, then may thou the
sooner be brought to believe the strange Doctrine of the Ubiquity of Christ's
body.

That what is said to the former Paragraph serves to undeceive the Reader in
both. Note.


The Towel, Napkin or Cloth, wherewith Christ wiped his Apostles feet after
that he had washed them, is not only at Rome in the Lateran Church, but also at
Aix, and at St. Cornelius, with the sign of Judas foot.

The Traitor Judas betrayed Christ but once; Note.
these Popish Priests make a Trade daily to betray Christ in his Person and
Members into all the contempt imaginable, by their frauds and falsehoods.

The very same bough that Jesus held in his hand when he entered into Jerusalem
on Palm sunday, is (as they say) at St. Saviors in Spain, and is taken for a
great Relic.

It is doubtful whether Christ had a bough or not, Note.
for the holy Text is silent. But that this is a falsehood, is out of all doubt.

The common opinion is, That Christ was fastened to the Cross only with three
Nails, which Nails, how they were bestowed, we have heretofore heard.
Notwithstanding it is found that there is one of those Nails at Rome in St.
Helens Church, another in the Church of the holy Cross, another at Milan,
another at Carpentras, another at Venice, in Germany two, at Colein one at the
three Mary's, another at Triers, one in France at the holy Chapel of Paris,
another at the Carmes, one also at St. Denis in France, one at Bruges, one at
Tenail, one at Draquigne, etc. And every one of these places persuade
themselves to have one of those three Nails wherewith Christ was fastened to the
Cross, and count it for a precious Relic. But how this may be true, let the
indifferent Reader judge. But who knows not that the Kingdom of the Papists is
crowned, confirmed, and maintained with lies and tyrannies?

The Spear-head wherewith Christ was thrust to the heart, is not only at Rome,
but also (as they report) at the holy Chapel of Paris, at the Abbey of Tenail,
at St. Euge, at Selne, etc. And in all these places it is counted to be a
precious Relic: Also the very same Spear wherewith Christ was pierced unto
the heart.

That diverse Thorns of Christ's thorny Crown be at Rome, we have likewise before
heard: But besides those there are other, yea and those not few, at Venice one,
at Bruges five, at Besanson in St. John's Church three, at St. Saviors in Spain
I cannot tell how many; at St. James in Galicia two, at Alby three, at
Toulouse, at Mascove, at Charoure in Poictiers, at Clear, at St. Flower, at St.
Maximine in Province, in the Abbey of Salle, in the Parish Church of St. Martin
at Noyon; in every one of these places there is at the least one, and in many
other places.

The Purple Robe wherewith Pilate clothed Christ in derision, for as much as
he called himself a King, is at Rome, as we have heard. But as touching the
Garment that was Woven from top to toe, without seam, whereon lots were cast,
it is found to be in diverse places, one at Argentine, near Paris, another at
Trier, etc. And the Turk mocking the folly of the Christians, says plainly,
That he has this Garment in his hands.

Reader, consider well the five former Paragraphs, Note.
and thou will see the Trade of cheating by the Priests, and how well content
the people are to have it so, like them in the Prophet Jeremiah's time, Jer.
5.31. and thou will see cause to thank God thou art delivered from the Error of
the wicked Church of Rome.

The Soldiers that crucified Christ played, as they say, at Dice for the
aforesaid Coat of Christ, which Dice were three in number, and yet remain as
precious Relics: One of them, they say, is at Trier, and the other two at St.
Saviors in Spain.

That they cast Lots, the holy Text says; but that they played at Dice, is one
of their Fables: but what if it shall appear there was no Dice in those days,
will not they appear great liars? But if perchance there was amongst the Pagan
Soldiers, must the Devils bones (as people call Dice) now become holy Relics?
O horrid Impiety!

The Cloth which was put upon Christ's head when he was laid in the Sepulcher,
is kept as an holy Relic at the Augustines of Carcossone.

It Is strange this old Clout is not washed to rags in 1600 years, Note.
or else it is but a foul one by this time: but where was this small piece of
Cloth kept before the Whore of Rome began to show her tricks, which she thought
not of, or was ashamed to do, till within these six or seven hundred years?

Christ's Winding Sheet wherein he was wrapped, and laid in his grave, is found
perfect and whole, (as they say) in diverse places, as at Nice, at Aix, at
Traicte, at Besancon, at Eadoe in Limosin, etc. And in all these places it is
kept as a most precious Relic. But how one sheet can be in so many places at
once, must be learned of those Masters who teach the Ubiquity of Christ's
natural body.

If it were possible by their art of Transubstantiation to make Christ's person
in many places, Note.
yet this old sheet sure is not a fit subject of that Art.

The Asses tail whereon Christ rode on Palm Sunday, Note.
is to be seen at Genes, and is there held for an holy Relic.

What Asses are the poor people that have given up their sense and reason to
their lying Priests, and are made to believe an Asses tail to be a holy
Relic! and why must his tail be cut off? could they not as well have kept the
Ass, as have been such Asses themselves as to think a man in his wits will
believe such a fiction?

There is also in a certain Monastry kept for a Relic, a morsel of that
broiled fish which Christ presented, and gave to St. Peter when he appeared
unto him on the Seashore after his Resurrection.

How incredible things do these men fain! Note.
but what good-luck have they, that they can keep fish so long after it is
broiled? It Is a wonder the Mice had not eat it in 1600 years time! it is strange
the Jews had not eat it in the time of the Siege of Jerusalem, when old shoes
were good meat, if Josephus spoke true!

At Reins in Campania there is a Stone behind the high Altar, wherein (as they
say) is the form of Christ's Hips: This is taken for a great Relic also, and
full devoutly kissed of many devout people. And they say this was done at such
time as our Lord became a Mason to build their Churchporch.

This is such a weak and senseless Fiction, Note.
that I can note in it nothing, but that the Inventors were notorious fools.

Our Ladies Smock, besides diverse other places, is to be found (as they say) at
Aix. And this is the order when it is showed. One holds it out upon the end
of a pole, as it were a long white Surplice of a Priest. This Smock is so long
and large, that if Mary had been a Giant, yet could she scarcely have worn such
a monstrous Smock. And for to make a better show thereof, one does carry
straightway after a Hose of St. Joseph her Husband, yea and that so little, and
so slender a Hose, that it may seem little enough fora Dwarf to wear, and such
a one as they say Tom Thumb was.

The stories of Thomas Thumb and Don Quixot sure would be Canonical with the
people which believe such things as these, Note.
if the Popes Holiness would declare them so.

Of our Ladies Kerchers, two yet remain and are preserved as most precious
Relics: one at Trier in St. Maximins Abbey; another at Lilio in Italy.

That a woman of so great virtue, and worthy of so much honor, Note.
should be so disgraced as to have her Smock and other parts of her old Napery
thus exposed when Sixteen hundred years old, is certainly a great shame.

The Girdle of our Lady is at Prat, and kept as a holy Relic.

One of our Ladies Slippers is at St. Jaqueries, and one of her Shoes at St.
Flowers, and are taken for great and solemn Relics.

That she might wear a Girdle, is credible; but that she wore Shoes, Note.
I doubt, because there was none but Sandals worn in that Country; but I am
glad she was so well furnished to have Shoes and Slippers both; but how
ridiculous such stories are I leave you Reader to judge.

Two of our Ladies Wedding-ring is also kept as a precious Relic and Heavenly
Jewel at Peruse.

Diverse of our Ladies Gowns are to be found in diverse places, as at Rome in St.
John of Lateran. In St. Barbara's Church. In St. Mary's upon Minerve. In St.
Blases Church. At St. Saviors in Spain. At the least they say they have
certain pieces of her Gowns, and keep them devoutly as holy Relics.

The Slippers of St. Joseph our Ladies Husband are in St. Simons Abbey of Trier,
and are had in great reverence and honor. Of his Hose we have heretofore heard.

Reader, Note.
consider what vain people these are which always keep minds exercised about
such toys and old rags as these: as for a Wedding-ring she never had any, nor
was it the custom in those days to have Weddingrings.

At Carcassone the Papists boast to have certain Relics of St. Michael the
Archangel, and likewise at St. Julians of Toures. They do show at great St.
Michaels (which is so well haunted of Pilgrims) his Sword which is like a
Child's Dagger, and his Buckler likewise which is as it were the boss of a
Horse-bit.

That Angels should have Swords and Shields, is so vain, Note.
that all the wit the Pope and Clergy of Rome have, can never defend themselves
from the imputation of being most horrid Impostors in asserting; but that the
Sword should be like a Child's Dagger, and the Shield or Buckler like the boss
of a horse-bit, none but knaves will say, and none but fools will believe it.

Although we (...) before that the head of St. John Baptist is in diverse
places, yet they (...) Amiens boast to have the visage of St. John. And in the
Mask which they show, there is the sign of the cut of a knise overthwart the
eye, which they say Herodias gave him. But they of St. John of Angel deny it,
and show the like part. As concerning the rest of the Head from the crown to
the forehead, it was at Rhodes, and is now at Malta, as it is thought; at the
least they have made men believe that the Turk did render it them. The hinder
part is at St. John of Nemoures. The Brain is at Noyon. Besides all this, they
of St. John of Morein do not want some certain part of the Head. His Jaws are
seen at Besanson at St. John the great. There is another part at St. John of
Latians at Paris, and at St. Floura in Auvergne. They keep his Hair at St.
Saviors in Spain, the Brow and some of the Hair. There is also a little
thereof at Noyon, which is shown very authentickly. There is also some part (I
know not of what place) at St. Lukes. As for St. John Baptists Arm, they of
Seen boast to have it, which is repugnant to all ancient Histories. Now as
touching that finger wherewith St. John did point and show our Lord Jesus
Christ, saying, Ecce Agnus ille Dei, etc. Behold that Lamb of God that takes
away the sin of the world, it is found to be in many and diverse places. There
is one at Besanson in the Church of St. John the great, another at Lions,
another at Bruges, another at Florence, another at St. John of Adventures near
to Mascone.

One of St. John's Shoos is at the Charter House of Pa is. His Jacket is at
Rome in the Church of St. John of Lateran; where also, as they say, is the
Altar whereon he prayed in the desert: As if in those days they used to make
Altars for every purpose, and in every place! It is a marvel that they make not
the people believe also that he sung Mass!

In Avignon is the Sword wherewith he was beheaded. At Aix is the Linuen Cloth
that was spread under him when he was beheaded.

At Poicters they have the Jaw Bone and beard of St. Peter.

At Trier there are diverse bones both of St. Peter and St. Paul.

At Argenton in Bury, one of St. Paul's Shoulders.

At St. Saviors in Spain one of St. Peter's Slippers: They of Poicters also
brag that they have St. Peter's Slippers, but those are wonderful trim and
brave, made of Satin, and broidered with Gold, as though he had been like to
our Popish Bishops when they are dressed and decked like Puppets in their
Pontificalibus. When it is well known that Peter lived a very poor man, as it
evidently appears by these words which he spoke to a certain man that was
lame from his mothers womb, Silver and gold (says he) have I none, such as I
have I give thee; in the name of Jesus Christ of Nazareth rise up and walk. And
are not these the words of St. James, Has not God chosen the poor of this
world? Says not St. Paul of himself and of his fellow Apostles in this wise,
Even unto this time we hunger and thirst, and are naked, and are buffeted with
fists, and have no certain dwelling place, and labor, working with our own
hands?

This Paragraph shows that their Relics are of their own invention by the
gayness of them, Note.
which agrees not at all with the poor estate of the holy men they talk of.

St. Peter's Pontifical Chair with his Cope wherein he said Mass (as the
Papists fain) are at Rome, and kept as precious Relics.

About the Altar whereon he said Mass, there is great contention; they of Rome
affirm that they have it, and they of Pise likewise say they have it. But how
the lying Papists strive among themselves for ^^ye, who knows not? seeing
that neither that monster the Mass, nor ye^ ^^tars were received into the
Church of Christ many years after the death of St. Peter.

By this they pretend to justify their own foolish Gayeties, Note.
and therein be-lye the Primitive modesty and plainness of the Christian
Religion.

The Sword also wherewith St. Peter cut off Malchus his ear, is reserved and
reverenced of the Papists in diverse and sundry places.

The having one Sword in so many places, Note.
is a reasonable ground to conclude they have it no where.

Saint Peter's Crosier is showed at St. Stephens of Grees at Paris: But they of
Collen plainly affirm that they have it: So likewise say they of Trier. But it
is truly to be thought that none of them all have it; for in St. Peter's time
there were no such baubles as the Popish Bishops use nowadays, neither Miter
nor Crosier, Cope nor Vestment, Altar nor Altar-cloth.

Saint Bartholomew's skin is at Pisa, and there kept for an holy and precious
Relic, notwithstanding in the Kingdom of Naples they plainly affirm that they
have the whole Body of St. Bartholomew with skin and all. And in St.
Bartholomew's Church at Rome they stoutly maintain that he is there both body
and skin, and in no other place.

Poor St. Bartholomew is at Pisa, and at Rome too; what place next? an Arm with
the Walloon Jesuits at St. Omers, and five Ribs at Liege in Germany, and a Leg
at Burgos, and an Head at Villa Garsia.

Saint Mathias has one Body at Padua, Note, here is a blessed in crease of St.
Mathias.
another at Rome in the Church of St. Mary the greater, and a third Body at
Trier. Besides this, he has a Head and an Arm at Rome, and another Body at
Salamanca in Spain, and another at the Cathedral at St. Omers, and another
where Mr. Pope pleases: Nay he has any thing but Truth and true Religion; but
these have left Rome long since.

At Ortone the Body of Saint Thomas the Apostle is kept and taken for an holy
Relic, notwithstanding they of Trier say they have certain of his Bones, and
at Rome they boast to have his Arm and Head.

The Chalice out of which St. John the Evangelist drank the Poison, being
condemned by Domitian the Roman Emperor, is found in two places, and taken for
a great Relic: One is at Rome in the Church of St. John of Lateran, and the
other at Bullen.

At our Lady of the Isle near Lions are kept for precious Relics the twelve
Combs of the twelve Apostles.

St. Anne Mother of the Virgin Mary, has one of her Bodies at Apt in
Provence, the other at our Lady of the Isle, at Lions. Besides this, she has
one Head at Trier, the other at Turen, another at Turinge a Town named after
her name. I omit the pieces of her Body which are in more than a hundred
places, as an arm in St. Paul's Church at Rome, etc.

When they are agreed amongst themselves, Note.
it will be time enough to believe them, of the story of the twelve Combs and
Cups, Bodies and bones, they talk of in these four last Paragraphs.

Lazarus the Brother of Martha and Mary Magdalen, has three Bodies, one at
Marseilles, the other at Authum, the third at Avalon. Every one of these places
boast that they have the true Body of Lazarus. But how this may be, no man may
demand, except he will be taken for a Lutheran.

Mary Magdalen is known to have two Bodies, Mary Magdalen 's Noli me tangere,
has great Veneration in the Romish Church.
one at Veselnere Auserre; the other, which is of greater renown, at St.
Maximius in Provence.

Besides, she has diverse parts of her Body in diverse places, as her head, with
her Noli me tangere, her bones, her hair, etc.

With what face can these people look men in the face, Note.
and boast of unity of the Church of Rome, when they cannot agree about a few
bones and old invented Relics, about which they prove themselves liars, and
under the curse of believing lies? But as for the Noli me tangere of Mary
Magdalen, I suppose the Priests have a great devotion, and the people kiss it
with as much.

St. Longus the Knight who pierced the side of our Lord Jesus on the Cross with
a Spear, has two Bodies in two sundry places, the one is at Mantone, the other
at our Lady of the Isle, near Lions.

Truly I should be as well contented if he had had two and twenty.

The Bodies of the three Kings which came to worship the newborn Savior of
the World, whom the Papists have baptized with these names, Balthazar,
Melchior, and Gaspar, are constantly affirmed of many to be at Colen; but they
of Millain say plainly that they have these Bodies of the three Kings; so that
whosoever will worship them, they must come unto Millain and offer there unto
them, or else all their labor is lost. About this matter there has been great
contention in times past, insomuch that it was brought before the Apostolic
See to be determined.

And could not the Pope by his art persuade the fools they are in both places?
Note.
and if I am not misinformed, they are in the great Church in Portugal also.
And they pretend to have the Bodies of one of those three Kings at Palencia,
and another at Toledo in the Kingdom of Spain.

St. Denis, whom some take to be one of the Apostles Disciples, and the first
Preacher of the Gospel in France, has two Bodies in two sundry places: one is
at St. Denis in France, the other at Regensburg in Germany. About this matter
also there has been no small ado who have the true body of St. Denis, insomuch
that the Apostolic See was fain to give judgment therein. And yet both of
them persist in their fancy.

And well they may persist, for it is but a fancy, Note.
like all the trinckets we have heard of in this whole Inventory of their
Merchandise.

The Body of St. Stephen is reported to be whole in his Church at Rome.
Notwithstanding his Head is affirmed to be in Arles; and his Bones are in more
than 200 places.

Thus do these fools prove themselves Knaves and Liars; Note.
and would not England be blessed to entertain such a sort of Religion and
Religious men?

The Stones also wherewith St. Stephen is reported to be stoned to death, are
kept as Relics at Florence; again in Arles at the Augustines, and at Vigan in
Languedock. There is also at Poictiers one of the aforesaid Stones, which, as
they say, if it be aptly applied to a certain part of a Woman that is big with
Child, is very profitable unto the safe deliverance of the Child, to the hasty
expedition of the Birth, and easing of pain.

Would it not be well to find out who gathered these stones together, Note.
and kept them till the Church of Rome began to show such tricks, and invent
this Trade, cheating her followers.

St. Sebastian has four whole bodies, in four sundry places, whereof one is at
Rome in St. Laurences Church, the other at Soison, the third at Pilligne, near
Nantes, the fourth near Narbon, in the place where he was born; besides this,
he has two heads, the one at St. Peter's at Rome, the other at the Jacobins of
Toulouse. But all these are but empty skulls, if it be true what is reported;
for the Gray-friers of Angers affirm, that whosoever have St. Sebastians head,
they have all his brains, which they keep for holy and precious Relics. Item,
the Jacobins of Angiers have an Arm of his, and they of St. Servine of Toulouse
have another. Another also of his Arms (if one man may have so many Arms) is at
Avergne, and another at Mombrison in the forest, besides the small little
pieces that are in many other Churches.

This Story, if well observed, does so fully confute it self, Note.
that one half blind may perceive it. And what is the reason that they at
Lisbon, who do one day every year go down to the Waterside to look for him, do
not rather go to these places to meet him?

The Arrows also wherewith St. Sebastian was shot, are preserved and kept for
Relics; whereof one is at Lambest in Provence, another at Poictiers at the
Augustines, and the rest are here and there.

Mr. David Rivers, when he kept a Cooks Shop in Nortonfallgate, at the Sign of
the Plow, there lodged two Frenchmen at his house, which were (as they said)
Pilgrims, and had been at Jerusalem.

Among several other discourses, said Mr. Rivers, you could not choose but be
exposed to great want, in so long a Journey.

No, said one of the Pilgrims (the other standing by) we did seldom want long,
for by one means or other we were soon supplied.

But we were once in a very great strait, night coming on, and we having
neither food, nor money, but only a few odd things that might yield some small
matter; So we entered into an house, required Lodging; which being granted, we
demanded of the Woman, if she had any thing to eat? No indeed, replied the
Woman, I have nothing in the house but Bread, that is fit for this day (it
being then a Fish-day); but had it happened on another day, I could have
furnished you with a good Rib of Bacon: bring us that, said we, we are holy
Men, and can make it Fish. It being brought, we prayed over it; and then
pronounced it was no more Flesh, but Fish. And after it was boiled, and we well
supped thereon, we soon found an invention for to make profit of the Bone, to
surmount the price of our Meat and Lodging. So to work went we with our Knives;
and after two hours we had scraped it so exactly, that it appeared to have lain
long in the ground.

We gave the Woman the Bone, with great charge to lay it up very safe, which
she did: In the morning we demanded the Bone, and gave her the things which we
had brought with us, to lay up until we went a little way, and we would soon
return. So walking about three or four Miles, we came to an Abbey, and having
found the Abbot, we told him our business; how that we were Pilgrims, and had
been to visit the holy Land; and in our Pilgrimage, in the Sepulcher of our
blessed St. Anthony we had found a wonderful Relic of his, even one of his
Ribs. And having special love and respect to that Abbey, more than to any
other, were willing to bestow it upon the same.

The which was received with great joy and thankfulness, and we honorably
treated. And he forthwith summoned all the people in the adjacent parts, to the
Abbey; where being met, and the aforesaid Bone being set on the Table, in a
Silver Charger, the Abbot said, Here lies the Bone of our blessed St. Anthony;
therefore let no Adulterer, Thief, Drunkard, or other profane person, presume
to come within six foot of the Table, to offer their offering; and the very
woman that sold them the Bacon, did offer among the rest.

St. Anthony, whom the Papists feign to be a choleric and angry Saint, burning
whomsoever he is angry with, is found to have two bodies; one at Arles, the
other at Venice among the Anthenians. There is a Knee of him also at the
Augustines of Albi. There are also at Burge, at Mascon, at Dion, at Chalouse,
at Ourour, at Besancon, etc. diverse Relics of diverse Members of St. Anthony,
to say nothing of that Baggage which Pardoners carry about them from Country
to Country to deceive the people withal, which is no small quantity.

Here I cannot omit to affix a Story which I received from an honest man, Note.
whom I dare credit, and is alive to attest the Truth of it as he heard it.

St. Patronel, otherwise called Parnel, the Daughter of St. Peter, has also
two bodies, one at Rome in her Fathers Church, and another at Man's in the
Jacobin Covent. This latter body is had in great Reverence, and is sought far
and near of all such as are diseased of Agues. Besides these two bodies, there
are found in other places many Relics of hers, which are full Religiously
kept, and taken for things of great virtue.

Are not the words of the Apostle, 2 Thessalonians. 2.9, 10, 11. verses, Note.
fulfilled in these Merchants of Rome? And are not their followers given up to
believe lies, with whom such cheats are in credit?

St. Susan likewise has two bodies, one at Rome, and another at Chalosse; and
both are affirmed to be her true body.

Aarons Rod, whereof we spoke before, Arons Rod gain the thi^ time.
is found to be not only at Rome in the Lateran Church, with the Ark of the
Covenant, but also at the holy Chapel of Paris. And they of St. Saviors in
Spain affirm, That they also have a certain piece of the Rod. Moreover, they of
Bordeaux say, That the Rod which is shown there in St. Severines Church, is the
very self-same Rod that Moses and Aaron had in Egypt, and was turned into a
Serpent.

Sure these men are taught by the old Serpent that deceived Eve, Note.
and are in love with all forbidden fruit.

Mr. Moor writes, that while Rhodes was in the hands of the Christians, which
is now in the possession of the Turk, there was in that City a great and
precious Relic, which was one of the Thorns in Christ's Crown. This Thorn,
says he, upon Good Friday every year for these two hundred years, has been
seen in the service-time to bud and bring forth flowers.

Though we have had a good burden of these Thorns already, Note.
yet none like this which brought forth flowers, which when the Turk says it,
we may think it worth the while to go see it. But though he be a misbeliever,
he is not such a liar as these Popish Priests, and therefore till he say it, we
may suspend our Journey.

Erasmus in his Colloquies says, That when he was at Canterbury he saw in the
Church dedicated to Thomas Becket, a certain Altar dedicate to our Lady, where
the said Thomas said his last Goodnight to her when he should depart hence. In
that Altar, says he, is the point of the Sword that stirred about the brains
of this blessed Martyr, and there lie his Brains shed upon the earth, whereby
ye may well know that he was never dead.

Not far from thence, says he, we saw the Brain-pan of that holy Martyr, which
was thrust quite through, all the other was covered with silver, except the
upper part, which was bare to be kissed, etc.

There hang also the shirt of hair and his girdle, with his hairy breeches
wherewith the noble Champion chastened his body.

From thence we returned into the Quire, on the North-side whereof were the
Relics.

A wondrous thing it was to see what a sort of bones were brought forth,
Skulls, Jaws, Teeth, Hands, Fingers, whole Arms, etc.

There was also brought forth an Arm which had yet the red flesh upon it.

Also a Napkin full of sweat, and bloody, wherewith St. Thomas wiped both his
nose and face.

From thence (says he) we were led to greater things. For behind the high
Altar we ascended as it were into another new Church; there was showed us in a
Chapel the face of that blessed man gilded over, and garnished with many
precious stones.

At last we were brought back again into the Vestry, where was taken out a
Coffer covered with black leather, which being set down upon the Table and
opened, every body kneeled down and worshipped. In this Coffer were certain
rags of linen Cloth, many having yet remaining in them the token of the filth
of the holy man's nose. With these, as they, say St. Thomas did wipe away the
sweat of his face and neck, the filth of his nose, or other filthiness
wherewith man's body does abound.

At Herbert-Down there was an old shoe of Thomas Becket bound about with an
Iron-hoop, wherein was a glass like a precious stone. This shoe the poor
Brothers of the same House were wont to offer to be kissed by such as came that
way, as a most holy and precious Relic.

At St. John's in Canterbury, Becket's Comb was kept, kissed and worshipped as
an holy and honorable Relic.

And have not we cause to love and praise God that we are delivered from such
frauds? Note.
Would it not be a dreadful judgment upon this Nation that it should again be
given up to such blindness, and have such Villains to lead us, as these Popish
Priests are? the Lord Almighty deliver Prince and People from them, and make
their folly manifest to all men.

At St. Stephens, a mile from Canterbury, was the Boot of St. Stephen kept for
a precious Relic.

The Relics that follow are taken out of an old written Book yet remaining in
the Cathedral Church of Canterbury. This Book is called, Memorale multorum
Henrici Prioris. And it may appear by the account to be 262 years since it was
written, and left for a perpetual remembrance of such things as at that time
appertained unto the Monastery commonly called, Christ's Church, being then a
place of Monks, now, through the benesit and liberality of the most noble King
Henry the Eighth, a most worthy Cathedral Church, and Place of Godly and
Learned Prebendaries, etc.
First the Body of Thomas Becket, Bishop of the said Church, which was first
buried in the Undercrast, and afterward translated into the upper part of the
Church on the East side, and there lay in a Coffin of pure Gold, as a most holy
and precious Relic.

The Body of St. Alphege which was put into a Coffin of Silver, and gilt.
The Body of St. Dunstan in a Coffin of Copper and gilt.
The Body of St. Odo in a Chest of Wood gilded.
The Body of St. Wilfrid in a Coffin of Copper gilded.
The Body of St. Anselme in a Coffin of Wood gilded.
The Body of St. Elphrick in a Coffin of Wood gilded.
The Body of St. Blase in a Chest of Wood gilded.
The Body of St. Andoen in a Coffin of Silver and gilt.
The Body of St. Salvin in a Coffin of Wood gilded.
The Bodies of St. Wulgan and St. Swithune.
The Head of St. Blase: The Head of St. Fursey: The Head of St. Austrobert;
these were framed of Cases made of Silver, and gilt enameled.

Item, two Arms of old St. Simeon wherewith he embraced Christ in the Temple,
as we read in the Gospel of St. Luke, when he said, Nune dimittis servum tuum
domine, etc. We have heard before that one of his Arms was given to Carolus
Magnus, King of France, for the good service he did to Mother Holy Church:
Whether that Arm were one of these two Arms that were at Canterbury, or whether
the third Arm was begotten since that time or not, I know not; for, in the Art
of Multiplying, the Papists for lucres sake are very wise and expert.

Item, the Arms of St. Blase, St. Bartholomew, St. George St. (...), St.
Richard, Bishop of Chichester, of St. Roman, Gregory the Pope, St. Hugh, Bishop
of Lincoln, St. Mildrith the Virgin, and of St. Edburg: All these, as Holy
Relics, were covered over with Cases of Silver, and gilt enameled.

Item, a Piece of Christ's Cross: More of the Cross still.
A Fragment of the Cradle wherein Christ was rocked: A Parcel of the Maunger
wherein Christ was laid after he was born: A Piece of the Sepulcher wherein
Christ was buried: A Remnant of Moses's Rod which was turned into a Serpent:
Christ's usual Napkin wherewith he wiped his Face.

To say no more of the Cross, Note.
which has afforded a good Cart-load already, let us observe their Foolery
about his Cradle, and Maunger, and Sepulcher, which was of Stone, all which it
seems lay dormant till Antichrist did awake to deceive the Nations, which was
not till 800 years, and is it not (...) they should tell us who kept all the so
bits of (...), before we believe the reallity there of.

In a great Cross of Gold given by Stephen Archbishop of Canterbury, with a
Ruby on the top, and two Emeralds on the sides, were these Relics contained.

In the midst of the Cross there was a piece of the Cross that Christ dyed on;
More of the Cross yet.
a Bone of St. Benign, a Tooth of St. Blese, a Bone of St. Julian, a piece of
St. Paul's Staff, certain Relics of St. Quintin, St. Mark, and Marcellian;
Item, a Bone of the man of God; also a Bone of St. Stephen the Pope.

How were those poor people pulled in pleces by these Popish Villains, Note.
if what they say were true; but the things are so gross, yea so impossible,
that we will rather put them down for Liars, than suppose the people were thus
born Limb from Limb by the Primitive Professors of the Christian Religion.

In the Cross of St. Andrea, being of silver, and gilt, set with diverse goodly
and precious Stones, were these two Relics: First, a piece of St. Andrent's
Cross: Secondly one of his Bones.

In a Cross of Silver, and gilt, set with diverse goodly and precions stones,
was this one Relic, viz. a piece of the Holy Cross.

In the Cross of S. Peter, which was of Silver and gilt, was this one Relic,
that is to say, a piece of the Cross that St. Peter dyed on.

In a Cross of Silver, gilt on the one side and not on the other, were
contained these Relics following.

First, a piece of the Holy Cross; a good gobbet of Christ's Sepulcher; certain
Bones of St. James; of St. Osuha; of St. Andrem, of St. Paneras; of St.
Brigide; and of St. Faith.

In a little Cross of Silver, and gilt, without any precious stones, having the
Image of a Lamb on the backside, was this one Relic, viz. a piece of
Christ's Cross.

What Fictions are here about the Cross, and what abundance do we meet with,
Note.
is worth noteing.

In a Glass of Crystal was this one Relic contained, The Thorns of Christ's
Crown sure were many. Aron's Rod again.
viz. one of the Thorns of Christ's Crown.

Item, In a great Aumbry or Cupboard were these Relics found; Aaron's Rod; a
piece of the Coffin that our Lady was buried in; the superaltare of St.
Elphege; Item, a Chalice of St. Elphege, made of Crystal, gilt and enar^^led,
with a paten of Mother Pearl.

The people have no other ground to believe these things to be such, Note.
but that the false Priest tells them so.

In a certain great Chest of Crystal, set in silver, and gilt and garnished
with many goodly precious stones, were these two Relics; first our Ladies
Hair; secondly a piece of he Vail.

It Is impossible that a little Hair, Note.
and a piece of her Vail, should laft, and not be rotten, or lost, in those
1000 years that passed before the Papists began to make such show.

In a Coffer of Copper, and gilt, was the Blood of St. Edmund, King and Martyr,
a piece of his Shirt, a remnant of his Breeches, and a fragment of his Cushion.

The ground of their Faith in these things is the bare word of their Priests;
Note.
why may not these bits be old Clouts gathered off a Dunghill, and the Blood
might be the Blood of a sheep as well as of St. Edmund, but they are bound to
believe what the Priests say, right or wrong.

In a Chest of silver, and gilt, with a round Crystal, and a Vine graven
thereon, were these Relics contained; the bones of St. Laurence, and a piece
of his Gridiron whereon he was broyled.

In another Chest of silver, and gilt, and adorned with precious stones, was
the Hair and the Girdle of St. Laurence.

In some places they have St. Laurence's whole body, here is but a piece, and a
piece of his Gridiron: I have seen a whole one, in several places: The Hair of
St. Laurence was roasted; but that may be, for, if the Whore lies not, there was
an Angel that held his Head whilst he was roasting, and so did preserve his
Hair.

In a Chest of silver, and gilt, set with precious stones and a long Crystal,
were contained a Tooth and a Bone of St. Bennet the Monk.

St. Bennet's Tooth an excellent Relic, and a Bone which is as good as the
other; I pray how many Devils have these rotten Relics cast out?

In a Coffin of silver, and gilt, garnished with diverse, precious stones, were
a Tooth and a Finger of St. Stephen; also diverse of his Bones; Item, certain of
the stones where with he was stoned unto death: also part of his Blood.

I have seen as many of St. Stephen's Teeth as would fill a Pe^k, St. Stephen I
believe was never troubled with the Toothach, for he saved all his Teeth for
Relics.
and as great a quantity of his blood; I suppose song Angel saved that: These
are admirable Relics, but the Virtue of the stones I cannot as yet learn.

In a Chest of Copper, gilt, without precious stones, with a long round Crystal
were these Relics contained; part of St. John Baptist's head, and one of his
bones; Item, a bone of St. Blase, a bone of St. Pantaleon, and a bo^^ of St.
Menna the Martyr.

We found a whole head in one Church, and now poor St. John Baptist has but a
piece of one here; but it is all one, Neighbor Pope, thy ipse dixit will
rather pass than be proved, unless one of thy graving Angels will bring this
Church to us.

In a Coffer of silver, and gilt, having a great round Crystal at the foot
thereof, were contained certain of the bones of those Innocents whom Herod slew.

Really the Pope has a great advantage of us Hereticles, there is not many of
us that can say any thing against this Relic, but a little proof for the
confirmation of our Faith would have done no hurt.

In a little Chest of silver, and gilt, set with precious stones, having in it
a little long Crystal, were part of the bones of St. Nicholas.

St. Nicholas's bones are very efficacious to cure the Itch; therefore if any
be troubled there with let them repair to Rome, and it shall cost them nothing
but their Charges.

In a Chest of Silver and gilt, having in it a long Crystal; were contained
diverse parts of our Ladies Clothes.

Certainly the Virgin Mary had the best Wordrobe of any in her time, for in
Spain, France, and Flanders I have seen as many of her Clothes as a good
handsome Cart would contain.

In diverse other Chests of silver, whereof some were gilt and enameled, and
some ungilt; some set with Precious Stones, some without Precious stones, these
Relics following were contained.

Part of Thom is Becket's Flesh resolved: a piece of the Flesh of St. Nicholas:
a Finger and a Tooth of St. Alban. Part of the Hair of St. Edmund the
Confessor, and part of his Garments, and one of his Teeth. A Tooth of S.
Mildred the Virgin. Also of the Rib of St. John Baptist. The Shirt of Thomas
Becket, and his Sandals. Part of the Blood of St. Edmund the Martyr, with his
Hose, Shirt, and Pillow. A Bone of St. Mildred. A Bone of St. Edburg. The Powl
of Thomas Becket: The Dust of his Body. The Arm of St. Jerome. The Bones of St.
Corduba one of the eleven thousand Virgins. A bone of St. Martin, with a piece
of his Cloak or Mantle. The Oil of Saint Demetris. Part of the Flesh and Skin
of Thomas Becket.

St. Thomas Beckets Flesh certainly is a precious Relic; and will appear so,
if we consider the Qualifications of the man; and besides I have seen as many
pieces of his Skull as an ordinary man can carry: and I have seen no less than
four or five Arms of St. Jerome: but the Papists may make as many Arms as they
please.

In an Ivory Chest were these Relics contained.

The Cheek-bones of Cosmas and Damian with nine Teeth. The Bones of St. Peter
the Apostle. St. Peter's Beard, and part of his Cross. Certain pieces of our
Ladies Garments. Part of St. John Baptist's Hairy Coat. Of the Dust of St.
Furseus Head. Certain Bones of St. Hipolytus the Martyr. The Blood of St. Paul
the Apostle: Certain Relics of S. Stephen: Part of Christ's Crib: Part of our
Ladies Bed: Certain Bones of St. ^ore of the ^ross.
Agnes, of St. Julian, of St. Praxed, of St. Wandregesile, and a large piece of
the holy Cross.

These costly Chests in which these pretended Relics were kept, as these
Liars say, Note.
might amaze the ignorant beholders; but to see their pretended Saints thus
pulled in pieces to be shown, shows planny the Tyranny of these Merchants of
Rome; and that St. Peter's Beard was pulled off to be shown, if it were true,
was Inhumane: but where were all these Trinkets kept the 800 years before they
thus set them out to view?

In a little round Chest of Ivory was contained the stone upon which St.
Stephen stood when he was stoned unto death: Also a Bone of Saint James the
Apostle.

How does it appear Saint Stephen stood upon one stone? or upon any stone at
all? Note.
And there are so many of these stones, that a sober Dominican wished that
Relic were taken out of the way, it appearing so ridiculous.

In a great Coffer of Ivory, with a round head, and barred about with Copper
and gilt, were these Relics. Thomas Becket's Mitre made of white silk, with
the Tunicle wherein he was buried: Another Mitre of his made of white Satin,
which he used to wear on single Feasts: Also his Gloves which he used in Divine
Service, with three goodly Ouches upon them: Also his Sandals embroidered most
costly, with Roses and other Flowers of Gold: Item, his Breeches of Hair: Part
of his Bed and of his Girdle: The Dust of his Body: His Cap, and other
Vestures: His Coul: The Lace or band wherewith his hairy Breeches were tied
together: Part of his Flesh and Blood resolved: His Girdle, his Hair, his
Pillow, his Coat, his light Cap of silk which he wore under his Mitre: His
Stamine, his Hood: A Tunicle of white silk to wear over an Albe: A Cloth dyed
in his blood: In fine, a Whip wherewith he used to scourge himself when he felt
Carnis insurrectionem, that by this means he might obtain Vitam aeternam.

Hem! hem! hem! very witty: Note.
All these Relics are pretended to be his, to countenance the use of such
Formalities, Every Covent would do well to get this Whip and these Vestments.
and to bring Whipping in the more credit. But this St. Thomas Becket's Whip
and Vestments I know are excellent Relics, for they have cured Watton College
of an extraordinary Distemper, viz. Poverty, for if Father Williams did speak
the truth, an old Lady gave the College 20000 l. Sterling, or else for ought I
know, said the Father Williams, we might have starved.

In the first standing Table made of Wood, with two doors, covered over with
silver, and gilt, and adorned with diverse precious Stones, were these Relics
following contained.

A Tooth of St. Laurence the Martyr, with diverse of his bones. Beckets lowzy
Breeches were sweet Relics. A blessed Crop of Relics.
Also a Rag of the hairy Breeches of Thomas Becket. Certain bones of Saint
Urban, Pope and Martyr; of St. Sebastian, Martyr: of St. Nicholas Bishop: of
St. Eugenius, Pope: Of S. Clement, Pope and Martyr: Of S. Felix, Pope: of St.
George, Martyr: of St. Bennet, and also of the Innocents whom Herod slew.

How they came a thousand years after by the bones of the Babes that Herod
slew, makes them that understand themselves wonder. Note.


In the second Table was a bone of St. George, a bone of St. Stephen the Pope,
a bone of St. Salvius, and a bone of St. Mildrid.

What the Virtues of these bones are, these Popish Doctors are able to give an
account to the people; but the most sober men of their party look on them as
abominable Cheats.

In the third Table was a piece of Christ's Cross, a piece of his Napkin, More
of the Cross.
and a piece of that Table whereon he made his Supper with his Twelve Apostles,
when he ordained the Sacrament of his Bodywand Blood.

Item, A bone of St. Philip the Apostle; a bone of S. James the Apostle, and a
bone of S. Thomas the Apostle.

Item, A bone of S. Stephen the Martyr, a bone of Mary Madalen, the Hair of S.
Cecily, a bone of S. Margaret, and the blood of Thomas Becket.

More blood of this cket.
blood Saint still, good God! when shall we have an end of it? Certainly the
blood of Traitors has greater veneration amongst Papists, than the blood of
Jesus Christ.

In a long Crystal, with a Foot of silver, and gilt, and a round Cover set with
four precious Stones, were these Relics contained.

The Oil of S. Katherine the Virgin, part of the body of S. Osith, Virgin: Also
a good lump of the stone whereon Christ stood when he ascended into the Kingdom
of his Father.

These Papists are excellent Chemists, they have extracted more Oil out of poor
S. Katherine (who before she suffered was almost starved) than out of any Saint
I can read of; I have seen at least a Quart my self in Spain and Flanders.

In the first Chest of Ivory were the Napkin of our Lady, the Arm of S. Pauline
the Bishop, a bone of S. Ciriack, and of S. Modevine the Virgin.

Certainly our Lady was an excellent House-wise, and provided good store of
Napkins, or else how would this poor Whore of Rome have had Napkins enough
(called our Ladies Napkins) to have bestowed on Churches.

In the second Chest of Ivory were part of Christ's Sepulcher, part of our
Ladies Coffin, with part of her Hair. Also a bone of S. Stephen the first
Martyr, a bone of S. George, the Dust of S. Ignatius, Martyr: A piece of the
Cross that the good Thief, called Dismas, did hang on: A Rib of blessed S.
Edburg, Virgin: Also certain bones of S. Theodore the Martyr.

Item, A bone of one of the Innocents, with diverse bones of S. VVilgan,
Confessor.

Here is a jolly Crop of Relics: Certainly if our learned Jesuits in England
could but get a lusty Fardel of them, they would store a bonny company of shops
with them.

In the third Chest of Ivory were contained these Relics following, certain
of the bones of S. Damian, Martyr: a bone of S. Nereus, Martyr: certain bones
of S. Innocentius, Martyr; of S. Sebastian, Martyr; of S. Theodorus, Martyr; of
S. Demetrius, Martyr; of S. Grisand, and S. Dariss.

Item, A bone of the head of blessed S. Amphibalus, Martyr: also certain
Relics of the man of God, which were found with the body of S. Sebastian,
Martyr.

Again, The bones of S. Pentaleon, Martyr; of S. Julian, Bishop and Confessor:
A Tooth of S. Francis, also part of his Hair: Also the bones of S. Fortunate,
Bishop and Confessor. A piece of the Sepulcher of S. Lazarus.

Item, The bones of S. Aguss, Virgin. Also the Relics of S. Christina, Virgin.

Item, The Sponge of S. Praxed, Virgin, which was dipped in the blood of many
Martyrs.

Item, A Penny that was bored through with the Spear of S. Cyriack, Martyr.

Item, A Penny that was bored through with the Spear of S. Maurice, Martyr.
Moreover the bones of S. Eustathius, Martyr; of S. Vitale, Martyr; of S.
Cyriack, Martyr; of S. Agapit, Martyr; of S. Roniface, Martyr; of S. Algar,
Martyr; of S. Sylvester, Pope and Confessor; of S. John Chrysostom, of S.
Nicander, of S. Secundius, Virgin; and finally, a piece of the Sepulcher of S.
Seba. Note.


How these people are fooled and cheated with a multitude of idle things, under
the notion of holy Relics! But that a Penny should be a Relic, because it
had a hole bored in with the spear of a pretended Saint, is such a Foppery, as
none but men and women bewitched by their juggling lying Priests would set any
value upon.

In the fourth Chest of Ivory were contained these Relics following.

The Bones of the holy Martyrs which were put to Martyrdom with blessed St.
Priscus.

Item, certain bones of St. Ireneus Bishop of Lions, and Martyr, and of his
Fellows. Also bones of St. Flavian Martyr, of Potentian Martyr, of St. Darius
Martyr.

Item, the Oil of St. Mary of Gardmey, which flowed out of the Breafts and Paps
of the Image of the blessed Virgin Mary.

Item, certain bones of St. Nictarius, of St. Liberius, of St. Serenus, of St.
Marian, of St. Julit, of St. Cyrick, of the 11000. Virgins, and part of the
Head and Hair of St. Trocia Virgin.

As one may stand amazed at the great multitude of their Bones, Note.
and Hair, and Clouts that are mentioned in the eight last Paragraphs; so may
they wonder at the horrid lie in this last, that when they have made the Image
of a Woman of Clouts, or Wood, or Stone; Oil should flow out of it.

In the fifth Chest of Ivory these Relics were contained.

A piece of the Table whereon Christ did eat his Supper with his Disciples when
he ordained the Sacrament of his Body and Blood. Et de quadragena Christi. Some
of the Flesh and Blood and many other Relics of Tho. Becket.

Item, a Tooth of worshipful Odo, Abbot of Battle.

They take great care to set up Tom. of Becket, Note.
who was a great Cheater, and horrible Traitor, and yet one of the Popes Saints.

In the Sixth Chest of Ivory were these Relics contained.

The Bones of St. Peter the Apostle, of St. Paul the Apostle, of St. Clement
Pope and Martyr, of St. Urbian Pope and Martyr, of St. Facundine Martyr, of St.
Cyprian Martyr, of St. Maurus Bishop and Confessor, of St. Macharius Confessor,
of St. Justin Virgin and Martyr, of St. Barnaby the Apostle, of St. Chremes
Martyr, of St. Tiburtius Martyr, of St. Cornelius Pope and Martyr, of St.
Adrian Martyr, of St. Maurus Abbot and Confessor. Also of the dry Blood and
Vestures of St. Eufemia Virgin and Martyr.

We find the Bodies of St. Peter and St. Paul in the Churches in Rome, Note.
and that their bones should be in this Chest, looks like the rest of their
Frauds, and proves them Forgers of Lies in the sight of all rational men.

In a Cupboard of Ivory with a Crucifix upon it were these Relics contained.

The bones of Cosino and Damiane; the bones of St. Austin Bishop and Confessor,
and a great Doctor; a bone of St. Leo Pope and Confessor; the dust of St.
Disciple; the bones of St. Machutus, Vulfrannus and Martinianus. The bones of
St. Anastatius, Martyr; of St. Agnes, Virgin and Martyr; of St. Amalburg
Virgin; of St. Keinburg Virgin; the hair of St. Barbara Virgin.

Item, three fingers and two teeth with other bones of St. Alban, the first
Martyr of England; the bones of St. Cyriack Levite and Martyr, with three of
his teeth. Also the bones of St. Gervasius and Prothasius, Martyrs; the bones
of St. Wandregesile Abbot and Confessor; of St. Samson Bishop, with one of his
teeth; of St. Albine Confessor; of St. Remigius and Germanns Bishops; of St.
Margaret Virgin; of St. Oportune Virgin; of St. Batilde Queen; the hair of St.
Alburg Virgin; the Vestures of St. Aldegund Virgin.

Item, The dust of St. Pancras Martyr; the bones of St. Adrian Martyr; of St.
Christo, Martyr; the dust of St. Crispian and Crispine, Martyrs; the bones of
St. Pantaleon Martyr; of St. Sixtus Pope; of St. Apelliner Martyr; of St.
Stephen Pope.

Item, The dust of St. Medard Confessor, also a rib of St. Apolliner Martyr,
with one of his teeth.

Item, The bones of St. Firmine Martyr and Bishop; and of St. Quintin Martyr; a
piece of Christ's Sepulcher; a lump of the Pillar whereunto our Lord was bound
when he was scourged of the wicked Jews; a piece of the stone whereupon the
Angel stood when the Women came to anoint the Body of Christ. Also a good big
lump of the stone whereupon Christ stood when he ascended into heaven.

Item, More of Moses Rod. Sure there was abundance of Olive branches, we find
of them so many in this story.
A piece of Moses rod that was turned into a Serpent. Also a parcel of that
stone whereupon the Lord stood in Galilee; also the Palm and Olive branch which
Christ bare in his hand on Palm Sunday, as he was riding toward Jerusalem.

Item, Part of the Table whereat Christ sat at his supper when he washed his
Disciples feet; a piece of the Garment which our Lady made for our Lord; a
piece of the prison out of the which the Lord delivered blessed Peter the
Apostle; a piece of the cloth which was laid upon Christ's sepulcher; part of
the hair and garments of St. Anne our Ladies Mother; also of the garments of
St. Helias, of the two sisters Mary and Martha; and also of St. Sophy the
Virgin; again, part of the wool which our Lady did spin.

Item, The dust of St. Benet the Virgin: the bones of St. Chrystopher Martyr;
of St. Lambert, with his dust and part of his garments; a piece of the beard
and Vestures of St. Cuthbert Bishop and Confessor; the bones of St. Gregory the
Pope, with one of his teeth; the bones of S. Wingunalock Abbot and Confessor;
of St. Sebastian Martyr; of St. Quintin Martyr; In fine, a piece of the Manger
wherein Christ lay.

That all these Relics should be shown were more than a days work to produce,
and thus they busied the minds of the poor people, to fetch in money to them
that made the show; but that some of the Wool that the Virgin Mary spun should
be kept to Tom. of Becket's time, which was nine hundred or a thousand years,
none but Cheaters would pretend, and none but deluded souls believe: how happy
was England when all these Frauds were detected, and how is the rest of the
world abused by Papal Pettifoggers.

In the first Coffer made of Copper, are contained these Relics:

The bones of St. Vulstane Bishop and Confessor; and of St. Prisca Virgin.

Item, The hair of St. Anselme Archbishop of Canterbury.

Certainly, Anselme's hair must needs have much virtue in it, because our
blessed Lady used to comb it once or twice in a week; and because that he was
very devout to her Ladyship, she did assume the Popes power, and gave
Indulgences her self to this hair; witness a Sermon Father Conniers the Jesuit
preached.

In the second Copper Coffer were these Relics contained.

The Relics of St. James the Apostle: the bones of St. Thomas the Apostle:
the bones of St. Thaddeus the Apostle: and also of St. Matthew the Apostle and
Evangelist.

Item, The Staff of St. Paul the Apostle: the bones of St. Luke the
Evangelist. In fine, the bones of St. Philip the Apostle.

It Is a wonder they had not some of Saint Paul's Needles and Thread he made his
Tents with, as well as his Staff: Note.
but that the good Servants of Christ should have their Bodies torn in preces,
to have their bones thus shown, is a sign of great inhumanity.

In the third Copper Coffer were these Relics contained.

A piece of the holy Cross: certain Relics of St. Andrew: More of the Cross
yet.
the blood of St. Gervase: Relics also of St. Grisant and Darias: of Joseph
of Arimathea, of the Prophets Elizeas and Abdias: of St. Pancras: St. James:
St. Faith: St. Brigide: St. Maurice and his Companions; and of St. Bertine.

Item, Certain bones of St. John Baptist; the Relics of the Saints John and
Paul: A bone of S. Eustathius, Martyr.

Saint John Baptist was buried by his Disciples, Matthew. 14.12. Note.
and then how came they by his bones that was buried a thousand years before?

In the fourth Copper Coffer were these Relics.

Part of the Dust of Saint John Baptist's Body which was burnt: Two little
pieces of the Holy Cross: More pieces of the Cross.
A certain bone of Saint James, the Brother of Saint John the Evangelist: Part
of that stone whereupon the Lord did eat after that he called his Disciples out
of the Ships.

Item, A piece of that Oak upon which Abraham did climb to see the Lord: A
portion of our Ladies Coffin: A large piece of that stone whereupon Christ
stood when he was transfigured: A piece of our Lords Sepulcher: A piece of that
Earth whereof God formed Adam: Certain Relics of the elven thousand Virgins
which lie at Collen: Also a bone of Saint Faith.

Saint John Baptist was not burnt but buried, Note.
as above; so that the fraud in this, as in all other cases, is plain. But that
they may have of the Earth of which Adam was made is no wonder, but a cheat in
them that would make it seem a wonder, for it was of the common dust.

In a white great Box. made of Wood, were these Relics contained.

Part of Christ's Sepulcher: Part of that place where he prayed unto his
Father: A piece of that Table whereat Christ our Lord supped: A piece of that
Earth where Christ's Cross was put down when he was Crucified: A piece of
Christ's Cradle: A piece of our Ladies Bed: Part of the Seat whereon the Mother
of our Lord sat in the day of her Purification.

Item, A bone of S. Jerome, Priest and Confessor, with part of his Stole and of
his other Garments: Also bones of the Innocents: Bones of S. Bartholomew the
Apostle, of S. Blase, Bishop and Martyr; of S. Clement, Pope and Martyr; of S.
Vincent, Martyr; of S. George, Martyr; of S. Maurice, Martyr; and of his
Fellows. A piece of the Leg of S. Damian, Martyr: The hones of S. Ignatius,
Martyr; of S. Gregory the Pope, and of S. Bennet the Abbot together. The Dust
of S. John Baptist, and part of his Hairy Coat, and of his other Garments. The
Hair of S. Elizabeth, the Wife of Zachary the Priest, and Mother of S. John
Baptist. A piece of the Gridiron whereon S. Laurence was roasted.

Item, More of the Cross yet.
A great piece of the Holy Cross: Part of S. Peter the Apostle's Beard, and
also of his Table: The bones of S. Hipolytus, Martyr; of S. Roman, Martyr; of
S. Martyn, with a piece of his Cloak. The bones of S. Silvester, Bishop and
Confessor: The Beard of S. Anthony: A bone of S. Paul the first Hermit: Part
of S. Julian's Head, with a piece of his Coat.

These things are so ridiculous, Note.
that none that is honest will pretend to have them, and none that is wise will
regard them.

In a great Horn of Ivory, hanging under the Beam beyond the High Altar, were
these Relics following contained.

The bones of S. Blase, of S. Stephen the first Martyr, of S. Bartholomew, of
S. Patrick, of S. Martyn, of S. Thomas the Apostle, of Saint Andrew the
Apostle, of S. Giles, of S. Serene, of S. Done, of S. Edburg, of S. Nicholas,
of S. Katherine, of S. Agnes, of S. Justus.

Item, The Hairs of S. Agasse, and of S. Cecile: A piece of the Rock whereupon
the Cross of our Lord stood: A piece of the Rock of Golgotha: And a piece of
our Lady's Sepulcher.

A little before the Cross stood in Earth, and now it was upon a Rock; Note.
but how can they have the bones of. S. Stephen? when the holy Text tells us,
Acts the 8. and ver. 2. that devout men carried Stephen and buried him, which
was 900 years before poplings began their Pageantry, and doubtless turned to
dust.

In a great Cross made of Wood at the Altar of S. Cross, etc. covered over with
Silver, and gilt, and set with diverse precious stones, with a Cross in the
midst, were these Relics following.

First, A Cross of Silver, and gilt, garnished with precious stones, having in
the midst of it a piece of the Holy Cross, More of the Cross yet.
with certain Relics of Thomas Becket. Secondly, A Finger of S. Andrew the
Apostle. Thirdly, A Bone of S. Stephen. Fourthly, A piece of S. Vulstan's
Flesh.
To pull the Saints thus in pieces, to show so many pieces of their flesh, is
to be more like Cannibals than Christians, Note.
and would make a tenderhearted Christian weep to think of such horrid
Cruelties.

In the first Coffin, over the Beam, were these Relics.

The Arm of S. Vulfade, Martyr: The Arm of S. Russinian, Martyr; and another
great bone of his back.

Item, A bone of the Head of S. Chad, Bishop and Confessor, with part of his
Clothes.

They tore the very back bones of them they call Saints in pieces, Note.
to make a show of to get money.

In the second Coffin were contained,

A piece of Christ's Cross, of his Crib and Sepulcher. More of the Cross yet.


Item, The bones of S. Calix, Pope and Martyr: The bones of Saint James the
Apostle, who is called the Brother of the Lord: The bones of S. Catharine,
Virgin and Martyr.

Lord, Note.
how many poor people did they pull Limb from Limb to get money by?

In the third Coffin were contained,

The Banner of Christ: A piece of Christ's Sepulcher: Certain Relics of our
Latly: The bones of S. Peter the Apostle, with the bones of S. Martyn, Bishop
and Confessor.

In how many places have they pretended to have the bones of Saint Peter. But
that they should have a piece of Christ's Sepulcher, which S. Matthew tells us
was hewn out of a Rock, c. 27. v. 60. is very unlike, but as Solomon says, the
simple, meaning ignorant and foolish people, believe every word, Prove. 14.15.
and such are they which go after Popish Priests.

Of the famed, or rather, infamous Indulgences, Pardons, and Privileges of
Rome.
FRom the beginning of the world unto the time that Rome was firstmade, were
3212 years. And from thence to the Nativity of our Lord Jesus Christ, were 750
years. And in this City of Rome there are 400 Churches, in which Mass is daily
done: but there be seven of the same privileged above all other with great
holiness and pardon, as is hereafter showed. And something else, or Rome is
fearfully belyed, even by her own Votaries; and therefore not too much Holiness
good Father Pope.
The first is St. Peter's Church, situate on the foot of an Hill, so that men
ascend thereunto by a stair of 29 steps. And as often as a man goes up and down
that stair, he is released of the 7th part of penance enjoined. This was
granted by Pope Alexander.

Item, as ye come before the Church a Well springs, and above the door is an
Image of our Lord, between whose Feet is one of the pence that God was sold
for: and as often as ye look upon that penny, The penny relic that God was sold
for.
ye have 1400 years of pardon.

Certainly, men that are in their wits would scarce give two pence for so much
pardon as the sight of this penny would or could produce; but I see they prefer
a penny before the blood of Christ.

Item, in the same Church, on the right side, is a Pillar that was sometime of
Solomon's Temple, Our Lords leaning Pillar and excellent cure for mad people;
but Bedlam has been more effectual
at which Pillar our Lord was wont to rest him when he preached to the people:
At which Pillar, if there be any mad, or troubled with spirits, they be
delivered and made whole. And in that Church be 11 Altars, and at every Altar
is 48 years of pardon and as many Lents or Kerries: And seven of the Altars are
privileged with great grace and pardon.

At the first Altar is the visage of our Lord: who looks upon that, has 700
years of pardon: Also the Spear that Christ was pierced with, brought from
Constautinople, sent from the great Turk to Pope Innocent the Eighth.

When I have nothing else to do I will visit these Altars, yet I think a man
may do as well to stay at home.

The second Altar is of St. Andrew, there ye have 500 years of pardon.

The third Altar is of St. Gregory, there ye have 400 year of pardon.

The 4th Altar is of our Lady, there is 700 years of pardon.

The 5th Altar is of St. Leo, there he received the absolution in his Mass from
Heaven: and there is 700 years of pardon.

The 6th Altar is of All Souls: and there is 500 years of pardon, and every
high Feast a Soul out of Purgatory.

The 7th Altar is of Simon and Jude: there is 600 years of pardon.

And before the door stand two iron Crosses; who kisseth those Crosses has 500
years of pardon.

Had not Christ proposed in his Gospel the way and method that God used in
pardoning the sins of mankind, the Pope would have deserved well at men's hands,
yet these pardons require so tedious a Journey, that it would ruin a poor
Papist to perform it: therefore my advice is, That he stay at home, and make
but use of Gods means for obtaining pardon, and I assure him he may have it an
easier rate; for God offers it without money, or without price, Isa. 55.1, 2.

Item, upon our Lady Day in Lent, hangs before the Quire a Cloth that our Lady
made her self, and it hangs still till our Lady Day Assumption. And as many
times as a man beholds that Cloth, he has 400 years of pardon.

Our Lady was admirably well employed, and so very many good works have been
done by her, that the Papists need do none themselves.

Also as many times as a man goes through the Crowds at St. Peter's Church, he
has 400 years of pardon.

Here the Pope of his great liberality, (we thank his Holiness for it,) crowds
a great deal of pardon upon his Votaries.

And as often as a man follows the Sacrament to the sick bodies, he has 1400
years of pardon.

I do not wonder now why Rogues and Whores were so Zealous to follow the
Sacrament, for here is a Jolly crop of pardon bestowed on them by good Mr. Pope.

Also Pope Sylvester granted to all them that daily go to the Church of St.
Peter, the third part of all his sins released, and all his Vows and Promises
released, and all his sins forgotten, released and forgiven, except laying
violent hand upon Father or Mother. And above this is granted 2800 years of
pardon, and the merits of as many Lents or Karins. (What a Karin is, ye shall
find in the end of this book.)

And in the Feast of St. Peter 1000 years of pardon, and as many Karins, and
the third part of penance enjoined, released. And from the Ascensionday of our
Lord, unto the Assumption of our Lady, ye have 1400 years of pardon, and as
many Karins, and forgiveness of the third part of all sins.

Who would converse with such Vermin, or stand bound to take their words; for
here is at the first dash a bonny release from all vows and promises. Certainly
men are not safe in such Conversation as may be ruined for such a
proinise-makers going to see a Church. Nay, it is the Opinion of the Jesuits,
if a man has but a Friend at Rome that will do it for him, it is all one:
therefore there can be no credit given either to their Promises or Vows.

And upon the one side of St. Peter's Church lies a Churchyard, But they must
part with the money that they have begged in their Journey.
and that is called Gods field, where none but poor pilgrims are buried, and it
is the Land that was bought with the 30 pence for which our Lord was sold. As
often as a man goes upon that ground, he has 15 years of pardon.

This, if the Pope lies not, would be an excellent motive to draw Pilgrims and
other persons to Rome; but lazy Protestants had rather stay at home.

In the old Latin Book we read concerning the Church of St. Peter, that there
are granted every day in the year to so many as devoutly come unto it, 48 years
of pardon, and as many Lents, with the forgiveness of the third part of all
sins.

Well, it is but the forgiveness of the third part of your sins; but the Pope
has an excellent Church, where all your sins shall be pardoned: go thither,
and let this alone till you are assured of your bargain, for before you get
home it will cost you dear.

Note also, That whenever the Feast of St. Peter comes, or the Feast of the
aforesaid Altars, or the Feast of the Nativity of our Lord, or of Easter, or
the Feast of All Saints, or any other double Feast, than all the aforesaid
Indulgences and Pardons are doubled. Also in the Feast of the Annunciation of
blessed Mary the Virgin, there are 1000 years of pardon. Again, from the
abovenamed Feast unto the Kalends of August, Come, here is your man Sir, no
less than 12000 years of pardon together, with a 3d part better and better yet,
give me this Church for my money.
there are 12000 years of pardon, and as many Lents, and the forgiveness of the
third part of all the sins.

Poor St. Peter, how has this abominable Harlot dressed thee up, I am sure
thou did teach the world other Doctrine; but this Pardon-monger has not told
us the price: I believe, if we go round the Church, we shall find the reckoning
dear before we come out.

Item, whosoever ascends or goes up the stairs of St. Peter devoutly, to him
are granted for every step seven years of pardon by Pope Alexander.

St. Peter's steps being well trod, and the example of his Master our Lord
Christ, will produce a better than Pope Alexander could ever give: but as for
the Stone steps in St. Peter's Church what pardon they procure, let Pope
Alexander inform you; but unless he gives better evidence than his own words,
we will give him leave to lie, and our selves the liberty of not giving credit
to what he says.

In the Church of St. Paul without the walls, ye have 47000 years of pardon.

Here is more pardon than many an honest man can tell what to do withal, or at
least, more than he will have occasion for.

Item, in the day of St. Paul's. Conversion, ye have a 100 years of pardon.

Item, on Childermas day 4000 years of pardon.

Item, in Vtas of St. Martin, when the Church was hallowed, 14000 years of
pardon, and as many Karins, and the third part of all sins released.

Moreover, he that visits the Church of St. Paul two Sundays, does as much as
though he went on pilgrimage to St. James, and come again.

In this Church also on the right hand of the Quire, is a devout Image of the
Cross, which spoke to St. Bridget, because she used to pray before it.

In the Church of St. Laurence without the walls, lie the bodies of Saint
Laurence, and of St. Stephen: and at the high Altar ye have 18000 years of
pardon, and as many Karins. And whosoever visits the other Altars, has at each
Altar 7000 years of pardon, and as many Karins. Also Pope Pelagius granted
there at four Feasts of the year, at each Feast 700 years of pardon, and as
many Karins. And he that goes thither every Wednesday in the year, delivers
a Soul out of Purgatory, and is himself quit of all his sins. Likewise the holy
Father Pope Calixt the third has granted to all men and women that devoutly
visit the aforesaid Church, full remission of all their sins. Also if any man
enter into the aforesaid Church by the door that is on the South Side, and so
goes from one Cross to another, devoutly praying, he shall have clean
remission of all his sins toties quoties.

In the Church of St. Cross, there is a Chamber or Chapel which Pope
Sylvester named Jerusalem, in which Chapel is that Bond wherewith Christ was
led to his Crucifying. Also two Sawcers, the one full of Jesus's blood, and the
other is full of our Ladies milk. Also the Sponge wherein was mingled Vinegar
and Gall. Item, one of the Nails wherewith Jesus was nailed to the Cross. Item,
a part of the block upon which St. John's head was smitten off. Item, two Arms,
the one of St. Peter, the other of St. Paul. Item, there stands a Chair in
which Pope Anicetus was martyred: And to all them that sit in the Church, they
gave an hundred thousand years of pardon, and as many Karins; and every Sunday
a Soul out of Purgatory, and the third part of all sins released.

Item, in the same Church is a great part of one of the Crosses that one of the
Thieves was put on that was crucified with Christ.

I believe this Cross grows in Spain, for there is a Jolly company of them; for
I have seen at least 40 or 50 of the Thieves Crosses, and all to be the Crosses
of the good or bad Thief, besides pretty gobbets of this Cross in their little
Pigeon-houses, or Hovels where Mass is said.

Item, In the same Church is the title of Christ, which Pilate wrote in Latin,
Hebrew and Greek, which title was found in the time of Pope Innocent, the
Eighth of that name, in the 7th year of his Reign: To which title the same Pope
has granted great pardon to be received of all them that either look upon the
title devoutly, or with reverence either hear it read, or else read it
themselves.

This Pope was very happy in this Find-all, I suppose it was one of his
Image-graving Angels that contributed this Worthy Relic to this Church.

And it is to be noted, that into that Chapel which is called Jerusalem, women
do not enter, but only one in the year, that is to say, on the Dedication day
of that Chapel, which is on the even of St. Bennett the Abbot, in the month of
March. At which time there is full remission of all sins, none excepted.

In the Church of St. Mary Major there stands on the high Altar, the head of
St. Jerome, and there ye have 14000 years of pardon, and as many Karins. And on
the other Altar on the right hand, there is the Cradle that Jesus lay in, part
of our Ladies milk, and a great part of the holy Cross, and many bodies of many
holy Saints. And there ye have 19000 years of pardon, and as many Karins. And
Pope Nicholas the 4th, and St. Gregory, each of them granted thereto 10000
years of pardon, and as many Karins. And from the ascension of our Lord unto
Christmas, ye have there daily 14000 years of pardon, and as many Karins, and
the 3d. part of all sins released.

Well, for my part I do believe a man may go to all the Cathedrals in England,
yea, and Parish-Churches, and not find so much pardon as the Pope is pleased to
confer on those that go to St. Mary Major.

Item, That on the even of the Ascension of our Lord, in which the Feast of the
translation of St. Jeroms body is celebrated, whose body rests there; Pope
Pius the second has granted to so many as devoutly visit in that Church the
Altar of St. Jerome, clean remission of all their sins toties quoties.

Item, On all the Feasts of blessed Mary the Virgin, there are 1000 years. Also
on the Feast of the Assumption of Mary the Virgin, to the Feast of her
Nativity, there are 12000 years of pardon, besides the daily Indulgences
aforenamed.

In the Church of St. Schastian without the Town, is a place that Pope Calixt
named Talundas, where an Angel appeared and spoke to St. Gregory the Pope. In
that place is forgiveness of all sins, and of all penance. At the high Altar is
granted 2800 years of pardon, and as many Karins. And he that comes to the
first Altar that stands in the Church, has 2400 years of pardon. And there
is a Cellar or Vault wherein lies buried 49 Popes that died all martyrs. Whosoever
comes first into that place, delivers eight Souls out of Purgatory, of such
as he most desires, and as much pardon thereto, as all the world cannot number
nor reckon: and every Sunday deliver a Soul out of Purgatory. And in that
Cellar stands a Well or Fountain, where the bodies of St. Peter and St. Paul
lay hid fot the space of 250 years, so that no man wist where they were become:
And whosoever puts his head into that Pit, Well, or Fountain, is clean of all
sins. Pope Gregory, Pope Sylvester, Pope Nicholas, Pope Pelagius and Honorius,
each of them granted to the same place, 1000 years of Pardon, and as many
Karins. And also there lie the bodies of diverse holy persons, which were too
long to write of. And so the grace that is at St. Sebastians, is so surely
grounded, that it cannot be taken away.

Here is all in all; what need we have any more than all our sins past,
present, and to come, forgiven us; ay, and Souls out of Purgatory too? here is
not only a bit for our selves, but our Friend may come in for a snack, we
heartily thank his Holiness.

Item, In this Church of St. Mary Major, before the Quire, is the Image of our
Lady, which St. Luke did paint: which Image St. Gregory did bear from St. Mary
Major to St. Peter's the Apostle, and so coming before the Castle of St. Angel,
he saw an Angel in the top of the Castle, having in his hands a mighty flame of
fire, and with him a great multitude of Angels, which sung before that image,
Regina caeli laetare, etc. And St. Gregory answered, Ora pro nobis Deum.
Allelujah.

I am not yet satisfied about St. Lukes Painting; for he did not come to the
Faith till she was aged, as will appear, if we consider the account the
Scripture gives of him, though small; and this Image that he is said to paint,
represents the Virgin Mary not to be above 12 years of age, and then I am
confident, that St. Luke never knew her: but his Holiness has said it,
therefore it shall pass, rather than I will foul my fingers to disprove it.

In the Lateran Church, Pope Sylvester gave thereto as many years of pardon as
it rained drops of water on the day that he hallowed the same Church. And at
that time it rained so sore, that no man had seen a greater rain before that
day. and when he had granted this pardon, he thought in himself whether he had
so much power or not; And a voice came from Heaven and said, Pope Sylvester,
Thou have power enough to give that pardon: And God has granted also thus much
thereto, that if a man had made a vow to Jerusalem, and could not do his
pilgrimage, if he go from St. Peter's Church to the Lateran Church, he shall be
discharged, and have Absolution of that promise.

And any time that a man comes to the Lateran Church, he is quit of all sins
and of all penance, so that he be penitent for his sins. O blessed is the
mother that bears the Child that hears Mass on Saturdaies at St. John of
Lateran, for he shall deliver all them that he desires out of Purgatory, to
the number of 77 Souls.

Item, Upon the Tower of the Church stands a double Cross made of the Sword
wherewith St. John was beheaded: And every time that a man beholds that
Cross, he has 13000 years of pardon, and as many Karins of all penance, and
innumerable pardon more than he needs for himself. Moreover, there is the
grave where St. John laid himself in when he said mass, and then came there a
great light over the grave, and when that light was gone, nothing was found
there but heavenly bread. Out of the grave comes every good Friday in the
night, holy Cream and Oil. And he that puts his head in that grave, has
100000 years of pardon, and as many Karins. Item, Behind the high Altar
stands a Chair wherein God himself fate, whosoever sits therein, has the
third part of all his sins released. And he that visits all the other Altars,
has at each Altar 4400 years of pardon, and as many Karins. And on one side of
the Church is a sacrifice at St. John Baptist's Altar. There is the Table that
our Lord did eat at upon Maunday-Thursday; also the Tables of Stone, with the
ten Commandments that our Lord gave to Moses upon Mount Sinai; and many other
Relics that belonged to our Lord of Heaven. There is also of the five Barley
Loaves, and two Fishes, wherewith Christ fed the people in the Wilderness. Also
certain of our Ladies Kerchiefes. Item, the heavenly Bread that was found in
Saint John's grave: In that offering you have release of all sins and penance.
Item, in the same Church on the high Altar, be the heads of St. Peter, and of
Zachary the Prophet, Father of St. John Baptist, with diverse other Relics.

Item, In the same Churchyard stands a Chapel that is called Sancta
Sanctorum, there is the face of our Lord. There may ye have 14000 years of
pardon, and as many Karins. When the Emperor Constantinus was Christened, he
spoke to Pope Sylvester, saying, In that I have given my house to the Worship
of God, grant you meekly his Grace to all that willingly come to this Town. To
whom Pope Sylvester answered, Our Lord Jesus Christ, that by his great mercy
has purged you of your great Lazary, purge all their penance. He that will not
believe this, may go to Rome, unto the Lateran Church, and there before the
Quire door may he see graven in a Marble-stone, all that is written here. From
St. John's day unto Shrovetide all this pardon is doubled; and from shrovetide
unto Easter the pardon is threefold doubled: and blessed is he that may deserve
to have this pardon.

But this we must note by the way, that the Chapel abovesaid is of so great
Grace and Holiness, that no woman may come therein. Item, above the Chapel on
the left side, are steps which sometimes were at Jerusalem. Whosoever goes up the
steps on his knees, delivers one Soul out of Purgatory.

Pope Sylvester and Pope Gregory, who both consecrated and hallowed that
Church, have given and granted to all them that devoutly visit the Lateran
Church; such and so great, yea, and so many Indulgences and Pardons, as no man
is able to number them, but God alone, as blessed St. Boniface testifies,
saying, If men did know the Indulgences and Pardons of the Lateran Church, they
were so many and so great, that they should have no need to go to Jerusalem to
visit Christ's Sepulcher, nor yet unto St. James. That same Pope says again, If
any man comes unto our See of Lateran for devotion sake, or for prayer, or on
pilgrimage, he is absolved and delivered from all his sins. And further says,
If any man come unto the aforesaid See on the day of St. Savior, he is out of
hand dispatched of all his sins.

In the Feast of St. Savior, whose Image appeared visibly to all the people of
Rome when Pope Sylvester hallowed the aforesaid Church, where the People of
Rome were gathered together, there is remission of all sins. This Image of St.
Savior which at that time appeared visibly to all the people of the City,
remains yet at Rome in a certain wall, and it may duly be seen, and is of so
great virtue and power that it could not be burnt, although the Church in times
past have been twice burnt. Item, in the Chapel of St. John Baptist, into
which women may not enter under pain of Excommunication, is full remission of
all sins. Item, in the Chapel of St. Laurence, into which also women may not
enter under the like pain, (which Chapel is called Sancta Sanctorum) there is
also clean remission of all sins. And in the same Chapel is an Image of Christ
when he was 12 years old, and it is very nobly and cunningly made and set
forth. And about the same there are certain Stairs, upon which our Lord Jesus
Christ fell, even unto the shedding of his blood, and the sign, token or mark,
now evidently appears where the blood fell; which Stairs stood before Pilates
house in Jerusalem. And whosoever goes up these Stairs, he shall have for every
Stair nine years of pardon, and as many Lents, and forgiveness of the third
part of all his sins.

Item, in the Church of St. Eustace ye may have release and pardon of all sin.
And he that is shriven, and repents of his sin, has a 1000 years of pardon,
and as many Karins.

Here follows the knowledge of what a Karin is.
A Karin is to go Wolward and barefoot seven year, and to fast with bread and
water that Friday, seven year. Item, In seven years not to sleep one night
where he sleeps another. Item, In 7 years not to come under no covered place,
except it be to hear Mass in the Church-door or Porch. Item, In 7 years not to
eat or drink out of any Vessel, but in the same that he made his avow in.

He that fulfilleth all these points seven years successively, does and wins
a Karin or Lenton.

Thus may a man have at Rome great pardon and Soul-health. Blessed be those
people, and in good time are they born, that receive these Graces and well keep
them. Of which pardon and grace, our Lord Jesus grant to every good Christian
man.

Here follows the Indulgences granted to other lower Churches in Rome.
IN Rome there is a Church of St. Peter ad vincula, which Pope Pelagius did
Consecrate and Hallow. To this Church the aforesaid Pope Pelagius granted to
remission of all sins the first day of August, by the prayer of the Son of
Theodorus the Emperor, who brought the Chain from Jerusalem, wherewith Peter
the Apostle was bound.

In the Church of St. Vitus, Modestus, Crescentia, Marcellus, and others, to
the number of 5000 martyrs, whose bodies were slain in the same place in the
time of Antoninus the Emperor, is granted 100 years of pardon, and as many
Karins, and forgiveness of the 4th part of all sins. In this Church also is a
Vault, wherein lies the body of Sylvester the Pope, to which is granted 800
years of pardon, and as many Karins, and remission of the third part of all
sins.

The old Latin Book says, that the Indulgences and Pardons that belong to this
aforesaid Church, are 7000 years, and as many Lents. And that in that Church
there is such grace through the merits of the holy Martyrs Vitus and Modestus,
etc. that whosoever is hurt of any mad dog, etc. or of any other noisome beast,
and dippeth his bread in the Oil of St. Vitus, and eats it, he is presently
made whole.

In the Church of all the Apostles, is every day a year of pardon; and every
Feast of one of the Apostles, 300 years of pardon.

In the Church entitled, Quatuor Coronatorum, is 40 years of pardon.

In the Church of St. Julian, is a 100 years of pardon. In this Church is a
certain kind of holy water, very medicinable, and easily cures all kind of
Diseases, but especially Agues, be they never so fervent, sharp, and hot:
Provided always, that they which are diseased, and come to take this blessed
and holy water, be fasting, and say three Pater Nosters, and as many Ave
Mary's, in the Worship of Almighty God, and of the glorious Virgin Mary, and of
the sweet Saints Julian and Albert: Or else, either say Mass, or cause it to be
said, in the honor of the aforenamed St. Albert.

In the Church of St. Foelix is 1000 years of pardon.

In the Church of St. Visy is 100 years of pardon.

In the Church of St. Peter and St. Marcellin is 1000 years of pardon.
Moreover, Pope Alexander, who consecrated and hallowed this Church, granted
unto it from the day of the Consecration unto the Vtas every year, 3 years of
pardon, and as many Lents. And after that, he removed the said pardon from that
time, unto the Monday after the second Sunday of Lent, and added the pardon of
one year, and forty days.

In the Church of Marcell is 1000 years of pardon.

In the Church of St. Cire and Joannes, is the remission of the fourth part of
all sins.

In the Church of St. John and St. Paul is 1000 years of pardon.

In the Church of St. Eustace, where his own and his Wifes body lies, with
their two Sons, is 1000 years of pardon.

In the Church of St. Bartholomew, where his body lies, and the body of St.
Pauline, is 1000 years of pardon.

In the Church of St. Gregory is 300 years of pardon; and in the same Church
whosoever be buried, he shall never be damned. This Church, which before was
dedicated (says the old Latin book,) to St. Andrew the Apostle, St. Gregory
did hallow, and endowed the same with great and singular privileges. And after
he had finished the Consecration of the said Temple, he kneeled down, and most
humbly prostrated himself before the Majesty of God, and prayed on this manner,
saying, O Lord Jesus Christ, the Son of the living God, which said to thine
Apostles, and by thine Apostles, to all faithful Christians, Whatsoever ye
shall ask the Father in my name, he shall give it you: I desire of the
Omnipotency and Almightiness of thy Majesty, that whosoever for ever after
shall choose his burial in this Church, or Churchyard, so that he hold the
Christian faith, may never be adjudged to the pains of Everlasting damnation,
but be exalted to the joys of Everlasting life. When he had thus prayed, the
Angel of the Lord appeared unto him, saying, O Gregory, thy prayer is heard.

In the Church of St. Augustine is 1000 years of pardon.

In this Church is the chiefest Image of our Lord that ever St. Luke painted;
which Image he always carried with him whithersoever he went. And it was found
in the Grave of St. Luke, about his head. And this Image is called, Sancta
Maria Virgo Virginum, and matter omnium; that is, Saint Mary Virgin of Virgins,
and Mother of all. This Image, throughout all the City of Rome did excel; and
was very famous in working of Miracles in the time of Pope Innocent the 8th, in
the year of our Lord Jesus Christ, 1485.

In the Church of St. Jerome is 1000 years of pardon.

In the Church of St. Alexius, where his body lies, is 2000 years of pardon.
In this Church, says the old Latin Book, are every day in the year 100 years
of pardon, and as many Lents. In this Church also is a worthy Image of our
Lady, which sometime was in a Church of the aforesaid Lady, at a certain City
called Edesia, where blessed Alevius being a Pilgrim, was, and greatly desired
to come and pray before it, and he could not be suffered. In consideration
whereof, the most blessed Image miraculously spoke twice to the Keeper of the
Church, and said, Let Alexius the man of God come in, who sits without at
the door; and is worthy of the Kingdom of Heaven.

In the Church of Salvator is 1100 years of pardon, and 40 days.

In the Chapel of 3 Wells, where St. Paul was beheaded, is 1000 years of
pardon, and as many Karins, and the third part of all sins released.

In the Church of St. Salvator, in the way to St. Paul's, is an hundred years of
pardon.

In the Church of St. Sylvester is 1000 years of pardon; and there is the head
of St. John Baptist.

In the Church of St. Jacob is 1000 years of pardon, and the third part of all
sins released: and there is the head of St. James the Apostle.

In the Church of St. Nicholas is 100 years of pardon.

In the Church of St. Nicholas is 100 year of pardon, and as many Lents.

In the Hospital of St. Spirit is 700 years of pardon, and the seventh part of
all sins released. Pope Sixtus the fourth granted to all and singular persons
that enter into the said Hospital of St. Spirit, and become a Brother or Sister
of the same Fraternity, that they may choose where they will a meet Confessor,
or Ghostly Father, to absolve them from all their sins, yea, and also once in
their lifetime, and again at the hour of death, to Absolve them from the Cases
reserved to the Apostolic See; as it is most fully contained in a certain Bull
made upon the same matter. In this Hospital is the Arm of St. Andrew, and the
Finger of St. Katherin.

In the Church of St. Michaelis is 1000 years of pardon.

In the Church of St. Matthew is 200 years of pardon: and there is his Arm, and
the Arm of St. Christopher. The old Latin book says, that there is in this
Church 1000 years of pardon, and as many Lents, and the forgiveness of the
seventh part of all sins, given, granted, and confirmed by Pope Honorius, Pope
Alexander, and Pope Innocentius.

In the Church of St. Celore is 100 years of pardon: and there is the finger of
St. Nicholas the Bishop, and the foot of Mary Magdalen.

In the Church of St. Simplician and Faustinus is 5000 years of pardon.

In the Church of St. Anastasius in the way to St. Paul's, is 1000 years of
pardon. In this Church is the Pillar whereupon blessed St. Paul the Apostle was
beheaded.

In the Church of St. Thomas is 1000 years of pardon.

In the Church of St. John Portlatin is one Soul delivered out of Purgatory;
with many Indulgences and Pardons.

In the Church of St. Christopher is 100 years of pardon.

In the Church of St. Apollinaris is 100 years of pardon.

In the Church of St. Bennet is 100 years of pardon.

In the Church of St. Andrew is a 1000 years of pardon: And in this Church
there are very many Relics which were found in the ground, and lay hid there
in a Basin and Glass more than 200 years, as it appears by the writing that
was found with the Relics.

In the Church of Cosine and Damiane is 1000 years of pardon: Whosoever
visits this Church, has 1000 years of pardon granted by Pope Gregory the
first, toties quoties.

In the Church of St. Simon and Jude is 1000 years of pardon.

In the Chapel that is called Domine quo vadis, be the steps of the Feet of
our Lord Jesus Christ, and there is 1000 years of pardon. In this place, when
the Angel of God delivered Peter from the hand of Nero, our Savior Christ met
with him, to whom Peter said, Lord whither go thou? and he answered, I go to
Rome to be crucified again.

In the Church of St. John is 1000 years of pardon.

In the Church of St. James the Apostle is 2000 years of pardon.

And Pope Innocent the Eighth has granted full remission of all sins to all
and singular persons that devoutly visit the aforesaid Church, in the Feast of
the aforenamed Apostle, with this Proviso, That they hear Mattens, Masses, and
Even-song, in the aforesaid Church.

In the Church of St. Bernard is 300 years of pardon.

In the Church of St. Luke is 1000 years of pardon.

In the Church of St. Mark is 1000 years of pardon. This Church Pope Paul the
second endowed with many privileges, and very great Indulgences, insomuch,
that all and singular persons that visit the same Church in the Octaves of the
most holy body of our Lord Jesus Christ, or at the Feast of the Epiphany of
Christ, or else give somewhat to the beautifying and enriching of the said
Church, shall have manifold indulgence and pardon, with full remission of all
their sins.

In the Church of St. Panthaleon is 48 years of pardon.

In the Church of St. Pancras is 100 years of pardon.

Of certain Churches in Rome dedicated to our Lady.
IN the Church of our Lady called Rotunda, is every Friday in the year, and in
the Feast of All-hollows, clean and perfect remission of all sins. This Church
was edified by one called Agrippa, in the Worship of Sibilla, Venus, and
Neptunus, and of all other Gods and Goddesses, and was called Pantheon: But
afterward at the desire of the Pope Boniface, it was granted by the Emperor to
be made a Temple of the Christians, so that the asoresaid Pope, with a great
multitude of the Romans, did dedicate the same the first of the Kalends of
November, in the Worship of our Lady, and of all Saints. He has also made
there an Altar, and said Mass there himself, and ministered the Sacrament to the
people, and on the morrow after, he said Mass in the same place for all Souls
past. He granted also great Indulgence and Pardon to all that devoutly visit
this Church, and meekly, kneeling upon their knees, say a Pater Noster, and an
Ave, in the Worship of our Lady, and all Saints.

In the Church of our Lady Trans Tiberim, where a Well of Oil plentifully
flowed by the space of one whole day, and one whole night, when Christ was born
of the Virgin Mary, is 700 years of pardon in the Feast of the Nativity of our
Lady, granted by Pope Calixt; and in Lent 400 years of pardon, granted by Pope
Gregory the third.

Item, In the same Church are the steps of Odraphin, printed in Stone, which
was found upon the Castle of St. Angel.

In the same Church also is one of the five Images of our Lady, which St. Luke
did paint.

In the Church of our Lady, called Ara Coeli, is 3000 years of pardon, and as
many Lents. This Church was sometime the Palace of Octavianus the Emperor, who
saw in his Vision, a fair Virgin in Heaven, standing upon an Altar, holding a
goodly Child in her Arms: At which sight he marvailed greatly, and afterward
heard a Voice from Heaven, saying, Haec ara Coeli filij Dei est. And he fell to
the ground, and worshipped Christ, and believed in his coming. This Vision he
had in his Chamber, where now the Church of St. Mary, called Ara Coeli, is.

Under this Church is a Prison where St. Peter was imprisoned, where is now a
fair Chapel, in which is a Pit, wherein St. Peter did baptize many Martyrs.
And St. Peter was led out of that Prison by the Angel; and there is great and
mighty pardon.

In this Church also is one of the Images of our Lady, which St. Luke painted.
This Image was made after the same form and manner that our Lady stood at the
Cross of our Lord Jesus Christ, mourning, weeping and lamenting. This Image is
of great virtue, and works daily many miracles, as ye may see in a certain
Table that hangs by the aforesaid Image.

In the Church of St. Mary the New is 1000 years of pardon; and in Lent 200
years.

In this Church also is an Image of our Lady which St. Luke painted in Troas of
Greece. This Image an Angel brought from the Frangapanes unto Rome, into the
said Church; which Church being burnt in the time of Pope Honorius the third,
this Image stood, and was nothing hurt.

St. Luke had two strings to his bow, Physic and Painting; Gods word speaks
the former, but as for the latter, we have none but Mr. Pope's word for it: and
let the Papists believe him if they will, Protestants are so saucy as not to
believe him.

In the Church of St. Mary Transpontin, in which are the two Pillars unto which
the blessed Apostles, St. Peter and St. Paul were bound when they were
scourged, is 300 year of pardon.

In the Church called Sancta Maria de Campo, is 40 years of pardon.

In the Church of St Mary in Porticum, is 200 years of pardon.

In this Church is a certain precious stone called a Saphir, wherein (as they
write) is graven by the hands of the holy Angels, the Image of Christ, and of
our Lady, and was delivered miraculously from Heaven, to a certain Nobleman,
called Galla. And to this Stone also is granted great Pardon.

I never knew the Angels to be Gravers before; and it seems they kept their
Graving-shop in Heaven: but are not their Tools with which they Graved these
Images, to be seen also. Certainly they would be excellent Relics, and would
give a little credit to this incredible story.

In the Church of our Lady De aqua Salina is 1000 years of pardon, and in the
day of the Consecration of the same, is remission of all sins.

In the Church of our Lady De Apostolis is 200 years of pardon.

In the Church of St. Mary, called, Schola Graeca, is 100 years of pardon.

In the Church of our Lady, called Scala Coeli, is also great pardon.

This is one of the first Temples that was built in the world unto the honor
of the blessed Virgin Mary. It is called Scala Coeli, This Church is of great
height where St. Bernard saw this sight.
because in it blessed St. Bernard deserved to see a Ladder which reached up to
the very Heavens. In this Church whosoever says Mass, or cause it to be said
for the the Souls that are in Purgatory, the aforesaid Souls are delivered out
of hand, But the misery is, no Masses can be gotten without money.
through the virtue of the Mass, and the Merits of the blessed Virgin:
Moreover, whatsoever thing is devoutly asked in that place, it is straightway,
without all doubt, obtained. And there is great abundance of pardon, a poena
and culpa toties quoties.

In the Church of St. Mary, called Imperatrix, is great Indulgence, and
manifold pardon, even to the number of 6000 years. In this Church is an Image
of the blessed Virgin, which spoke to St. Coelestine the Pope, saying, Why do
not thou pray unto me more often; seeing that when thou go by my Image, thou
clost always salute and reverence it. St. Coelestine hearing this voice, fell
down upon his knees and prayed, and desired before that Image forgiveness. And
more, this holy Father has granted to them that kneel before this Image, and
say with a good intent, three Pater Nosters, and as many Ave Mary's, 15 years
of pardon, toties quoties.

In the Church of our Lady, called, Libera nos a poenis inferni, i.e. Deliver
us from the pains of Hell, is great plenty of pardon. St. Sylvester, Bishop of
Rome, who delivered Constantine the Emperor from his Leprosy, and afterward
baptized him, Consecrated and hallowed this place, which being the Chapel of
the blessed Virgin, is called, Libera nos a poenis inferni. He has also
granted to all and singular persons that devoutly come unto that place, and
give somewhat to the maintenance thereof, 11000 years of pardon, toties quoties.

In the Church of our Lady De Consolatione, is an Image of the blessed Virgin
which has wrought many Miracles; and there is in the same Church full
remission of all sins on the second Sunday of the month of June, from the first
Even-song unto the last, granted by Pope Sixtus the fourth.

In the Church of our Lady, entitled, Maria inviolata, is the Oratory in which
blessed Luke painted four Images of the glorious Virgin. One of these Images he
made after such sort, as he himself knew and saw the blessed Virgin; and
therefore he painted, and set her forth with a Ring on her finger: which Image
remains at this present day in the aforesaid Oratory. And forasmuch as the
blessed Virgin does work many miracles in the said Image, therefore is there
great resort of People unto the said Image, which receive there great help and
comfort, great indulgence and pardon, and are replenished with many Graces, and
singular Benefits.

In the Church of our Lady De populo, is great Indulgence and Pardon: For Pope
Pascalis has given and granted to all that devoutly visit this Church at the
Feast of the Dedication of the same, and bring somewhat for the maintenance of
the said Church, from the Friday after the third Sunday of Lent unto the
Octaves of Easter, for every day 1000 years of pardon, and as many Lents. Pope
Sixtus the fourth also has endowed this Church with marvailous, and many great
Indulgences, insomuch, that all and singular persons that of a good mind come
and visit this Church at the Feasts of the Nativity, Purification,
Annunciation, Visitation and Assumption of Mary the Virgin, or at any one of
them, shall have for every time full remission of all their sins.

Here follow certain other Churches, with their Indulgences and Pardons.
IN the Church of St. Agnes is every day 48 years of pardon; and in the Feast
of the same Saint, 200 years of pardon.

In the Church of St. Susan is 300 years of pardon.

In the Church of St. Tabine, the Wife of St. Alexius, is 2000 years of pardon,
and as many Karins.

In the Church of St. Praxed is remission of the fourth part of all sins: and
in the same Church is the Pillar that Christ was bound unto when he was
scourged. The old Latin book says, that in the aforesaid Church there is daily
12000 years of pardon, and as many Lents, and the forgiveness of the third part
of all sins.

In this Church also is an Altar, upon which Pope Pascalis sung 5 Masses for a
certain Soul departed: which 5 Masses being once ended, he saw with his
corporal eyes, the blessed Virgin Mary to fetch the Soul out of Purgatory, and
to carry it into the bosom of Almighty God, as ye may see it painted upon the
wall of the aforesaid Church: In consideration whereof, the aforesaid Pope
Pascalis by his Apostolic Authority, has given and granted to so many, as
either say Mass themselves, or cause Mass to be said in the aforenamed Church,
power to deliver one Soul out of Purgatory, toties quoties.

In the Church of St. Katharine is 200 years of Pardon.
In the Church of St. Felix is 40 years of Pardon.
In the Church of St. Barbara is 100 years of Pardon.
In the Church of St. Lucy is 100 years of Pardon, and as many Lents, and the
third part of all Sins forgiven.
In the Church of St. Elizabeth is 100 years of Pardon.
In the Church of St. Pernil is 1000 years of Pardon.
In the Church of St. Mary Magdalen is 100 years of Pardon, and as many Karins.
In the Church of St. Clare is 100 years of Pardon.
In the Church of St. Vinnian is 3000 years of Pardon, and in Lent 5000 years
of Pardon.
In the Church of St. Agatha is 28 years of Pardon.
In the Church of St. Margaret is 200 years of Pardon.
In the Church of St. Christine is 40 years of Pardon.
In the Church of St. Clement is 40 years of Pardon, and as many Lents, yea,
and forgiveness of all sins at the Feast aforesaid. And in Lent all these
Indulgences and Pardons are doubled; granted of special grace by Pope Gelasius,
to so many as devoutly visit the aforesaid Church, or give ought thereunto.
Also Pope Alexander the Third by his Apostolic authority has granted this
privilege, That so many as with good devotion come to pray in the aforesaid
Church, shall have the third part of all their sins forgiven.

In the Church of blessed St. Peter the Apostle, ad carceres, is granted of
diverse Popes to them that of a good mind visit this Church, or help any thing
at all unto the maintenance of the same, Every day the forgiveness of the third
part of all their sins, and 200 years of Pardon. And it has pleased the most
holy Fathers of their special grace that this Indulgence and Pardon shall be
doubled on every Feast day.

In the Church of St. Bibian is great Indulgence and Pardon. For Pope Honorius
the Third has granted to so many as devoutly visit this Church, A great Pardon
on my word.
3 years of Pardon, and as many Lents toties quoties.

Again, at the Feast of all Saints there is Six hundred thousand years of
pardon. In this place also St. Bibian planted a certain Herb, which being dried
and made into Powder, is very profitable to deliver men from the
Falling Sickness.

This Saint was inclined to be a Physician; Was not he a Painter as well as St.
Luke? Well, this Herb certainly is a very precious Relic.

In the Church of St. Eusebius is granted to all them that Devoutly come unto
it, Who would let such a Church fall, but Heretics.
and put their helping hand to the maintenance thereof 7454 years of Pardon,
and as many Lents.

The Misery is, this Pardon is Chargeable, but the Ware is good, and therefore
let us not grudge to be bountiful

In the Church of St. Vitus is 7000 years of Pardon, and as many Lents. Let him
Eat a good Breakfast after it, he may chance to fill his belly.
There is also in the same Church such and so great grace through the merits of
the Holy Martyrs Vitus, Modestus, and Crescentia,; that if so be any man be
bitten with a Mad-dog, or any other Beast, and take a piece of Bread and dip it
in the Oil of St. Vitus, and so eat it, he shall strait-ways be made whole.

Excellent Cures by this Chemical Oil of St. Vitus. I suppose a good Plaster
will not do amiss; for the stone does well to be added to the Gospel. Which
Proverb was occasioned by a certain Man's meeting with a fierce Dog, upon whose
sight he fell a repeating the Gospel of St. John, Cap. 1.1. but the Dog making
up to him, he took up a Stone, and casting it at the surly Cur, made him
retreat; I see, says the poor Man, the Stone does well with the Gospel.

In the Church of St. Potentian is granted by Pope Simplicius to all and
singular Persons, that devoutly visit the said Church, one year of Pardon, and
one Lent, and the forgiveness of the third part of their sins. But Pope
Celestine, Pope Boniface, Pope Clement, Pope Gregory, Pope Urban, and Pope
Alexander, of their Godly zeal have doubled the aforesaid Pardon.

Who would not turn Papist at this rate? but why a third part of his Sins, but
some other Church must have a little privilege? By all which, I see the Pope is
an excellent Carver, if he please he shall be Carver to the King of Spain's
Foot-Boy's Cobler's Apprentice; for certainly he is a deserving Gentleman.

It is to be noted, that in this Church there is a Chapel behind the High
Altar, in which Chapel St. Peter (as they say) sung his first Mass: There is
also great Pardon.

I never understood that St. Peter sung Mass before, but a man may see that
Popery is the Fountain of knowledge, and being that St. Peter did grace this
Chapel, This is Chargeable, but any thing to go to Heaven.
it will follow that there must be a great Pardon belong to this Chapel, but
the Priests had rather have great stipend, or else there will be but small
store of Music.

And for a small Conclusion we shall Note, that all Indulgence of Rome is in
Lent doubled. Again in the way of his Pilgrimage unto Rome, he is truly
assoiled of all deadly sins and of all other, whatsoever they be: So that his
Soul is not only by this means free from the pains both of Hell and Purgatory,
but it is also straightway by the Ministry of the Holy Angels, carried up into
the glorious Palace of the Heavenly King. O blessed is that man or woman, that
is partaker of these Indulgencies and Pardons, for he may be sure to make a
blessed end, let his Life be never so Sinful.

This would be excellent Doctrine to preach to the Turks; as for Heretics,
they deserve not one tittle of this kindness, but it suits wonderful well with
the rest of the Pope's doctrine.

Here follow the Indulgencies and Pardons, which certain Popes have granted to
all such as devoutly say certain Prayers, which hereafter shall be named.
TO all them that be in the state of grace, that daily say devoutly this Prayer
before our blessed Lady of Pity, she will show them her blessed visage, Be sure
you get into this state of Grace, or else the fat is in the fire.
and warn them of the day and of the hour of death, and in their last end the
Angels of God shall yield their Souls to Heaven, and they shall obtain 500
years and so many Lents of Pardon, granted by our Holy Father Pope Bonifacius.
Obsecro te Domina Sancta Maria, etc.

Who says devoutly this short Prayer daily, shall not depart out of this World
without penance and ministration of the Holy Sacrament: the which was showed by
an Angel to St. Bernard. Ave Maria, Ancilla Sanctae Trinitatis, etc.

Our Holy Father Pope Sixtus, has granted to all them that devoutly say this
Prayer before the Image of our Lady and her Son 11000 years of Pardon. Ave
Sanctissima Maria, etc.

Our holy Father Pope Sixtus, has granted at the instance of the most High and
Excellent Princess Elizabeth, late Queen of England, and Wife to our Sovereign
Lord King Henry the Seventh, (God have mercy on her sweet Soul and all
Christian Souls) to all them that every day in the morning after 3 tollings of
the Ave Bell, say three times the whole salutation of our Lady, Ave Maria
gratia plena, that is to say, at six of the Clock in the Morning 3 Ave Mary's:
At 12 at Noon 3 Ave Mary's: and at six of the Clock at Evening: for every time
so doing, is granted of the Spiritual Treasure of the holy Church 300 days of
Pardon, toties quoties. And also our Holy Fathers the Archbishop of Canterbury,
and the Archbishop of York with other 9 Bishops of this Realm, have granted 3
times in the day 40 days of pardon, to all them that be in the state of Grace
able to receive pardon, the which begun the 26th day of March, Anno 1492, in
the seventh year of the Reign of King Henry the Seventh. And the sum of the
Indulgence and pardon, for every Ave Maria gratia plena, is 740 days, toties
quoties. Suscipe verbum Virgo Maria, etc.

This Prayer was showed to St. Bernard by the Messenger of God, saying, That as
Gold is most precious of all other Metal, so exceeds this Prayer all other
Prayers. And whosoever devoutly says it, shall have a singular reward of our
Blessed Lady, and of her sweet Son Jesus. Ave Maria, ancilla Trinitatis
humillima.

Our Holy Father Pope Bonifacius has granted to all them that devoutly say
this lamentable Contemplation of our Lady standing under the Cross, weeping and
having compassion on her sweet Son Jesus, 7 years of Pardon and 40 Lents. Also
Pope John the 22d. has granted 300 days of Pardon. Stabat matter dolorosa.

These be the 15 O's which the Holy Virgin St. Bridget was wont to say daily
before the Holy Rood in St. Paul's Church at Rome. Who so says them an whole
year, shall deliver 15 Souls out of Purgatory of his next Kindred, and convert
15 Sinners unto good life; and other 15 Righteous men of his Kindred shall
persevere in good life. And whatsoever he desires of God he shall have it, if
it be to the Salvation of his Soul.

To all them that before the Image of Christ scourged, devoutly say 5 Pater
Nosters, and 5 Ave Mary's, and a Creed, piteously beholding the Arms of
Christ's Passion, are granted 32755 years of Pardon. And Pope Sixtus of his
great clemency and fatherly goodness, has doubled this aforesaid Pardon. Adoro
te Domine, Jesu Christ.

This Epistle of our Savior, sent our Holy Father Pope Leo unto the Emperor
Carolus Magnus, of which we find written, That whosoever bears this Blessing
upon him and says it once a day, he shall obtain 40 years of Pardon, and 80
Lents; and he shall not perish with sudden death. Crux Christi sit mecum.

This Prayer made St. Augustine, affirming, That whosoever says it daily
kneeling, shall not die in Sin, but after this life he shall obtain everlasting
Joy and Bliss. Respice ad me, etc.

Our Holy Father Pope Bonifacius the Sixth has granted to all them that
devoutly say this Prayer following, between the elevation of our Lord and the
third Agnus Dei, 10000 years of Pardon. Domine Jesu Christ, qui hanc
sacratissimam carnem, etc.

Our Holy Father Pope John the 22d. has granted to all them that devoutly say
this Prayer after the elevation of our Lord Jesu Christ 3000 days of Pardon for
deadly Sins. Anima Christi sanctifica me, etc.

The same Pope has granted 100 days of Pardon to all them that say this Prayer
at the Elevation of our Lord Jesus Christ. Ave caro Christicara, etc.

Our Holy Father Innocentius Pope of Rome, has granted 7 years of Pardon to
all them that say this Prayer devoutly at the Elevation of our Lord in the
Mass. Salve lux Mundi, etc.

Our Holy Father Pope Sixtus the Fourth, has granted to all them that be in
the state of Grace, saying this Prayer following immediately after the
Elevation of the Body of our Lord, clean Remission of all their Sins
perpetually enduring. And also Pope John the 22d. at the request of the Queen
of England, has granted unto all them that devoutly say this Prayer before the
Image of our Lord Crucified; as many days of Pardon as there were wounds in the
Body of our Lord in the time of his bitter Passion, which were 5465. Precor te,
amantissime Domine Jesu Christ, etc.

This Prayer was showed to St. Augustine, by revelation of the Holy Ghost: and
whosoever devoutly says this Prayer, or hears it read, or bears it about him, he
shall not perish in Fire, nor Water, nor Battle, nor Judgment. And he shall dye
no sudden death, and no venom shall poison him that day. And whatsoever he
asks of God, he shall obtain it; if it be to the salvation of his Soul. And
whenever his Soul shall depart from his Body, it shall not enter into Hell.
Deus propitius esto mili peceatori, etc.

Our Holy Father Innocentiue the Third, has granted to all them that say this
Prayer following, devoutly, Remission of all their Sins confessed and contrite.
Domine Jesu Christ Fili Dei vivi, etc.

This Prayer following made the worshipful Saint Bede of the seven last words
which our Lord Jesus Christ spoke hanging on the Cross. Whosoever says this Prayer
devoutly kneeling, neither the Devil, nor wicked men shall hurt him. And he
shall not dye without Confession. Domine Jesu Christ, qui septem verba, etc.

These 5 Petitions and Prayers made St. Gregory, and has granted to all them
that devoutly say these 5 Prayers, with 5 Pater Nosters, and 5 Ave Mary's, and
5 Credo's, 500 years of Pardon. Ave manus dexter a Christi, etc.

This Prayer shall ye say in the worship of all the Blessed Members of Christ
devoutly. And ye shall have 300 days of pardon for every Salve. And there be 13
Salves. Salve tremendum, etc.

This Prayer is made by our Holy Father Pope John the 22d. and he has granted
to all them that devoutly say this Prayer, beholding the glorious Visage or
Vernacle of our Lord, ten thousand days of pardon. And they that cannot say
this Prayer, let them say 5 Pater Nesters, 5 Aves, and 5 Creeds; and they shall
have the like Pardon. Salve Sancta faeies, etc.

Another Oracle to the blessed Vernacle or Visage of our Lord Jesu Christ:
Whosoever says it devoutly, shall have 300 years of pardon granted by our Holy
Father Pope Innocentius. Ave facies praeclara, etc.

Whosoever devoutly beholds these Arms of our Lord Jesus Christ, shall obtain
6000 years of pardon granted by our Holy Father St. Peter, the first Bishop of
Rome, and by 30 other Popes of the Church of Rome's Successors after him. And
our Holy Father Pope John the 22d. has granted to all them that be very
contrite and truly confessed, saying this devout Prayer in the Commemoration of
the bitter Passion of our Lord Jesus Christ, 3000 years of pardon for deadly
Sins, and other 3000 for venial Sins; and say first a Pater Noster and one Ave
Maria. Diripuisti Domine, vincula mea.

Our Holy Father Pope Innocentius the Second, has granted to all them that say
this Prayer devoutly in the worship of the Wound that our Lord had in his
blessed Side, when he was dead, hanging on the Cross, 4000 days of pardon. Ave
vulnus lateris nostri, etc.

This most devout Prayer, said the Holy Father St. Bernardin the Gray Friar,
daily kneeling, in the worship of that most Holy Name Jesus. And it is well to
believe, that through the Invocation of that most excellent Name of Jesus, St.
Bernardin obtained a singular reward of perpetual Consolation of our Lord Jesus
Christ. And this Prayer is written in a Table that hangs at Rome, in St.
Peter's Church, near to the high Altar, where our Holy Father the Pope is wont
to say Mass. And whosoever devoutly with a contrite heart daily says this Orison,
if he be that day in the state of Eternal pain, it shall be changed into the
Temporal pain of Purgatory. And if he has deserved the pain of Purgatory, then
it shall be forgotten and forgiven through the infinite Mercy of God. Obone
Jesu, etc.

Pope Alexander has granted to all them that say this Prayer devoutly, in the
worship of St. Anne, and our Lady and her Son Jesus, 10000 years of pardon for
deadly Sins, and 20 years for venial Sins, toties quoties. Ave Maria, etc.

Bocatius says, That the hairs of that Angel of the Seraphical Order, which
came down from Heaven (as the Papists feign) unto filly simple St. Francis the
Grey-Friar, in the likeness of a young man, and printed in his Hands, Feet and
Heart, the signs and tokens of the five wounds of Christ; are kept in a certain
Monastery of Franciscan. Friars in Italy, as most Heavenly and Holy Relics.

In the same Monaftery also are diverse Relics of the aforesaid Francis,
namely his Night Coul, and his Breeches. These are highly reverenced, and had
in great price.

It seems the very Celestial Bodies must be abused by these Forgers of Lies:
Note.
here they pretend Angels to have Hairs, which is false, for Hair is an
Excrement, and Celestial Bodies have no Excrements; but it seems they spare
none: The Angels must have their Hair pulled off to accommodate their
Covetousness; But that this Angel should put the five wounds of Christ upon
silly Fanatic St. Francis, none but stark Fanatics will believe.

POSTSCRIPT.
ANd now, Good Reader, I have given thee an account of their monstrous
Merchandise, and horrid Cheats of the Church of Rome; discovering to thee their
feigned Relics.

Let me tell thee how happy a Nation thou live in, how God did bless the
Church of England, when he did discover the folly of all these wicked Crew of
Popelings, which with these Thousands of Cheats did pick the Peoples Pockets,
as they do at this day; and to my knowledge in other Nations.

And should the Pope and his Popelings prevail to introduce the Romish Religion
in England again, all these swarms of Fopperies will undoubtedly flow in upon
us again: Yea, the Traitor Colman's as well as the Traitor Tom Becket's Bones,
may hap become holy Relics. Therefore for the Honor of Christ, and for the
good of your own Souls, and the Souls of your poor Babes, and all Posterity, be
earnest with God by Prayers, and with your Children and Servants, and
Neighbors, by Counsel to prevent it, That that cloud of the darkness of Popery
may never overshadow this Nation any more. And let all Protestants, as good
Christians and Lovers of the Souls of their Posterity, join heart and hand
against it, that so our Kings and Nobles, and all our Governors and People may
never be subject to the Censures or Pretended Ecclesiastical Jurisdictions of
that abominable proud Pretender and Father of all Errors and Mischiefs, the
Pope of Rome.

And to that purpose, be faithful in Discovering all their Priests and Parties,
and Interests, and Designs, to the uttermost of your Skill.

And Encourage all sorts of Protestants whatsoever that fear God, honor the
King, and are willing to be subject to the Civil Magistrate, though Dissenting
from the rest of Christians in some small Matters and Indifferent things, and
so live together in Love and Neighbourly Friendship, as they of Rome may never
have hope again by our Divisions to Impose upon us their monstrous Heresies and
Phanaticisms; and living in Unity of Affection and Civil Peace, put the Pope
and all his Crew from all hopes of setting up their Trade of picking
Englishmens Pockets, by showing their feigned Relics, and pretended Pardons
and Indulgences. From which, that England may be ever free, is the Prayer of
him that is the Lover of the Protestant Interest, and of his King and Country,

Titus Oats.

FINIS.

