Orders, conceived and approved by the Committee for the Militia of the County
of Middlesex, without the Lines of Communication, Directing the several
Commanders and Officers, etc. in some particulars of consequence, for the
better Regulating of the Regiments to be Exercised and Trained for service and
defense of the said County, etc.
I. THat the Colonels give order to their Captains, to send the Clerks of each
Band unto the Church wardens, etc. of every Parish within their limits, to take
from thence a true copy of their Lists of able and fit bodies to bare Arms;
adding to each Name their qualities and professions, according to their
several descriptions on the said Parish-List of Resiants from Month to
Month, with the number of Arms subscribed and furnished by any of them for the
service of the County.

II. That the several Colonels, attended by the Captain and Clerk of each
Band, with some of the Committee Men of each quarter, do forthwith rectify and
order both the number and persons, to be Registered under the command of every
Captain.

III. That the Regiments and Companies be from time to time drawn forth and
Exercised, according to the Commissions of the Colonels and their Captains, in
readiness for command of higher Authority.

IV. That since the Constitution of the said Bands are in special
consideration for the defense of each others persons and estates within the
County, and not to be drawn out thereof, but upon reciprocal consideration
with other Counties, for the more general good, as may arise from the care and
judgment of higher powers and Authority, unto which all persons, and every
County must yield ready obedience. The said Colonels, Captains and Officers, in
their faithful care and diligent prosecution of their Martial Discipline,
shall nevertheless have regard, That the several listed Soldiers be from
time to time, rather helped (as far as may consist with their Martial duties)
then hindered in the due prosecution of their several Vocations, and
providence, for their livelyhoods and estates.

V. That as often as any one or more of the said Bands and Regiments, shall be
drawn forth for Exercise or Employment, within the County, the Committees of
every respective Division or Limit, shall have warning, and notice before hand,
of the times and places of Exercise or Employment, where they may be to
observe, the hopeful encouragement and duty of Officers and Soldiers.

VI. That on the days of Exercise, as well as at other occasional
opportunities, The Commanders and Officers shall inform, and inculcate amongst
the Soldiers, the happy consequence of their Constitution, whereby their
persons, estates, and goods, are in more security then in former times: And
that the Exercise or Discipline, adding confidence to their Courage, will breed
delight in their Employment, and by frequent conversation and joining in
affection to public good, will increase love and kindness between Neighbors,
pleasing to God, and delightful to all good men, or what else of this nature
may arise from their own conceptions, which may invite or draw on such a love
or liking to this Warlike, Manlike Exercise, as may hereafter exclude worse or
more impertinent expense of time.

VII. That whilst Soldiers are in the field, either Exercising or preparing
toward their Rendezvous, no one of them (nor any other) may presume to break,
or in any kind to interrupt the due Silence, in attending the words of
Command, as specially by any bold assertions of Exception, nor by any pretense
of Proposition, before leave obtained from the chief Commander on the place,
and that he be pleased to cause Silence proclaimed for that purpose (in case
the business will not attend another time:) But for those complaints which
they may otherwise possibly have cause to make, they must take other time and
place to address themselves to the next superior Officers. And in case of
hard hand, or slighting by them, their appeal lies fair and justly higher, as
to the Colonel or Deputy Lievtenants. The Committee Men being engaged (in
their trust) to assist the preferring of the same at the first fitting
opportunity, and the Secretary for the Regiment to solicit on the appealants
behalf, whilst in the mean time (as always) the said Committee Men are to
receive respect from Officers and Soldiers, equal with their Captains,
especially whenever they come to view or superintend the Musters or Exercise.

VIII. That the several Captains and Committee Men, within or near the Limits
of each Company, with the approbation of the Colonel, do select and place in
chief within their List, the prime men that serve with their own Arms, and
having also found others for their Neighbors. And in the next degree, those
that only find and wear their own Arms in the field: And next, those most
recommended for their good and faithful neighbourly condition: And lastly,
those that shall be any ways thought fit for the Service, of whom there may be
best hope of their due application.

IX. That however the prescription is, that only Householders should be Listed
on these Trained Bands (the Garrison of this County) yet it may be allowed,
that every Subscriber and Furnisher of more then two completed Arms, shall (if
he desire it) have his Meniall servant (or Retainer, for whom he will be
responsible, though no Householder) to serve with one or more Arms, above the
said number of two; which privilege is also allowed to the Colonels and
Captains for any, or the whole number of completed Arms they have provided, or
may subscribe and furnish: being expected, that such Menials or Retainers,
shall be persons of so fair carriage and demeanor, as may make them worthy of
being accounted Gentlemen of the Company.

X. That for the bettering of Conversation, and that good Example, which may be
contracted and drawn from the meetings at public Exercises, and to advance the
reproof and punishment of drunkards, swearers, and other persons of
disturbance. The Martial of each Company shall be assisted in the field, by
the Petty Constables or Headburroughs, who in number convenient, and of each
Captains Limits by turns, shall be summoned with the Soldiers, to attend the
days of Exercise, etc. as aforesaid, for the better Ordering of the
bystanders or lookers on: and shall attach the bodies of all drunkards and
swearers in sight, or hearing, or that shall be appeached duly, to be exposed
to such Justice, as by the Law of the Land is ordained. But if the offender be
a Listed Soldier, or Officer: The Martial shall cease him in Guard, till he
have received punishment or acquittall, at the discretion and direction of the
Captain or chief Commander in the field; which nevertheless, must not exempt
him from the Legal punishment due to all such offenders. And if the said
Captain or chief Commander in the field, find cause of further punishment on
any Officer or Soldiers, then determined before the Colors going off from the
field, the offender shall be charged by the Martial, into the custody of the
next Constable or Headburrough, to be carried with his accusation before the
next Justice of the Peace, to be proceeded against or acquitted, as in justice
may be requisite: But if the offense of any Officer or Soldier, be tending to
mutiny, or of that kind which may whol'y concern the Power, Command,
Obedience, and Diligence, in the Martial way. The offender shall still be
detained, to be delivered over within twenty four hours or less time, into the
custody of the chief Martial of the Regiment, who shall be answerable for his
forth coming at the appointment of the Deputy Lievtenants, Colonel, and
Committee for the Militia, to be proceeded withal in such manner, as may be
thought most expedient and just in the case. The Martials Fees, both of the
Regiments and Companies, to be appointed or allowed by the Colonels and
Captains, till farther direction in that particular.

XI. That whatsoever may further arise upon ordinary or emergent occasions,
either on the usual days of Exercise, or upon drawing out the Regiments to
the confines of the County, or farther from their Limits, is left to the
Colonels and their Captains, to be determined under the Rules of War, and
Martial Discipline.

XII. That as it may be presumed and so ordered, That no Licenced Victualler do
find less then one complete Arms toward the Service, for his part (valued
by, or in his recognizance:) So shall it belong to some of them, to be selected
by the Captain of each Limits, and authorized by Warrant under his hand and
Seal, as Sutler, or Provider, for necessary wholesome Bread, Drink, or other
convenient Victuals, to be uttered in the fields, principally to furnish those
Soldiers for their Moneys, who cannot without breach of duty, go from their
Colors. The said Sutlers or Providers, undertaking and contracting for the
wholesomenesse of their Victual, and to give Measure and Weight according to
the Law at reasonable Rates: And in default therein to abide the censure of the
Committee for the Militia. And if any others shall presume to vent and set to
sale, any kind of Victual whatsoever, without admission of and under the said
Sutler and Provider, who is undertaker in the Service, as aforesaid, He shall
be informed against by the Martial of the Company, unt^ the Committee of the
Militia, to be proceeded withal, as they shall conceive most expedient and
just.

XIII. Lastly, That considering the whole Constitution and Charge, proceeds
from the most general good affections and estates of the County, through t^^
providence of the Deputy Lievtenants, and Committee, selected and appointed by
Ordinance of Parliament. And since thereby the said County with the Lines,
etc. have had interest or reasonable satisfaction in the choice, or
recommendation of their Commanders and Officers amongst themselves: an^ whilst
all Levies, that shall be had for any allowance or provision of Pay or
Ammunition, a benefit still reverts on themselves with the general good; an^
that even the Trophies and Accomplishments of the said Commanders and Officers,
are defrayed by the County; whereby all and every one from the highest to the
lowest, have the more obligation to perform their parts of Service in faithful
Command and most due Obedience. Let no man grudge or stand upon vain
Punctilioes in any case, since in the most Christian generous occasions,
whosoever sets his hand or shoulder to the work affectionately as he ought. His
honor in proportion may be accounted as great, who moves regularly at the
lowest Wheel or Nick, as his that stands or works at the highest of all Motion
or Transaction for Public good: which may seem to conclude, That all Commands
in this way, are as of the whole Commit^^^ for the Militia, authorized by
Ordinance of Parliament: Wherein every man's unfaithfulness, disobedience, or
neglect, must be accounted in proporti^^ as against the State, and wished
happiness of the Kingdom.


