HEROD THE GREAT.

A TRAGEDY.

Written by the Right Honorable the EARL of ORRERY.

LONDON, Printed by T. Warren for F. Saunders at the Blue-Anchor in the
New-Exchange; T. Bennet at the Half Moon, and I. Knapton at the Crown in St.
Paul's Churchyard, 1694.

PROLOGUE TO HEROD the GREAT.
HOW various are the Humors of this Age!
Sermons at first were followed, then the Stage;
But that they neither are frequented now,
Is a variety we owe to you:
One would have thought Extremes which were so vast,
As pleased the Soul and Sense, might longer last.
Your Fathers other methods did pursue,
Yet some Fops swear they were as wise as you:
They left not Stage nor Pulpit in the lurch;
Weekdays they went to Plays, Sundays to Church:
And judged the Muses gracious did appear,
Presenting them one new Play every Year.
But without daily new ones you are cloyed,
And slight Plays seem as Mistresses enjoyed.
For we must say -- we'll give the Devil his due,
In Wit, as Love, you daily gape for new.
Rare Scenes like Opera's, nay She-Actors too,
Though they less often Act with us, than you;
Whereby -- will none here blush when it is said,
Some with great Bellies Virgin's parts have played?
Yet a good Play once acted, you're so nice,
You Will go to Church as soon as see it twice.
God's Death, Gentlemen, this usage we'll not bear,
You are not better than your Fathers were;
And if we are not as well used by you,
We'll shut up House, nay worse, our Women too.
Then with Street Cruzors you must have to do,
Amongst which, you will sometimes board a Fireship too.
When thus in your Chief Pleasures you are crossed,
You Will value us, like Health, most when it is lost.
Dramatis Personae.
HErod, The King. Antipater, His Son by a former Wife. Pheroras, Herod' s
Brother. Sohemus, Formerly in Love with Solome. Phaltiel, Friends to Antipater.
Samias, Haziel, Pollio, Abner, Confident to Herod. Annanecles, The High Priest.
Asdrubal, Captain of the Arabian Guards.
WOMEN.
Mariamna, The Queen. Solome, Sister to Herod, in Love with Sohemus, but
Married to Cossobanes. Tamer, and Women to the Queen. Dina, Mariana, Confident
to the Queen. Merab, Woman to Solome.
The Ghosts of Hircanus, and Aristobulus, Pages, Priests, Guards, Gentlemen,
and Attendants.

Herod the Great.
The First ACT.
The first Scene is an Obscure Grotta.
Phaltiel and Samias enter hastily, Antipater comes out to meet them. Phalt.
THrough all Jerusalem they have spread the News,
Which is received in Raptured by the Jews,
That Faithless People in their looks display,
How much their hearts longed for this fatal Day.

Sam. When Herod to the Isle of Rhodes did go;
We all foresaw 'twould prove his Overthrow.
Caesar the Friend of Anthony must hate,
And make Revenge an Interest of State.

Phalt. How natural was it for a Prince to frown,
When but by doing it, he gained a Crown?

Ant. But Honor should have made Octavius Just,
Seizing my Father, he deceived his Trust.

Sam. Caesar will judge that Imputation weak,
Since Herod his Safe Conduct did not seek*

Ant. Yet all the World must this black deed upbraid,
The noblest trusts are without Bargain made;
The height of Honor Herod's Ruin was,
Trusting his Virtue, he contemned his pass.
[To them Hazael hastily.
Haz. The Sanhedrim are now resolved to meet,
To lay the Crown at Mariamne's Feet:
For she, in highest Virtue first does shine,
And is the last of the Asmone Line.
Sir, You should instantly our self declare,
Ere they, beyond Retreat, engage are.
[To them Pollio hastily.
Poll. Ten of the Priests are from the Temple come,
Who told the People in the Hippodrome,
That as last night, their Sacred Watch they kept,
They heard in Tombs, where Kings, and Highpriests slept,
Noises, much like to dying Warriors Groans:
Then saw great drop, spring from those polished Stones;
Which seemed to weep, that so much precious Dust,
Ere the last day, was Ravished from their Trust.

Phalt. O Heavens what may this Prodigy portend.

Poll. Restrain your Wonder till you hear the End:
The Grief, which did those Tears from Marble draw,
So Powerful was, it did the Marble thaw.
Then from the gaping Tombs there did appear!
All those who Israel's Sacred Crown did wear:
From Saul till fatal Zedechiah's days,
The bad Kings Crowned with Flames; the Good with Bays.
Every one smote his Breast, and shook his Head,
The trembling Priests with fear were almost dead.

Sam. Sure dismal Changes in this Place must fall,
Since Heaven out of their Graves theDead does Call.

Poll. But that which most of all increased their fears,
Were direful Noises which did wound their Ears.
Then Troops of Furies did the Priest surround,
And danced with Impious Feet on Sacred ground.
Each Fiend in Course the Dances leading takes,
And when they changed, all cracked their Whips of Snakes.
The Priests were then yielding to their despair,
When all the Furies did resolve to Air;
At which the Temples vast Foundation shook,
And three times, Woe, by all the Ghosts was spoke;
The Tombs did then with have their Dead enclose,
When straight Aurora pale, and trembling rose,
As if she seemed concerned and in a fright,
At the dire Visions of the vanished Night:
Nor has the Temple only haunted been,
Strange sights have too been in the Palace seen;
But yet the Queen her Courage has not lost,
Though her slain Brother, and Hircanus's Ghost,
Have to the Arabian Guards appeared to Night.
Nor does it Mariamne seem to fright;
Though both the Ghosts did bid them tell their Queen
In the black Hall, this Night they should be seen:
For she, to evidence she knows no fear,
Boldly declared, she would expect them there.

Ant. These are strange things! But the event must tell,
If these Presages come from Heaven, or Hell.
Lest in that Dread these Visions have begun,
The giddy People to extremes should run;
You to the Hippodrome again must go,
And let me hourly, all that passes, know.
Phaltiel and Samias here with me shall stay,

Haz. You must resolve, and act without delay.

Poll. Good Fortune rarely visits him who mourns;
But when she does, if slighted, never returns.
[Pollio and Hazael go out.
Phalt. Sir, you must now your Father's Army lead,
And by their Swords the Crown fix on your Head.

Ant. O no, my Phaltiel! why should I pursue
Gaining that Crown, which to the Queen is due:
'Twere Sin if I her double Right withstood,
It Is Hers by merit, and it is Hers by Blood.

Phalt. Since you Her Right above your own prefer,
First take the Crown, and then present it Her.

Ant. Giving a Crown which I that way shall win,
To pay a Duty, I must act a Sin;
But if the Crown I from her Love receive,
To the great Gift, 'twill double Luster give.

Sam. O, Sir, that guilty hope you should suppress,
The Queen can never make your happiness:
Her Virtue should in you all thoughts remove,
Ere to possess her by Incestnous Love:
And 'twould eclipse the Glories of your Life,
Should you attempt to wed your Father's Wife.

Ant. My Father's Wife! Witness ye Powers above,
She was first mine, by Sacred Vows, and Love.
But as the Priest our willing hands did ty,
Herod from me forced her by Tyranny;
For which my Sword I did against him draw,
He broke Our Match, and then I broke his Law.

Phal. No one can say but he in that did ill,
Yet, Sir, Forget not, he is your Father still.

Sam. And to that Sacred Name a Debt is due.

Ant. And to offended Love there is so too.
All that I owed, he to himself did pay,
That Life he gave, he more than took away.
These guilty Tears which from my Eyes would flow,
Too little Love, and too good nature show.
[Wiping his Eyes.
Phalt. Blame not that Piety which makes you mourn;
Consider, Sir, your Father may return.

Ant. That thought in your belief should find no room,
A Prince's Prison's Prologue to his Tomb.
The Folly equal to the guilt would be,
First to Restrain, then set a Monarch free.
He never can again his freedom win.

Sam. Grant it, yet Incest is a Crying Sin.
Methinks that word alone should make you start.

Ant. Incest, most think, is but a term of Art.
A name with which thePriests keep Fools in aw,
For no such thing is found in Nature's Law.
He must himself, and not his Fortune blame,
Who from his Joys is frighted by a Name.

Phal. What we have said we wish we could unsay,
Since it augments the Storm it should allay.

Sam. But in a calmer hour we hope 'twill move.

Ant. You speak your Friendship, and I speak my Love.
Yet I conjure you leave me for some time,
Else you will both participate my Crime:
For I am now into a Chaos hurled,
Darker than that, which first involved the World.

Phalt. to Sam. His Passion thus opposed does higher grow.

Sam. May Heaven that Quiet which you want bestow.
[Phalt. and Sam. go out.
Ant. Before she knows I live, it is fit I see
If she preserves her Constancy to me:
But if my feigned Death made her prove untrue,
What Herod thinks is done, my hand shall do.
[Ant. goes out.
The Scene is a Magnificent Apartment.
Enter Solome, who is met by Merab. Mer. Madam, the Prince Sohemus now is come.

Solo. Call him, and when he enters, leave the room.
[Merab goes out.
Solo. How should I, without blushes, on him look,
Whom while we loved, so meanly I forsook.
[Merab introduces Sohemus, and then goes out again. Sohemus, does it not your
Soul surprise,
That Solome is without weeping Eyes.
When Herod now is Dead; a Loss so great,
That all our Glories, in his fall, are set.

Sohe. Madam, the Assaults of Fate, though nere so rude,
Have still been Conquered by your Fortitude.

Solo. This Conquest you ascribe to a wrong Cause,
It Is Love alone, which to my grief gives Laws.
Nothing can now my Inclinations cross,
This Joy does more than recompense that loss.
For I can now do your brave Passion right,
Our hearts which Power divorced, Love shall unite.

Sohe. I am amazed to hear such words as these;
Madam, have you forgot Cossabanes;
To whom by Sacred Marriage you are tied,
And how you did my grief for him deride;
A grief, which I one day could not have born,
And which my Death had cured, had not your scorn.

Solo. Though I was forced by Herod's stern Command,
To give the abhorred Cossabanes my hand.
Yet 'twas above his Tyranny, and Art,
To make me from Sohemus give my heart.
Your doubts of me on a false ground are built,
You should not call my punishment my guilt.

Sohe. Ah to that Punishment you seemed inclined.

Solo. I seemed more faulty, but to be more kind.
For had you by my words or Actions, seen
How firm for you my Passion still has been;
Your Love, or your Revenge, had made you run
To those extremes, I found it wise to shun:
With Joy I did submit to be his Wife,
Since I had no way else to save your Life.

Sohe. Could you think fit to me your Love to give,
Yet hope I could the loss of it outlive?

Solo. In that fierce Storm we then did both endure,
A seeming scorn could only be your Cure.

Sohe. The Power of Love for me you never knew,
Since while you loved, you seemed to scorn me too.
Darkness, and light may both together reign,
As well as perfect Love, and such disdain.
Though a Just Person may a Sin commit,
Yet his Soul trembles, while he is acting it:
But when your Vows to me you did decline,
Nothing but Joy in your fair Eyes did shine.

Solo. Though for your sake I did that guilty deed,
Yet while my Face did smile, my Heart did bleed:
I did, to break that match, all I could do,
Both with Cossabanes, and Herod too:
But when all failed to which I had recourse,
I from my heart, that Brother did divorce;
And on his Ruin ever since was bent,
In hope of this blessed time, Heaven now has sent.

Sohe. These are strange Secrets which you now declare.

Solo. Listen, and I will tell you stranger far:
'Twas I made Herod to Octavius go,
And made Pheroras wait upon him too;
That Caesar having both, might more incline
To cut off the Male Race of all Our Line.
'Twas I made Herod to all else unjust,
And leave his haughty Wife to your sole trust;
With Orders, if he Caesar did not win,
You instantly should put to Death his Queen.

Sohe. He told me none but I those Orders knew.

Solo. You see he told you then, what was not true.

Sohe. But to what end did you those Crimes pursue.

Solo. For my great End; That of obtaining you.

Sohe. Madam, against the Power of Heaven you strive.

Solo. How Is that?

Sohe. Is not Cossabanes alive?

Solo. It Is Man, not God, makes Marriages by force;
Therefore this day I sent him a Divorce.

Sohe. That right is only by our Sex enjoyed.

Solo. That Usurpation I for you destroyed.
It Is just, where two under one Contract are,
That they alike, the privilege should share.
Affection only ties true Wedlock Bands,
Where hearts divide, in vain Priests join the hands:
He now in his Arabia does reside,
Where I have sent him leave to choose a Bride.
Now if you act your Prince's last Command,
Nothing between us, and our Joys does stand:
For when the Queen you have of Life bereft,
I only of both Royal Lines am left:
Then will a Crown which my free Love bestows,
[Sohemus starts and trembles. Make some Atonement for my breach of Vows.
Why do you start, and such disturbance show?

Sohe. It Is at the Mischiefs you would make me do.

Solo. To a true Subject then can any thing
Look like a Crime, when it is to obey his King?

Sohe. Those who by Power alone have Scepters swayed,
Ought not when Dead, to have their wills obeyed:
Only to Lawful Kings that Duty's shown.

Solo. Then do it for my sake; or, for your own.
I would have done it ere I spoke of it,
But that to me it did appear unfit;
That I for you should every guilt contract,
And leave you for my sake, not One to Act.
Too much it did like to Engrossing look,
But finding now how highly I mistook;
Admit me to this Queen, and you shall see,
I dare do more for you than you for me.

Sohe. Who lets you act the Sin he can withstand,
Does himself act it by another's hand.

Solo. Will you not then let me a Crime commit,
Of which you are to have the benefit.

Sohe. O, Madam; were you now what once you were --

Solo. What Herod forced me to, I will repair.

Sohe. But Oh --

Solo. But what? Speak without more delay,
I Am armed against whatever you dare say.

Sohe. But wrongs which Honor, and which Love endure
From those who did them, can admit no Cure.

Solo. Ungrateful Man! Have I in vain for you
Ruined my King, my Fame, and Brothers too.
Through all your Vails I see what you would hide,
I could not else thus rudely be denied.

Sohe. Madam, but hear me out --

Solo. I Will hear no more.
It Is Mariamne's Beauties you adore:
What you would not confess, your blushes do;
I feared the Change, and now I find it true.
No other Passion could so powerful be,
As thus to make you scorn a Crown and Me.
Begone; and to your Cost you soon shall prove,
A Woman's hatred does transcend her Love.
[They go out several ways.
The Scene changes to a spacious Room all black.
Antipater muffl'd up with a Cloak, and a Page with a Flambeau. Page. It Is in
this Room the Queen will watch to night.

Ant. Where I may see, and yet be out of sight.

Page. There you may all things see, and not be seen:
But should this be discovered to the Queen;
I shall, past hope of Pardon, be undone.

Ant. Fear not, there is your Reward; and now begone.
[He flings him a Purse, which the Page takes and goes out. Love only could
this strange Design inspire.
[A noise within. What noise is that? -- The Queen! He looks I must retire.
[He conceals himself. The Queen and Mariana they bolt the door after them.
Mar. Why to these Horrors, Madam, will you run.

Queen. It Is brave to seek, what it is in vain to shun.
One of the Noblest Joys that is above,
Is there to meet those whom we here did love.
Since Fate to grant that Blessing does delay,
I would possess what here of it I may.

Mar. Should the best Friend of mine that is dead appear,
I should be soon as dead as he with fear.

Queen. Poor Mariana; this too much does show
Thy Soul the Charms of Love did never know.
Had thou been ever warmed with that blessed Fire,
What makes thy fear, would then be thy desire.

Mar. Sure you at Herod's Ghost would startled be.

Queen. His Ghost! -- it is all of him I long to see:
But since Hircanus and my Brother have
The Privilege to wander from the Grave;
And pay their Visits where they are justliest due,
Why may not Antipater do it too.
For if Departed Souls about them bear
Those Virtuous Loves, which did inflame them here;
No place to him, a place of Joy can be,
Where he is banished from attending me.

Mar. But durst you look on Antipater's Ghost?

Queen. Durst I? You know that I disdain to boast;
But though he were in that dark place of pain
Which Priests do preach of, and which Poets feign:
Yet there, were I but sure with him to stay,
I would -- I would do more than I will say.

Mar. But an Infernal shape like his may seem.

Queen. Nothing Infernal can resemble him.
[A great flash of fire.
Mar. Bless me; what means this sudden flash of light?
My trembling Knees do one another smite;
My Hair does stare, I scarce can draw my Breath,
And a Cold seises me like that of Death.
[A second flash of fire.
Queen. Guard me, ye blessed Angels, for I find
My timorous flesh strives to infect my Mind:
In Fears Men Sin, I scorn to be involved,
What is it can resist a Soul resolved?
While terror does the mortal part invade,
To the Immortal, it should Courage add.
Why Mariana do thou tremble so?
Can thou be Innocent, and fearful too?

Mar. I dare not stay more Prodigies to see,
Impute this Rudeness to my fear, not me.
[Mariana goes out trembling, and shuts the door after her. [A third, and
greater flash of fire. [Hircanus's Ghost rises, dressed in the High-Priest's
Habit.
Queen. Ha? it is Hircanus Spirit does appear,
But why should I my Mother's Father fear.
See how he shakes his Head, and seems to groan;
Oh, since 'twas Herod that Usurped your Throne,
Why do you not, him, or his Ghost pursue,
Rather than me, who still does weep for you.
[Another flash of fire. [Aristobulus's Ghost rises in the like Habit. More
Horrors yet? it is Aristobulus.
What makes you, my dear Brother, haunt me thus?
Is it because that I was Herod's Queen,
And that by him, you both have murdered been.
'Twas by Hircanus, and by your Command,
That to the Tyrant I did give my hand;
But when to that dire deed I did consent,
Of both your Murders, he was Innocent.
[The two Ghosts shake their heads. Then I perceive you judge that I did ill,
Not to kill him, who both of you did kill.
But Heaven does know, I feared to do amiss,
And by a Sin of mine to punish his.

Arist. Ghost. You little know the blessed place where we are,
Who think, Revenge can find admittance there:
Nothing so Hellish up to Heaven can fly,
Passions in Bodies live; and with them dye.

Her. Ghost. No, Mariamne, we both now appear,
To tell you, that your hour of Death is near;
And then from Death, you must to Judgment come,
To hear from Justice self, your endless doom;
Before that Bar Actions are truly weighed,
The Kings, and Slaves, are in one Balance laid:
Mitres, and Crowns, which here the World adore,
If ill employed, are weights to sink us more.
Life's but a Race, the longest quickly ends;
Yet on it, our Eternity depends.

Arist. Ghost. ETERNITY; That word so much does weigh,
As if it were pronounced but once a day;
With the Belief, and Reverence that is fit
For Worldly trifles, who durst hazard it?
Since but one Moment of those Joys w' are in,
Does far transcend the longest Charms of Sin.

Her. Ghost. Farewell; Remember your last hour is near.
[The Ghosts descend.
Queen. Only the unprepared should dying fear.
Blessed, and Kind Ghosts, who Heaven awhile could miss,
To teach me here the Glorious Way to Bliss.
[Antip. within the Scene says.
Ant. The Queen's great Soul is a Reproach to me;
She speaks with those I trembled but to see:
Now that the Ghosts are vanished, I Will appear.
[He makes a noise.
Queen. More Ghosts; or am I cheated by my Ear?
[Antipater appears. Ha? it is Antipater's dear Ghost I see;
In Death as Life he is still kind to me.
Stay, stay, you blessed Spirit; for I know,
Assuming of that shape, you must be so*
Come you to tell me of my dying too?
No news, unwelcome is that is brought by you.
Or come thou to accuse me that did wed*
The bloody Tyrant, who cut off thy Head?
Ah Generous Prince, it was to save your Life
That I did yield to be the Monsters Wife.
My kindness only made me seem untrue,
And for your sake, I became false to you.

Ant. Madam -- I am not Dead --

Queen. Not Dead? -- O why!
Do you alas the fatal truth deny?
But know, (for I now see what you would do)
I dread not Death when I may go with you.
This unkind Doubt of me does make me fear,
Lovers in the other World love less than here.

Ant. By your fair Eyes, the Oath I value most,
I am Antipater, and not his Ghost:
And, if, of what I swear you doubtful stand,
Allow me to confirm it on your hand.

Queen. Take it -- but wonder not I tremble so,
That Is sit, whether you are a Ghost or no.
[Antipater kneels, kisses her hand in such transports, that she endeavors to
withdraw it; but he still holds it.
Ant. Why to this: Joy would you a period give.

Queen. I would not know by guilty proofs you live.
[She withdraws her hand. I am convinced that you no Spirit are,
But how you escaped, I beg you will declare.
[He rises.
Ant. To tell that story I too dearly pay,
Yet since it is your will, I must obey.
When Herod's Guards did my Revenge prevent,
To Massada I was close Prisoner sent.
The Generous Samias, to whose Friendly Care
The Orders for my Death, entrusted were,
Beheaded a young Slave of his by night,
And to his Body, paid my Funeral right;
Which made all Palestine, and Herod too,
Think he had done the Sin he bid him do.
Thus Heaven preserved whom Herod meant to kill,
By which I now have privilege to kneel.
[He kneels. And beg thus at your Feet that you will give
That Joy, which if denied, I dare not live.

Queen. Rise, Generous Prince -- Ah what is it you implore.

Ant. That Blessing now you could not grant before.

Queen. Into the blackest Incest I shall run,
If I should wed the Father, then the Son.

Ant. True Love mistaken Scruples should despise,
The hand of Death cancels all humane ties.
Dare you not end what Love made you begin?

Queen. Prince; I for you dare die, but dare not Sin.

Ant. By such false Maxims be not kept in awe.

Queen. But Incest is forbid, by Heavens great Law.

Ant. If Incest, Madam, be the Sin you fear,
I of that Incest the whole Guilt will bear.
My Love were neither generous nor true,
Would I not act one Crime to purchase you.

Queen. Ah do not ask what Heaven bids me deny.

Ant. Then give me leave, here, at your Feet to dye.
[Ant. offers to draw his Sword.
Queen. Hold, Generous Prince, I might as soon agree
To Sin for you, as let you die for me:
But if you think your Cure in Death to find,
Be not so Cruel to leave me behind:
Do not refuse what now I press you to;
Or live with me, or let me die with you.

Ant. Alas when of your dying I but hear,
All my despair I yield up to my fear.
[A great knocking at the door.
Tamar within.] O Madam, Madam.

Queen. That Is Tamar's Voice, Retire awhile, I know
Something Important brings her hither now.
[Ant. retires within the Scene. [The Queen lets in Tamar.
Tamar. Madam, I hope this Rudeness you will excuse,
Since it is to bring you most surprising News.
Herod, whom we believed till now, was dead,
From his Restraint is by Octavius freed;
And Caesar on him has confirmed the Crown,
And what is as strange, Herod is now in Town.
He feared some Insurrection from the Jews,
And therefore brought of his Success the News.
The Sanhedrim to his great Fortune bend,
And through the Streets they all on him attend.

Queen. Never a greater Change was wrought by Fate.
[To them Dina hastily.
Din. Madam, the King is at the Palace Gate.

Queen. Will my Misfortunes never have an End?
In my Apartment all of you attend.
[Dina and Tamar go out. Antipater comes out.
Queen. You hear the News of this prodigious turn.

Ant. Yes, Madam; but what News should make me mourn?
For I have nothing now to hope or dread,
Herod's alike to me, alive or dead:
Yet my Complaints my Duty shall subdue,
Since I can now complain of none but you.

Queen. Do not complain of her whose only fault
Is that she loves you much more than she ought.
After these guilty words I dare not stay,
Shame now, like Herod, hurries me away.
[Mariamne goes out.
Ant. Prodigious Fate! what is it thou do mean?
How in an instant have thou changed the Scene:
But thou have Joyful hours as well as sad,
The good I Will court, and I Will outbrave the bad.
[Antip. goes out at the door he entered.
ACT II.
The Scene opens.
The Temple appears, and Herod seated on a Throne within it. On his right hand
Annanelus the High Priest stands dressed in all his Pontifical Habits: On his
left hand Pheroras, Abner, Phaltiel, Samias, Asdrubal, with all the Courtiers
and the Guards. The Singing Priests are all in their white Robes, with wreaths
of Laurel on their Heads; after some time of silence, the chief Singer lifts up
his right hand, and then the whole Quire of Priests sing the following Song.
SONG.
THose Clouds which dare the Sun obscure,
But a short time endure;
And when he breaks what did his Light confine,
His Beams with brighter Luster shine.
So Herod's Danger which we did deplore,
Serves but to raise his Glories more;
He now appears to his glad Subjects sights,
Like cheerful Mornings after stormy nights.
In sign that we this blessing prize,
We offer up whole Herds in Sacrifice:
And flaming Incense on our Altars burn,
To Celebrate Our King's return:
Since to this Temple he new Life does give,
His Fame shall in his Piety still live.
[Flames are seen behind the Theater in the Temple. This Song is to be sung
twice by the whole Quire of Priests; at the first ending of the Song Herod
descends from the Throne, walks out over the Theater, attended by all, having a
Canopy of State carried over him by four. By that time the Priests have ended
the Song the second time, the last of the Procession are to be gotten off the
Theater, and then the Scene of the Temple is to be closed by the Scene of
Herod's Apartment. Enter Herod, Pheroras, Abner, Phaltiel, Samias, Asdrubal,
and the Arabian Guards. Pher. The Sanhedrim are at your Palace Gate,
And beg admittance.

Her. No. There let them wait.
By Fear, not Love, they now are hither drawn,
Base Spirits; when insulting fails, they fawn.
When they but dreamt Fortune had cast me down,
They did consult how to bestow my Crown.
Since they will not tell on whom that guilt does fall;
Rather than punish none, I Will punish all.
Justice must not be mocked.

Pher. But Justice then
Should not designedly punish guiltless Men.
Because to you the faulty are not known,
You Will punish All, rather than punish none.

Her. Since all were present at the black Debate,
It Is they the Guiltless must discriminate.
My Resolution is on Justice built;
Who in this Case conceals, does share the guilt.
Pheroras, take my Guards, and carry all
The Sanhedrim into the Judgment-Hall,
There torture them, till you from some have got,
Who first proposed, and then approved the Plot.

Phalt. The Jews will rise in Tumults through despair.

Her. Tumults the Frenzies of the People are.
And who in Frenzies strive must be withstood,
Such fits are quickly cured by letting Blood.

Sam. It Is hard with a whole Nation to dispute.

Her. But harder when Kings are not Absolute.
He of a Throne should be unworthy held,
Who to his will makes not his Subjects yield.
Who to obtain that end his Life does give,
Does die more glorious than he else can live.
Brother you seem as if you were afraid:
Go you; and see these Orders now obeyed.
[To Phalt. Sam. and Asdr.
Pher. Sir, I will never give you cause to say,
That what you Order, I dare not obey.
Come all with me --
[Pher. Phalt. Sam. and Guards go out.
Her. Abner, to thee alone
My Counterfeited Passion I made known;
But now I fear it is Mariana's due,
That false Love made to her must change to true;
Love by her Eyes, that Fiction would upbraid,
And burns me in those Flames with which I played.

Abn. Sir, since the Queen some coldness did express,
While she unrivaled did your heart possess.
May it not, Sir, provoke her to despair,
Seeing another in that Glory* share.

Her. Perhaps it may -- Perhaps too -- It may not,
Few Women are by reason lost or got:
Since to the Love I paid her she would not bend,
I tried a different way to reach my end.
Yet Abner, I must say, to be possessed
As much of hers as she is of my Breast;
And to enjoy that Monarchy alone,
I would despise the Universal Throne.
Though I her Coyness, and her Pride abhor,
Yet her triumphant Beauties I adore.
Often I resolve her coldness to resent,
But I as often that Resolve repent.
How was it Mariana did receive
Those Jewels which to her I bid you give.

Abn. As soon as the vast present she had seen,
She said, I had mistook her for the Queen;
But when to her I solemnly did swear,
That they by you presented were to her;
She trembled instantly, then blushing said,
They were too mighty Presents for a Maid;
And begged me I would make you her Excuse,
Since 'twas her Virtue did those gifts refuse:
Then from the Chamber she in have did go.

Her. She had good Cause, the Offering was too low.
'Twas fit so great a Beauty should decline
A present made by any hand but mine.
O Love; where did thou get the Power or Art,
Thus to erect two Thrones within one heart:
That Empire must be stormy, and decay,
In which at once two different Powers bear sway.
My Queens aspiring Soul does daily rise,
Her Mind is as Imperious as her Eyes.
While Mariana with as Conquering Charms,
By her humility my heart disarms;
Thus to subdue me Opposites agree,
Yet both produce the same effects in me.
Let the Queen know I Am to the Garden gone,
And tell her, I expect her there alone.
[Herod and Abner go out several ways.
The Scene the private Gallery of Herod's Palace.
Sohemus meets Mariana. Sohe. O Sister, I am now for ever lost,
My flattering hopes by my ill Stars are crossed:
The Queen to my Address does cruel prove,
My Services she takes, but slights my Love.
While Solome her former flame renews,
And with such guilty Love my Love pursues;
That I perceive it is the Decree of Fate,
I must be ruin^d by her Love or hate.

Mar. If you but for the Queen can Love admit,
Solome must be paid with Counterfeit;
Else all your hopes of Life will be but Dreams,
Her Soul no Passion knows but in extremes.

Sohe. Sister, you know my Heart could never brook
Whatever did but like dissembling look.

Mar. Dissembling must to you uneasy be,
And to persuade you to it, is to me;
But since on you depends all I hold dear,
My Virtue now indulges to my fear.
When in this Love you did at first engage,
The sad effects of it I did presage;
Now my Prophetic fears I find are true,
-- But may it not be yet suppressed by you.

Sohe. O it is in vain me to that change to move,
Who once loved well can never cease to Love.

Mar. Then you at first loved Solome but ill,
Or by that Rule you ought to love her still;
And if for her a Passion you did feign,
For both Our Sakes dissemble it again.

Sohe. Though once her Beauties gave my Heart the Law.
Yet her Change froze more than her Eyes can thaw.
And you as well may raise the dead again,
As Love which has been murdered by disdain:
Solome ordered me to meet her here --
Sister, retire, yonder she does appear.

Mar. O ere I go, let me this promise win,
That you will not think what saves us both a Sin.
This on my Knees I would of you implore.
[Mar. says the last Verse as she is going out.
Sohe. I Will do what Honor bids me, and no more.
Enter Solome.
Solo. Though the last usage I endured from you,
Made me resolve your Ruin to pursue;
And by the Power which I with Herod have,
I with one word can send you to your Grave:
Yet Love has purchased for you a Reprieve,
And makes me this last meeting to you give.
You know the trust which he on you did lay,
And Love, I know, made you that trust betray:
Herod, as Lawful King, you would not own,
Either of these, by me, to him made known;
Would raise his Anger, and Revenge so high,
As nothing but your Death could satisfy.

Sohe. Madam, you need not to your Brother sue
To take a Life that is abhorred by you.
From me your Will shall no resistance meet,
I freely lay it, Madam, at your Feet.

Solo. Your Life, Sohemus, would my Blessing prove,
If you would reassume -- your -- former -- Love.
[She puts her hand before her face.
Sohe. Why would you have that Passion live again,
Which when you could reward, you did disdain:
In pity, Madam, do not press me more,
To suffer Shipwreck twice upon one Shore.

Solo. I told you Herod forced me to that Crime.

Sohe. Force which once awed you, may a second time.

Solo. But to repeat a Sin few dare consent,
Of which they once did really repent.

Sohe. Herod I know will make you soon repent
Of that Divorce you to your Husband sent.

Solo. Brother, and King, Husband of best degree,
Are empty Names to one that loves like me.
Do but declare that I possess your Heart,
Then all the rest trust to my care and Art:
Those who oppose me I Will to Death pursue,
And in vast Crimes show as vast Love for you.

Sohe. So much your Servant I resolve to be,
That you shall never act a Crime for me.

Solo. Perfidious Man; since you my Love disdain,
I Will tear you hence, where you too long did reign:
All those Objections you to me did move,
Were now I see to triumph over my Love;
And when all Obstacles I would subdue,
I find my greatest, nay my Only -- You.

Sohe. Were I as proud, or false, as now you say,
I might with ease you by your Love betray:
But by my Faithfulness I make you shun
Crimes, which would make you hate your self when done:
Ah Madam, it is severe to use me thus,
We give not Laws to Love, but Love to us:
Could we at will quench or revive ^is Flame,
You Would kill that Love which now you blush to name.
If what I say cannot your wrath assuage,
Here, in my Blood, be pleased to drown your Rage.
[Opening his Arms. If over Love I could the Victor prove,
To whom I give my Life, I Would give my Love.

Solo. Too deep a wound thy bold contempt affords,
Ere to be healed by Fawnings and by words.
Since thou with scorn my proffered Love do brand,
'Twere too great Death to perish by my hand.
[Striking her Breast. Thus -- with one blow Love's Image I deface,
Revenge, do thou ascend, and take the place.
In thy black Empire few successless prove,
Whose Hearts are filled with Rage, as once with Love.
[Solome goes out.
Sohe. I see her fury cannot be withstood,
She will allay this tempest in my Blood:
Yet to my Death it is nobler to submit,
Than to Contract a guilt which merits it.
[Sohemus goes out.
The Scene the first obscure Grotta.
Enter Antipater, Pollio. Ant. Dissuade me not, by all my hopes I swear,
Nothing shall hinder me to wait on her.

Poll. Your Life in doing it will hazard run.

Ant. 'Twill run more hazard if it be not done:
For Life on no account to me is dear,
But only as it does belong to her.

Poll. Lose not that Life which for her sake you prize.

Ant. Ah it is not Life while banished from her Eyes.
To them Phaltiel and Samias.
Phalt. Sir, from the Judgment-Hall we now are come,
Where forty noble Jews received their doom:
The Arabians putting many to the Rack,
Which in the Plot did not at all partake.
The rest urged by a Virtue most sublime,
The guiltless cleared, and did confess their Crime:
But those which were absolved did boldly say,
They Would rather perish than be saved that way.

Sam. Never did men so generously contend,
Each would have lost his Life to save his Friend.

Ant. My Father's Crown and Life in danger lies,
Attempted thus by them who Death despise.

Sam. He that in this great Action led the way,
Was Abner's Father, aged Barzillai:
All hoped the favor Herod shows the Son,
Would for the Father a Reprieve have won:
But as we came out of the Hippodrome,
The Orders that he first should dye were come.

Ant. What is this Abner, for whose sake you thought
My Father might from his revenge be brought?
Since my disgrace he did to favor climb.

Phalt. To draw him, Sir, at length, requires much time.
He is, to give his Character in short,
In War most fierce, most humble in the Court
Who merits favor, yet obtains it not,
In him unasked an Advocate has got.
Respect for him he in all hearts has bred,
Because it is not sought, but merited.
Malice does fear such Virtue to pursue,
Which makes him favored without Envy too.
Enter Hazael hastily, who takes Antip. aside.
Haz. Tamar, your Trust did with such Joy receive,
And in such Raptures learnt you were alive:
That in disguise as you desired, she is gone
To Nathan's Tomb, to meet you there alone.
Your stay with her she begs may be so short,
As none may mind her absence from the Court:
Where over her there are suspicious Eyes.

Ant. My Joys from this blessed meeting take their Rise*
My generous Friends, excuse me for one hour,
I Am drawn from hence by Love's Resistless Power.
Mean while, disperse your selves in several ways,
For this rough Justice must a Tempest raise:
And drive into despair the furious Jews,
What ere you learn, let me soon hear the News.
[Ant. and Haz. go out hastily.
Phalt. I Will try to stay him.

Sam. Do not, it is in vain.
Reason and Love never together reign.
[Sam. Phalt. and Poll. go out.
The Scene is the Palace-Garden.
Enter Herod and the Queen. Her. It Is to Agrippa, Madam, that I owe
At once my Liberty, and Kingdom too.
With such success he did my Cause debate,
As he did alter what was thought my Fate.

Queen. Does it not meanly in a Monarch show,
Both those to a Proud Roman King to owe.
But to his Subject thus in Debt to run,
Is what I should elect by Death to shun.

Her. Freedom you seem, and Empire to abhor.

Queen. No; I love both, but I love Glory more.
For those who do not Glory more esteem
Than Life and Empire, cannot merit them.

Her. You my Return so coldly entertain,
As if some other in your heart did reign.

Queen. I for your absence had no cause to mourn,
Nor can I joyful be for your Return.
Neither in me had reason to prevail,
Since I but change my Jailer, not my Jayl.
Your part Sohemus acted, you being gone;
And now you are returned you act your own.

Her. While Rules of Honor you on me obtrude,
You quite forget your Debts of gratitude.
'Twas I that raised you to my Bed and Crown,
When all your House were by their Fate cast down.

Queen. You made them Victims to your Pride and Hate,
And then ascribe their Ruins to their Fate.
With them I rather would have lost my Life,
Than be Condemned to live their Murderers Wife.

Her. Madam, there are affronts which press so near,
That it is beyond the strength of Love to bear.

Queen. And there be Loves which so offensive are,
That to be hated were more pleasant far.

Her. Take heed, your Death may end so bold a strife.

Queen. You should not threaten me with Death but Life.

Her. Oh Cursed Herod to give all thy heart
To her who is unworthy of a part.

Queen. It Is hard to credit I have all your heart,
Sure -- Mariana -- does possess a part.
Love that divided is must quickly fall.

Her. Then Mariana shall possess it all.
Unworthy it is of Monarchs, nay of Men,
To pay their Loves where they are not loved again.
He merits scorn who tamely scorn endures,
Yes, I Will recall my heart as you do yours.

Queen. The losing such a heart should I take ill,
Which you can give and take when ere you will.
Pray teach me too how I should grieve for it,
-- Yet such a Passion is for her most fit;
Whose Family you for her sake thought good
To waft to Heaven through a Sea of blood:
Of this new Love let this new proof appear,
By the like passage pray, Sir, send me there.
The greatness of your Love will more be seen
In making me your Martyr than your Queen.

Her. Spite of affronts so sensible and high,
Yet for your Beauties sake you shall not dye;
Since while you scorn me I my wrath subdue,
Judge how I Would love you, would you love me too.

Queen. Love you? Methinks at those two words alone,
I hear the Ghosts of all the Asmoneans groan.
Should I once more that guilty motion hear,
Out of their bloody Urns they would all appear:
And could I grant that Love which now you crave,
They Would fright me with their looks into my Grave.

Her. As well your weakness as your hate I see,
Can you fear Ghosts, and not fear angring me?
The dead nere to the living durst appear,
Ghosts are but shadows painted by our fear.
But were your House revived, did they all reign,
My looks would fright them into Ghosts again.
Looks, which if you your Crimes do not redeem,
Shall act on you what I but talked of them.

Queen. Your trembling Limbs could not your weight sustain,
If once you saw me head that Ghastly Train:
The sight would make the Crown upon your brow
Totter as much as Usurpation now.
If you doubt this, let me to them be sent,
Heavens, how I long to try the Experiment.

Her. Imperious Woman, by thy Pride and hate,
Thou have at length hurled on thy self thy Fate.
Were I as timorous as thy weak Sex,
Me thy Contempt more than thy Ghost would vex.
Ho, who waits there?
Enter Gentleman. Go instantly, and call
Some of the Arabian Guards, and Asdrubal.
[Exit Gentleman. Since thou so longst in hope to frighten me
To be a Ghost, that Ghost thou now shall be:
In my Apartment thou thy Life shall lose,
And I that place before all others chose:
That if thy Ghost to me it self dare show,
The trembling shape shall not have far to go.

Queen. Though all the Asmoneans died by your Command,
Yet let your Wife, pray, die by your own hand.
You should in Justice some distinction place
In murdering her, and others of her Race.
I do not beg you would delay my Fate,
But that your self would shed the blood you hate.
Since I the Title of your Queen possessed,
Do not deny my first and last request.
Here -- let your Sword your own Revenge pursue,
[Opening her Arms. And pierce that Heart, your feigned Love could not do.

Her. Feigned Love! Witness ye Sacred Powers above,
What she calls feigned, till now was Real Love.
A Love which here did with such Empire Reign,
As nothing could have quenched but her disdain:
Ah what to prove it could I more have done,
[Enter Asdr. and the Arabian Guards hastily. Than for thy sake to kill my only
Son.
Seize on the Queen, and let her then be led
To my Apartment, there to lose her Head.

Asdr. The Queen, Sir?

Her. Yes, the Queen; Did thou not hear,
Or is that Question asked me by thy fear?

Asdr. How should I touch the Partner of your Bed?

Her. Her Death delayed, shall forfeit thy own Head.

Asdr. Madam, Thus at your Feet my self I lay,
To beg your Pardon, that I dare obey.

Queen. You have it, Sir, why should you troubled be,
At once obeying him, You pleasure me.
[Asdrubal takes the Queen by the Hand to lead her out.
Her. Now let her to her Death be sed away.

Queen. It Is your first Order, I with Joy obey.
[Asdrubal leading her out, but still looks back toward Herod.
Her. Heavens; with what Tortures is my Bosom torn,
I neither can Revenge, nor bear her scorn.
My Soul was racked till I her Death decreed,
And now the Doom is given, my Heart does bleed.
[When Asdrubal has almost led the Queen off the Theater, Herod goes hastily,
and taking her from him, says. How dare thou on my Queen thus lay thy hands?

Asdr. The Sin I do, is, Sir, by your Commands.

Her. To wait on Kings thy Judgment is too weak,
Thou know not when, Justice, or Rage does speak.
If Passion hurls us out of Reasons way,
It Is the best Duty then, to Disobey.

Queen. If you Reprieve me from the wished for Blow,
You Will grieve at it e're long, as I shall now.

Her. Your Hate, and your Disdain, I will outbrave,
Love has reverst the Doom which Anger gave.
You with the Guards have leave now to retire,
[Asdrubal and the Guards go out.
Queen. Death is denied, because I Death desire.

Her. Madam, retire, and do not by your stay,
Augment that Storm which Love strives to allay.

Queen. Heaven knows I go from hence with greater grief
Condemned to Live, than now to lose my Life.
[The Queen goes out.
Her. How great a Soul does this Asmonean show,
Her generous Heart will rather break, than bow.
While I, who have Battles and Kingdoms won,
Yield to her Pride, and blush for it when done.
[Herod walks in deep melancholy about the Stage. Enter Solome, who having
considered a while Herod's disorders, says.
Solo. What fitter time to tell it him than now,
When Grief and Rage sit mingled on his Brow.
All Passions must in him at once combine,
To make him act those mischiefs I design,
I met the Queen as she from hence did go,
[To Herod. She scarce would look on me --

Her. It may be so --

Solo. Your Sister with respect should treated be

Her. Respect for you? Why she has none for me.

Solo. How can one Woman's Pride keep you in awe,
Whose word alone gives to two Kingdoms Law.

Her. Ah, it is by much an easier task to guide
Two mighty Kingdoms, than one Woman's Pride.

Solo. Your Fame is lost if awed thus by your Wife,
You ought to take away her Pride or Life.

Her. To one who begs, I death to her would give,
It Is the worst Punishment to let her live.

Solo. If Death she does desire, why should she strive
For that from you she to her self can give.

Her. Perhaps she would have me her-Murth'rer prove.

Solo. Life, Sir, is sweet, to one that is in Love.

Her. In Love?

Solo. Yes, Sir, in Love, I say.

Her. With who?
Hold -- I would think your malice speaks, not You.

Solo. No, it is my Love, and Duty, makes me tell
A Truth, which 'twere a Sin should I conceal:
Nor could they both more generously appear
Than now in telling, what you dare not hear.

Her. No more -- Why should I let into my Breast,
What would for ever rob me of my Rest!
[Aside. A thousand horrors in that narrow Room
Have found their Cradle, and may find their Tomb.
This fatal Subject do not then pursue,
[To Solo. But pity both your King and Brother too:
Who to the other Torments of his Life,
Knows he should hate, but cannot hate his Wife.
[They both go out.
ACT III.
The Scene opens, Herod appears asleep under a Magnificent Pavilion. Hircanus
and Aristobulus's Ghosts enter, attended by several other Ghosts, in white,
having great stains of blood over all their Garments. They dance Antic Dances,
with black Iavelins in their hands. The Dances ended they fall all in into one
Rank, and march up to Herod, brandishing the Points of their Weapons toward
him. Herod wakes of a sudden, starts up, and draws his Sword, at which all the
Ghosts vanish. He stares about him a while, and then says: Her. Vanished! --
Well have they managed their Escapes,
They owe their Safeties to their airy shapes:
Their flesh did with such fear their Souls subdue,
That after Death, their Ghosts turned Cowards too.
Poor senseless Devils! that could themselves persuade
To frighten him, by whom they Ghosts were made.
I blush that I the honor did afford,
Of scaring them, by drawing of my Sword.
[Herod puts up his Sword. Who waits without?
[A Gentleman comes in.
Gent. Your Brother, Sir, has been
Above an hour attending.

Her. Call him in.
[The Gentleman goes out. That Brother is my Brother but in name,
He does by Honesty aspire at Fame.
By Virtues Charms, to Glory he pretends,
And scruples by bold Crimes to reach great ends.
[Pheroras comes in.
Pher. Sir, by those Spies which are employed by me
To watch the Jews, I find they all agree:
And to your Palace Gates great numbers crowd,
And without fear, their Anger tell aloud.

Her. Those who by talk do give their anger vent,
To great and bold Revenges are not bent;
I Would more suspect them if they did not so.

Pher. Yet winds will murmr ere the storm does blow.
In Policy when you strict Justice do
Seem to lament, at what they force you to.
This may the Jews from their despair withhold.

Her. A King who fears does make his Subjects bold.
Monarchs by solid Rules should Vassals steer,
Dissembling is too near allied to fear.
Who to please Subjects some degrees shall fall,
Does give them hopes he may descend from all.
Do not a talking Conquered People fear,
They cannot raise such Storms as I feel here.
[Putting his hand on his Breast.
Pher. I cannot guess from whence this Storm should rise,
Since you have vanquished all your Enemies.
Winning Agrippa, you Octavius win.

Her. The worst of Storms are those which are within.
O Heavens,
If to wear Crowns to which I was not born
Is Sin -- Why do you thus my Head adorn?
But if in that I did your will pursue,
Why do you punish what you made me do?

Pher. How should I see till you unseal my Eyes,
Whence this Internal Tempest, Sir, does rise.

Her. My Sister in her Rage such things expressed,
As ever since have stole away my rest:
The fatal words through my Ears pierced my Heart,
And are above the Cure of Time or Art.

Pher. It Is strange her talk takes such deep root in you.

Her. I dare not think her words are false or true.

Pher. Can you but in suspense such Torments find.

Her. Suspense, it is the worst torture of the Mind.
Our Reason and our Valor it controuls,
It Is in one word, the Chaos of our Souls.
From one Resolve I to another run,
I know not what to meet, or what to shun.

Pher. Then, Sir, to my suspense pray give an end,
Trust with your Griefs, your Brother, and your Friend.

Her. Solome in her truth, or by her Art,
Would make me think -- Another has her Heart?

Pher. What Her d' you mean?

Her. What Her else can it be,
But my Proud Queen which could so torture me?
If to my Love another she prefers,
I Will tear out both her Lovers Heart and Hers.
Then I Will in Flames reduce them both to Dust,
Flames, which shall be as burning as their Lust:
And when those Thrones of Love to Ashes turn,
I Will mix their guilty Ashes in one Urn:
There we shall see what Charming Fires are bred
In Hearts united, when those Hearts are dead.
This Brother's an Experiment may be,
Worthy an Injured King's Philosophy.

Pher. Give not your Anger, Sir, such guilty vent,
A Sin you Fancy, then a Punishment.
Is this the weight which made your Soul to bow.

Her. You talk as if a heavier I could know.

Pher. If Virtue did not the Queens Actions guide,
Her Honor would be guarded by her Pride.

Her. Honor o'r Love, rarely the Field does win,
When Pride does keep the Gate, Love will get in.

Pher. But Love an Entrance always is denied
Where Woman's Virtue heightened is to Pride.

Her. To such extremes it is unsafe to trust,
Where Virtue turns to Pride, Love may to Lust.
Sin will from Sin but too ill guarded be,
Nor durst my Sister trifle thus with me.

Pher. Believe me, Sir, Our Sister has mistook,
She has not proved it on the Queen, but look
Falsehood and Lust which so deformed appear,
Durst not approach, much less reside in Her.
In her, where Virtue to such height does rise,
It shines both in her Actions and her Eyes.
[Solome comes into them.
Her. Sister -- I to Pheroras did declare,
That you, of the Queens Virtue, Jealous are.
If ought but Truth leads you to what you do,
The Death I meant for her, shall fall on you.
Methinks at this your Color comes and goes,
Does it your Anger, or your Guilt disclose.

Solo. It Is a just Anger does my Face infect,
Oh Heavens! Can Herod Solome suspect?
And can he of that Friendship have a doubt,
Which all the actions of her Life make out?
Dismiss Pheroras, and you soon shall see
With what Injustice you suspected me.

Her. Brother, leave Solome with me alone.

Pher. Since you Command me, Sir, I must be gone.
[Pher. goes out.
Solo. Before the fatal Secret I declare,
Which will with Horror bristle every Hair;
And make you summon all your Fortitude,
To help you to support a shock so rude.
Tell me without Reserve -- Have you not seen,
Since your Return, a Coldness in the Queen,
Greater by much than you observed before?

Her. May be I have -- Proceed -- but ask no more.

Solo. What did you think in her this Change had wrought?

Her. Tell what you know, and ask not what I thought.

Solo. Then know -- yet stay -- for I begin to fear
Truths against Her would but offend your Ear.

Her. Play not thus with my Anger -- it is not good,
The Storm you raised, must be suppressed by Blood.
It wounds my Soul as long as it endures,
It Is the Queens Death shall end it -- or else -- Yours.

Solo. Alas, I would not live one moment more,
If, Sir, my Death your Honor could restore.

Her. My Honor -- Speak -- I Am rackt by this delay.

Solome. 'Twill rack you worse to hear what I can say.

Her. Rack me then higher yet, if it can be,
That I may others Rack as you do me.
Tell me, oh tell me, of that Man the Name,
Who durst presume to rob me of my Fame.
He might all other Crimes have safer done,
Than only to have wished for but this One.

Solo. Sohemus is the Person who I dread
Has more than offered to have wronged your Bed:
For when alas we of your Death did hear,
(The thought of which makes me yet shake with fear)
And that I pressed him those Commands to Obey,
Which you on him for the Queens Death did lay.
He said, forbid it Heaven that I the Sin should do,
Which words he spoke blushing and trembling too:
By which it was too evidently seen,
He had a guilty Passion for the Queen;
For whom so warmly he did then appear,
That he told me you an Usurper were.

Her. At this I feel such Rage as Man never knew,
Which seems to tell me, what you speak is true.

Solo. Your Orders which to him entrusted were
For the Queens Death, he did to her declare.

Her. I thought my Uncle's Death enough had been
To fright all else from acting of his Sin.
-- Have you a proof of this, the Charge is high?

Solo. Ask him your Self, if he the truth deny,
It shall be proved by those you cannot doubt.

Her. It Is only Love could rack that secret out.

Solo. Admire not if those Charms which Conquered you,
Had the like Power to Conquer others too.

Her. My fury in untrodden Paths shall walk,
But why do I mispend my time in talk.
If he confess, or faintly but deny,
By my own hand, the Queen and He shall die,

Solo. Ah for the Queen, Sir, give me leave to sue.

Her. Of all the World it is most unfit in you.

Solo. Perhaps she did not of his Love admit.

Her. She is too guilty in Concealing it.
To me immediately Sohemus send,
And at my Chamber let some Guards attend.

Solo. From this design I would your wrath dissuade.

Her. My anger cannot be by talk allayed.
[Herod goes out.
Solo. My fierce Revenge has now begun her flight,
To hurl my Rival into endless night;
And her proud Servant to his Cost shall prove,
There Is no Revenge like that of slighted Love.
[Solome goes out.
The Scene is the Obscure Grotta.
Enter Antipater and Hazael. Ant. Yes, I met Tamar there.

Haz. And did you find
Her Friendship firm in all you have designed.

Ant. Yes, yes, this night I to the Queen shall go,
And there, whatever my Fate is, I shall know.

Haz. I hope you have her leave to wait on her.

Ant. She must not know of it till I am there:
Since to such Rules of Honor she is tied,
That to ask leave were but to be denied.
[To them Phaltiel and Samias.
Sam. Oh, Sir, from whence we came such grief we saw,
As far transcends the skill of Art to draw.
Observing as we past along the street,
At Abner's Palace Gate much People meet:
We through it at length did make our way,
Where on a Hearse his Headless Father Iay.
About it stood his Friends and Kindred all,
Whose griefs did more than fill the spacious Hall;
And seemed to put a Voice into the Stones,
By making them to Echo back their Groans.

Phal. But all their Sorrows scarce deserved that name,
Compared to Abner's when he thither came;
At his dead Father's Feet himself he threw,
Where for a while he lay as Speechless too.
Nothing in all his griefs did mean appear,
He neither breathed one sigh, nor shed one Tear;
But did convince all who were in the Room,
That Grief is still when it is highest dumb;
His Eyes did on the pale Corpse so fixed stay,
As if through them he would look his Life away.

Sam. At last to Heaven he such a look did throw,
As threatened more than all his words could do.

Phal. A look, which Herod, if he had been there,
Could not have seen but must have shook with fear.

Sam. Your Father who for Abner then did send,
To this great Scene of Sorrow gave an end.
He at the Message cheerfully did rise,
And such Contentment sparkl'd in his Eyes;
As if by it he to the World would say,
I go to meet the Fate of Barzillai.

Ant. I almost envy Abner, I confess,
Who did his grief so generously express.

Phalt. Not knowing why Herod for Abner sent,
And thinking you would long for the event;
Pollio, who we in a disguise met there,
We sent to learn it, and then meet us here.

Ant. I for the News impatient am, and wait,
[Pollio comes in* But he is come already -- Pray relate
What it is my Father has with Abner done.

Poll. When he came in, the King sat on his Throne;
Environed by his Court, and Guards, and all
That Curiosity did thither call.
To whom the noble Youth did boldly say,
Sir, though you sent for me from Barzillai,
Yet I with Joy to wait on you am come,
That I from you too may receive my doom.
For sure I Am Summoned for no other Cause,
Yes -- to excuse the Justice of the Laws.
Herod at length did with a sigh reply,
It Is they that took your Father's Life; not I.
Any less Crime than what my Crown would take,
I would have Pardoned for my Abner's sake;
But he who into that great Sin could run,
Cannot deserve the Tears of such a Son.
Too many for him are already spilt.
But Worth to cherish, while I punish guilt;
Thy Father's, and the forfeitures of those
Who for their Crimes with him their heads did lose,
With Iewry's Government to thee I give.
Abner with sighs did the great gifts receive:
And Herod then made him the Throne ascend,
Where he embraced him, and did call him Friend.

Ant. This Action his past Fame for ever wounds,
He in it for his Father's Blood compounds.
All the great things which by him have been done,
Cannot wash off the meanness of this One.

Poll. But, Sir, as through the Palace Court I past,
I saw the Guards run to their Arms in have;
And though I asked the Cause I could not know,
Something Important Herod means to do.
For Courtiers run about from place to place,
And much of Fear is seen in every Face.

Ant. What do you think the Cause of this may be?

Phalt. We are as Ignorant of that as he.

Sam. But such Alarms from nothing cannot grow,
It Is therefore fit we to the Court should go,
And learn from whence this trouble does begin.

Ant. Till your Return, I Will stay for you within.
[They go out several ways.
The Scene the Queens Lodgings.
Enter the Queen and Mariana. Mar. It Is from Pheroras I attend you now,
Who has commanded me to let you know,
That you over your self should watchful be,
For Solome who is your Enemy,
Does your Dishonor with much art pursue,
And fills the King with Jealousies of you.

Queen. I am indebted to Pheroras Care,
Did he name nothing in particular.

Mar. No; for when he but spoke in your Defense,
Herod in Anger did command him thence.
What is it, Madam, that provokes her thus?

Queen. Her nature makes her still malicious.
Besides, her Brother's Will she aims to sway,
And thinks that I sometimes obstruct her way.
Another Cause may have her hate begot,
Yet since it is but my thought, I name it not.
[Tamar comes in hastily.
Tam. to Mar. My have has made me almost out of breath,
Herod, I fear, designs your Brother's Death;
And all the Guards are running to their Arms,
As they are used to do in fierce Alarms.
While Herod in Impatience till he comes,
Walks stern and silent in his private Rooms.

Mar. Pardon those fears which in my Face you see,
That Brother is more than the World to me.
Pardon me too if I go seek him now,
And, Madam, if I humbly beg of you,
That you Pheroras warmly will engage,
To use his Power to lessen Herod's rage.
My Brother's guiltless, Madam, but you know,
The King thinks no one, who he hates, is so.

Queen. May Heaven direct you in the Happiest way,
While, I, what you desire of me, obey.
[They go out several ways.
The Scene Herod's Apartment.
Herod with Asdrubal, and some of the Guards, comes from within the Scene on
the Theater, at the same time Sohemus, by another of the Theater Doors, enters
on it. Sohe. The Princess, Sir, bad me here wait on you.

Her. Now Guards perform that which I bad you do.
[The Guards immediately seize on Sohemus, and disarm him.
Her. Thy guilt, without my telling, lets thee know,
For what Crime it is, that I have used thee so.

Sohe. Though I must judge your usage, Sir, severe,
Yet I with Joy would this Oppression bear,
Were I the only guiltless you pursue.

Her. That name of all belongs the least to you.
To thee, whose Lust has to my Queen confessed,
That Secret I entrusted to, thy Breast:
Which She of all the World should not have known,
Traitor; in vain thou will thy Guilt disown.
My Sister who revealed will prove thy Sin.
Heaven's! How I feared that it had been the Queen.
[Sohe. aside lifting up his Hands and Eyes.
Her. His lifting up to Heaven his Hands and Eyes,
Does Evidence his Crime, by his Surprise.
This Storm which thou have raised, do thou not dread?
Look on me -- Look -- Have I not star'd thee dead?

Sohe. Looks cannot make one of my Courage fall.

Her. What my Looks cannot do, my Dagger shall.
[Herod stabs Sohemus thrice, who falls.
Sohe. By my Compliance I thy Throne have built,
My Death's the Justice due to that base guilt;
Which by my Hand I had atoned on thee,
Had not thy bloody hand prevented me.
Thunder, the Sword of Heaven, does sure design
That Death for thee which it denied to mine.
Tyrant; receive this Truth from my last Breath,
If Man has an Existence after Death;
My Ghost shall haunt thhee out in every place,
My gaping Wounds shall stare thee in the Face;
Till thou thy Life a burden shall esteem,
Great as thy Subjects found -- it was -- to them.
[Sohemus dies.
Her. Would every Foe of mine all hope had lost,
But that of frighting of me with his Ghost.
Guards, to his Grave bear that perfidious Man,
There let him tell my Secrets -- if he can.
[They all go out, the Guards bearing off Sohemus's Body.
ACT IV.
The Scene the Queens Bedchamber.
The Queen Seated, Tamar and Dina stand on each hand of her. Tam. 'TWas
Mariana's sad and fatal Chance,
To meet the Body as they bore it thence:
As soon as she beheld her Brother dead,
From her fair Face the bright Vermilion fled;
And in an instant in her Charming Eyes,
We saw a Cloud blacker than Night arise:
Her Limbs seemed by their trembling to declare,
Her Sorrow was too great a weight to bear.
Then on his bloody Corpse her Self she threw,
Whilst from her Breast extorted Curses flew.

Din. She his pale Cheeks a thousand times did kiss,
Till her red Lips infected were with his:
And to the Wound which through his Breast had made
A passage to his Heart, her Heart she laid;
In hope, which was the end she did pursue,
By the like Sympathy, 'twould kill her too.
Then with a look in which Death Printed was,
Through her cold Lips these moving words did pass:
Herod, Thy Steel my Friendships Truth has Crowned,
Since to kill both, thou did but give one Wound:
Then in a Groan she gave her Sorrows vent,
A Groan so vast, her Breath at once it spent;
Which to her Soul to Heaven a passage gave,
The only brighter dwelling it could have.

Din. To such a Death our stock of Tears was due,
And Sorrow after so contagious grew;
As those who bore them to one Grave to rest,
Seemed by their Looks of more than Life divest.

Queen. She in that Fate which you deplore is blessed,
Her storms of Life are past, and she at Rest;
And to her Death this envied Praise is due,
She taught such Friendship as the World never knew.
Yet for my Loss in her these Tears I owe,
And truer Tears no Friend did ever bestow.
[The Queen weeps. Leave me; for my Disorders such are grown,
As I am only fit to be alone.
[Tamar and Dina go out. [The Queen having mused a while, Antip. discovers
himself, the Queen starts, steps back, and stands amazed.
Queen. Ha! Antipater.

Ant. Yes, Madam, it is he.

Queen. At such a guilty hour to visit me!
Prince, it is your first offense, but it is too vast --

Ant. I come to beg that it may be my last.
Since without seeing you I cannot live,
And since that leave your Virtue will not give;
Thus prostrate, Madam, at your Feet I lie,
[Kneeling. And humbly beg, you will give me leave to dye.

Queen. What brought you hither, and who hid you there?

Ant. The highest Love, and most undone Despair.

Queen. Ah Prince! What is it that you now have done?

Ant. That which I had, nor Power, nor Will to shun:
But as I paid what to my Flame is due;
So, Madam, I will be as just to you.
Justice would lose her Name could she deny,
That who offends you, merits not to dye.
And since my Love into this Crime has run,
This hand shall punish what my Love has done.
[He rises, draws his Sword, turns the Hilt to the ground, and when he is going
to cast himself upon the Point, she snatches up the Sword by the Hilt.
Queen. Oh Heavens! What was it that you meant to do?

Ant. To end my Torments, and be just to you.

Queen. Though I your guilty visit much deplore,
To kill your Self, I should lament much more.

Ant. You cannot to my Death such Sorrows give
As I shall feel, if doomed by you to live.

Queen. How ill those words do with your Love agree,
Is Life a Curse, while you can live with me?
Oh Antipater, this is too severe,
I have my share in all those griefs you bear.
And nothing can, alas! my Sorrows heal,
Unless kind Heaven would Judah's Laws repeal.
Which were a Sin to wish, or to implore.

Ant. Then, Madam, let us resolve to live no more:
If the other Life be what is taught us here,
Such Loves as ours must needs be happy there.

Queen. Those who the Blessings of that Life would win,
Must not leave this by any Act of Sin.
Did not the dread of that our Journey stay,
I would not hinder you, but lead the way.
[Tamar comes in hastily.
Tam. Madam, forgive the rudeness of my fear.
-- Oh Heavens! -- the Prince -- alas! how came he here?
Herod with Abner through the Gallery comes,
And all his Guards have seized the Passage-Rooms:
Sure he has learnt Antipater's here.
[Ant. draws his Sword.
Ant. Now, Madam, Fate does on my side appear,
For Herod, or else you, and I, must fall,
Our Safeties for my ready Arm do call.
And to that Sword no Sin ascribed can be,
Who takes his Life, that first took you from me.
He Will think you guilty if he 'scape the blow.

Queen. I Would rather be thought guilty than be so.

Ant. Presumptions on his side will seem too strong.

Queen. It Is Juster yet to bear than do the wrong.

Tam. Madam, You should resolve, the King's at hand.

Queen. Right, Right; Prince it is my positive Command,
That you on your Revenge now think no more,
But hide your Self where you were hid before.

Ant. Hide? and when you into great Danger go.

Queen. I run more Danger if you do not so.

Ant. Madam, he comes all Night with you to stay.

Queen. My Usage soon shall hasten him away.

Ant. Can the worst Usage which you have designed,
Drive him from all the Joys of Womankind?

Queen. Will you then ruin me by your delay?

Ant. Ah, Since you will Command, I must obey.
[Antip. conceals himself behind the Queen's Bed.
Queen. Tamar retire, but keep within my Call,
[Tamar goes out. What Sins of mine can make such Curses fall?
[Herod comes in in his Nightgown, Abner with a Light before him.
Her. Since I have sent Sohemus to his Tomb,
Madam, I now am come to sill his Room.
Whoever offends me, I Will my Victim make.

Queen. You might have spared him for his Sister's Sake.
Her you Adored, your Pity ought to move.

Her. Revenge a nobler Passion is than Love.
You seem unmoved that I his Blood have spilt.

Queen. No, I am moved; but it is at your new guilt.

Her. Madam, What you call guilt, I Justice call,
His Crime deserved he by my hand should fall.

Queen. What Provocation could he cast on you,
To make you both Condemn and kill him too?

Her. Sure you would have me think you do not know.

Queen. I Am not concerned whether you do or no.

Her. You ought to know the Crimes you made him act,
Your fatal Beauties did his Death contract:
Those Secrets I committed to his Trust,
His Love revealed to you, or else his Lust.
Abner, retire here, I will stay this Night.
[Abner aside.
Abn. Just heaven assist me as my Cause is right.

Her. Or else your Lover's Death you so resent,
As you for it on me your Spleen would vent.
[Abner having locked the door, draws his Sword, and advances toward Herod.
Abn. Tyrant, prepare thy s^^^, for thou shall dye.
[Herod starts and turns about toward him. My Father's Blood for my Revenge
does cry.

Her. Treason -- My Guards -- Must I his Victim fall?

Abn. Thy Guards, by my Command, are out of call.
No Humane Power shall hinder me to pay
The Righteous Debt I owe to Barzillai.

Her. He was a Traitor, and was false to me.

Abn. He Is more a Traitor that is true to thee.
To Thee, who have done Crimes t'usurp a Throne,
Which till thou taughtst them, were to Man unknown.
To Thee, who all thy bloody ends to gain,
Have broke all Bonds both Sacred and Profane:
That Head thou made thy Murthring Axe invade,
Old Age to all but thee had Reverend made.
His Restless Ghost bids me revenge the Crime,
And right at once the injured World and him.

Her. Never did Man into like madness run,
To kill the Father, and then trust the Son!
This to my Cost should let all Monarchs see,
That they by halves must never Bloody be.

Abn. Since the short time I gave thee to repent
Of thy old Sins, in teaching new is spent;
To cut thee off no longer I Will deferr,
The Ghost of Barzillai thus greets you, Sir.
[Abner offering to make a thrust at Herod, the Queen interposes.
Queen. I Will now forget, since he assaults his Life,
All wrongs, and but remember I Am his Wife.
You through my Heart your way to his must force.

Abn. Ah let not Innocence stop Justice Course.
He killed my Father, he Usurped your Throne;
Your Wrongs I come to punish, and my Own.
He ows to both of us his hated Life.

Queen. But I owe him the duty of a Wife.
You of a Subject; Abner, then repent,
Kings faults we should not punish, but lament.
In this brave Act I will your Pattern be.

Her. Oh Heavens! then she is in earnest kind to me.
O happy danger which to light has brought
A Truth, which I would by my Death have bought:
Desist, young Man, and I Will thy Pardon give;
I owe thee now, what makes me wish to live.

Abn. Had thou no Crime but this, yet thou from me
Do merit Death, thinking so mean I Would be,
Accept a Pardon from a Tyrant's breath,
Now when I Am to revenge a Father's Death.
Heaven would not me, if I did thee, forgive.

Queen. Hold -- I command you, Abner, let him live.
You to your Queen should your Obedience yield.

Abn. Ah! You are not my Queen till he is killed:
You but a Subject are while he does Reign;
While you are so, I your Commands disdain.
But when my Sword our Debts to him has paid,
Whatever you command shall be obeyed.

Queen. Can you then think 'cause he usurped my due,
That I have therefore lost my Right ore you.
This misbelief involves you in his Crime,
You Will act your Self, what you would revenge on him.

Her. If in my hand he but a Sword did see,
Your Mediations soon should needless be.
That Death he means for me on him I Would fling,
No Subject can in Fight resist his King.

Abn. Tyrant, not King; know, guilt is such a Charm,
As would a stronger hand than thine disarm.

Her. 'Twere brave would thou but try what thou do say.

Abn. I would, if 'twould not my Revenge delay.

Queen. Since my Command so useless now appears,
I Will try if I can move you by my Tears.
[The Queen weeps.
Abn. Ah would the Ghosts of all your Murdered Line,
Stalked in your Sight as Barzillai's in mine.
The Ghastly Visions could not be withstood,
You weep but Tears of Water, they of Blood.

Her. To lose my Life more sit for me appears,
Than to preserve it, Madam, by your Tears.
[Putting away the Queen. Such precious Showrs a Traitor should not have,
Reserve them, Madam, to adorn my Grave.
I would with Pleasure have my Life resigned,
But to have thought you, what I find you, kind.
Now nothing grieves me in my Fate but this,
That it is sent by hands so vile as his.

Abn. Since by my hand to die does grieve thee so,
The knowing it shall hasten on the blow.
[Herod the second time holds the Queen from him with one hand, and puts by
Abner's thrust with the other, yet still she interposes her Self. [Antip. while
this is doing looks from behind the Bed, as Tamar looks in at the door.
Tam. The Queens high Virtue does my Soul amaze,
Since She Is in Danger, I the Court will raise.
[She runs out.
Ant. How Love and Duty does my Breast divide.

Abn. Heaven to thy Heart at last my hand will guide.
[Abner making a furious thrust at Herod, the Queen puts it by, and he wounds
her in the Arm, at which he stops and says. Oh Madam, Pardon the unintended
Guilt.

Queen. I will, if nothing but my Blood be spilt.

Her. How dare thou think that Heaven thy hand would steer,
Since Sacrilegiously it wounded her.

Abn. Against my will Heaven did this Crime decree,
To punish her so long defending Thee.
I Will kill him yet though the Altar he embraced.

Queen. And I Will defend him while my Life does last.
[Antip. runs from behind the Bed, draws his Sword, and advancing says:
Ant. To save her I her Orders disobey,
[Abner renews his Assault, the Queen and Herod put by his thrust. Hold, Abner,
Hold, and turn thy Sword this way:
Since the Queens Sacred Blood by thee is spilt,
Not to Revenge it were as black a Guilt.

Abn. Ha! Antipater; how am I amazed,
Hell has the dead to help the Tyrant raised.

Ant. No, it is by Heaven that I preserved have been,
That in thy Blood, I might revenge the Queen.
Yet I must grieve I can but strike thee dead,
For all the Tears, and Blood, thou made her shed.
[Herod gazes at Antip. and looks like a man astonished.
Abn. Sure Antipater once his Head had lost,
Herod has conjured, and has raised his Ghost.

Ant. That I Am no Ghost thy Death shall soon make known.

Abn. Art thou no Ghost? Why then I Will make thee one.
That which the Tyrant to my House has done,
Calls me to kill theFather and the Son.
[They fight, Abner falls, mortally wounded.
Ant. That Death which thou deserv'dst thou now have got.

Abn. I merit it, because I killed him not.
The Attempt was noble, though it did not thrive,
It Is well -- I do not -- the disgrace -- outlive.
[He dies.
Antipater to the Queen. Accept this little Service I have done,
And let me now proceed as I begun,
A thousand Storms the Tyrants brows display,
Which his Death only, Madam, can allay.

Queen. Prince, you were ordered, where you were, to stay.

Ant. Your danger, Madam, made me disobey.

Queen. How many ills on your Discovery wait?

Ant. By acting his let us prevent our Fate.
It Is Heaven has sent us this propitious time.

Queen. I will not owe Our Safeties to a Crime.
His Kindness I command you to implore,
If this you Disobey, never see me more.

Ant. Madam, I Am All Obedience, you shall see,
When to obey is but to ruin me.
[Antipater Bows to Herod, and lays his Sword at his Feet.
Her. Is this a Dream which does my Eyes abuse,
If they see right, would I had lost their use:
How is my Reason by my Passions tossed,
Tell me; Art thou my Son -- or else -- his Ghost?
[Enter hastily Solome, Pheroras, Phaltiel, Tamar, Asdrubal, and some of the
Guards, All the men with their Swords drawn, who seeing Abner dead, and
Antipater alive, stand on a sudden as People astonished.
Ant. I am that Son you thought was in his Grave,
Rescued by Heaven that I your Life might save.

Her. Who from my Doom did save thy guilty Head?
And who concealed thee now behind her Bed?
All thy Dissembling's vain; -- It was -- my Wife.

Ant. 'Twas your good Genius to preserve your Life.

Her. To find thee here, and to be saved by thee,
Makes Life a worser Doom than Death could be.
[Herod muses awhile. [The Queen speaks to Tamar privately.
Queen. Run, run, seek Samias out and bid him fly,
Till we have learnt the Prince's Destiny.

Tam. Permit me first, Madam, to dress your Wound.

Queen. It Is but a scratch, and it is already bound.
[Tamar goes out.
Herod. Never was Man with such misfortune Crossed,
[Lifting up his hands. I am preserved to see my Honor Lost.
Fool that I was to think that Son, that Wife,
For any other end, would save my Life.

Ant. Whoever a doubt of the Queens Virtue shows,
Sins worse in that, than he can think she does.
Is this all the Return to her you give,
Who made you by her Blood and Kindness live?
Can you suspect who did so much for you,
To her own Fame, and yours, can prove untrue?

Queen. Ah Prince, why do you thus mispend your Breath,
It Is a much milder Fate to suffer Death:
Than live to see him our bright Virtues blot,
Since Merit cannot change him, words will not.
In his ungrateful guilt still let him lie,
But let us in our Innocence dye.

Pher. How can you think, Sir, that your Son and Wife,
Had they your Honor wronged, would save your Life?
And that their Innocence might more be shown,
They for your Safety did expose their own.

Solo. Brother, 'twere sit you these great Doubts would clear,
What brought him hither, who concealed him here?
But it is the Queen must Answer them, not you.

Queen. She does despise your Arts and Malice too.

Solo. Madam, I wish your Actions may not show,
That you as much despise your Honor too.

Ant. Kill her for what she said, or else kill me,
For tamely hearing such a Blasphemy.

Her. What does my Wife but touch, I find wounds you.

Ant. She had been mine, had you not took my due;
Which I Would Revenge, but that the Queen does tie
My Arm; and therefore I but seek to dye.
[Herod snatches up the Sword which Antipater had laid at his Feet.
Her. O Heavens, what is it that I live to hear?
The affront I merit, if the affront I bear:
Thy Death is from my hand too justly due,
Both for thy old Offenses and thy new.
[He runs at Antipater, who opens his Arms to receive the thrust, Pheroras
seizes on Herod's hand, and at the same time the Queen offers to interpose.
Pher. O hold; though I condemn what he has done,
Yet let not, Sir, your Passion kill your Son.
The Justice of your Laws that Right will do,
Which all will blame, if it is imposed by you.

Her. Justice and Laws -- They Are too Pedantick things,
To act the vengeance of offended Kings.
Since thou my hand in paying mine has staid,
Guards, let him be to Massada conveyed.
On your Lives instantly convey him hence,
Justice, and Laws, in time, may bring him thence.
[Pheroras delivers himself up to the Guards.
Pher. To Prison, nay to Death, I Will rather go,
Than see those Crimes, which here you mean to do.

Her. Away with him.
[Pher. and some of the Guards go out. [Ant. kneels, opening his Arms.
Ant. Now act what you designed,
It Is in that only, I shall think you kind.

Her. Do thou first wrong me, then outbrave me so?
[Herod runs at Ant. The Queen puts her self between Herod and Antipater.
Queen. If you will kill him, you shall kill me too.

Her. Ha; will She of her Crimes convince me more?

Queen. Honor does now, what Duty did before.

Her. That Fire of Lust which in their Bosoms burns,
Makes them each others Champion, now, by turns.
I am convinced of what I did but doubt,
My Infamy so grossly they make out;
That a swift Death my Justice does esteem
Too great a Mercy, to be showed to them.
Thou, Asdrubal, here with the Queen shall stay;
If she escape, thy Life for it shall pay.

Phaltiel; that Traytor's Son to David's Tower
With Guards convey, where you are Governor.
I Will have him Chained, and in the Dungeon too.
[Phaltiel seizes on Ant.
Phalt. What you have ordered I Will exactly do.

Ant. It Is time to die, when you will my Jailer be.

Phalt. whispers to Antip. I play this part, to save both you, and me.

Antip. whispers to Phalt. No more -- admire not, I suspected thee.
For the Queens Sufferings have distracted me.
[Phalt. leads out Ant. with some of the Guards, when he comes to the door, he
turns about, and bowing to the Queen says:
Ant. Madam, until we meet in Heaven, Farewell.
[The Queen bows to him and weeps.
Her. You never shall meet again, unless in Hell.
Ye Sacred Powers above whom I adore,
[Lifting up his Eyes and Hands. This only Blessing I from you implore;
Teach me on them so well my Self to right,
That to express Revenge in all its height;
Men shall, in future times, need but to say,
That it has been performed, in Herod's way.
[They all go out, Asdrubal leading the Queen within the Scenes.
ACT V.
The Scene Solome's Apartment.
Enter Solome and Asdrubal. Solo. THough you Cossabanes's Subject are,
Yet I of you have took the greatest Care,
And to my Favor only, it is you owe
Those high Employments, you are raised to now.

Asdr. Nothing with greater Joy I can admit,
Than owning of the Debt, but paying it.

Solo. I Will try you then -- Know Herod does repent,
That he to Massada Pheroras sent:
That Brother still has my designs withstood.
His Puling Vitrue does disgrace our Blood.
If he return, his Interest such will grow,
That all my Plots, now ripe, he will o'erthrow.
To hinder this is only in your Power,
For you of Massada are Governor.

Asdr. But Madam, if the King sends a Command
To free him, who those Orders dare withstand?

Solo. Those Orders while I can, I will delay,
But -- In obeying you may disobey.

Asdr. I understand you not.

Solo. Do you not think
That a few subtle drops, mixed in his drink,
May in a Moment send Pheroras where
He aims to be -- and -- where I wish he were.
Such Death as this, would make all Israel say,
'Twas his grief only took his Life away.
Methinks at this you should not scrupulous be,
'Twixt Statesmen, it is a common Courtesy.

Asdr. Sins by their Commonness the worse are made.

Solo. You, who I need to my Revenge persuade,
Are too unfit my deep designs to wed,
But on your Life keep Secret all I said.
Be gone --
[Asdr. offers to go out.
Asdr. If I refuse to do the Crime,
She Will by some others Poison me and him.
[He returns. But on his Death does your designs depend?

Solo. Without it all my hopes are at an end.

Asdr. Then, Madam, there is no duty you shall know
Greater than that which to your will I owe.

Solo. When this deed is performed, every degree
That I ascend, you shall ascend with me.
Consider too were but Pheroras gone,
There is between the Crown, and me, but One
Who while he lives my Councils still will sway,
And when he is dead -- But I too much do say.
-- It must be done with Secrecy and speed.

Asdr. You may already reckon he is dead.
[Herod comes in.
Solo. Retire; for Herod comes to visit me,
[Asdr. goes out. What strange Disorders in his looks I see.

Her. Ah would my Stars had then my Death designed,
When I so easily believed her kind.
By her appearing in my Life's defense,
I had gone happy, though deluded hence.
For such a Death, though scarce a worse could be,
Were better than that Life reserved for me.
Alas, Herod's Ambition was not Great,
That would have died content, though by a Cheat.
O Solome --

Solo. What, Sir, distracts you now.

Her. Those Loads I bear, would make even Atlas bow.
What I, and all my Court, nay Guards have seen,
Makes me resolve to kill my Son and Queen:
But then when I reflect on what was done,
To save my Life, both by my Queen and Son:
Which if of my disgrace they guilty were,
Was what they ought to end, and not to spare:
When too they might my Death to Abner owe,
It so distracts me, that I do not know
Which of the Sins I greater should esteem,
Or that of killing, or not killing them.
Some Power, which Justice knows, instruct me now,
What I am not, or what I am to do.

Solo. You wonder why they of your Life took Care,
But I admire, why the Queen hid him there:
Her Love to him you once did so much dread,
As you Decreed, that he should lose his Head.
Think you by chance he to her Bed did stray,
Or came he there, but to talk time away?
Did he at all in your Defense appear,
Till Abner's Sword, by Chance, had wounded her:
But then with Rage he on the Traitor flew,
Which proves it was to rescue her, not you.
That he your danger saw, you cannot doubt,
But till her danger called he stirred not out.

Her. I like these Observations well -- Proceed,
My Justice has that Traytor's Death decreed:
Ah for the Queen would you the like could find,
It Is she alone which now distracts my Mind.
It was her Kindness sure made her appear
In my defense.

Solo. No, 'twas her Interest, Sir.
She feared that thousands would revenge her Sin,
If in her Chamber you had murdered been:
For no one could, though Abner did the Crime,
He being killed, attribute it to him:
But had the truth it self been brought to light,
Her hiding there, that guilty hour of night,
Him, who for Loving her, to Death you sent,
Would make all judge she was not Innocent;
Which shows her Safety only made her do
What you but dreamed her Kindness led her too.

Her. Speak on -- Speak on -- it is Music to my Ears,
My mist of Doubts thy Conquering Reason clears.

Solo. Nor could they escape the Vengeance of their Sin,
Though by your Death your Son our King had been.
Since had that Sacred Title awed them all,
Yet I, on both, would have revenged your Fall.
Brother -- there is no such despicable thing
In all the World, as a tame Cuckold King.
[Herod starts. Yet your ill Fate in that has all outdone,
For you alas are made one, by your Son:
If you can live under that Infamy,
Then Pardon both -- if not -- then both must dye.
It Is but their Crime if they your Honor blot,
But it is yours, if you Revenge it not.

Her. I will no longer then thus trifling stand,
This Night the Queen shall die -- and by my hand:
Since she has been the Partner of my Bed,
It Is only I that ought to strike her dead.
O Heavens forgive my Criminal Debate,
[Lifting up his Hands and Eyes. Her Doom is Sealed, past the Reverse of Fate.
That Traitor Samias from the Court is fled,
But I Will at leisure take his guilty head.

Solo. Since you are forced your Son and Wife to kill,
You ought no more of your own Blood to spill.
Your Pardon for Pheroras, Sir, I crave,
Grief else, I fear, will send him to his Grave;
And when he has been Prisoner one day more,
Be pleased his freedom to him to restore.
He Will tread no more in such a dangerous path.

Her. He is too mean an Object for my wrath;
And does on whining Virtue set such price,
As makes it much more troublesome than Vice.
Let all my Guards in Arms ever Midnight be,
It Is the last hour the Queen shall ever see:
Those Stains which on my Honor she does lay,
Shall then, in her own blood, be washed away.
[They go out severally.
The Scene the Tower of David.
Enter Antip. Phalt. Sam. Pollio, and Hazael. Sam. Discovering of your Self has
ruined all.

Ant. Talk not of that which now is past recall.

Phalt. What you resolve must be immediately,
Since Herod doubts not whether you should die;
But studies for that Death may be to you
Most full of pain, and Ignominy too.

Ant. The Queen her self to such strict Virtue ties,
That it is from thence my greatest troubles rise.
[Phaltiel's Page comes in hastily.
Page to Phal. A Lady that is Veiled and in a Mask,
With pressingness to speak with you does ask:
Her business, Sir, admits not of delay.

Ant. to Phalt. See who she is, and hear what she will say.
[Phalt. and the Page go out.
Haz. Such Labyrinths involve you, that I doubt
It Is only Miracles can bring you out.

Ant. So bright and great her Virtues still appear,
That we may hope for Miracles for her.
However our Duties let us not decline,
And trust the Issue to the Powers Divine.
[Phaltiel comes in hastily, lending Tamar, who takes off her Mask, and turns
up her Veil.
Tam. Oh if to save the Queen be in your Power,
You ought not to delay it, Sir, one hour.
From Herod's Palace I in have am come,
His Guards begin to seize on every Room:
And one of them did tell me in a fright,
That Herod means to kill the Queen this Night;
They all hang down their Heads, and sigh and weep,
And ever she is dead her Funeral Rites they keep:
While she (had she the means) does scorn to fly,
And full of Joy, as Innocence, would dye.

Ant. O Friends; hearing what Tamar tells us now,
Can you refuse to join in this just Vow,
That whosoever the Queen's Murderer is,
I Will lose my Life, or give an end to his:
We must to Arms, my Friends, the furious Jews
Will join with us, hearing the fatal news.
Then let us Storm the Court immediately;
Thus, we shall save the Queen, or bravely die.

Poll. Consider, Sir, the Queen's in Herod's Power,
This will but hasten on her fatal hour;
For if Success should on our side appear,
You cannot doubt but he will murder her.

Ant. He dare not if our Arms Victorious grow.

Phal. What wickedness is that he dare not do.
I thought you better understood the Man,
He Will with his ruin ruin All he can.

Poll. This way with too much Reason, Sir, I fear,
You Will lose your Self instead of saving her.

Ant. Oh Friend, to lose my Self if she be lost,
Is of all Blessings what I covet most.
If we prevent it not, the Queen must die,
This way may save her, and this way I Will try.
[Ant. offers to go out.
Tam. Stay, Sir; I call to my Remembrance now,
What in this strait may be of use to you.
The Queen now-lies where Alexandra lay,
Who from that Chamber made a Vaulted way,
Through which she might pass to the Garden-House:
She did this when she feared Antigonus.
Herod himself does not this Passage know,
Safely that way you to the Queen may go.
Whence you as safely may convey her too,
If you can win her to escape with you:
For at the Garden-House no Guards I saw.

Phalt. There, without noise, I may some Soldiers draw:
That if the Queen you from the Palace get,
We safely by their help may here retreat.

Sam. This, Sir, is the most hopeful way I see.

Ant. Samias, it does appear the same to me.
For by it either I shall rescue her,
Or else die fighting with her Murderer.

Sam. Mean while I Will try the chiefest Jews to win.

Tam. Oh how I fear the Scruples of the Queen.

Phalt. Since Herod has resolved the Queen to kill,
You ought to save her, Sir, against her will.
Once you to do it disobedient grew.

Ant. Heaven knows naught else could make me do it now.
Come, let us away the time too fast does slide.

Tam. Follow me, Sir, for I must be your Guide.
[They all go out.
The Scene Herod's Apartment.
Enter Asdrubal and an Officer of the Guards, as passing over the Stage. Offic.
As through the Streets I past the news was spread,
That Prince Pheroras struck with Grief was dead.
The People did his Death with horror bear.

Asdr. I doubt of greater Deaths we soon shall hear.
Carry that News to Solome from me,
Let all while I am absent watchful be.
[They go out several ways.
The Scene is the Queen's Chamber, with a small Throne in it.
The Queen appears asleep on her Bed, Herod comes in with a Taper in one hand,
and a drawn Dagger in the other, as soon as he enters, he stops on a sudden.
Her. What Horror's this which does my heart overcome,
As soon as I but enter in this Room:
I who in Breaches Stormed have often stood,
And flaming Cities quenched with humane Blood:
Nay swom to Usurp a Throne through Royal Gore,
Yet never felt what trembling was before.
[He advances toward the Queen's Bed, and when he sees her sleeping says: Can
guilt so calmly sleep when Death is near,
While I, who but Revenge it, shake for fear.
What art thou Whispers, While she sleeps it is best,
To send her Soul to its Eternal Rest?
Lest her bright Eyes which have such Power to Charm,
Were they awake, might my fierce hand disarm.
Whatever thou art dare whisper to me so,
Be gone -- Else -- If I can -- I Will kill the too.
For thou would rob me by such guilty fears,
Of what in my Revenge most great appears.
Yes -- I will wake her ever I give the blow,
That She, and I, and the whole World may know;
While all her Beauties in full Luster shone,
To my wronged Honor, I have Justice done.
But though this brave Revenge I will enjoy,
Yet I must sigh, for what I will destroy.
[Herod sighs, the Queen wakes.
Queen. Who Is that who waked me with a sigh?

Her. It Is I --
But it is to make thee sleep Eternally.
[The Queen sits up.
Queen. Ha, in his hand an unsheathed Dagger too!

Her. Thy guilt does make thee such amazement show.

Queen. If an amazement on my Face does seize,
It Is that my Tyrant comes to give me ease:
Naught from thy bloody hand could welcome be,
Unless as now, when it brings Death to me.

Her. Were thou not ripe for what I now will do,
Thou could not merit Death, and wish it too:
But thy dire guilt all others has outdone,
For thou have wrong d my Bed, and by my Son.

Queen. I wrong thy Bed! I scorn to undeceive
Him, who of me dare such vile Crimes believe.
[The Queen lies down again.
Her. Thus of that scorn I my revenge begin,
And thus pursue it.
[He stabs the Queen twice.
Queen. Heaven forgive his Sin.
Oh let my Guiltless Blood thy Rage atone,
And turn thy heart -- from murthring -- of -- thy -- Son.
[The Queen dies.
Her. Unheard of Crime! She begs with her last Breath,
That her Adulterer may not suffer Death.
But he shall die; and in those Tortures too,
Which to his Crimes, and her last Prayers are due.
[Herod a while gazeth steadfastly on the Queen. Thus Night's dark Veils the
Face of Heaven overspread,
When to the other World the Sun is fled;
No Kings Revenge like mine the Glory had,
To make at once so many Beauties fade.
[A door opens under the Theater, Antip. comes up out of it, muffled up in a
Cloak, at first looking toward the Pit.
Ant. Sure all the Ominous Screech-Owls, and the Toads,
Have in this horrid Vault fixed their abodes:
Under my Feet these croak'd at every pace,
And those were still a fluttring in my Face.
Through Deaths obscurest Regions I have past,
But -- I am come to Paradise at last.
[He looks after down into the Vault.
Her. Whose Voice is that? -- A Man -- and muffl'd too,
And comes to her through ways I never knew.
I Will undiscovered learn what brings him here.
[Herod conceals himself behind the Scene, puts down the Taper by the Queens
Bed.
Ant. to Tam. in the Vault. Since I am within Call you should not fear.

Tam. Yet, Sir, to your Return a short space give,
For here, methinks, I Am buried, while I live.
[Antip. advances softly toward the Queen, and flings off his Cloak.
Ant. How quietly she sleeps -- she does not know,
How near she is to Herod's guilty blow.
Yes -- I must wake her; for by time I Am pressed,
[He lifts up his Hands and Eyes. Sure I was born still to disturb her Rest.
Madam, to save you, I from Heaven am sent.
How sound they sleep, whose Lives are Innocent.
Madam -- it is Antipater that does speak.
[Herod looking out of the Scene. My Son? How did he from his Prison break?
[Antip. starts up, and going to the Bedside says:
Ant. Either my trembling sight abuses me,
Or else -- O Heavens, why must I live to see
What more than I millions of dyings dread,
In Streams of her own Blood, the Queen lies dead!
Though fate to lose her Life, this Trick has shown,
I come not yet too late, to end my own.
[He draws his Sword, and offers to kill himself. Yet hold -- for while her
Murderer does live,
I must to my own self grant a Reprieve,
Till I have killed him, though he Herod be;
For this dire Crime none durst perform but He.
Thou injured Ghost, who ought to hover here,
[Lifting up his Hands and Eyes. Till I have Sacrificed thy Murderer;
Listen to this Irrevocable Vow;
My Tyrant Father I Will to Death pursue.
Through all his Guards I will a passage make,
And by the loss of mine, his Life I Will take.
[Herod comes in with his Sword drawn.
Her. Traitor, such horrid Guilt thou do commit,
That none but I to punish it am fit.

Ant. To mention horrid Guilt do thou not dread,
Being within the prospect of that Bed?
[Pointing toward the Queen. Heaven may to thee perhaps some mercy show,
For offering up thy Self, her Victim now.

Her. This Hand which on my Wife has Justice done,
Shall do the like now, on a Rebel Son.
Yes; thou shall feel, that it is a fatal thing,
To dare offend thy Father and thy King.

Ant. Those Sacred names were Cancelled both by thee,
That moment thou did force the Queen from me.
But were thou Mankind's Father, and their King,
Yet killing thee is but too mean a thing
To Expiate thy Sin in murdering Her.

Her. It Is greater Sin, my Vengeance to defer.
[Herod runs at Antip. and Antip. at him. They run each other through, Herod
falls.
Her. It Is Chance alone which the whole World does guide,
Or now Success had waited on my side:
Nor could I else have thus been stricken dead,
And by a Traitor which defiled my Bed.

Ant. Defiled thy Bed? -- By all that is divine,
A brighter Virtue never yet did shine,
Than that with which Heaven thy great Queen did bless.
To raise thy horror, I this truth confess.
[Ant. reels, then falls at the feet of the Queen's Bed.
Her. My Joy it raises, for I make thee die,
And make thee do it, telling of a Lie.
My Destiny had been tyrannical,
Had I not ever my Death, beheld thy Fall.
But now I care not what becomes of me,
Since with my hand -- I have killed -- Her -- and thee.
[Herod dies. [Tamar rises out of the Vault.
Tam. What noise was this, Ha! -- the Prince murdered lies,
-- And the Queen too -- Weep out your Selves, my Eyes;
Though for that Loss the payment is too low.

Ant. I amar, raise all the Court, and let them know,
The Queen has by the Tyrant murdered been,
And I too meanly did revenge the Sin,
By only making of the Monster fall:
Then carry these Commands to Asdrubal,
That he from Massada Pheroras bring,
And now it is his Right, Proclaim him King.
[Tamar runs out crying Murder, Treason, Treason, Murder.
Ant. I feel a Coldness like the hand of Death,
Which by degrees does steal away my Breath:
Against the wished Assault I will not strive,
Since all is done for which I Would wish to live:
These double Blessings in my Fate I meet,
To kill her Murderer -- then -- die, -- at -- her -- Feet.
[Ant. dies. [Asdrubal with several Gentlemen, and the Guards, come running in
at one side of the Theater; Dina, and some of the Queens Women, come running in
at the other, who all stand amazed, lifting up their Hands and Eyes.
Asdr. O Dismal Night, the dismal'st ever has been.

Dina. It Is here my grief should first of all begin.
[Running to the Queen, and kneeling by her. Ah who can doubt Virtue is Crowned
above,
Since Men to hers did still so Cruel prove.
[They all sigh and weep. Enter Solome and Tamar.
Solo. There Is none which has such Cause to mourn as I,
But it is below true grief to sigh and Cry;
And too much Sorrow ought not to be given,
To what appears is the Decree of Heaven:
Bear the dead Bodies from the Gazers sights,
Till all is ready for the Funeral Rites.
[Some of the Gentlemen take up Herod's Body, others Antipater's, and carry
them off. [Tamar, Dina, Merab, and some of the Women, draw the Curtains before
the Queens Bed. While this is doing, Solome says to her self. Fortune above my
Hopes has smiled on me,
Where I but begged two Deaths, she gave me three.
[Solome takes Asdrubal aside. If to your Promise you have faithful been,
It Is I who am, by right of Blood, your Queen:
When I, by you, am Seated in the Throne,
Ask whatsoever you will, and it is your own.

Asdr. Sure, Madam, you must know your Brother's dead,
The news of it through all the Court is spread.

Solo. Why do you not your duty then begin,
And make all others own me for their Queen?

Asdr. This Throne which the late Queen was used to fill,
Madam, ascend, You Will not become it Ill.
Fair Mariamne in it still did sit,
When Foreign Embassies she did admit.
Take it as earnest of a greater far,
And while your Right to these you do declare,
All the Arabian Guards in Arms I Will draw,
The stronger to the weaker gives the Law.
You must expect a Storm from David's Tower,
While it remains in the fierce Phaltiel's Power.
[He leads Solome to the Throne. While she is going to it, she says:
Solo. Fate never did to one a Throne assign,
Who did ascend it in such griefs as mine.
[Asdr. as soon as She is seated bows humbly to her, so do all the rest, Asdr.
goes out.
Solo. Since the Male Race of all the Royal Line
Is now extinct, the Crown by Right is mine:
That I should Reign, Heaven does concerned appear,
Taking so many Lives, to place me here:
Owing this Blessing to Celestial aid,
With Fear and Reverence I must be Obeyed.
I will with Glory fill great Herod's Room.
[Asdrubal introduces Pheroras hastily, attended by all the Guards.
Pher. Descend, vile Woman, and receive thy Doom.
Though in such Sins thou have consumed thy time,
As there is no Judgment equal to thy Crime.
Solome starting up. Are these the Guards which he went out to call?
My Crimes I Will expiate by a glorious fall.

Pher. To thy wronged Lord, to send thee, I design;
And if his Justice does agree with mine,
In wild Arabian Deserts thou shall be
Confined, until Death's hand does set thee free:
May thou a Life of Sorrow there begin,
And be as great in Penitence as Sin.
Seize on her, Guards, and let her be by you
Lead to endure what is less than is her due.
By Poison too, thou did design my fall,
But I am saved by Heaven and Asdrubal.

Solo. I laugh at all you dare design, or do,
For though by Men betrayed and Fortune too:
And though to live in Thrones my Stars deny,
Yet spite of all I in a Throne will die.
[She stabs and kills her self.
Pher. Her thirst of human Blood so great was grown,
Rather than shed no more, she shed her own:
She never showed Mercy, or did Mercy crave,
For her Birth's sake, yet, bear her to her Grave.
Phaltiel and Samias when they see I Am King,
I know their Fort they will to Obedience bring.
It Is, Sir, but part of what I owe, I pay,
[To Asdrubal. Making you Ruler of Samaria.
[Asdrubal bows. Though many Precious Lives at once are lost,
Yet Mariamne's Death afflicts me most:
Her Beauties, and her Virtues were so great,
As for her loss, grief cannot pay the Debt.
A Loss so vast, that Mourning is due
Not only from the Jews, but Nature too.
The Curtain falls.
THE EPILOGUE.
OUR Poet wishes, as I heard him say,
That all your Critics would condemn his Play;
Since if for him that kindness you will do,
He Will leave off Writing, and turn Critic too:
He Will find it then a thing of more delight,
To damn a hundred Plays, than one to write.
Into your mode he will quickly too have got,
Of finding fault where there is cause or not;
Nay be more pleased at all your Plays to hiss,
Than but to Night to have your Claps at this.
He knows, as well as you, it is easier far,
To be the Judge than Prisoner at the Bar.
He Is yet good-natured, for he never was known
To hiss at Plays, though worse than are his own:
Troth, urge him not, for sweetest Wines, you know,
Ill used, to sharpest Vinegar will grow:
And there is no Tyrant's Rage so fiercely burns,
As a hissed Poet's, when he Critic turns.
Then to this Play let your Applause be shown,
If not for Justice sake, yet for your own.
FINIS.

