A DECLARATION OF THE LORD LIEUTENANT GENERAL OF IRELAND.

DIEV ET MON DROIT HONI SOIT QVI MAL Y PENSE royal blazon or coat of arms

Printed at Corck, in the year 1648. and are to be sold at Roches building.

BY THE LORD LIEUTENANT GENERAL OF IRELAND.
ORMOND,
TO prevent the too frequent prejudices incident through jealousies, distrusts,
and misconstructions to all undertakings, We account it not the least worthy
our labor upon the instant of our Arrival to prepare this people, whose
welfare We contend for, with a right understanding of those intentions in Us,
which in Order to his Majesty's service We desire may terminate in their good.

To enumerate the several reasons by which We were induced (for preservation
of the Protestant Religion, and the English interest) to leave the City of
Dublin, and other his Majesty's Garrisons then under our power in this
Kingdom, in the hands of those entrusted by his two Houses of Parliament, were
to set forth a Narative in place of a manifest. It may suffice to be known,
that those Transactions had for one main ground this Confidence. That by being
under the power of the Houses they would upon a happy expected Composure of
Affairs in England revert unto, and be revested in his Majesty as his proper
right.

But having found how contrary to the inclinations of the well affected to his
Majesty's restoration in England, the Power of that Kingdom has unhappily
devolved to hands employed only in the Art and labor of pulling down and
subverting the Fundamentalls of Monarchy (with whom a pernicious Party in this
Kingdom do equally Sympathize and Cooperate.) And being filled with a deep
sense of the duty and obligations that are upon Us strictly to embrace all
oportunities of employing our endeavors toward the recovery of his Majesty's
just rights in any part of his Dominions. Having observed the Protestant Army
in the Province of Mounster (by special providence discovering the Arts and
practizes used to entangle the members thereof, in engagements as directly
contrary to their duties toward God and man, as to their intentions and
resolutions) to have found means to manifest the Candor and Integrity thereof
in a disclaimer of any obedience to, or concurrence with those powers or
persons which have so grosely varyed even their own professed principles of
preserving his Majesty's Person and rights, by confining him under a most
strict Imprisonment, his Majesty also vouchsafing graciously to accept the
declaration of the said Army as an eminent and seasonable expression of their
fidelity toward him, and in testimony thereof having laid his Commands upon us
to make our repair unto this Province to discharge the duties of our place.

We have as well in obedience thereunto as in pursuance of our own duty and
desire to advance his Majesty's service, resolved to evidence our approbation
and esteem of the proceedings of the said Army by publishing unto the world
our like determination in the same ensueing particulers. And accordingly We
profess and declare.

First, to improve our utmost endeavors for the settlement of the Protestant
Religion according to the example of the best Reformed Churches.

Secondly, to defend the King in his Prerogatives.

Thirdly, to maintain the Privileges and Freedom of Parliament, and the
Liberty of the Subjects; That in Order hereunto We shall oppose to the hazard
of our lives, those Rebels of this Kingdom who shall refuse their Obedience
to his Majesty, upon such Terms as He has thought fit by us to require it;
And We shall endeavor to the utmost, the suppressing of that
Jndependent-Party, who have thus fiercely labored the extirpation of the true
Protestant Religion; The ruin of our Prince; The dishonor of Parliament, and
the Vassaladge of our Fellow Subjects, against all those who shall depend upon
them, or adhere unto them; And that this our undertaking might not appear
obnoxious to the Trade of England, but that We desire a firm union and
Agreement be preserved betwixt us; We do likewise declare, that We will
continue free trafique, and Comerce with all his Majesty's good Subjects of
England; And that We will not in the least manner prejudice any of them that
shall have recourse to our Harbors, either in their bodies, ships, or goods,
nor shall We take any thing from them without payment of ready money for the
same; And now that by his Majesty's said Command, We have proceeded to reenter
upon the work of his service in this Province, We conceive no higher
Testimony can be given of his Majesty's acceptance, or of the estimation We
bear about Us toward their Proceedings then by resorting unto them in person
with His Majesty's Authority, and exhibiting unto them the encouragement and
satisfaction they may receive in this assurance. That as We bear an especial
regard to their present undertakings and performances accompanied with a real.
Sense of their former sufferings. So least there should any advantage be
derived unto those who endeavor to improve all oportunities of sowing sedition
and distrust by this suggestion, that the former differences in Judgment and
opinion which have induced persons to serve diversely under His Majesty, and the
Parliament, will occasion prejudice, or ill resentments to arise toward such
Persons as have not formerly concurred in Judgment with others in His
Majesty's service, We do declare, that We are quallified with special power
and authority from His Majesty, to assure them, that no distinction shall be
made in any such Consideration, but that all persons now interested and engaged
in this Cause, shall be reflected upon, with equal fervor and regard; And
that We shall make it our endeavors so to improve and confirm His Majesty's
Gracious disposure toward them, as that We will never call to memory any
past difference in opinion, Judgment, Action, or Profession to the prejudice
of any Member of this Army, or any person relating to it, but on the contrary,
shall be very ready to attest our good affections toward them in the discharge
of such good Offices as shall be in our power, In return whereof We shall
only expect their perseverance in their present engagements for his Majesty's
service with such allacrity, constancy and affection, as may suit with their
late public declaration, and Professions. To whom We desire this assurance
also may be inculcated. That as We shall in the future use our utmost care and
diligence to provide for their preservation from the like hardships, to those
they have formerly undergone; So We have already employed our best industry
and endeavors for the settlement of such a course, as we may (with most
reason) hope will in these uncertain times produce a constant and competent
Subsistence for them, enabling them to make such a progress in their present
undertakings as may with the accomplishment of the great ends thereof establish
their own honor and content. Thus much We have thought fit to publish unto
the world, to furnish it with an evidence of strong conviction against Us, if
We ever swerve (to the best of our power from the just ways of maintaining the
true Protestant Religion, the honor and interest of His Sacred Majesty, the
just rights of Parliament, the Liberties of the Subjects, and the safety, quiet
and welfare of the people entrusted to our Care.

6. October. 1648.

