LAWS AND ORDERS OF WAR. M.DC.XLIII.

Established for the conduct of the Army designed for the expedition of VLSTER.

IN HOC SIGNO VINCES. CASTLEHAVEN AVDLY.


Printed at Waterford by Thomas Bourke, Printer to the Confederate Catholics
of IRELAND 1643.

BY THE GENERAL.
Laws and Orders of War, established for the good Conduct of the Army
designed for the Vlster Expedition.
JAMES Earl of Castle-haven and Lord-Audley, Genenerall of the Army for the
Vlster expedition, To the Lieutenant general. Sergeant-maior General, the
Colonells, Lieutenant Colonells, Sergeant-maiores, Captains, and all other
Officers and Soldiers of Horse and Foot in the Army, and to all the
Confederate Catholics and others, whom these Laws and Orders ensuing shall
concern, which Laws and Orders hereby published under my hand, I require all
the said persons respectively, and severally in this Army, or quarters of the
Confederate Catholics of this kingdom, to observe and keep, on the pains
and penalties, as by these presents are expressed.

Prayers to be frequented.
First, I do straightly charge and command all Commanders, and Officers of the
Army, to see that Almighty GOD be duly and reverently served, by often
frequenting the Sacraments, and daily hearing of Mass, And those that often,
and wilfully neglect this great good be duly punished.

Blalphemy.
2. Let no man speak impiously and maliciously against the Holy and blessed
Trinity, or any of the Three Persons, God the Father, God the Son, and God
the Holy Ghost, Heresy.
or against the known Articles of the Catholic Faith, upon pain of death.
Profanation.
3. No man shall take Gods holy name in vain, or use unlawful Oaths or
Execrations ^r commit any scandalous act to the derogation of Gods honor, upon
pain of the loss of his pay, imprisonment, and such further punishment, as a
Marshall Courtshall think his offense deserves. Traiterous words. Disobedience
to Comma^ders.
4. No man shall use any Traiterous words against his Majesty's sacred Person,
or Royal Authority, upon pain of death. 5. No man shall speak, or practice
any thing to the dishonor or destruction of the Supreme Council of the
Confederate Catholics of Ireland, on pain of death. Disobedience to
Commanders. Mutiny Not repairing to the Rendezvous. Extortion, etc. upon a
March.
6. No man shall offer any violence against, or contemptuously disobey his
Commander, or do any act, or speak any words which are like to breed any
Mutiny in the Army, or Garrison, or impeach the General, Lieutenant General,
or principal Officers directions on pain of death. 7. No man shall wilfully,
or through gross ignorance, fail in coming to the Rendezvous, or Garrison
assigned to him by the General, or other principal Officer, that commands the
Army, upon pain of death. 8. No Captain, Officer, or Soldier, of Troop, or
Company, on their March through any Country within our quarters, or which
shall be in peace or Cessation with us going to any Garrison, or place of
Service, shall upon any pretense of want whatsoever, commit any waste, spoil,
or violence, or extort any victuals, Money or pawn in liew of victuals, from
any good subject whatsoever, but shall content themselves with meat and drink
competent, paying the usual and accustomed Rates for the same, upon pain of
death. But, if in time of open action, by occasion of any March through the
Country the Soldier shall be in want, then the Officer, shall seek and provide
such diet and lodging for them as shall be thought fit, at reasonable Rates
heretofore accustomed, for the which, the Captain or Officer, shall give ready
Money, or for want thereof deliver his Ticket, to be satisfied upon his
Entertaynment. Persons not in^olled in ^he Army. Not repairing to the Colors.
Holding Intelligence with, or Relieving the Enemy.
9. No man that carries Arms, or pretends to be a Soldier, shall remain three
days in the Army, after it is on foot, except he be enrolled in some
Company, on pain of death. 10. No man shall fail immediately to repair unto
his Colors (except upon evident necessity) when an Alarm is given, upon
pain of death. 11. No Officer or Soldier whatsoever shall have conference or
Intelligence with any enemy, or Rebel, that is in open action against his
Majesty, or the Confederate Catholics, or harbor, or receive any such within
the Camp, or in any Town, Fort, Castle or Garrison, or shall send, or procure
to be sent, any victual, Ammunition, or other relief to any Enemy, or Rebel
in action; Neither shall do any other thing to the danger, or prejudice of the
Army; or being acquainted therewith, shall conceal the same from the chief
Officer, upon pain of death: Only such as shall be avowed, and warranted
thereunto by me, or those that command the Army-in my absence, may speak,
confer, have Intelligence, Revolting to the Enemy. Departing from captain.
Entering, or going out of the Camp by unusual ways. Watchword. Sentinel and
watch. Drawing sword after the watch set False Alarm or Noise in the night.
Murder or private quarrel. Officers of the Watch suffering Duells. seditious
words. Unlawful assembly. Mutinous demand of Pay. Abuse to bringers in, of
Victual.
or converse with the enemy, or rebel, for the advantage of his Majesty's
service. 12. No man shall run to the Enemy, or Rebel, that is in action, or
depart the Army, from the Garrison, or Colors, without license, upon pain of
death. 13. No Soldier shall depart from his Captain without license, though
he serve still in the Army, upon pain of death. 14. No man shall enter, or go
out of the Army, or Garrison, but by ordinary ways, upon pain of death. 15.
No man shall make known the watchword to the Enemy, or any other, but by
Order, nor give any Word, other than is given by the Officer, on pain of
death. 16. No man being set Sentinel by his Officer, shall sleep, depart, or
forsake his place, without being Relieved, or drawn of by the Officer that
placed him; Nor any other person being placed upon his watch, shall neglect his
duty commanded by his Officer, upon pain of death. 17. No man shall presume to
draw his Sword, without Order, after the watch is set, upon pain of death. 18.
No man shall give a false Alarm, or discharge a piece in the night, or make
any noise without lawful cause upon pain of death 19. No man shall commit any
Murder, or kill any person, or draw blood of any, or draw Sword in private
quarrel, with intent to offer violence within the Camp, or Garrison, upon
pain of death. 20. No Corporal, or other Officer, commanding the Watch, shall
wittingly suffer a Soldier to go forth to private fight, upon pain of death.
21. No person shall rehearse seditious words in the presence of private
Soldiers without Order, upon pain of death. 22. No persons shall make any
unlawful assembly, or be present or assisting thereunto, upon pain of death.
23. No man shall demand Money, with an unlawful assembly, or by other way,
tending to Mutiny, more especially, upon Marching toward an Enemy, or upon the
execution of any Enterprise, on pain of death. 24. No man shall outrage, or
do any violence to any that come to bring victuals to the Army, or Garrison,
upon pain of death. Deceit in Victual, or Ammunition.
25. No providor, keeper, or Officer of the Confederate Catholics victual, or
Ammunition shall wilfully corrupt, or imbeazell any part thereof, or give any
false account to the General, with a purpose to deceive the Confederate
Catholics, or to hinder the service, upon pain of death. 26. No Soldier in
Musters shall answer for another, False Muster.
or take two pays, or Muster in a false name to defraud his Majesty, upon
pain of death. Spoil, or sale of Ammunition. Selling, or pawning of Arms.
Robbery, or stealth. Betraying Castles, forts etc. Flying from Colors etc.
Departing a mile from the Army. Breach of Order in Chase, etc. Purloyning of
Prey, or Spoil. Ransoming of Prisoners.
27. No person shall sell, spoil, or carry away any Ammunition, upon pain of
death. 28. No So^uldier shall sell, or lay to pawn his Horse, or Hackny or any
part of his Furniture, Arms, or Apparel, for any respect, or pretense of want
whatsoever, upon pain of death. 29. No man shall steal, or take by force any
Treasure, victual, or Ammunition of his Majesty's; or take by force, or steal
from any person, any Money, Arms, apparel, or other goods, being above the
value of xij. d. in Marching, camp, or garrison, upon pain of death. 30. No
man shall deliver any Town, Castle, Fort, or Sconce, without warrant; Or
depart from any strait, or passage, which he is commanded to make good; or
take pasport of the Enemy, or any Rebel in action, or make any ignominious
composition with the Enemy, or Rebel in action, upon pain of death. 31. No
man shall throw away his Arms, or abandon his Ensign, Cornet, or Guidon, or
fly away in any Battle, or Skirmish, upon pain of death: 32. No man shall
depart a mile out of the Army, or Camp, without license, upon pain of death.
33. No Soldier shall break his Order, to follow rout, or chase or to seek
any prey, or spoil, except he be commanded by such as have authority, or
further then he is so commanded, upon pain of death. 34. No Officer or
Soldier, whenever any prey, or spoil shall be taken from the enemy, either
when the Army is in the field, or by any residing in the Garrison shall attempt
to imbeazell, or purloyne any part thereof, but shall endeavor themselves to
the uttermost of their powers, to keep the same together, to be disposed at
the direction of me the General, or any other by me thereunto authorized, upon
pain of death. 35. No Captain, Officer, or Soldier, or any other that shall
take any prisoner, shall presume to deliver him upon any Ransom, or conceal
him, but within four and twenty hours, he shall make the same known unto me,
or other chief Commander, and deliver the same prisoner under the charge of
the Provost Marshall, upon pain of death. 36. No man shall Ravish, Rape.
or Force any woman upon pain of death. Burning of houses Corn, etc.
37. No Soldier shall burn any house, or lodging, or burn, or wilfully spoil
any Corn, Ship, or Boat, or Carriage, or any other thing that may serve for
the Provision of the Army or his Garrison, without he be commanded so to do by
me, or some principal Officer of the Army, upon pain of death. Resisting
Provost Marshals or other Officers. Breaking of prison. Adultery. violence.
38. No man shall resist, or offend any provost Marshall, or other Officer in
the execution of his office, by rescuing offenders, upon pain of death. 39 No
man that is committed, shall break Prison, upon pain of death. 40. No man
shall commit adultery or fornication, upon pain of imprisonment, banishment
from the Army, or such other penalty, as by the Marshals Court shall be thought
meet. 41. No man shall beat, threaten, or dishonestly touch any man, woman or
Child, upon pain of punishment, according to the quality of the offense. 42.
No Soldier serving-on foot, shall carry any Boy, nor any woman shall be
suffered to follow the army, Boys, or women.
upon pain of such punishment, as shall be inflicted by me the Lieutenant
General, or other officer. 43. Every Soldier or Officer that shall be found
drunk shall be committed to prison for the first offense, Drunkenness.
and if he fall into it the second time, being a private Soldier, he shall
besides his imprisonment forfeyte two months pay: If he be an Officer he
shall loose his place. The third time a common-souldier shall have such greater
punishment, as a Marshall Court shall order. Affronts and Challenges.
44. No man shall give any disgraceful words, or commit any act to the disgrace
of any person in the Army, Garrison or any part thereof, upon pain of
imprisonment, public disarming, and banishment from the Army, as men for ever
disabled to carry any Arms. And as I do forbid all men under my command to
renew any old quarrels or to begin any new; so I do acquit and discharge all
men that have quarrels offered or challenge made to them, of all disgrace or
opinion of any disadvantage, since they do but the duties of Soldiers, which
ought to subject themselves to Marshall discipline. And they that provoke them,
shall be proceeded withal, as breakers of all good discipline, and enemies to
the good success of the service. Weak Companies. Deceit in Muster.
45. No Captain shall through corruption, or wilful or gross negligence
suffer his company to grow weak upon pain of imprisonment, loss of his
place, and ignominious banishment from the army. 46. No Captain, Lieutenant,
or other Officer of the Army, shall in the Tender, ^^presentme^t of their
Musters use any fraud, practice, or deceit whereby the Muster-Master, his
Deputies, or the Commissaries may be misled, mistaken, or prevented of the due
understanding of the true estate of that company, upon pain of loss of his
place, and such other ignominious punishment, as by a Marshals Court shall be
thought meet. Unequal cheques.
47. No Muster-Master shall either for favor, friendship, or other by respect
whatsoever, impose a less or greater Check upon any Captain or Officer, then
his default shall justly merit, or any Check at all, where no defect, or
default shall appear upon due view taken of the company; Cheques without view.
and that no Check shall be imposed by discretion with out view, upon pain that
every offender, who shall be found to transgress in all, or any part of this
article, shall forfeyte his place which he holds, and be further subject to
such corporal, or pecuniary punishment, as by the discretion of a Marshall
Court shall be thought convenient. Defects certified, not Supplied.
48. Every Cataine shall have a list of all the defaults in Apparel, Arms or
trayning certified by the Muster-Master, or the Commissaries authorized for
Musters sent unto him, attested under their hands; whereupon the said Captain
shall presently take Order, that the same be fully supplied, before the Muster
then next ensuing such notice given him thereof; and every Captain sailing in
his duty herein, shall for the first neglect have one months pay defalked out
of his entertaynment, And if he continue the said neglect with out amending,
and supplying the same, he shall be discharged of his place and command.
Neglect in Trayning.
49. All Captains shall be diligent in Trayning their Companies, and shall be
careful in governing them well, and in providing for them according to the
orders published for the Musters; and also shall see in all services, that they
do the duties of Soldiers, as they will hope for favor or advancement, or
escape ignominious discharging from their charges. Arms Vn-Fixt.
50 No Soldier shall appear with his Arms unfixt, or undecently kept, upon
pain of punishment according to the Officers good discretion. Defect of Arms.
51. No Soldier shall come, not fully armed to his Colors, being to watch, or
to be exercised, upon pain of being punished, according to discretion.
Non-Residence in Garrison. Orderly Quarters
52. No Captain, or Officer shall without express license in that behalf
signified, remain or abide forth of his place, assigned unto him by me for his
Garrison, upon pain of death. 53. All Captains, or other Officers, that for
the time shall have command of Troop or Company, shall see them orderly
quartered as they are appointed, and as they are commanded, upon pain of the
loss of their places. 54. Every private man and Soldier, Silence.
upon pain of imprisonment shall keep silence, when the Army is to take
lodging, or when it is Marching or Imbattailling, so as the Officers may be
heard and their commandments executed. Goods of the dead.
55. No man shall spoil, or take the goods of any that dies, or is killed in
the service, upon pain of restoring double the value, but the goods of such as
die in the Army or Garrison, if they make any will by word or writing, shall be
disposed of, according to their will. If they make no will; shall be distributed
to the hurt, sick, and poor, of the Company whereof the Soldier was, or
shall go to the Hospital of the Army. Buying, or taking to pawn of arms.
56. No inhabitant in Town or Country, shall presume to buy or take to pawn,
any Horse, or Hackney of any Soldier, or any part of his Furniture, Arms, or
apparel, for any respect or pretense whatsoever, upon pain of forfeyting the
double value thereof, and to suffer imprisonment, until he shall restore the
goods so unduely Bought, or taken to Pawn. Loosing of Arms by Negligence.
57. If any Horseman shall loose his Horse or Hackney; or Footman, any part of
his Arms, by negligence, or lewdness, whereby he shall be unable to discharge
the duty of his place, then until he shall recover the same, or furnish
himself with as good, he shall remain in the state and condition of a Pioner,
or sustain further punishment at my discretion, or other Officer thereunto
authrized. Unwholesome Vctualls. Unseasonable ^oures at Victualing hou^es.
Soldiers not to be Victuallers. Captains not to give Pasport. Casheering of
Soldiers Entertaining Run awayes.
58. No victualler shall presume to issue, or sell unto any of the Army,
unsound, unsavory, or unwholesome victuals, upon pain of imprisonment, and
such other punishment, as by a Marshall Court shall be thought fit to be imposed
on him, or them that shall so offend. 59. No victualler shall entertayne
Soldiers at unseasonable hours, upon pain of being severely punished. 60. No
Soldier shall be a victualler without the consent of the chief of the Army,
on pain of punishment according to discretion. 61. No Captain shall give
Pasport to any Officer or Soldier under his command without my leave. 62. No
Captain or other Officer of the Army shall discharge, or Cashier any Soldier
entered in his Majesty's List of this his Army without my privity and allowance,
and my special warrant in that behalf: unless it be by the privitie and
allowance of the Officers of the Musters, upon the public days of Muster. 63.
No inhabitant of City Town, or country shall presume to receive any Soldier
into their service, no having a sufficient authority, neither shall any
conceal, or hide any such runaway, or use means to convey them out of the
kingdom, or to any other secret place, but shall apprehend all such, and
deliver them ever to the Provost Marshall, upon pain of imprisonment, as shall
be thought fit by the chief commander to be inflicted. Detecting, etc. of
Offenders.
64. All Captains, Officers, and Soldiers, shall do their endeavors to
Detect, Apprehend, and bring to punishment all Offenders, and shall assist the
Officers of the Army for that purpose, as they will answer their Slacknesse,
and be censured in the Marshals Court. 65. All other Faults, Disorders, and
Offenses, that are not mentioned in these Articles, Faults in general,
provided against.
shall be punished according to the General customs; and Laws of War; and
therefore it is by me commanded, that all men look to their charge, and he
that has no charge, to look to his own carriage, as he will answer the
contrary. 66. Finally, the Lieutenant General of the Army, Sergeant Major
General, the Colonells, Captains, and all other officers of the Confederate
Catholics within this Kingdom, whom it may concern, are hereby required to
observe these Laws, and to see them put in due execution from time to time.
These Laws and Orders I require every Captain in the Army to cause to be
read in the head of their several Companies forthwith, and the chief Officer
of every Regiment are required to see to the careful performance and
observation as well of this Direction, as of all the said Laws and Orders.

CASTLEHAVEN AVDLY.

FINIS.

