BY THE LORD ^^EVTENANT GENERAL OF IRELAND.
^RMONDE.

WHereas we have granted our Commissions of sequestrations of all the Lands,
tenements goods and Chattles of such persons as are now absent, either in this
Kingdom or in (...)d and beyond the seas, who have estates and places of
residence within this his Majesty's (...)me of Ireland, And that in doing
thereof we might not be said to take any advantage of (...)ons Casual or
necessary absence, who haueing a disposition to return brings with him an
(...)n (...) submitt to his Majesty's power and authority entrusted with us,
and to the Articles and (...) of peace, which we have contracted upon good
deliberation, and by the concurrence and (...)ation of his Sacred Majesty with
such of his Roman Catholic subjects as have given us ^^surance and testimony
of their Loyalty and adhering unto him. We have thought fit and (...)eby for
the encouradgment and security of such absent persons publish and declare, that
if (...)ll return to their former habitations and possessions by or before
the times and days he(...) limited, and apply and submitt themselves to his
Majesty's power and authority here esta(...) under our command and Government,
And to the Articles and conditions of peace now ^^^cted and aggreed upon with
his Roman Catholic subjects, that then we shall readily receive unto his
Majesty's protections, and repossess them of their estates, possessions and
intrests, unless (...) just cause of exception against them for some
transcendent delinquency in reference to (...) ^^ecrable Murder of his late
Majesty of famous memory. That is to say. That every (...) now in this
Kingdom do return by or before the four and twentieth day of June next
(...)g, And every person now in England or beyond the seas do return
qualified as aforesaid (...) before the last day of September next ensuing. And
if they shall fail, refuse or neglect so to within the several times
aforesaid We do then hereby give such persons to understand that (...)
resolve to distribute and employ their estates and intrests toward the public
and his Ma(...) service.

Given at our Castle of Kilkenny the nynth day of May, 1649. GOD SAVE THE KING
Printed at Kilkenny in the year of our Lord 1649.


