THE TRAGEDY OF MUSTAPHA, The SON of SOLOMON THE Magnificent.

Written by The Right Honorable the Earl of ORRERY.

LONDON, Printed for H. Herringman, at the Sign of the Blew Anchor in the Lower
Walk of the New Exchange. 1668.

The Persons.
Solomon the Magnificent. Mr. Betterton. Mustapha, and Zanger. His Sons. Mr.
Harris. Mr. Smith. Rustan, and Pyrrhus. Vizier Bassaws. Mr. Samford. Mr.
Norris. Haly, and Achmat Eunch Bassaws. Mr. Cadiman. Mr. James Noke. The King
of Hungary an Infant. The Cardinal of Veradium. Mr. Young. Thuricus, and Viche.
Hungarian Lords. Mr. Medborn. Mr. Aingel. Roxolana, Solymans Wife. Mrs.
Betterton. Queen of Hungary. Mrs. Davis. Zarma, and Mirza. Roxolana's Women.
Mrs. Long. Mrs. Norris. Cleora, Queen of Hungary' s Woman Mrs. Shadwel. The
Sultans Guards. Mutes. Pages. And other Attendants.
Mustapha.
THE FIRST ACT.
Solymans Camp and his Pavillion. Enter Solomon, Rustan, Pyrrhus, and the
Sultans Guards. Rust. WHat Influence, Mighty Sultan, rules the day,
And stops your course where glory leads the way?
The Hungarian Armies hasten from the Field,
And Buda waits for your approach to yield;
Yet you seem doubtful what you are to do,
And turn from Triumphs when they follow you.

Pyrrh. We at the Suns one moments rest should more
Admire then at his glorious course before.
Glory, like Time, progression does require,
When it does cease to advance, it does expire.

Soly. You both mistake; my glory is the cause
That in my Conquest I have made this pause;
Whilst Hungary did powerful Foes afford,
I thought her Ruin worthy of my Sword;
But now the War does seem too low a thing,
Against a Mourning Queen, and Infant King;
Pyrrhus, it will unequal seem in me
To Conquer, and then blush at Victory.

Rust. None but the Conquered should have sense of shame.
Shall shows of Virtue darken your bright Fame?
Success does cover all the crimes of War,
And Fame and Virtue still consistent are.
In lazy peace let Christian Monarchs rust,
Who think no War, but what is defensive, just.
Our Valiant Prophet did by slaughter rise:
Conquest a part of our Religion is.

Pyrrh. He in his Holy War sounds no retreat,
Accounting none Religious but the great;
His Martyrs, not by yielding, glory gain;
They the other World, by Conquering this, obtain.

Soly. To Rome I will my dreadful Ensigns lead,
Rome which was once the Universal head,
Which still the worlds important part controuls;
Once she gave Laws to Kingdoms, now to Souls;
To that great Conquest my designs I bend,
This Kingdom is my way and not my end,
Which now, since too much scared by my Alarms,
Seems worthier of my pity then my Arms.

Rust. Since Rome did once the Universe subdue,
It Is now the only Conquest fit for you;
But he who Conquests wisely has designed,
Does never leave an Enemy behind.
Though all that Heaven ere finished in a Man,
Is now in you, yet Heaven's Great Agent can
Proceed but as the Instrument of Fate,
To work out Conquests, not at once Create;
Beginnings should to the end still useful be;
It Is more to use then gain a Victory.

Pyrrh. The Sword must end what Valor has begun,
Else you disgrace what is already done;
Your Foes would think if you should now relent,
That you of Conquests as of Crimes repent.
When your bright Crescents are to Buda shown,
It Is but a step to the Hungarian Crown;
Your presence lower then their knees will bring
The Hungarian Priests to offer up their King.
When by that proof your Conquest is confessed,
Dispose of him by rules of Interest.

Soly. Bear then my Standard before Buda's Walls
I should not stop my Ears when glory calls;
Since there the Foe all his reserves does make,
In taking Buda I the Kingdom take.
Call the Divan, let them consult with you,
What with the Infant King is fit to do.
[Exeunt the two Bashas. Divans like Commonwealths regard not fame,
Disdaining honor they can feel no shame;
Each does, for what the public safety call,
Venture his Virtue in behalf of all,
Doing by power what Nature does forbid,
Each hoping, amongst all, that he is hid,
Hidden because they on each other wink,
When they dare act what Monarchs scorn to think.
[Exit.
Enter Isabella Queen of Hungaria in Mourning, Cleora, Thuricus, Viche, and
Attendants. Thur. In the Hungarian Council does appear
Disorder varied in all shapes of fear.

Viche. And in their looks too clearly I descry,
They Will rather tamely yield then bravely dye.

Queen. But yet the remedy by Death remains,
When that may free them will they carry Chains?
Their Souls are with their Armies overcome,
They who the Bulwark were of Christendom,
Shall now be made at once their scorn and shame:
It Is less to lose their Country than their Fame.
But though the frighted States should yield the Town,
I am resolved never to resign the Crown*
My care of that, and my neglect of Life,
Are signs that I have been your Monarchs Wife.

Thur. The death of that Great King for whom you Mourn,
Did our advancing Empire backward turn;
The Turks may now the Christian world out-brave,
Since all our hearts lie buried in his grave.

Card. The Sultan's Army covers ^udas hills,
Enter the Cardinal of Veradium. Which our Consulting States with terror fills,
Who hearing he to such has mercy shown,
As, timely yielding, did his wrath atone;
They will a sudden present to him bring,
Worth more than all their lives, our Infant King.

Queen. Give up the King! in that resolve I see
The Hungarians now are ripe for slavery;
The Prince, who from your King his birth did take,
Shall not a part of Turkish triumph make;
Death may, but fear shall never cast me down:
Who yields, does never deserve to wear a Crown;
Death shall us both in the first breach relieve,
We Will die, since in the Throne we cannot live.

Thur. Ah Madam, that which you have now designed,
Does more become your fortune than your mind;
Let not your Virtue teach you cruelty.

Queen. It Is worse to merit death than it is to die:
A Queen who does resign her Son and State,
Does use her self, worse than she is used by Fate.

Card. Since now the States your broken Armies pay,
The orders of the States they will obey;
And what they have resolved, they soon will do,
Therefore my Counsel, Madam, pray pursue;
Since they have proved so false and so unjust,
Turn what they make necessity to trust;
Send the Crown-Jewels, and the Infant King
To Roxolana as an Offering;
Subdue that Beauty which the Victor sways,
With what the Great are soonest conquered, Praise:
Extol her Virtue, and her Mercy move,
By all the Charms of pity and of love;
In gaining her you make the Sultan sure,
A desperate ill can have no common cure.
Whilst with applause high minds you higher raise,
You make them virtuous to make good your praise.

Queen. The States, not I, this Counsel may esteem,
'Twill make me do what I abhorred in them;
If by their Cowardice I am destroyed,
I Will bravely meet what I in vain avoid:
Ah! it is enough my fate to undergo,
Must I the Patient be, and Agent too?
It Is Hazardous on th'Empress to rely,
I by the Sultan's Conquest can but die;
And 'twill less glory to my death afford,
To perish by her sentence then his sword:
By my own way I but to death submit,
But if I follow yours I merit it;
For when a Monarch is subdued by fear,
What he does suffer he deserves to bear.

Card. My way, the worst that can befall our King,
Is to become his peoples offering;
Of the two ills, which will the worser be,
To die for them, or by their Treachery?
Thus he will afflict whom he can never reclaim,
For sure the sharpest punishment is shame:
The worse they are, his fate the better seems,
When those who him destroy he thus redeems;
Religion too makes it a greater thing,
To die a Martyr then to live a King.

Queen. My Lord, your pious reasons make me yield,
Nature to Virtue should resign the field;
Bring me, Cleora, my unhappy Son,
And with him all the Jewels of the Crown;
[ Exit Cleora. You Thuracus on Embassy shall go
To Roxolana's Tent, and let her know
How much the common voice of Fame I trust,
Which renders her compassionate and just;
Whilst others say she all her sex exceeds,
They show their Faith by words, but I by deeds;
I by so strange a trust may find relief,
If she has virtue equal to my grief.

Viche. Madam, she will not now by one mean act,
A future stain on her past fame contract.

Thur. Honor will make her value what I bring.
It Is more to save then to destroy a King.

Enter Cleora with the young King, and a Casket of Jewels, with Attendants.
Queen. Ah! would thy Cradle had been made thy Grave.
Since born to be at once a King and Slave;
In bonds thy fatal Reign thou do begin,
And thou art punished e're thou know to sin.

Card. You feed your sorrow when you thus complain;
Think not of loss, but count what you may gain;
Fortune who leads him hence will bring him back,
And long preserve what you a while forsake.

Queen. My Lord, my sorrow seeks not your relief,
You are not fit to judge a Mothers grief;
You have no Child for an untimely grave,
Nor can you lose, what I desire to have.

Card. He Will be restored unless you hazard him,
By losing time which none could ere redeem.

Queen. I Will now seal up the heart which I must send
In thee, to thy new-Mother and my Friend.
[Kisses him Oh Heaven persuade her that she both may prove,
And that her power be equaled by her love;
Let me but seal't again ere it does go:
Two Seals the importance of Dispatches show.

[Kisses him again. Card. Madam, we must by stealth our passage get:
Our Guards are strict, and the Evening Watch is set.

Queen. Be you his Nurse, Cleora, teach him how,
He should to Heaven with early homage bow;
Teach him to sooth the Empress, and to be,
A pretty supplyant for himself and me.

[ Exeunt several ways, the Queen still turning her Eyes toward her Son, and
weeping. Enter Mustapha, Zanger, Attendants. Must. Sure, my dear Zanger, those
who heretofore,
The envied Crown of this Great Empire wore;
Nere knew the charms which Friendship do attend,
Or in a Brother never had a Friend;
Since he who Friendships sacred power has known,
Rather than kill a Friend, would lose a Throne:
Your Friendship at so just a rate I prize,
As I for that this Empire can despise.

Zang. That jealous care which on this Throne attends,
Thinks those too great who merit to be Friends;
None but an equal should in Friendship share,
And Sultans of their equals jealous are:
They think the proof of wisdom is distrust,
And then believe, what ere is safe is just;
Their fatal maxims made our Sultans still.
As soon as they were Crowned, their Brothers kill.

Must. How can that wisdom in our Sultans be,
Which of it self is fear and cruelty?
If titles change the intention of the Fact,
Then justice weighs the Actor, not the Act;
And who would not a Monarchy refuse,
When, to gain power, he must his nature lose,
The virtue of that man was never strong,
Who feared not more to do then suffer wrong.
By our great Prophet solemnly I swear,
If I the Turkish Crown do ever wear,
Our bloody custom I will overthrow;
That debt I both to you and justice owe.

Zang. And here I vow by all that is good and high,
I Will not outlive the day in which you die;
This which my Friendship makes me promise now,
My grief will then enable me to do.

Must. My vow is sealed.

Zang. Mine Friendship shall make good.

[They embrace. Must. Friendship's a stronger tie than that of blood.

Enter Haly. Haly. Sir, the Divan in secret Council sit;
The Sultan to their Judgment does remit
The Summons or Assault of this proud Town,
Or to demand the Infant with his Crown.

Zang. If the Divan may of this Realm dispose,
The Hungarians will have scarce enough to lose.

Must. Councils dare do worse than their Monarchs dare;
For where in evil many bear a share,
They hardly count, when they divide the guilt,
A drop for each, though streams of blood were spilt.

[Exeunt. Enter Roxolana with her Train, Cleora, Thuracus with the young King,
and a Casket of Jewels. Rox. She thinks that my compassion may be bought:
You had the King without these Jewels brought,
If she had held me worthy to have shown,
That I without reward could save a Crown:
She does at once what generous seems and low,
What her trust builds, her gifts do overthrow.
Bear back the remnants of her ruined State,
And leave the Infant to expect his Fate.

Thur. Great Roxolana cannot but excuse
Those errors which our Queens respects produce;
She makes for her offense no ill amends,
When she dares trust that Virtue she offends;
Nor has she cause that error to deplore,
Which gives you power to show your mercy more.
It Is not below your fame, nor yet your state,
To pardon faults your Glory does create;
For if your Glory had been less sublime,
You could not take her Present for a crime.
These glist'ring Ornaments of Regal State,
Become the Prosperous, not the Unfortunate.
Ah! to her error, Madam, be more kind;
The wrong she meant not, she the trust designed.

Rox. What I resolve, I change not through mistake;
Leave here your King, but bear your Presents back.

Cleora. This answer makes us both rejoice and mourn;
The greater gift you keep, the less return;
Yet your protection cannot be denied:
Honor and mercy ever were allied.

[Exeunt Thuracus, Cleora, Roxolana, Lady carries away the Infant. Enter Zarma.
Zarm. From the Divan, Rustan is hither sent,
Who humbly begs to attend you in your Tent.

Rox. Admit him; this must of importance be;
[ Exit Zarma. He is a Cloud between the Sun and me.

Achm. Your beams exhaled what they may soon dispel;
He Will shrink in lesser time then he did swell.

Rox. He Is now the Sultans, but I raised him first,
And poisoned him with power to make him burst.

Enter Haly, Rustan. Rust. From the Divan, Great Empress, I am come;
They have pronoun'd the Royal Infants doom;
And now their Mutes at your Pavilion Gate,
For execution on your pleasure wait.

Rox. Can they contest with what they should despise?
Or are they in such want of Enemies,
As to pursue an Infant to my Tent?

Rust. It Is said that he is here for refuge sent.

Rox. Design of refuge sanctifies this place:
Weakness pursued, shows strong pursuers base;
The privilege of refuge I Will maintain,
And they not breaking it will honor gain.

Rust. States may by honor lose, if they comply
With mischiefs, because weak, or when they fly;
They root up Infant Danger when it springs:
None can foretell the height of growing Kings.

Rox. The grave Divan in ruining their Foes,
Are not concerned when they may honor lose;
Because it most reflects on future fame,
But they seek present safety though with shame.
Great Solomon, who has for honor fought,
Does wisely prize what with his blood he bought;
And what he values, I must value too;
Doing like him, how can I better do?
But the Divan and I shall vainly strive,
Since from the Sultan they that power derive;
By which for bloody interest they contend,
And by his power, my honor I defend.

Rust. Your beauty keeps all humane power in awe:
What can resist it, but our Prophets Law:
The wise Divan, armed with Religious force,
Contests not with your power, but your remorse.

Rox. Religion now does many faces bear,
And all resemble those, who Copy her;
You Statesmen in your own resemblance draw
Her shape, by which you keep the world in awe,

Rust. Fair Empress, when Religion does oppose
What custom plants, or in our nature grows;
We are incensed, and yet we then forbear
TO accuse the Law, but tax the Interpreter;
As men refrain to quarrel with the strong,
But wrongs pretend from those whom they may wrong;
Our Law offends them by their own mistake,
Whilst what is merciful, they cruel make:
This Infants blood will quench the flames of War;
Millions of lives we by his dying spare.

Rox. But can Religion with such ill dispense
As harm prevents, by harming innocence.

Rust. Shall true Religion (which must still declare
Against all false Religions open War)
Be less provided for offense then those,
Who practice policy as well as blows?

Rox. Rustan, I did not think Camps could have bred
One, whose Religion might in Temples plead
For all that Heaven enjoynes, and Hell resists:
Rustan might lead an Army made of Priests.

Rust. They fight for the other World, and yield up this;
Would I could lead them all to Paradise:
But Madam, the Hungarian Child, to save,
Contesting Armies from a public grave,
Should dye, if with his death you would dispense.

Rox. I have some pity of his innocence.

Rust. His early dying may his Soul prefer
To the other World, and may secure us here.
Those, Madam, may rejoice who upward go,
And ought to pity us who stay below.

Rox. Ah Rustan! you by soaring Virtue reach,
Those heights of which our Priests can only Preach;
My pity you correct, and then destroy,
In pleading what the dead, by death enjoy;
And now, to show I prize what you esteem,
Call in my Mutes and bid them strangle him.

[Pointing to Rustan. Rust. It Is much to say it, can you mean it too?

[ Exit Mitza. Rox. I Will not dissemble as you Viziers do.
A Viziers power is but subordinate,
Enter Mitza and the Mutes. He Is but the chief dissembler of the State;
And often for public interest lies; but I,
The partner of Supreme Authority,
Do ever mean the utmost that I say;
Dispatch, he is such a Saint as needs not pray.

Haly. Hold, hold.

Rox. How Haly, by command from you?

Haly. It Is but for leave that I may humbly sue.
I can less doubt the justice of your will,
Then that you here have privilege to kill;
The greatness of his crime none will suspect,
Because he came to invade* what you protect;
But for that height of trespass let him live,
Lest you should seem unable to forgive.

Achm. You only mortal power by killing show;
But by forgiving it does Heavenly grow:
The Offender more your frowns, then dying fears.

Rust. To me your anger, worse then death appears.

Rox. Live, since my wrath does fear of death transcend,
Live to continue, what thy death will end.

Exit Rustan bowing low. Exeunt Mutes another way. Haly. He Is gone to study
what revenge can do;
But, Madam, it is more safe for us that you
Have left a Vizier living to complain,
Then that the Sultan should have found him slain.

Rox. Can you your safety doubt whilst you are mine?

Achm. You and the Sun warm all things where you shine.

Haly. Some flowers seem more then others to rely
On the Suns favor, such as with his Eye
Open and shut, and with his Noon grow strong,
We like to those may flourish, but not long.

Achm. The Sultan will not chide your violence,
But make our knowing of it an offense;
And we shall certain be of punishment,
For knowing that which we could never prevent.

Haly. He Will on your errors wink, as on his own,
And think them punished in but being known.

Enter Solomon. Achm. Our storm's already coming, would 'twere past.

Haly. Before it falls, let us to shelter haste.

Exeunt Achmat, Haly. Soly. We in our Camp want power to check your will,
And your Pavilion is your Cittadil;
Which you with Dwarfs, and Mutes, and Eunuchs, man,
To hold out siege against the whole Divan;
This wonder I am told, if it be true,
We must leave Buda to beleaguer you.

Rox. I thought in gaining you, I gained the Field,
And therefore would not to your Subjects yield.

Soly. Fortune does blush at the bold minds of those,
Who, what is long in gaining, rashly lose.

Rox. Your Vizier is a most impatient Saint:
He cannot suffer wrong without complaint.

Soly. You would be terrible, yet pleasant too,
And in gay humor when you mischief do;
Can you, when sullen grown, be cheerful made
With no less sport then death in masquerade?
My Vizier, on whose office I rely,
Whose power should advers Nations terrify;
You, for your Eunuchs, and your Dwarfs delight,
To try his Valor, with Death's vizard fright.

Rox. Had you not taught me, I had never known
All Power to be Fantastic, but your own.

Soly. I Will teach you now that Death's a serious thing.
Call for your Mutes, and for your little King!

Rox. What is your meaning Sultan? Zarma stay!

Soly. Ha! Is she doubtful whom she should obey?

Rox. You rule enough, ruling the world and me;
Pray let my Women, my own Subjects be.

Soly. Your Subjects are not safe obeying you:
Theyl make my Mutes do more then yours should do.

Rox. Your looks are changed, and many dangers there
Assemble like black Clouds when storms are near:
Ah Sultan! what should Roxolana do,
If, like your looks, your heart were altered too?
Is it your pleasure that my Women bring,
For your Diversion, Sir, the Infant King?

Soly. Your question breeds delay, let him be brought.
Your Women sure are Mutes, and only taught
To know your signs for what they should not do;
I Will send my Mutes to instruct them when to go.

The Women run out. Rox. Alas, their fear did make them loath to move:
They fear your anger, but I trust your love.

Enter the Women with the young King. Soly. Is this the thing that you would
keep alive;
For whom the Cross does with the Cressent strive;
Nay, bring him near, his motion has a grace;
And I perceive a promise in his face,
That he will perform what he declares in show,
If destiny will give him leave to grow;
His eyes do with a different luster move,
They threaten vengeance, and they promise love.

Rox. Pray look, methinks his features are not ill --
But cruel Rustan, thinks I have no skill --
Poor Infant, none dare speak in thy defense,
And thou want words to plead thy innocence.

Soly. You are too fond, be tender of your own:
They Will quit his company to get his Crown;
If this seems strange I Will put you out of doubt;
Zarma go call my Mutes, they wait without.

Rox. Stay! Zarma stay! If this, Sir, beyour doom,
Send me too where the cruel never come;
I Will bind him to me with my Arms and Hair,
Then try, Sir, if your Mutes or Viziers dare
Enforce him from the refuge of my Breast.

Soly. Though with strange valor you are now possessed,
Yet surely, Empress, the Divan, and I,
May charge with the most desperate Enemy:
Your heart will yield after this raging fit.

Rox. It may e'relong, when you have broken it.

[Weeps. Soly. Come, come! My Mutes, ending an Infants life,
Which seems but new begun, will end our strife.

Rox. The light of this new kindl*d life shall shine,
Till those who put it out extinguish mine;
Your Mutes may tremble and your Viziers too,
Knowing what I have done, and still dare do.

Soly. You will not sure with them and me contend.

Rox. Against th'opposing world I will defend
The life which in protection I receive;
Sultan I Will do it -- If you will give me leave --

[Weeps. Soly. You, Roxolana, are the Conqueror.
What storm is not allayed by such a shower?
I only tried whether your Virtue were
Above my anger, and your sexes fear:
Since over both it does so nobly rise,
It shall be more Triumphant then your eyes.

Rox. By yielding you prevail, and your remorse
Gains more then other Victors get by force.

Soly. Your shower of Tears will make my Laurels spring,
And growth does promise to this Infant King;
He shall applaud your gentle Victory,
For your remorse saves him and Conquers me.

Exeunt. The young King, being led out between Solomon and Roxolana. THE SECOND
ACT.
Enter Roxolana, Zanger, Haly, Zarma, Achmat, and Attendants to them. Achm.
THree Christian Ladies, who from Buda come,
Wait for admittance in the outward room.

Rox. Sure they are sent from the Hungarian Queen.
Her fears have made her restless: bring them in.
Zanger, your looks must now serene appear;
Rustan must find no more foul weather here;
He has endeavored to deserve his peace,
Therefore your frowns must with my anger cease.

Zang. The Vizier gains so much of your esteem,
That I e're long may wish good looks from him.

Enter the Queen of Hungaria, and two Ladies attending her. Queen. Madam, your
favors have so prosperous been,
And so obliging to the Hungarian Queen
(Still rising like your virtue and your power)
That she does find her sense of it is more,
Then she dares trust another to express,
Therefore is now her own Embassadress.
That high Compassion, Madam, by which you
The Infant saved, has brought the Mother too;
As the afflicted with Devotion run
To Altars, where great Miracles are done.

Rox. In this you trust my virtue, not my power;
And whilst you are obliged, oblige me more.

Queen. Those who at Altars blessings crave, may bring,
There where they begging come, an offering;
Which if they offer as a recompense
For what they then implore, were an offense.
But, Madam, I shall now a Present make.
O^ what I ought to give, and you may take:
Buda, for your acceptance, Madam, waits:
Your virtue, by a Charm, unlocks her Gates:
Buda, will bow to you, though it the power
Proudly withstood of every Conqueror;
By force never awed, norstratagem beguiled:
Buda, the Virgin Town; which has been styled
(When every Victor courted her to yield)
The Mistress of the Master of the Field.

Zang. Haly, we grow too great, Heaven make us less,
Since Conquests bring such beauties to distress.
Methinks my Mother should more tender grow.

Haly. You feel that pity, Sir, which she will show.

Queen. I to your virtue now a Present make
Of what the Sultans power could never take;
So much your powerful virtue does oblige,
That it does take what he can but besiege.

Rox. Whilst thus you strive to make my virtue known,
Madam, you show a greater of your own;
And what I did, you now reward so well,
As makes the recompense the Deed excel;
Yet but a little virtue were in me,
If I should now let yours, your ruin be.

Queen. How can my gratitude my ruin bring,
Trusting a Kingdom, where I trust a King?
Pardon me, Madam, if I come to you,
As all to Altars with self-interest do;
Hoping they mighty blessings shall receive,
For what they there in little offerings give:
I give an Infant King whom all forsake,
And of a Town besieged, a Present make;
But you adopting him restore a Crown,
And give a Kingdom, when you take a Town.
The Sultan may his Armies valor spare,
You by your single virtue end the War.

Rox. Your virtue has a greater wonder wrought,
It Conquers where it but protection sought;
Above this height, Honor can never get,
For it does Conquer, whilst it does submit.
Madam, it is only Solomon and you
Can boast they Roxolana did subdue;
And that your triumph may the more appear,
You in this very Camp have Conquered her:
But you are now my Guest, and you shall stay,
Till you at least believe that I Will repay
What you with more then gratitude have done:
Madam, I know you long to see your Son.
Zanger, attend the Queen, and let her be,
By finding your respects, assured of me.

Exeunt several ways, Zanger leading out the Queen. Enter Rustan, Pyrrhus.
Rustan. She over his heart still more victorious grows,
And faster Conquers him, then he his Foes.

Pyrrh. Your dark designs are all in vapor gone,
They are but Clouds, her beauty is the Sun.
Great Favorites seldom their resentments hide;
Revenge shows not their anger, but their pride;
She Will be revenged that you her power may see.

Rust. 'Twill her least mischief seem to ruin me:
She with the wind and tide of favor flows.

Pyrrh. Row with that stream which strength cannot oppose:
Swell up her Sails with praise and flattery.

Rust. Those are low Courtships for a Soul so high;
Such common fawning she will despise or hate,
She must be tempted with a subtler bait:
I must engage her by some bold design,
In which her Interest with great crimes may join:
The Great can never love, because too high
^or that which Love allows, equality;
But they to those they fear will favor show,
And they fear those, who their great mischiefs know,
Knowing her guilt, I may her favor find;
Guilt next to Love, above all ties do bind:
Her heightn'd mind and nature much disdain,
That Mustapha should over Zanger reign;
I can assault her only on that side,
Making her virtue vaslal to her pride.

Pyrrh. Advance, Sir, this design e're she can know,
What for her sake you have begun to do;
Honor or craft may make her else to shun
The sin designed, which she will applaud when done.

Rust. And, Pyrrhus, 'twere no little mark of skill
To make her think, when I opposed her will,
'Twas only that I might the Sultan blind,
More safely to effect what I designed;
My faults to her shall such deserts appear,
As she shall thank me that I injured her.

Pyrrh. If she discerns you not through your disguise,
She who has caught the Sultan, is your prize.

Rust. I should her Friendship wish, were Friendship more
Then a mere name 'twixt those who covet power;
You shall but Echo what I have begun,
To make the Father jealous of the Son*
I with the Sultan durst at first proceed,
Only so far as might attention breed;
Last night some words I artfully did say,
From Fame, not from my self, of Mustapha,
Which might the Sultan's jealous anger raise,
Not words of accusation, but of praise:
For nothing can old Monarchs more offend,
Then when their Successors we much commend:
I quickly found that he was loath to hear,
Therefore by pause and parcel in his Ear,
Did civilly that poison, Praise, infuse,
As men unwilling seem to tell ill news.

Pyrrh. His first Disease is fixed, what can remove
The Jealousy of Empire, or of Love?

Rust. Now I that fatal feed have own, it is fit
That I attend on time to ^ipen it.

Pyrrh. When fancy to that fruitful weed does give
But any root, 'twill grow whilst it does live.

Enter Zanger, and Achmat, at distance from him. Zang. Warm me, and quench me,
for I freeze and burn,
And at one object both rejoice and mourn:
What mean thou Nature, is it bad or good,
Which makes this April-weather in my blood?

Achm. I fear he has with two much passion seen
The charming eyes of the Hungarian Queen;
I saw him gaze on her with such review;
As if he feared the object were not true:
So miracles are seen by faithless men,
Who stay and fain would see them over again.

Zang. Oh Achmat! something does my heart pursue:
I wander from my self, and fly from you.

Achm. This, Sir, seems one of Loves great ecstasies.

Zang. I would I knew what it is not, or what it is;
Love to my breast has still a stranger been;
And yet that stranger may be gotten in.

Achm. Ah Prince! the secret passage of Loves flight
Is as unseen by day, as it is by night.
Though Buda should her Walls like Mountains rear,
And Solomon could never enter there,
No not with Armed Crowds the Outworks win,
Yet Love un-arm'd would by surprise get in.

Zang. Love is a god, and cannot be withstood:

Achm. Yet he is a god only to flesh and blood:
For those whose Souls are active and sublime,
Resist his power, and so prove gods to him.

Zang. Ah! talk not of resistance of his force,
Whom nothing Conquers but his own remorse:
I rather would, if e're he Conquered you,
Be told how first he did your heart subdue.

Achm. As quietly as day does vanquish night,
I heard no noise, but saw resistless light.

Zang. He does, alas! with quiet force begin,
But Oh! What does he do, when entered in?

Achm. My waking thoughts I still for dreams did take,
And whilst I dreamed, I thought I was awake:
With equal view, in darkness as in light,
Ciara's image entertained my sight:
If she was absent, sorrow made me pale;
If she appeared, then blushes did prevail:
What her concerned, did me more merely touch.

Zang. I know too little, and I hear too much:
Oh Achmat! cease and instantly retire,
Your words are more than fuel to my fire.

Exeunt several ways. Enter Solomon, followed at distance by Rustan, Pyrrhus.
Soly. Rustan does know much more then I dare hear:
Can I a Monster breed, which I can fear?
I find suspicion a sufficient pain,
Fear is a torment, which I should disdain:
He robs my heart of all the Calms of rest:
I Will tear the ^ire Usurper from my breast:
Rustan is full of tried integrity,
And servants often, more then Parents see.

Pyrrh. He has more thoughts then he has skill to use.

Rust. The poison of my whisper does infuse.
Oh cursed Court! where not to be the most
In sight and eminent, is to be lost;
Where still the weary by false steps must climb,
And yet their falling is esteemed a crime.

Soly. Rustan, my privacy you now invade.

Rust. Sir, it is self-invasion to be sad.

Soly. Have you a Cure; you brought the malady;
I say you brought it.

Rust. Heaven defend me! I*

Soly. Do you suspect the truth of what I said?

Rust. Would I had been unborn, or worse then dead,
Rather then e're have caused a grief in you,
To w^on the comforts of both worlds are due.

Soly. You talked to me, and took my sleep away.

Rust. Could I in words, too much my duty pay?
'Twere better I should perish in despair,
Then you should grieve one moment,

Soly. So it were.

Rust. Sir, you but heard what I was bound to say.

Soly. What was it that you spoke of Mustapha?

Rust. I did with joy acquaint you, that your Son
Nobly the hearts of all your Army won:
Your dreaded anger I had justly raised,
If I your dearest pledge had falsely praised,
To sooth you with fictitious flattery;
But Pyrrhus knows it true, as well as I,

Pyrrh. It Is true, that he is generous and good;
He will succeed by virtue, as by blood.

Rust. This, Sir, should cause your joy and not your grief.

Soly. Can thou believe my pain will find relief
In that which shows the justice of my fears?
Did I in Winter Camps spend forty years;
Out-wear the Weather, and outface the Sun,
When the Wild-Herds did to their Coverts run;
Out-watch the Jealous, and the Lunatic,
Out-fast the Penitential, and the Sick;
Out-wait long Patience, and out-suffer Fear,
Out-marches the Pilgrim, and the Wanderer:
And there, where last years Ice was not unthaw'd,
(When in thick Furs, Bears durst not look abroad)
I with cold Armor covered, did maintain
Life against showers of Arrows, and of Rain?
Have I made Towns immured with Mountains yield;
Sent haughty Nations blushing from the Field?
And must I, at one cast, all that I forego,
For which so often I desperately did throw?
They steal my Laurels to adorn my Son;
Who can but dream of Fields that I have won?

[ Enter Roxolana* Rox. What valiant power can be secure from fear
When, Sultan, we your voice of anger hear?
Who dares that anger raise, and hope to live?

Soly. If Mustapha usurps, shall I forgive?

Rox. He is your Son, and is your eldest too;
And may show faults, which others must not do:
Nature will tell you* Sir, how far in him
You ought to pardon any gallant crime.

Soly. Nature may yield when I my power outlive;
For when I cannot punish, I forgive.

Rox. His youth, Sir, has not only time to mend,
But has some license also to offend;
And since too apt for errors being young,
Some may advantage take to do him wrong;
And, whilst they Jealous of your glory seem,
Assume a privilege to darken him.

Soly. He Courts my Armies to usurp their love.

Rox. Can that your Jealousy to anger move?
Their love you purchased, when you bravely fought;
Let him inherit what for him you bought:
They show their love to you in loving him.

Soly. They, loving him too soon, make love a crime:
He knows by study of Usurpers Acts,
That he commands their hands, who gains their hearts:
Him whom they love, they still most worthy deem.

Rox. You have more power over him, then he over them;
He will confine that power which love does get.

Soly. Power never to it self could limits set;
It never thinks it lives, but whilst it grows,
And what it can perform, it ever does.

Rust. Our Sultans have their ripe Successors sent
To some remote and quiet Government;
Why since that rule is safe, and ancient too,
Should it for Mustapha be broke by you?

Soly. I did it out of tender care to breed
His youth, and make him worthy to succeed.

Rust. But if, when popular, he does express
A slow requital of your tenderness;
Which Heaven forbid, then you may soon remove
His person, till you can reclaim his love.

Rox. Sure, Rustan, you with too much vigilance,
Turn to design, and purpose, things of chance;
And, over-watchful with the eyes of fear,
Draw little objects, from wide distance, near;
And see them double, whilst you seem to make
All that, which is your malice, your mistake;
But do not fasly, as a Spy, prevail,
Because a Son may in his duty fail.

Rust. Madam, I cannot over-watchful be
In what concerns the Sultan more than me:
I humbly take the privilege to say,
That you connive too much at Mustapha,
And have of late been slow and negligent,
In what your care could not too soon prevent:
And, Madam, this perhaps you wisely do,
TO avoid report, grown public, though not true;
Which is, that with a Byas still you run
To follow Zanger, your neglected Son.

Soly. No more, these are the rising mists that make
Those stormy winds, that keep me still awake!
[ Exit Solomon*
Rox. Rustan, you must by fresh intelligence
Charge Mustapha, and with some new offense.

Rust. Madam, I am engaged past all retreat.

Rox. Go and attend me when the Watch is set:
These little Arts great Nature will forgive:
Exeunt Rustan, Pyrrhus. Dye Mustapha, else Zanger cannot live!
Pardon, oh Solomon thy troubled Wife;
Who must her duty lose, to save a Life;
A Husband venture to preserve a Son;
Oh! that is the fatal rock that I would shun:
For Solomon, must Mustapha deprive,
Of that loved Life, by which himself does live:
And Mustapha, to his untimely grave
Must hasten, that his death may Zanger save.
Oh cruel Empire! that does thus ordain
Of Royal Race the youngest to be slain,
That so the eldest may securely Reign;
Making the Imperial Mother ever mourn,
For all her Infants in succession born:
Excuse, oh Nature, what by me is done,
If it be cruel to preserve a Son!
[Exit.
Enter Mustapha, Zanger. Must. If it be Love, and you against it strive,
Then greater strength you to your torment give.
Love may all hearts under his Empire bring,
Since to resist, and yield, is the same thing.
Even Reasons power is useless against Love,
For when he enters, reason does remove;
And from your force of anger he is free,
Since none with what they love can angry be:
In vain you this unequal War abide,
When all your aids turn to your Conqu'rours side.

Zang. I do not, Sir, to Love, but grief submit,

Must. Your grief I know not, yet I share in it:
A friend is griefs Physician, and may heal
Your pain, if you the cause of it reveal;
But you, by hiding that which should be known,
Give me a torment greater than your own;
And do even worse then when you shun relief;
For you kill him who comes to cure your grief.

Zang. Ah Prince! since I the weight of grief deplore,
You are unkind in loading me with more.

Must. But you transgress against all Friendships Laws,
Showing effects, when you conceal the cause;
When those you cannot hide, these should be ^old;
Those show themselves, but you must these unfold.

Zang. Your Enemy much rather than your Friend*
Should tell you griefs which you can never end.

Must. Friendship will nothing like reserves endure,
But loves to share in griefs it cannot cure.

Zang. Then will I ^^row my vain defense away,
And, though obedience useless be, obey.
You know what by my Mother has been done
For the Hungarian* Queens abandoned Son.

Must. Yes, and the Deed was for her greatness fit.

Zang. The Queen her self is come to acknowledge it:
And that her gratitude may clearer shine,
She does strong Buda, as a gift (...)

Must. They may, by virtue urged, for honor strive;
But why should this make Noble Zanger grieve?

Zang. Can fate bring greater grief to me or you
Then now, when the subdued do (...) subdue*
We have by Arms the Hungarian Kingdom won.
And by their Queen in honor are outdone:
A Crown resigned my Mother ought to quit,
Since she by keeping does not merit it:
Can you my sorrow for my Mother blame,
Who now must lessen in her Power or Fame?

Must. In such a choice she cannot choose amiss;
But, Zanger, there is in it more then this.

Zang. Ah Prince! much more indeed, for had you seen
The griefs and beauties of the Christian Queen,
You would have felt the trouble which I had;
These did to pity, those to love persuade:
They helped each other to perform their part,
Grief softn'd, and her beauty sealed my heart;
Through all her blacks the luster of her eyes
Showed like the sun when it from night does rise:
But I want words for what I should commend.

Must. How soon from liking we to love ascend!

Zang. When she her Royal infant did embrace,
Her Eyes such floods of Tears showed on her face,
That then, oh Mustapha! I did admire
How so much Water sprang from so much Fire
And, to increase the miracle, I found
At the same time my heart both burnt and drowned.

Must. What you have told, seems miracles to me.

Zang. You will see greater when the Queen you see.

Must. To me no miracle can greater prove
Then seeing Friendships right resigned to love:
Your Heart once lost your Friendship too must end.

Zang. Sure I may have a Mistress and a Friend.
The Soul, dear Mustapha, is Friendships part,
And Love for his does challenge but the heart?

Must. That Is a distinction made by couz'ning Art;
Can I your Friendship have, and not your Heart?
Such Lovers Logic is too low for you;
What love a Captive, and a Christian too?

Zang. How ill the name of Captive does be^^t
A mind that conquers when it does submit?
Her abject fate who would not undergo
That she might Virtue in such Triumph show?

Must. Though Friendship may injust persuasion fail,
Yet, Zanger, your Religion should prevail.

Zang. Since Nature no Religion knows but Love,
He that loves most, does most Religious prove:
Religions true design in Love consists,
Heaven owns not that which Statesmen teach our Priests.
I love, but when I on the Queen reflect,
The cause will more than justify the effect.

Must. By seeing of your shipwreck I Will grow wise.

Zang. How can I shipwrack't be on Paradise?

Must. Something in your concern I hope to do:
Farewell; I must condemn and love you too.

[Exeunt severally. Enter the Cardinal with Papers in his hand, Viche, and an
Hungarian Gentleman. Card. This for the Governor with your first speed,
This for Count Urick, this for Ulfinshed,
These are the Bills which will be paid at sight.

Gent. It is your pleasure I return at night?

Card. You must, and learn who of the Garrison
Formed the revolt: be careful, and be gone.

[Exit Gentleman. Viche. Fortune's before you wheresoever you come;
You I happy be even out of Christendom.

Card. I shall be, if she end as she begun.

Viche. You are for Roxolana's darling Son.
The glorious Zanger has a Message sent,
Which says, he means to find you in your Tent;
He whom our Queens bright beauty did surprise.

Card. A Lover speaks at first but with his eyes;
But if he now has found his tongue, he will say
Something which I perhaps am to convey.

Viche. Their happy interview may raise us all:
Men may look up who to the bottom fall.

Card. My Lord, his visit seems designed in haste,
And to receive him I Will prepare as fast:
You must not go to Buda; you shall stay
And wait for our success: the Myrtle may
(Which does a forward Spring already show)
Even in a Camp where all things wither, grow:
In fames records 'twill no great wonder prove,
If we, who fell by hatred, rise by love.

[Exeunt several ways. Enter Mustapha and the Queen. Must. Madam, your fortune
would malicious be,
And make your beauty your worst Enemy.
I know with reason, Madam, you depend
On Roxolana, as your potent Friend;
But whilst she labors to restore your Throne,
Your beauty makes a Captive of her Son;
When she does that unhappy Conquest know,
Your kind Protectress will become your Foe.
Whilst fate against your beauty does conspire,
I grieve at the perfection I admire*

Queen. Do not believe, Great Prince, your Brother will
Submit to eyes where grief inhabits still;
To eyes in which there nothing now appears
To move a heart, unless it be their tears;
You but mistake his pity for his love.

Must. Thy passion, Zanger, why did I reprove?
[Aside, Madam, where grief and beauty so excel,
Pity and love may both together dwell;
They both are but his duties sacrifice,
This to your fate is due, that to your eyes.

Queen. Your Virtue which does thus my fate lament,
May all the malice of that fate prevent;
Conqu^ring a fortune so perverse as mine,
Will make you brighter than in Battle shine.

Must. Oh Heaven! I feel my own subjection near,
Even then when she would have me rescue her.

Queen. Fortune in this has made her last assault,
She Would have me bear what is alone her fault,
And make the Empress think that I design
What cannot be her trouble more than mine.
Believe me, Generous Mustapha, these eyes
Which made the last Hungarian King their prize,
Deserve more grief than to his Urn they pay,
When they do ought but weep themselves away.

Must. Whilst they shined out, who could resist their power,
Which, through griefs clouds, crowns you a Conqueror?

Queen. Your Brother, when his passion seeks relief,
May owe his Cure to reason and my grief;
It will a blemish to his Virtue be,
If he with fortune join to ruin me;
And Rexolana's fame he much neglects,
In making her destroy whom she protects:
This you may tell him, Sir; and tell him too,
I had not sent him Counsel but by you.

Must. How, Madam, with your Counsel can you trust
One whom already you have made unjust?
For I shall give to Zanger, for your sake,
Counsel which I my self can never take.

Queen. Were you unjust when you did well express
The danger I incurred by his address,
And counseled me t'advise him to refrain
From love, which would his Mothers hatred gain?
The Counsel is not altered, but the same.

Must. But I am alterd'd since I hither came.

Queen. It is not fit you should be understood,
I know you cannot change from what is good*
My case with pity should your heart inspire.

Must. Ah! who can pity what he does admire?
Your pity to my case is rather due:
How can I give that which I need from you?
Madam, I but in vain strive to conceal
A passion which my vanquished eyes reveal;
Instruct me how my self I should reclaim,
Before I Zanger for his passion blame;
Or rather teach us both now to endure
That wound, which you declare you cannot cure;
And do not trust our reason to subdue
A love, which reason does invite as to.

Queen. Oh Heaven! in what wild Ocean am I lost?
The Tempest rises and I see no Coast.

Must. Zanger, not you, may tax me of a crime;
I came to counsel you from love of him;
But you, when you avoid my love, prevent
All he could wish me for a punishment;
Your interest brought me here to keep you free
From such a love as might your ruin be;
Let me, when gone, at least your pity have,
Dying for you whom I did come to save.

Queen. You cannot be so cruel as you seem:
Why do you break that heart which you esteem?
Leave me, you must not love, and should not hate
One cruel made by rigor of her fate.

Must. You should not of your destiny complain,
You are deposed but with more power to reign.

Queen. Fate of this little beauty took a care,
Only by that to heighten my despair.
Since you resolve to stay, I must be gone,
True grief endures not any looker on;
And mine I feel to such a height does rise,
That 'twill I hope revenge me of my eyes.
[Exit.
Must. She is as tyrannous as she is fair;
Born to breed love, and to beget despair;
I did lament her fortune, but I see
One much more cruel is reserved for me.
Can Zanger, for my love, my friendship blame,
When the same fire does us alike inflame?
My weakness cannot forfeit his esteem,
Since I but yield to that which conquered him;
To love whom be first loved, can be no more
Then if I hate whom he did hate before.
[Exit.
THE THIRD ACT.
Enter Mustapha, Rustan, Pyrrhus. Rust. IT IS, Sir, the Sultans will to have it
so.

Must. Toward's Syria! and to morrow must I go?
The order is severe, and I am sent,
Not to a fair retreat, but banishment.
My memory is ill if I have done
Ought that should make a Father hate a Son.

Rust. Great Sir, take heed lest you his kindness blame,
He sends you not to exile, but to fame;
His Asian Armies will be led by you:
Whilst he the West, you must the East subdue:
Since for high valor and for conduct too,
The public voice allows that each of you
Is for the spacious worlds whole Conquest fit,
Why here should both subdue but part of it?

Must. You hold me up too high when I am praised,
I like a Meteor waste by being raised;
I am already by my Friends undone,
Praising the little Battles I have won;
And I the Persians should subdue in vain,
Losing a Father when I Persia gain.

Pyrrh. Your Father this distemper should approve,
Since you but jealous are of him you love.

Rust. If his displeasure hastens you away,
Do not increase it by desire to stay;
Or if his jealous love sent this command,
Yet do not inconvenient love withstand.

Pyrrh. Which way soever you consider it,
You should approve his orders and submit.

Must. I Am debtor to you both; leave me a while
That I may grief and duty reconcile.

Rust. You Will be defended against all offense,
Adding but patience to your innocence.

Exeunt Rustan, Pyrrhus. Enter Zanger observing him. Must. Fortune did never in
one day design
For any heart, four torments great as mine;
I to my Friend and Brother Rival am;
She, who did kindle, would put out my flame;
I from my Fathers anger must remove,
And that does banish me from her I love;
If, of these Four, the least a burden be,
Oh how shall I support the other three?

Zang. Can my dear Mustapha a grief admit,
And not let Zanger know the cause of it?

Must. I having Zangers Friendship how could Fate
Destroy my peace but by my Fathers hate?
Time does too long with the afflicted last,
But now in my affliction moves too fast;
To morrow from to day will quickly grow,
And I to morrow must toward Syria go,
Unless your power with Roxolana can
Revoke the order sent by Solomon.

Zang. Depart to morrow! no, let time run on;
My Mother stays, and you are yet not gone.
Sir, are you not of Zangers friendship sure?
And can you mourn for ills which he may cure?
But why do you aloud your grief deplore,
When I am silent, though I suffer more?
If by your foes you are to Syria sent,
You Will there in Armies gain by Banishment:
Persia, not you, the event of this should fear,
Since by that hatred which does send you there
You will prevail as Victor of the field;
But Love stays me, where like his slave I yield.

Must. The highest glory conquest can bestow
I would not purchase by my leaving you.

Zang. To any Deity, but Love, men come
With open glory to their Martyrdom;
But I must perish and conceal my flame,
As if to be his Martyr were a shame.

Must. Yet no affliction, Zanger, can transcend
The grief of being banished from a Friend.

Zang. My grief much greater is, whilst I remain
Near her I love, and am not loved again,
Oh my dear Mustapha! when you have seen
The Tears and Beauties of the Hungarian Queen;
Her Tears forbidding whom her Eyes invite,
Whilst she appears the joy and grief of fight;
Whilst empty hope does rise but to decline;
Then you will think your sorrows less then mine.

Must. Alas! you saw not more then I did see;
She who did conquer you, has conquered me;
And now I may my grief to yours prefer,
Since I am banished both from you and her*

Zang. Ha! Did you see her, Sir, and see her so,
That from my friend you did my Rival grow?
You made your visit in a fatal hour.

Must. You know her eyes* and can you doubt their power
In blaming me you will detract from them;
As those who do the conquered much condemn,
Do then disparage him who overcame;
Since all may yield to Worthies without shame*
None could her force resist, and how could I
Then choose but yield? for none can from her fly.

Zang. Though we but seldom the subdued condemn
When we the Victors conduct much esteem;
Yet they are less excused if they did know,
From others harms, the forces of the Foe.

Must. If, Zanger, freedom of confession may
The anger due to an offense allay,
Then I acknowledge I my visit made,
That from your Love I might the Queen dissuade;
Yet 'twas in fear, lest whilst you did pursue
Your Love your Mother might abandon you:
But if you had beheld that breaking light,
Which like a sudden dawn surpised my sight,
Love would have seemed against friendship a less sin,
Then not to love against her eyes had been;
I struggled much e're I his Fetters wore;
But that resistance showed her power the more;
And where resistance could not conquest stay,
It was discretion quickly to obey.

Zang. Yet we may just to one another prove;
You are the Heir to Empire, I to Love;
You as the Eldest may the Scepter bear,
You first the world did see, I first saw her;
And as I no invasion would design
Against your right, so you should leave me mine.

Must. If by mere sight we may possession take,
How vain is that long Love which Lovers make?
None but the sleepy can their fortune doubt;
Men need but rise betimes and look about:
But she must be by merits claim possessed,
And he who loves her most, deserves her best.

Zang. Deserves her! This all injuries exceeds;
Her, by your words you wrong, me by your deeds;
He of her Love unworthy does appear,
Who does but think that he can merit her;
It may of her, even as of Heaven be said,
Which, though attained, is never merited;
If loving her can any merit be,
Who is the man that dares contend with me?

Must. I am the man who silence all that boast
How much they love; for I love more and most;
And will not such a wretched Lover be,
As merely to depend on courtesy.
He who declares that he no merit has,
Then when he loves, does heedlesly disgrace
Her whom he thinks he highly does prefer,
By saying, that no Love can merit her;
As if her Virtue could not soon improve
To her own value all that dare make Love.
Love makes both sexes equal and but one;
A Cottage-Lover may deserve a Throne.
Love is, like Valor, still improved by praise,
And whilst I thus Love's merit highly raise:
I would not the rewards of it destroy;
The beauty whom I love I must enjoy.

Zang. Did ever Love assume a shape like this?
Or Passion talk with such an Emphasis?
Your sense of Banishment does dangerous grow,
It sends your reason from you e're you go.

Must. Zanger, you may my Banishment approve,
Because my absence may promote your Love.

Zang. Affliction makes men wise, but seldom vain:
You fear your absence more than her disdain.
The Empress strait still in your cause appear,
And get you License to continue here;
And since you height of Love as merit boast,
Make good your claim by daring to love most.

Must. What destiny ordained me to contend
Against so brave a Rival and a Friend?
And yet my passion I must still pursue:
Let Love which makes my fault, excuse it too.

Exeunt several ways. Enter Solomon, Rustan, Pyrrhus. Soly. Were my Commands
with such surprise received?

Pyrrh. He seemed as much amazed as he was grieved.

Rust. Wonder and grief did his condition fit,
Though each did seem to the other opposite;
Wonder inferred he knew not his offense,
But so much grief disgraced his innocenc^.

Pyrrh. Yet grieving for a punishment from you,
He does but pay that sorrow which is due.

Rust. When your dislike does up to anger climb,
You reach too high for an intended crime;
Such grief as his no fiction could admit.

Soly. I may believe he did not counterfeit;
For having on my stage begun his part,
I called him off e're he could show his Art.

Rust. Can he, who is so highly born and bred,
Walk under ground, and be by Traitors led?

Soly. From ha^mless Childhood I with render care
Did breed him up to all the harms of War;
I taught him, that unguarded innocence
Served but to tempt the powerful to offense;
That none are safe from wrongs, but when so strong
As always to be able to do wrong;
That only valor is true faith, and those
Do most trust Heaven who always life expose;
I taught him Virtue, and to love her so
As tame Philosophers durst never do;
Enduring for her sake the pangs of power,
And all the toyls that make a Conqueror:
For none but Chiefs who firmly these endure,
Can reach such power as may the good secure:
I taught him such a greatness as might be
From all the yokes of Subjects counsel free:
None but our Prophet Empire understood,
Which, when it is bounded, ceases to be good;
His Sword did two Usurping Saints devour;
Forbidding even the Saints to share his power:
He blessed Heavens King who Monarchy first made,
And praised him cause he no companion had.
All this I taught my Son; but when we give
Our young Successors counsel how to live,
They are in haste, thinking we do them wrong,
And we their lives mis-spend when we live long.

Enter Roxolana. Rox. Forgive me, Sultan, if I boldly sue
In Natures cause between your Son and you;
Those orders which to Mustapha you sent,
His filial kindness takes for Banishment,
When you your Successors so far remove,
Reason may make him jealous of your Love;
I Will answer for the kindness of his grief,
And you will want pity if he wants relief.

Soly. Alas! it is far above a Woman's art
To reach the height of an aspiring heart:
He who by craft, my Armies love procures,
Can never want the cunning to gain yours.

Rox. Seduce your Armies love! no humane skill
Can do it, and, I hope, he wants the will.

Soly. The Nations whom I lead will not seem strange,
If they, like other Nations long for change;
For men of what they have soon weary grow,
When they the utmost value of it know;
And long to change plain things, which they possess;
For that which hope does gild with promises.

Rox. Be to your self and to your Army just:
You should their love and your own merit trust.
Prodigious jealousy, how can it shoot
And spring to such a height without a root?

Soly. It may a wh^le be hidden from your eye;
For roots are deepest where the trees are high.
Rustan and Pyrrhus can direct your sight;
But they a Curtain draw before the light.

Rox. Perhaps they find what they are loath to see;
Virtue in others may offensive be
To some, who when it is to luster grown
Are jealous that it may Eclipse their own.
Sultan, no Curtain can be drawn so wide,
That it the Sun can from the people hide:
The world is full of Mustapha's renown.

Rust. Yet we offend in telling what is known.

Rox. You injure him whose virtues you conceal*

Rust. We need not show what does it self reveal.

Soly. I tax them not that they his Virtue hide,
But they conceal the danger of his pride:
His race of glory is too soon begun.

Rox. None blame the early rising of the Sun,
Not wish for Clouds his luster to disgrace.

Soly. But if he shines too fully in my face,
I Will draw a Curtain and his luster hide;
His glory shall not make me turn aside.
The shining Mustapha must change his Sphere;
He threatens me worse than a Comet here.

Rox. Can Solomon by those forsaken be
Whom he so often led to Victory?

Soly. They by the many Battles I have won,
Think all the stock of my success is gone:
Though fortune often graced me in the field,
And many favors hung upon my shield;
Yet now cold looks men to my winter bring,
Whilst they rejoice at my Successour's spring:
Fortune they think is to his youth in debt,
And what she pays to him they hope to get.

Rox. Though glory may a while his youth mis-guide,
Yet he has duty to correct his pride,
Nature does give him counsel against this.

Soly. Pride is more natural then duty is;
Duty is only taught by care and Art,
Pride is by nature planted in the heart:
He who to Empire hastily aspires,
Is only counseled by his own desires;
And thinks all crimes which help him to a Crown
Are then absolved when he does put it on.

Rox. I fear you have discovered more then I
Discerned, who on your judgment must rely;
Therefore, in care of you, I beg he may
For a few days have liberty to stay:
That license is to narrow time confined:
If he has any public crime designed,
He must by many hands assisted be:
Crowds are inconstant and want secrecy:
If guilty, why should you his death delay?
If innocent, he then may safely stay:
Your anger ought to kill where it does touch;
His Exile is too little or too much.

Pyrrh. When in few days this secret shall look out,
Punish his crime, or else suppress his doubt.

Rust. Be pleased to allow what the Empress does advise,
And seem to wink, whilst we employ our Spies;
Your doubts will just appear, or quickly cease,
Excuse your anger, or restore your peace:
Let not the Prince, whilst thus suspected fly
Beyond the reach and terror of your eye.

Soly. Go, I Will consider e're I change his doom;
I Will reckon what is past, and what may come.
Oh Roxolana! Fate in vain bestows
Exeunt Rustan, Pyrrhus. Continual Conquests over my open Foes;
Whilst it a tumult raises in my breast,
Fiercer than all those Wars I have suppressed.
Justice persuades what nature fain would shun.
Pity a father who must hare his Son.

[Exeunt. Enter the Queen and Zanger. Zang. He who can all his love contain in
words,
Has such a heart as little love affords.

Queen. He has too much for those who none return:
You know my sorrow, and for whom I mourn:
From such a guilty person you should fly
As does the duty want by grief to die.

Zang. I would not in my wishes covet more
Then to change fates with him whom you deplore:
You crowned him with your love when he did live,
And to his death your life in sorrow give.
But, Madam, why will you so highly grieve,
For one more happy dead, than I who live?
You are in this unjuster then your Fate,
Wasting your sorrows on the fortunate.
Heaven did his death design to make it known
That you a blessing are too great for one.
The Christian world did to your beauty bow,
Which over our larger world must govern now.

Queen. In pity and in prudence, Sir, forbear,
To speak what my discretion should not hear.

Zang. Lovers high thoughts to wonders are inclined;
And boundless thoughts suit not with speech confined.
I wonder much how he, whom you bemoan,
Having your love, could not defend your Throne;
And how by any force he was suppressed,
Whilst with the influ'ence of your favor blessed.
But, Madam, now his losses you repair,
For you revenge all his defeats in War;
Fate did deny his Sword success in fight,
Only by that to do your beauty right.

Queen. Your raising me by your depressing him,
May find my hatred seeking my esteem.

Enter Mustapha. Zang. Ha! I employed my Mother for his stay,
And Rival-like he hastens me away;
But I Am past hope, and need no Rival fear.

Must. This visit without leave may rude appear:
Yet, Madam, when you shall vouchsafe to know
That I to morrow must toward Syria go;
The opininion of my rudeness you will re-call:
I must attend you now or not at all.
Think on a Lovers sorrow, who removes
From seeing and from serving what he loves;
Whilst he suspects those blessings are designed
For a more happy Rival left behind;
Do but allow your pity to allay
That sorrow which your love might take away.

Zang. Madam, if this request successful be
Then I shall need your pity more than he:
I am destroyed if this be not denied,
For pity is to love too near allied.
Loves wounds are safe when of your pity sure;
The wounds you pity you desire to cure.

Must. Your love does make you cruel when you plead
Against that pity which your Friend does need.

Zang. Your Love in high injustice does delight,
Pleading to get your Friend's and Brother's right.

Must. You have declared that Love no right can show
But what a Mistress freely does bestow.

Zang. As of the fair new world he claimed a right
Who chanced to have it first within his sight;
So, since to me she did the first appear,
I claim the right of a Discoverer.

Must. The first Discov'rer only saw the shore;
The second claimed possession seeing more.
In your first seeing, and then loving her,
The favor of your fortune did appear,
Not greatness of your love; for all, like you,
Having but eyes to see, would love her too.
You but the beauty of her face did find;
I made the rich discovery of her mind.
You of the borders of Elysium boast,
Her mind is all the Inland to that Coast.
I by a second voyage finding more
Of beauty then was ever found before;
More in it to be loved and worshipped too,
Must therefore love her more then you can do.

Zang. Amongst the Priests of Love there Casuists be,
Who Love's Religion vex with Sophystry;
But I for sacrifice bring such a heart
As Nature offers in disdain of Art.

Queen. Princes no more. You both but vainly strive
To be possessed of what I should not give;
That which I should not give, you should not take,
Nor prize my Love when Duty I forsake:
It is in me impiety to stay.
Detain not whom the dead does call away.

She offers to go out, Zanger stays her. Zang. Stay, Madam. When the Clouds of
grief are gone,
Which cannot darken long so bright a Sun,
Let Zanger in his love so happy be
That none may happier prove in yours then he:
If you to any others suit incline
Then my Successors Love disgraces mine.
This is not envy, but does rather show
I prize my love because it is given to you.

Must. True Friendship, Madam, cannot yield to this;
If you reject my Love, accept of his;
Next to your Love the blessing I would choose
Is that my Friend may gain what I must lose.

Zang. I am amazed at what you seem to do;
Let me not bear Loves wounds and Friendships too.

Must. Only those Lovers should be counted true
Who Beauties interest, not their own pursue;
Who nobly would, when by their fortune crossed,
Have others get what to themselves is lost.
None but the Fiends can wish Heaven empty were
Because they cannot get possession there.

Zang. This gallantry does reconcile in you
The utmost of revenge and friendship too;
Revenge appears most sensible and high
In placing favors on an Enemy.
Forgive me if that style I undergo;
He who a Rival is, is then a Foe.
Friendship till now did never so high ascend
As to endure a Rival in a Friend.
In one bright Sphere we may together move,
Whilst you excel in Friendship, I in Love.
But having paid what to my Love was due,
Let me discharge my debt of Friendship too.
Madam, I thus would expiate my crime;
That which he begged for me I beg for him.
Tracing his steps how can I surer tread?
I Will follow Virtue which I should have led.

Queen. This which you Beauty call so much offends,
When it does Rivals make of two such friends,
That I, by drowning it, will give relief
To your unequalled Friendship and my grief.

[She weeps. Zang. Against that Beauty why should you repine
Which makes our Friendship with such luster shine?

Must. You wrong the world when you your beauty wrong;
That and the Sun to all the world belong.

Queen. My grief is greater then I should endure;
I Will fly from wounds I make and cannot cure.

Exit, and they gaze after Must. Oh, Zanger, look not after her so long!
Through all her clouds her luster is too strong.

Zang. As courage of weak Towns, in their defense
Against strong Armies, is held insolence,
So I, resisting Fate in this assault,
May make even fortitude become a fault.

Enter Achmat, and whispers Zanger. Achm. The Empress, Sir, commanded me to say
She has prevailed, and Mustapha shall stay.

Zang. Leave us, we shall her pleasure strait attend.

[ Exit. Achmat. Must. What froward message does my fortune send?

Zang. Sir, you are timely eased of half your fear.
My Mother says that you shall tarry here.
Since I have this procured you may allow
Your self to think that I will keep my vow.
I have in Friendship vowed not to survive
The fatal day on which you cease to live.
And it is a work more difficult and high
To help a Rival then it is to dye.

Must. I know you will keep your vow; and I some sign
Have given that I shall faithful prove to mine.
I vowed, if by succession I should gain
The Imperial Scepter, you should with me reign.
And since in Love's nice interest I comply
(Whose Empire is secured by jealousy,
And where each Lover strives to rule alone)
I can admit a Rival in my Throne.

[They Embrace, Exeunt. Enter Thuracus, Viche, Cleora. Viche. Ha! Will she
leave the Camp? who can prepare
Counsel for changes which so sudden are?

Thur. My Lord, her resolution must seem strange;
But, as it is sudden, so it soon may change:
She did by me a second offer make;
Urging the Empress instantly to take
The keys of Buda, our revolting Town;
Hoping by quitting that to keep the Crown.

Viche. What was the answer which the Empress made?

Thur. She summoned all the glory that she had;
Then said, she would not from the Queen receive
A Present till she could a greater give.
And then declared, her Sultan ought and must
Esteem that faith which did his honor trust;
That he by conquest should proceed no more;
And what his glory took it should restore.

Enter Cardinal, and Queen. Cleora. The Cardinal seems thoughtful, and the Queen
Does feel more sorrow then she would have seen.

Exeunt Thuracus, Viche, Cleora, Card. But when pursued will you from refuge
run,
And Sanctuaries shut against your Son?
Your Infant, whilst from proffered love you fly,
Must meet the hatred of your Enemy.
Rustan has long your Royal house abhorred;
And he is now to former power restored:
The storm which from the Empress he endured
Has his foundation tried and strength secured.

Queen. When you the Princes proffered loves commend
You seem to Empire, not to me, a Friend:
And when your King I in his Grave forsake,
I lose more love then you would have me take.

Card. Be taught by Nature; she forsakes the Dead;
Your precious Tears you but on ashes shed,
Which now an Urn keeps sacred, but they must
By wandering Winds be blown with common dust.
Nature does turn her looks from Death's ill Face;
Where ruin does not Natures strength disgrace,
But by the slightness of man's Fabric shows
(Which time even with a touch soon overthrows)
That she made flowr's intending they should fade;
And Mourners err when Nature they upbraid.
It is at once Idolatry and Pride
To place on Altars what she throws aside.
Love only to the living does belong:
Loving the dead you all the living wrong;
And both betray and lose love's interest when
You love the dead who cannot love again.

Queen. But is there to the dead no sorrow due?

Card. What useful is grows only fit for you.
Grieve not for one made useless being gone;
But favor those who may restore your Throne.

Queen. Since both the Princes do alike pretend,
Which to my favor will you most commend?
If I must Love, and shall be taught by you*
I cannot, sure, be counseled to love two.

Card. But you may favor both, and may disguise
Or show your Love as interest shall advise.

Queen. I cannot interest by such arts improve,
Seeming to favor whom I do not Love:
Nor with two Faces severally invite
From both what I in neither can requite.

Card. Yet do not both for want of loving lose;
But suddenly consider which to choose.
In gainging Zanger you the Empress gain;
But Mustapha must by succession reign.

Queen. Each is sufficient to restore my Throne.
But, whilst for Empire you are studious grown,
You nothing for the other world prepare.
My Lord, take Heaven a little in your care.
How can I ought of Love from Princes hear,
Who scorn those Altars where I kneel with fear?

Card. They their Religion did by Conquest make;
And will no Rules but from their conqu'rors take.
If they, till taught, can never truth discern
They must be conquered to be made to learn:
And since no Power but Love can them subdue,
Madam, they must be overcome by you.
But she who will overcome in Love's fair field
Must by her yielding make her Lover yield.

Queen. My Lord, your Purple Robe has studied well.
Must I this way convert an Infidel?

Card. Love is persuasive and will soonest teach.

Queen. They both can to the top of Empire reach,
But cannot soar to our Religions height.

Card. By trusting Mustapha you will teach him Faith*

Enter Cleora. Cleora. My Lord, Prince Mustapha is in your Tent.

Card. Madam, my thoughts are with true duty bent
To serve your Throne. Do not kind Fortune lose
When she presents you two great Lotts to choose.
[ Exit Cardinal.
Queen. Without a Clue I Am in a lab'rynth left:
And where even Hope is of her Eyes bereft,
With Noble Zanger Mustapha contends,
They strive as Rivals and they yield as Friends:
I injure one if I the other choose;
And keeping either I the Sultan lose.
Flying from both I from my refuge run;
And by my staying shall destroy my Son.
Them for their false Religion I eschew
Though I have found their Virtue ever true.
And when Religion sends my thoughts above,
This Card'nal calls them down and talks of Love.
And simple Love (which does as little know
State-int'rest as Religion ought to do)
He would, bold with Ambition lead through all
The dark and crooked walks where Serpents crawl.
His Priests to what he counsels gravely bow;
Whilst other Priests condemn what those allow:
Those would by Pious craft r^store our loss;
These scorn the Crescent should redeem the Cross.
Zeal against Policy maintains debate;
Heaven gets the better now, and now the State.
The Learned do by turns the Learned confute,
Yet all depart unaltered by dispute.
The Priestly Office cannot be denied;
It wears Heavens Liv'ry and is made our Guide.
But why should we be punished if we stray,
When all our Guides dispute which is the way?

THE FOURTH ACT.
Enter the Queen, and Cleora. Queen. DIspatch, Cleora, lest we should be seen.
Lay my disguise beneath the Couch within.
You should have sent to call the Cardinal:
I have forgot my Letters. Burn them all.
Here, take the Key! make up my Jewels strait,
You shall attend me at the Eastern Gate:
But burn my Letters in the inner Tent.

Cleora. I fear you will this haste too soon repent.

Queen. Fortune, with thy distempers I must strive;
And from a crime will not my cure derive.
Those who by policy their actions steer
Faint when they faults as well as losses bear;
But those who on firm virtue still rely
May boldly perish when they guiltless die.

Cleora. 'Twere want of necessary Faith in me
To think your virtue can successless be.
All your commands I Will instantly obey.

Queen. Our flight, Cleora, cannot brook delay;
Nor can I any pause to fear allow.

Enter Roxolana. Rox. You were my Guest, but are my Prisoner now.
Do you not tremble seeing me appear?

Queen. None but the guilty should have sense of fear.

Rox. Dismiss Cleora! we must be alone
To reckon both what I and you have done.

Queen. Retire! The intentions of my flight are all
Betrayed by her, or by the Cardinal.

[ Exit Cleora. Rox. To make the Audit of my actions true
I Will briefly take their Register from you.
Did I not struggle in your Sons defense,
When with no Armor but his innocence
The rescue of his Crown I undertook,
Whom all his Nation, being armed, forsook?

Queen. Madam, of what you did this is the least.

Rox. No Bird, new fledged, and frighted from his Nest,
Could, more then he, be of his home bereft,
Or more to Natures casual mercy left.
Did I not boldly his weak cause maintain
Against the Vizier and the whole Divan,
Though from their number I did need defense?
For number has a prosperous impudence,
Which more prevails in Courts then in the Field,
Making by clamor single Favorites yield.
And I was forced, when charged by the Divan,
To my last strength, the love of Solomon.

Queen. Your Enemies could not but many be,
You having then all that were so to me.

Rox. When, without leave, you did adventure here*
And, by the right of War, my Prisoner were,
Did I not then my favors so extend
That you became no Prisoner but my Friend?
When Buda you did offer to resign,
Did I not constantly the gift decline,
And in your cause the Sultan did implore
That what his Sword had gained he would restore?

Queen. All bounties, Madam, must to yours submit,
Which nothing equals but my sense of it.

Rox. Having confessed my allegations true,
Mark what returns has since been made by you.
For more than hope of what you wished to be,
For your protection and your liberty,
For all I did, and purposed to have done,
You, in requital, have enslaved my Son.
A Son, who never yet my will controlled
Till he your fatal beauty did behold:
But now, with that enchanted, is no more
By his own reason ruled, nor by my power.
What my designs have built, you have overthrown*
And I, in Zanger's ruin, feel my own.
My patience has not strength for this assault.

Queen. Oh do not make my misery my fault,
You now confirm all my Prophetic fears;
I did employ my Reason, Prayers, and Tears,
To make the Prince his Fatal Love decline;
I knew you would resent his fault as mine:
But I, alas! found my disswasions vain.

Rox. Why did you not betimes to me complain?

Queen. Who to a Mother could accuse a Son,
Or lead you to that grief which you would shun?
When I perceived his Love was fixed so sure
That 'twas above my Tears and Reasons cure,
I did resolve in a disguise to fly
Where I unknown might in a Cloister die.
And, lest you might suspect what I designed.
This Letter I did mean to leave behind.
[Gives her a Letter. Which begs your pardon, and informs you too
My flight was but in thankfulness to you.
Nor can I doubt your mercy to my Son,
When I, to keep your Love, from Zanger's run.

[ Roxolana reads the Letter to her self. Rox. In taxing you, who now so just
appear,
I am more guilty then I thought you were.
Nor can you your revenge more cruel make
Then when you show the guilt of my mistake.

Queen. Of what is past you show too great a sense;
The reparation does exceed the offense.
Again you will wound me if you treat me so;
I only meant my innocence to show;
You, seeing that, make me obtain my end.

Rox. You must my pardon seal, and be my Friend.
[Kisses her. And that I may deserve what I request
I Will lodge my greatest secret in your breast.
I know you will be ever kind and just.

[Kisses her again. Queen. No obligation binds so much as trust.

Rox. The Friendship placed by my unhappy Son
On Mustapha, is not to you unknown.

Queen. To that high Friendship I no stranger am:
A nobler never yet was told by Fame.

Rox. Ah Queen! from that dire friendship I receive
The deepest wound which Fate did ever give.
You know the bloody custom of this Crown;
Naught but the Sultan's life secures my Son.
For when the Eldest does the Throne enjoy,
He must the Younger by our Laws destroy.

Queen. That custom he by friendship will reclaim.

Rox. Friendship, to Love and Power, seems but a name.
Though Mustapha has Virtue and Renown
Fit to possess and dignifie a Crown:
(For never yet did any Sultan's Son
Perform and promise more than he has done)
Yet when he shall the Imperial Scepter bear
He must become my Zanger's Murderer.
For that is made a righteous Law by time,
Which Law at first did judge the highest Crime.

Queen. Powers private safety is the public good;
It lives in health by letting others blood.

Rox. The Sultan's love gives me a power so high
That I to this could give a remedy
If Zanger did not secret Friendship pay,
Even with Religious Rites, to Mustapha.
All my designs fond Zanger does oppose,
Who saving Mustapha himself will lose,

Queen. Your Fate against your Virtue does conspire*

Rox. Alas I must destroy what I admire.
In this attempt I shall your aid implore:
And, since your beauty they do both adore,
You must love Mustapha, and slight my Son;
Despair may do what reason should have done:
For Friendship never yet could climb above
The high resentments of neglected love.

Queen. Madam, the weight you on my bosom lay
I cannot bear, nor your commands obey.
Prince Mustapha my love can never have;
My King and Love are buried in one Grave.

Rox. If Mustapha cannot your love obtain,
It may suffice when you affection feign.

Queen. But Honor, Madam, quickly will forget
And lose it self whilst it does counterfeit;
As men a little used to speak untrue
The just remembrance lose of what they knew*
Till their first shapes grow to themselves unknown.

Rox. Can this be said by you who wear a Crown?
When from your heart your looks do different show,
Love does but change the weather of your Brow;
Which should no more a constant meaning bear
Then the outward face of Heaven should still be clear,
The Great should in their Thrones mysterious be;
Dissembling is no worse then mystery.
Obscurity is that which terror moves;
The gods most awful seemed in shady Groves,
And our wise Prophet's Text a reverence bears
Where it is hard and needs Interpreters.

Queen. I ever was without dissembling bred,
And in my open Brow my thoughts were read:
None but the guilty keep themselves unknown.

Rox. No wonder we so soon subdued your Throne;
When wise Dissimulation, which should guard
Chief Power and make the approaches to it hard,
Was banished from your Court to Rebell-states,
To Conclaves, Councills, and small Magistrates;
These stronger grow then Monarchs who refuse
The close false-Armour which their Subjects use.

Queen. Madam, you teach what Christians are not taught,
And seem to soar as high in flights of thought
As now your Empire wide in compass swells.

Rox. Sure Christian Kings live not in Courts but Cells,
That is un-courtly-ill-bred innocence
Which cannot with dissembled love dispense*
You must dissemble love to Mustapha,
And make him think by what you often say,
That you for Love can mourn and languish too.

Queen. Madam, I shall need counsel what to do.

Rox. How, Madam? you may counsel take of me,
But should from Subjects counsel still be free.
We, but in asking it from Subjects, give
Much more of value then we can receive.
We give our secrets to them, which, when known*
May make their interest greater then our own.
By counsel men persuade or else direct;
Direction like appointment we suspect:
And even persuasion does the Throne invade;
For slaves may govern whom they can persuade.
Advise your self and boldly then proceed;
Counsel must yield to courage and to speed.

Queen. When I shall counsel ask, I Will none reveal;
I can advise my self what to conceal.

Rox. I Will press you now no farther, but retire.
Madam, improve what Honor shall inspire.
If that which I request may not be done
You ruin me, and Zanger, and your Son.
But, e're I go, assure me of your stay.

Queen. In this, because I can, I will obey.
[ Exit Roxolana* No Fortune aims at more than she can do:
She takes my Crown then tempts my Virtue too.
I am for Mustapha's true love in debt,
Which I will never pay with counterfeit.

Enter Cardinal. Card. Madam, last night I did advise your stay;
But now I come to hasten you away.
Time has been active since I saw you last.

Queen. Shall I trust Councils which can change so fast?

Card. By various ways we may our end pursue.
Councils should alter as their causes do.
Physicians, Madam, will not think it strange
If I change Medicines when Diseases change.
The Pilot, of most firm and constant mind,
Must shift his course and turn with every wind.

Enter Thuracus, Viche. Thur. The Sultan's Troops, more swift then in Alarms,
Are, without orders, running to their Arms.

Viche. Rustan does now in several shapes appear;
For he is often altered by his fear.

Card. The Army is so bent to Mutiny
That Mustapha does counsel you to fly.
Madam, we all are to your flight inclined.

Queen. But, to this place, my Lord, I am confined;
And by a tie which has such influence
That I will rather dye then fly from hence.

A Mutinous noise is heard. Card. Their anger is grown loud! Madam, it is fit
That you send out to know the cause of it.

Queen. Make haste my Lords, and sev'rally inquire
If those who raised this storm can raise it higher;
And when you have the danger of it learned
Observe how far the Princes are concerned.

[ Exeunt Thuricus, Viche. Enter Cleora at another door, and whispers the
Queen. Cleor. Zarma has hastily a whisper brought
Which says, that means for your escape is wrought.
This Tempest Mustapha would have you shun;
And she will help to send away your Son.

Queen. O how am I perplexed? secure him Heaven!
[Aside. I have my Faith to Roxolana given
TO assure her of my stay, by which my Son
May in my Fortunes equal hazard run.
[Whispers Cleora. Go strait to Roxolana's Tent, and there
Observe what change does in her looks appear.

[ Exit Cleora. Card. Madam, you said you would not fly from hence:
It Is a resolve of fatal consequence.

Queen. The cause of that resolve I must conceal;
But will a secret of more use reveal.
The Prince has by his Presents Zarma won*
Who will contrive to send away my Son.
This is a business worthy your debate.

Card. Unhappy is the Minister of State
Whom for successless counsel you despise
Yet that conceal by which he should advise.
His fate and not his skill you ought to blame
Who plays the Cards yet must not see the Game.
If I but hold the Cards which you will play,
I throw your judgment not my own away.

Queen. But this which needs your counsel open lies.

Card. To what you have revealed I thus advise.
Your Son, to Buda flying, will redeem
By his own loss those who abandoned him.
You trust the Conquered who were false before
And by distrust provoke the Conqueror.
How can your Son by flight advantaged be
Who quits the Port to meet a storm at Sea?
And doubtless, Madam, you by staying here
The whole revenge of his escape must bear.
There are the dangers which attend his flight;
But he is safe in Roxolana's sight.
For, till her growing power you can suspect,
Doubt not his safety whom she does protect.

Queen. Your reasons urging his continuance here,
Like Rays of light, are sudden, strong, and clear.
My Lord, as these convince me for his stay
So let my counsel hasten you away.
The Mutinous, who now in tumult rise,
Hate our Religion, and your Robe despise.
This storm you may in Buda safely see*

Card. Madam, it will no more my wonder be
That you, not trusting me, disguised appear
Since you suspect I am so faint with fear
As to forsake my Queen in her distress.
But, Madam, walk in Clouds and trust me less:
Though but in part your mind you will declare
Yet in your whole misfortunes I will share:
And though my counsels may defective seem
I Will by my sufferings merit your esteem.
[Exit.
Queen. Our greatest Counc'lours think we are unjust
When our least thoughts are hidden from their trust;
And till (by knowing the utmost that we know)
Those restless Counc'lours may our Rulers grow,
They do not love us, and they sullen seem;
But after care not though we love not them.
[Exit.
Enter Solomon, Rustan, Pyrrhus. Shouts are heard from within. Soly. What
Shouts are these?

Rust. Shouts which your Soldiers pay,
Hearing Prince Mustapha has leave to stay.

Pyrrh. About his Tents the joyful Soldiers crowd.

Soly. There was no need their joy should be so loud.
Their shouts of Triumph never rose so high.

Rust. It shows they love him more than Victory.
And when these shouts they in your presence make
It is a sign they love him for your sake.

Soly. How long can they the Father love, who run
With such a guilty kindness to the Son?
It Is much to do it, more to show it so.

Pyrrh. Men never fear to pay the debts they owe.

Soly. He takes that love which does belong to me,
And lets me reign but by his courtesy:
His early acquisition shows his skill
In ruling, and his power declares his will.

Rust. Suspicion's good unless it start too soon
And then does faster then the offender run.
If he pursues, too early and too fast,
Your Armies love, he errs but in his haste.
Your jealousy and his desire to gain
That love from which he should a while abstain,
May be excused; for neither is a crime
But as you both may err in point of time.

Pyrrh. Why should your Armies kindness be his fault?

Soly. They love or hate but so as they are taught.
By fear Usurpers should their power sustain;
But a true Prince chiefly by love should reign.
Whilst, in loose knots, fear but the body binds,
We strongly rule by love our Subjects minds.

Rust. Yet wisest Monarchs by success have proved
That it is safe to be feared than loved.
For Subjects as they please, their love dispense,
But always fear as it does please the Prince.
A King should more the ruling power esteem
Placed in himself then when it is lodged in them.

Soly. That error is destructive to a state:
For whom soever the people fear they hate.
This is in me and in my Subjects true*
For fearing Mustapha I hate him too.
And he, even in my Camp, my power controuls;
I ruling but their Bodies, he their Souls.

Pyrrh. By his first deeds he seemed to study you;
And of your story a fair Copy drew.
Can he deface the Virtue he has shown
And on his fathers Ruin build his Throne?

Soly. Since on Ambition's wings he means to rise
He will both hate and slight all Natures Ties.
A Fathers name cannot his Nature fright
From Glory when it does his youth invite.
The enchanting sound of Power so Charms his Ear,
That he will now no other Music hear.
New shouts are heard, at which Solomon starts. This insolence is loud enough
to wake
Revenge from duller sleep then death can make.

Rust. Perhaps not understanding their offense,
They deem this duty which is insolence.
And think they not offend in what they do.

Soly. My Army then is bravely taught by you.
Can any ignorant of Treason be
Who shout for ought but victory and me?

Rust. Yet do not, Sir, decline what I advise.
Repentance is a noble Sacrifice.
But if, when taught, their crime they should pursue,
'Twill justify what you intend to do.

Pyrrh. When but a few into offenses run,
Justice may safely punish what is done.
But when whole Camps are kindled to a flame.
Persuasion then, not force, must them reclaim.

Rustan. Revenge, which to the injured does belong,
Can be successful only to the strong.
Your Foes you summon e're their Towns you storm:
It to your Army now you less perform
They all in Arms for Mustapha will rise
Because you use them worse then Enemies.

Soly. I yield to your advice, go both, and try
To make them in their joys more mannerly.
My race of Glory did proceed too fast.
[ Exeunt Rustan, Pyrrhus. My Armies now grow weary of my haste.
And yet, though tired, they shout and gladly run
To see me over-taken by my Son:
All in this Race are stopped when overtook;
And I, whom all did follow, am forsook:
Forsook by him whom I begot and bred:
I Am left behind by those whom I have led.
Must I, like Conquering Fleets, when storms begin,
Take all my glorious Flags and Streamers in?
Though Mustapha by Heavens decree was sent
To warn great Monarchs by my punishment
Yet he does Heaven offend, offending me.
What means our Prophet by this mystery*
My Son's ordained to what he should not do
And I to bear what I should punish too.
[Exit.
Enter Mustapha, Zanger. Mustapha seems very pensive. Zang. Ah Prince! you
wrong your love whilst you admit
Another Passion thus to reign with it.

Must. Zanger, my grief may well my heart subdue
Since it is too great to be revealed to you.
Pity that Fate with which I now contend;
It makes me hide my danger from my Friend.

Zang. What can you seem unwilling to declare,
After confessing you my Rival are?
Or of that Friendship are you not secure
Which did, unshaken, such a proof endure?

Must. Let what I heard be silenced as untrue,
Since my believing it may trouble you:
And yet my speaking it may pardoned be
Since your not hearing it may ruin me.

Zang. What can I more an injury esteem
Then when by silence you distrustful seem?

Must. Alas! you know not that you are unjust
When thus you take my kindness for distrust.
Be loath to hear what I shall speak with pain.

Zang. I torment feel in that which you retain.

Must. Your Mother with the Vizier is agreed:
And she has secretly my death decreed.

Zang. You wrong me, Brother, and your self deceive:
And I wrong nature when I this believe.

Must. I Will rather perish by your mis-belief
Then give you evidence to increase your grief.
Farewell! the duty of a Son retain.
You Will hear your Brother, and your Friend is slain.

Zang. 'Twere cruel, Sir, to leave me with this wound.

Must. You are too good to see what I have found.

[Going out* Zang. Stay, Sir, I cannot nature much offend,
Doubting a Mother to preserve a Friend.
Our Friendship does the minds alliance show.
Let me the utmost of this secret know.

Must. It comes from one who does not prudence lack,
Nor his intelligence from Rumor take;
One to whom Zarma does with trust disclose
(Charmed by his love) all tha^ her bosom knows.
This bloody mischief is with art designed,
The secret, cautiously, to few confined;
Which by such close contraction is made strong,
And still you Mother abler to do wrong.

Zang. Perhaps she is thus cruel since I grow
As cruel in believing she is so.
Yet then she with her self does dis-agree,
Knowing I die in you and she in me.

Must. This Junto could not so successful be
Were not the Sultan wrought to jealousy
That I, affecting popular esteem,
Follow those Crowds which have forsaken him;
And that I aimed not, by my Battles won,
To conquer Persia but usurp his Throne.
These false suggestions I might soon remove
Were I admitted to implore his Love;
But oh that rigid form which us bereaves
Of all approach without our Father's leaves!
That rigid custom which does bring no less
Then death when we, unsent for, seek access!
But, Zanger, if I could admittance gain,
I must not where your Mother rules complain.

Zang. If they have raised the Sultan's wrath so high,
You must, to save your life, vouchsafe, to fly.
Your stay makes life depend upon his breath;
Your flight prevents his guilt and your own death.
Whom he suspects he does but seldom save;
A Princes Prison is a Princes Grave.

Must. 'Twere better, Zanger, that my blood were spilt
Then saved by Flight; Flight is it self a guilt.
Since still my duty did my actions steer
I Will not disgrace my innocence by fear,
Lest I the saving of my life repent.
I Will rather bear then merit punishment.

Zang. When Prisoner made 'twill be a new offense
TO accuse his wrath by pleading innocence.
Your death he will then decree to avoid complaint;
Power often by death does justify restraint:
And, when incensed, into two faults will run
Rather then own that it has acted one.
We shall by your retreat gain time to learn
Those dangers which our haste cannot discern.
You then may make that innocence appear
Which yet his passion will not let him hear.

Must. I Will sooner yield my person to his power
Then be held guilty by him but one hour.
By flight my fear and shame will equal be;
And fear or shame is worse then death to me.

Zang. I doubt your virtue will your life betray;
But since so nobly you resolve to stay,
I Will to my Mother strait, and she shall know
The important secret of our mutual vow.
It will divert the hope of her design*
When she is assured your ruin must be mine.

Must. Friendship like this who ever did enjoy,
Which Rival'd-love nor death cannot destroy?
Oh Zanger! If you knew how much I strove
To make my Friendship overcome my Love
(Though in that strife I could not Victor be)
You would both envy then and pity me.

Zang. I Am glad in that design you mist your end:
Who quits his Mistress may forsake his Friend.
And none of Friendship should a proof admit
Which may occasion fear of losing it.
For he who can break off your Conqu'rours chain
Has such wild strength as nothing can restrain.

Must. Hah! stay! methinks I Am on a sudden brought
To light's last glimps, and to a stop of thought!
Methinks, something prophetic in my Breast
Bids me make haste and in Fame's Temple rest.
And as men dying leave chief Legacies
To those whose Friendship they did dearest prize*
So, Zanger, I, as to your merit due,
Bequeath the Queen, my life's last gift, to you.

Zang. Our secret Sympathy your Fate secures:
If bad, my Breast would feel't as soon as yours.
And since you but bequeath a Legacy,
Which cannot be possessed before you dye,
You safely give what I shall never receive
Because I cannot Mustapha outlive.

Must. How poorly some in Friendship take a pride
Which never yet was by Love's interest tried:
To ours alone the perfect praise is due
At once of being Friends and Rivals too.

[Exeunt Embracing. Enter Rustan, Pirrhus. Pirrh. Compliance now must serve us
more then force
Since the European and the Asian Horse
Refuse our orders and in public say
That we conspired to banish Mustapha.

Rust. No pride so dangerous is as being proud
Of prosperous Mutiny. They threaten loud
Who used but in their whispers to complain.

Pirrh. If they the Ianizaries Aga gain
We are, beyond repairs of Court, undone.

Rust. The force we dare not meet we ought to shun.

Pirrh. The Empress feels remorse, or finds her fear.

Rust. We shall be called, Zarma expects us here.
Achmat, the Asian Horse have long been led
[ Enter Achmat* Haly. By you, and by your great example bred.
This Monster-mutiny will all devour.
You might oblidge the Sultan with your power
If you could quell this Monster.

Ach. May be so.
But you had better try what you can do.

Rust. The deed is noble and belongs to you:
I would not take what is to Achmat due.

Ach. Indeed you ever, with a tender hand,
Touched what another Bassa should command.
Your Justice (which knows when, and whom to strike)
Usurps no business which you do not like.

Pirrh. Haly, this doubtful language strange appears.

Haly. You Will in the Army find Interpreters.

Rust. Haly it seems does listen to the Crowd.

Haly. Men need not listen where Complaints are loud.

Pirrh. The people rail to exercise their Tongues.

Haly. Their patience first is exercised with wrongs.

Pirrh. They, wanting judgment, should submit to Laws,
And cannot Judges be in their own cause,
But to their Rulers gently should appeal.

Ach. Men their own judges are of what they feel.

Rust. This is not meant in Friendship nor for sport.
Sure, Pirrhus, they are angry with the Court,
And having found, none for their anger care,
Strive out of malice to be popular.

Enter Zarma who whispers Rustan. Zarma. You must bring Pyrrhus, and may have
access.


Exeunt with Zarma, Rustan and Pirrhus, smiling scornfully on the other two,
and they on them. Achm. Methinks we were ill-natured to express
So much contempt of Greatness in distress.

Haly. When shining Favorites grow with greatness proud
All men rejoice to see them in a Cloud.
If this ill nature be, it is not confined
To us alone, but is in all mankind.
And whilst we blame our selves we injure all:
Nothing's ill natured that is natural.

Achm. I must confess, in thus insulting, you
Do but as Statesmen to each other do.

Haly. When they are more afflicted we will seem
To mourn with their few Friends who pity them;
But secretly we will their Foes insence
And then, in haste, bring them intelligence
Of mischiefs which they never can avoid;
And so be thankt by those we have destroyed.

[Exeunt* Enter Roxolana, Rustan, Pyrrhus. Rox. My favor to the Sultan you
implore
Only for Governments your sought before.
You sue for Egypt, you for Babylon;
If I could these procure you would be gone.

Rust. In these from sudden Foes we distant are;
No Mutiny can last to march so far:
And we, by absence, may perhaps abate
The rage contracted by this Armies hate.

Pirrh. This Armies temper, well considered, shows
You are not safe when we our safety lose.
But 'twill in vain with your designs contest
When in our hands you shall possess the East.

Rox. Men who to high designs, like this, are bent
Should less fear death then not to see the event.

Rust. The Camp to Mustapha such love has shown
That we shall hasten by his death our own.

Pirrh. That which does lead your hope the surest way
Brings us to certain ruin if we stay.

Rox. You vowed (striving my favor to regain)
That Zanger after Solomon should reign.
And, that I might to mark of horror bear,
You said, I still against it should appear.

Pirrh. But, Madam, neither of us promised we
The Princes Executioners would be.
All but the Mutes will that black office shun;
And all things else are near perfection done.

Rox. None here the fatal Orders will obey,
If in this juncture you should fly away.
You both must stay, and what you plotted, act*
I Will not the guilt of your designs contract.

Rust. In staying we the Princes fate partake;
We who are guilty only for your sake.
So guilty none did ever yet appear.

Rox. You only guilty are because you fear:
But fear in Statesmen is the highest crime.
Those who to Empires upper stations climb
Are not so useful by their being wise
As they may hurtful be by cowardice.
For they, fearing to act what they should do,
Make with themselves the valiant useless too.

Rust. Provoke not those who with your ruin may
Save both themselves and injured Mustapha.

Pirrh. This, were we Cowards, we could quickly do.

Rox. Am I forsaken, and then threatened too?
You doing this will your best visage wear.
Falsehood in Statesmen is less vile then fear.
Go to the Sultan, go! and the interest try
Of crafty Art: On Nature I Will rely.
You are whole Statesmen and his Friends in part;
Statesmen, like States, are but the works of Art.
When in both shapes your wisdoms have appeared,
Weak Wives and Mistresses may chance be heard.
You with your blood must for your mischiefs pay;
But a few tears will wash my guilt away.
What you designed, Ambition made you do;
I did but that which Nature called me to.
You did the Plot contrive to kill his Son;
At which I but connived to save my own.
Go then, and by your deaths the difference prove
Twixt those whom Kings but trust, and whom they love.

Rust. Our Treason against you would be a fault
Greater then ever entered in our thought.
Pardon our Passion since you did deny
The suit we made with sharpest injury.

Pirrh. Too much your loyal servants you despise
When you their care impute to Cowardice.

Rox. Care does unworthy of it self appear
When it the ugly vizard wears of Fear.
If, as you said, the deed is almost done,
Stay but one day to end what you begun.
The Soldiers fury, which you would decline,
If well improved will perfect your design.
Their love to Mustapha is turned to rage;
Which nothing but his blood can now assuage.
Go then and make my Son the Empires Heir;
Leave your preferments to my sudden care.

Rust. We in your cause all dangers will despise.

Pyrrh. And with your fortune quickly fall or rise.

Rust. We will the Sultan instantly attend:
The Princes lingering Fate in death shall end.

[ Exeunt Rustan, Pyrrhus. Enter Zarma. Zarma. Madam, Prince Zanger, much
impatient, stays
Within, and humbly for admittance prays.

Rox. I guess the business which has brought him here?
His fatal Friendship gives me grief and fear:
Finding the Sultan does his Brother hate
He would employ me as his Advocate.
Say I am close at my Devotion, go!
Say I Am retired; make haste and tell him so.
Admit him not though much he will pretend.

Zarma. He is too much a Brother and a Friend.
[Aside. [ Exit Zarma.
Rox. What sin of mine, oh Heaven! incenses thee?
Thou make my Son his own worst Enemy.
What by my care and Art he might enjoy
He does himself contribute to destroy.
And I, in my perplexed condition, must
Become unnatural, or else unjust:
Must leave a Son to Empires cruelty,
Or to a generous Prince inhumane be.
My Husband, whom I Love, I cruel make,
Even against Nature, yet for Natures sake.
His Son, by my contrivance, he must kill;
Whilst I preserve my own against his will.
The blood I save must answer for my guilt
And wash away the stains of what is spilt.

THE FIFTH ACT.
Enter Solomon, Roxolana, Pyrrhus, Rustan. Soly. I Will not stay to see him in
my Throne:
I yet can reach him and will take him down,
Rustan has now my orders: he shall die.

Rox. Excess of Justice turns to cruelty.

Soly. Whilst but suspicion did my breast invade
Your mediation could my wrath dissuade;
But now his Treason is so certain grown
That I must take his life, or lose my own.
The name of Mustapha infects your breath.
Those who desire his life, design my death.

Rox. Then, Sir, my intercession is unfit.
Yet pardon me if I with grief submit;
For it does too much cause of grief afford,
When Justice against Nature draws her Sword.

Soly. His death is but deferred, because I stay
To send him to his Grave the safest way.

Rust. Since you by Achmat did the Prince advise
That if he either loyal were or wise
He from the Camp should secretly retire,
And by his absence quench his raging fire.
It were convenient to you Achmat sent
With kindness to invite him to your Tent;
Pretending it is your will he should receive
Your counsel e're he does the Army leave.
But, Sir, since for your safety he must die
It should be done with speed and secrecy.

Pyrrh. Else they may rescue him by open force.
His Train and Guards are Thirty Thousand Horse:
And he so much your Soldiers rules that they
Will scarce, but in your presence, you obey.

Soly. Already his dark evening is begun:
He shall be sure to set before the Sun;
And never more shall rise to be adored,
But part in an Eclipse and be abhorred.
Send Achmat hither to avoid delay.

[ Exeunt Rustan, Pyrrhus. Rox. Fate rises in your Brow! I dare not stay
To hear the bloody sentence you must give:
Horror and pity in my bosom strive,
Remembering what to Mustapha is due,
And not to punish him would ruin you.
[Exit.
Soly. We our compassion rather should extend
To strangers than to Sons when they offend:
With wrongs from strangers we may well dispense
Who nothing have received to recompense:
They only are by common justice bound:
None are ingrate who have no favor found.
But Mustapha (unthankful for that care
Which bred him to deserve the Wreaths of War;
Whom all the Bonds of Nature could not tie)
Shall now, for Natures sake, unpitied die.
[Exit.
Enter Mustapha* Zanger. Must. This counsel Achmat from the Sultan brought,
Whose favor I have now by Achmat sought;
Begging I may attend him e're I go,
And fully my supposed offenses know.
If to this just request he does consent,
I may avoid my fatal Banishment,
And be delivered from a double grief
Whilst I to Love and Friendship give relief.

Zang. I fear in your request by Achmat made
You have but sought the means to be betrayed.
And since against your self you now conspire
Who will oppose that Fate which you desire?
My Mother, in denying me access,
Does rashly your determined death confess.

Must. Since only guilty minds have cause of (...)
It does to me more probably appear
That even my Foes are likeli'er to abhor
Their mischiefs past then to consult of more.

Enter Achmat. Achm. The joys of conquest ever fill your breast*
The Mighty Sultan yields to your request;
Believes your love is in your message sent;
He trusts that love, and thinks you innocent.
His Cloud is vanished and his Brow so clear
That you may plainly read a Father there:
Sir, he does straight expect you in his Tent:
Improve his kindness whilst he does relent.

Must. How like you now the way I did pursue?

[To Zanger. Zang. I think the change too sudden to be true.

Must. If false, I then am but of life bereaved:
It Is worth my dying to be undeceived.
And who would with a Father be in strife?
Rather then duty lose I Will lose my life.
Zanger, farewell! I leave, in leaving you,
The best of Friends and best of Brothers too.
Yet I shall take some glory in my death
Counting the worth of what I can bequeath.
And, to confirm my Legacy, I now
Freely release the rigor of your vow.
For if in the upper world we ought can know
Of things which those we love transact below,
I shall rejoice when I am thither gone,
That you possess my Mistress and my Throne.

Zang. Can you such gifts to one so worthless give
As after you will be content to live?
Ah Prince! If this discourse you should pursue,
Sorrow to me would kinder prove then you.

Must. If in my Fate, Dear Zanger, you should share.
Who of the Queens concerns will take a care?
Think it her suit, not mine, which you deny.

Zang. When you are dead, Honor will make me die.

Must. I shall be strong enough for my defense,
Where nature pleads the cause of innocence.

Zang. Methinks both these should all things overcome;
Yet Hope finds in my breast but little room.

Must. I must not your Prophetic sorrows hear:
It Is only Friendship which creates your fear.

[Exeunt. Enter the Queen, Zarma. Zarma. One whom I loved enjoined me to obey,
With faithful service, you and Mustapha,
And, Madam, I attend you now you are
Alone that all I know I may declare.

Queen. I Will not ungrateful be for what you do:
I Will serve you in rewards and Friendship too.

Zarma. I still have feared that Roxolana's love
To Zanger would his Brothers ruin prove;
But many proofs do now my thoughts convince
That she designs to save and serve the Prince:
For that effect she is to the Sultan gone;
But first commanded me to tell her Son
That he this evening in her Tent should stay
To speak with her concerning Mustapha.
The tumult in the Camp begins to cease,
And all put on the cheerful looks of Peace.

Queen. You tell me what I most desired to hear:
Which soon will free me from my grief and fear.

Zarma. Since all things move to meet with your desire
Your Son has no occasion to retire.

Queen. By your advice I may successful grow.

Zarma. Still what I hear you instantly shall know.
[ Exit Zarma.
Enter Cardinal, Thuracus, Viche, Cleora. Queen. My Lords, by Zarma (who is
newly gone)
I hear the Sultan smiles upon his Son:
The Empress nobly has procured his peace:
The Chiefs of factions from their tumults cease,
And now for favor to her Tent resort.

Card. I doubt all this is but a turn of Court.
Think not the Empress will her power employ
TO establish him who must her Son destroy.

Queen. Honor has in her Soul the highest place.

Card. Nature has greater power then Honor has.
But, Madam, whilst this seeming calm does last
You, with the Infant, should to Buda haste;
Which, now disloyal grown, will scarce with stand
The worst of all your Foes, King Ferdinand.
For whilst the Turk invades us from the East,
The un-christian King assaults us in the West.
With craft and wealth he has advan'd his power.

Thur. Madam, we now came from the Governor;
Who bad us tell you that he has surpised
Three of King Ferd'nand's Officers disguised.

Viche. With these there have been blank Commissions found:
Some of their faction we in Fetters bound.

Queen. Before this danger does resistless grow
You must, with both these Lords, to Buda go.

Card. Your presence, Madam, will be needful there.

Queen. My promise will a while detain me here.

Card. You Will then be left afflicted and alone.

Queen. You leave me for my safety not your own.
Whilst I the rage of fortune here withstand
We may be ruined there by Ferdinand.
I must not be denied. Your being there
Will free me from a most important care.

Card. Madam, my strict obedience makes me go.
All that does happen you shall hourly know.

[Exeunt Queen and Cleora one way, the Cardinal and Lords at the other door.
Enter Mustapha. The Guards and others, passing by him, shake their heads with
sorrowful looks. Must. All shake their pensive heads in passing by
As if they did dislike my destiny.
Let him dispatch whom he intends to kill:
It Is less to suffer death then fear it still.
Nor is the worst of deaths so bad a Fate
As still to live under a Fathers hate.
My torments are so many and so high
That only death can be my remedy.
Death will my Fathers jealousy remove
And free me ever from neglected love;
Whilst to my greatest guilt it puts an end
Of being Rival to so brave a Friend.
But even that comfort brings me sorrow too;
For death will then more then my Friendship do.
And if his kindness makes him keep his vow
He, dying, will the greater Friendship show.
He Will freely, for my sake, quitt life and love;
But cruel force does me from both remove.
In death his friendship will so clearly shine
That when I dye, he will see the faults of mine:
For I, by Rivalship, was faulty grown
And death resigns what friendship should have done.
Enter six Mutes, one of them advances before the rest and kneels down,
delivers Mustapha a black Box with a Parchment, the Sultan's Great Seal hanging
at it in a black Ribbond. Then he holds up a Bow-string and makes signs that he
should kneel and submit to the Sultan's sentence. These are to add new wings
to my last hour.
I understand your signs and see your power.
Stand off. I with your business can dispense.
But your officious have is an offense.
I will consider what I ought to do,
And dye to satisfy my self, not you.
Can I my duty show when I do ill*
They retire to the further end of the Stage. Unjustly yielding to a Fathers
will?
Sure we, by Natures gift, the right enjoy
To strive with those who would our lives destroy.
And when I tamely dye, without defense,
I teach the world to doubt my innocence.
But with my Father why should I debate?
My death he wishes and my life I hate.
Why should I make his anger higher rise
By striving to preserve what I despise?
[He beckens to the Mutes to come near him, and they advance. Before I dye I Will
to the Sultan show
My injured innocence, that he may know
My death will to the judging world proclaim
He is more guilty then he thinks I am.
When I have told him what I ought to say,
Then what he does command I will obey* --
[They all shake their heads in sign of denial. How, Slaves! am I refused? I
will not dye
Till I have first obtained what you deny.

[The Mutes draw their Sc^mitars and assault him; he draws too and Kills two of
them. Enter Solomon. Soly. O Traitor! art thou such an Enemy
To thy high Blood, which is derived from me,
That now, enforced by this new crime, I must
With my own hand mix it with common dust?
Against my power thou dying art at strife,
To make thy death as guilty as thy life.

At the first hearing of Solyman's voice the M^tes give over fighting, and at
the end of Solyman's speech, Mustapha, kneeling, lays his Scemitar at the
Sultan's feet. Must. The cause of my defense from their assault
Was that from you I might have learnt my fault.
Alas, what is it I with that life should do
Which, Sir, is hated and proscribed by you?
All I endeavored by my life's defense
Was to gain time to show my innocence.
I shun not dying, Sir, but to be held
Guilty, is dying after I am killed,
Losing the life of Fame when I am dead.

Soly. A man condemned is not allowed to plead.
I Will hear no more.

[Mustapha rises. Must. Then, Sir, to death I Will go.
I am too guilty since you think me so.
May not my servants do what must be done?
Let not your meanest Slaves destroy your Son.

Soly. Though justice takes that life which he must lose
[Aside. Yet Nature cannot this request refuse.
Go, lead him in, and let his Servants do
[To the Mutes. That sudden justice which I left to you.

Must. That cheerfulness with which to death I go
Some proof; Sir, of my innocence does show.
And since by death I would your hate remove
What would I not have done to gain your love?

[Exeunt Mustapha, and Mutes, Solomon looking after Mustapha whilst he is in
sight. Soly. What I have now decreed does just appear:
But against Nature who can stop his Ear
Though she against the right of Justice stands?
My Heart does sigh for what my Tongue commands.
[Exit.
Enter Roxolana. Rox. Now the great deed is doing, or else done,
I have been cruel to preserve my Son.
That cruel deed which makes him the Empires Heir
Heaven, sure, forgives since it rewards my care.
And nothing now can ever make me grieve
But for his death by which my Son does live.

Enter Zarma. Zarma. Madam, the Guards are doubled every where.

Rox. If Guards can make you safe what need you fear?

Zarma. Your servants hide their looks, and fear to show
The griefs they feel, and dangers which they know.

Rox. Zarma, be deaf to what you should not hear;
Or use your strength to what you ought to bear.
Easing your self, when you of grief complain,
To many others you transfer your pain.
[Enter Haly Weeping. By your amazement and the tears you shed,
[ To H^ly. You seem to tell me Mustapha is dead.

Haly. Yes, and so died, that the most fortunate
Would gladly for his Fame have had his Fate.
But, Madam, be sufficed that he is dead.

Rox. No, I dare hear both what he did and said.

Haly. The Sultan his last suit could not deny;
Which was, that by his servants he might dye.
And each of those declared it a less crime
To kill himself then 'twas to Murder him.

Rox. It shows he was with highest love esteemed
When none would kill whom Solomon condemned.

Haly. It turned our blood to tears when he did pray
To all, in vain, to take his life away.
He said aloud, can I so wretched prove
That your denyals must declare your love?
See what your guilty kindness drives me to;
Worse then my Father did, 'twill make me do.
One, whom he guilty thought, to death he sent;
But you will make me kill the innocent.
It Is you have made your Prince unfortunate,
Who finds your love more cruel then his hate.
And now (afraid of nothing but delay)
He frowning said, unfriended Mustapha
Must be beholding to himself for death:
Then snatched a Sword which straight he did unsheath.
Morat cried out, the Murd'rer's part I Will do;
It Is fitter I should bear that guilt then you.
The Prince about his neck his Arms did spread
In sign of gratitude, and smiling said,
Is it not fit my wretched life should end
When he who kills me I esteem my Friend?

Rox. He could not give more ornament to death
Then when so calmly he resigned his breath.

Haly. When grieved Morat the fatal deed had done
(Which kindness made him do and others shun)
With haste he said, no Tears can be so good
To shed for such a loss as Tears of blood.
His hand then acts the second Tragic part
So on his own, as on his Masters heart.
But grief had wounded him so much before,
That scarce his Cemiter could wound him more.

Rox. This was at once a duty and a crime.

Haly. It made us pity first, then envy him.

Rox. Call Zanger hither and return with speed.
But keep him ignorant of this dire deed.
[ Exit Haly. Brave Prince, if now thy Mother were alive,
She, by my sorrow, might be taught to grieve.
How soon thy death a miracle has done?
It makes me weep for what preserves my Son.

[ Exeunt Roxolana, Zarma. Enter Solomon. Soly. Forgot are now those Fields his
Valor won,
Which did too soon his Head with Laurel crown!
His Virtue with his Foes he overthrew;
For, growing great, he straight grew guilty too.

Enter Zanger, who kneels; Solomon steps to him* and takes him up. Zang. I come
at your command, by Achmat sent;
Who said, I should attend you in your Tent*

Soly. Zanger, I, how did for your judgment send:
You are my minds Physician, Son, and Friend.
Tell me, can Mortal-Monarchs always keep
The watch over Empire set without some sleep?

Zang. No man can live whom sleep does not repair;
Much less can Monarchs who are born to care.

Soly. Behold then the revenge which I did take
On him who kept me many Months awake.

Zang. My Brother dead? you have the world bereft
Of much more Virtue then is in it left!
'Twas Jealousy, not he (Oh dire mistake!)
Which did so many Months keep you awake;
And it was just that you, who in your Breast
Would jealousy admit should take no rest.
My speech is by this object overcome:
No grief is well expressed till it is dumb!
Ah Loyal Prince! till death does close my Eyes,
Zanger goes toward Mustapha. Accept these Tears, my Friendships Sacrifice!

Soly. Traitor, do weep for one condemned by me?
This shows that thou as guilty art as he.
Desist, or thou shall share in his just fate.

Zang. That, Sir, will rather show your love than hate.
Death is the only blessing I can find:
You think it just, and I shall think it kind.
I will his worth to all the world declare.

Soly. He did aspire and grew too popular.

Zang. Rustan, and Pyrrhus did his life pursue:
We their contrivance of this Murder knew:
And I desired him from your wrath to fly;
But in obedience he would stay to die.
For, but one day when banished from your sight,
Was worse to him than Death's eternal night.
If in himself he any guilt had known,
He, with your leave, to Syria might have gone.
He told me still what he designed or knew.

Soly. His black designs he did conceal from you.

Zang. Nothing could more his trust of Friendship prove
Then that we both the Hungarian Queen did love:
And though he then my first pretensions knew,
Yet freely he confessed he loved her too:
And when a Rival does his love reveal,
What can his cunning after that conceal?
How could you his unblemisht Virtue doubt?

Soly. Have I not often heard my Armies shout
When he appeared, and with applause so high
As if his presence brought them Victory?

Zang. In that their error and not his appeared;
He with more grief then you their gladness heard.
By all the duty to a Father due,
And to our Prophet, Mustapha was true;
True as you Viziers have been false and wrought
You into wrong suggestions of his fault.

Soly. Oh Heaven! my guilt now makes it an offense
To hear untimely of his innocence.
This truth (which now I may my torment call)
You should have sooner told, or not at all.

Zang. Who could, without offending you, have thought
(When your kind message was by Achmat brought)
That 'twas a train laid for my Brothers life?
And yet my doubt with duty was at strife;
And doubt prevailed, for several ways I tried
To get admittance but was still denied.

Soly. Zanger, to ease our griefs, let us agree
TO impute his Fate to our ill destiny.
Those who to death have made me send my Son,
Shall instantly in torture meet their own.
Let wisdom check your sorrow, and prepare
To be this day proclaimed my Empire's Heir.

Zang. But, Sir, religiously to me he swore
That, if the Turkish Crown he ever wore,
He to our bloody Law an end would give,
And I should safely in his bosom live.
My self I then by sacred promise tied
Not to outlive the day on which he died.
And as I knew he nobly did design
To keep his vow, so I remember mine.
[He turns to Mustapha. 'Twas only love had strength enough to invade
That mutual Friendship which we sacred made:
But now over love I have the conquest got;
Though Love divided us, yet death shall not. --

[ Zanger stabs himself and falls at Mustapha's Feet, Solomon runs to him.
Soly. Hold, Zanger! hold!

Zang. The happy wound is given
Which sends my Soul to Mustapha and Heaven.

Soly. Friendship and cruelty alike have done;
For each of them has robbed me of a Son.

Zang. When, Sir, you have forgiven me for my death,
Grant what I ask with my departing breath:
Your dying Zanger begs the Hungarian Crown
For the injured Queen and for her guiltless Son.

Soly. Shall I so little give for Zanger's sake,
Whose mighty mind would not my Empire take?

Zang. Sir, for your gift in thankfulness I bend;
[Bows to him. In death I serve my Mistress and my Friend.
He Will live in your esteem, she in her Throne.
Now all I had to do ^n Earth is done.
[Turns again to Mustapha. Lo at your Feet, dear Friend, your Brother lies;
And where he took delight to live -- he dies.

[Zanger dies. Soly. Fame in her Temple will adorn thy shrine.
No Roman Glory ever equaled thine.
Zanger, in height of Youth, for Friendships sake,
Did rather die then proffered Empire take.
I would die too, but by revenge am staid
Due for you both, which shall be doubly paid.
My Viziers shall be first your sacrifice.
Nor is she safe who in my bosom lies.
For they, without her interest in the deed,
Durst not at last have urged me to proceed.
[Turns to Mustapha. Oh Mustapha! the worthy may in thee
The dangerous state even of great virtue see.
Thine was to all the height and compass grown
That virtue e're could reach to get renown:
And the reward of it pernicious proved,
For I did punish thee for being loved.
Thy Mother was the first that e're possessed
By Conquest the Dominion of my Breast:
And had thy mind been blotted and as black
As virtue would paint vice, yet for her sake,
(The brightest Beauty, and the softest Wife)
I might, alas, at least have saved thy life.
But I shall mourn too long; for whilst I stay,
To count thy wrongs, I thy revenge delay.
[Exit.
Enter Roxolana, Haly. Rox. How Haly! are you certain that my Son
Is to the Sultan's Great Pavilion gone?

Haly. Achmat was for him by the Sultan sent;
And you will find him in the inner Tent.

Rox. You should have brought him to consult with me
E're he had known his Brothers destiny.

Haly. I humbly beg, this may be rather thought
Your servants great misfortune then his fault.

Rox. Wait in my name, on the Hungarian Queen:
Tell her, that those rude Tumults she has seen
May still increase, and may nenew her fear;
And therefore I would fain secure her here.
But something, from your self, you ought to say,
She having heard too much of Mustapha.
[ Exit Haly. Roxolana goes toward the Scene, where she sees Mustapha, and
Zanger with his Dagger in his hand, and then she starts back. Both dead! O
horror! Zanger does appear
Armed against himself as his own Murderer.
This deed Friendship and pity made thee do.
But was not I thy Friend and Mother too?
That Friendship against Nature was a crime
Which paid me nothing and too much to him.
Though Friendship to a Friend thou might assign,
Yet, since I lent thee life, that life was mine.
Unjust to Nature, though to Friendship true,
In paying Friendships debt with Natures due.
Is this the last reward of all the pain
I felt, saving thy life to make thee reign?
Thou have revenged (O Heaven) what I have done
With so much guilty kindness for my Son!

Enter the Queen. Queen. What voice of sorrow is alone so loud,
As if the cause had made the mourner proud?
For after noble Mustapha is slain
Who can enough, without my help complain?

Rox. Ah Queen! add to your grief by looking there.
Zanger is dead, and his own Murderer.

Queen. Zanger! I did not think Fate could have shown
(After it took away my King and Throne)
Another loss which could a grief impose
To make me weep as justly as for those.
Why did not Zanger fatal virtue lack
Since it did highest Friendship cruel make?
Grief grows too hard for our complaints alone
When the Worlds loss is greater then our own.

Rox. Ah Mustapha! I hither came to grieve
[Aside. That by thy death I made my Zanger live;
But he too soon for my offense has paid;
And I, thy Traitor, am by him betrayed.
Madam, your tears will now injurious be;
[Turns to the Queen. In grief, as honor, you out-rival me.

Queen. You Zanger loved, then do not me reprove
Grieving for two who had no fault but love.

Enter Haly. Rox. Haly! If you come nearer you will despise
All Glory and repent that you have Eyes.

Haly. The Sultan, full of horror, did relate
A Tragic story of such dismal fate
As keeps me from approaching out of fear
To see what it was cruelty to hear.
But these high sorrows are accompanied
With others which compassion fain would hide.

Rox. Will Heaven more weight on our affliction lay?

Haly. Madam, the Guards and Train of Mustapha
Assault the Camp with their united Force,
And are assisted by Prince Zanger's Horse.
The Sultan, armed against this sudden rage,
Is now advanced their fury to assuage.

Rox. O fatal strife where Victors nothing gain!

Haly. The Viziers by his order are both slain.
Madam, to you* as Regent for your Son,
[Turns to the Queen. The Sultan does present the Hungarian Crown.
The old Moravian Troops are by command,
Prepared to march against King Ferdinand.
You, with your Son, may now to Buda go
To meet your Friends and to pursue your Foe.
Your Restoration he before designed
When first the Empress with his purpose joined:
But this dispatch he justly has confessed
Is the effect of Zanger's last request.

Queen. The looks of gratitude should cheerful be;
But, Zanger, I am so obliged by thee,
As it occasion gives to make me mourn
That to the dead I nothing can return.

Rox. Madam, the Sultan's bounty strait receive;
And, in your absence, trust me here to grieve.

Queen. Madam, I Will with my Son to Buda go
And my last duty to his Father show:
Then in a shady Cloister will remain,
And, as a fatal Mourner, still complain
Of that which here both you and I have lost,
Where death does over love in triumph boast.
I shall undo my Son if I look back
On those whom I unwillingly forsake;
I Am more concerned in what I leave behind
Then in the joys he shall in Buda find*

Rox. Go, Madam, go, and hasten to your Throne!
Live to find Zanger's Friendship in your Son.
Be with much power more happy then I proved;
Live to be feared, and yet continue loved.

Queen. I Will fly from power; but yours to the distressed
Has been a refuge and should be increast,
Till (when you weary grow) your suppliants sue
That Heaven may be a refuge then to you.

[They Embrace. [Exeunt Queen, and Haly. Enter Zarma at the other door. Zarma.
The Mufty is within, and bad me say
That he is sent to counsel you to pray.

Rox. Why do thou weep? I do not dying fear:
Thou griev'st because Grief's remedy is near.
I Will meet the Mufty, and for death prepare:
Lead me this way, for I would shun despair.

[She looks backwards toward the dead Bodies and goes from them. Exeunt. The
Scene changes. Enter Achmat, Haly. Achmat. The tortured Viziers did their guilt
confess;
And, e're they died, accused the Sultaness:
Who to their first proposal did incline;
But by ambitious Rustan the design
(In hope to gain her favor) was begun;
And was pursued by her to save her Son.

Haly. The Guards and noble Train of Mustapha
Have got renown though they have lost the day.

Achm. Till Solomon in person did appear
They, in their fierce assault, Victorious were.
With Thirty Thousand Horse they braved the Field;
Of which Five Hundred are not left unkil'd.
He pardoned those and pitty'd their offense;
But they so hated life and loved the Prince
That it was harder to preserve those few
Then 'twas to overcome the many whom we slew.
When rumor (swift, though it flies low) had spread
Through all our Camp that Mustapha was dead,
And that his Friends, who had that battle fought,
Were only for his safety hither brought.
Then the Victorious threw their Arms away,
And wept for those whom they did lately slay.
Some, who had killed their Sons, more tears did shed
For their own guilt, then that their Sons were dead;
Guilt wrought by Fate, which had their valor moved
Against that Prince whom they for valor loved.

Enter Solomon, Zarma. Haly. His Brows are full of Clouds, his Eyes of Fire;
There Is dangerous Thunder near: let us retire*

[ Exeunt Achmat, Haly. A Table, with Staandish, and a Chair upon the Stage.
Sol. Well, call her in; and do as I command.
You, with her Women, must be still at hand.
The Mufty is of use; let him attend.
[ Exit Zarma. Thy progress, Love, was long, but it shall end.
By Beauty (which does even the wise delude)
The valiant ever soonest are subdued.
It Is nature's snare, and in defiance laid;
For when least hidden we are most betrayed.
Beauties fair hand has many a mighty name
Too foully blotted in the Book of Fame.
Accursed Beauty! it is at last to thee
That Famous Chiefs have owed their infamy.
Oh what? has it not done, and may do still.

Enter Roxolana. Rox. I come to know Heavens pleasure in your will.

Soly. Draw nearer then! Alas! be not afraid
When it is too late to fear, Speak, have you prayed?
For you have much to lose, but more to save.
Have you been Penitent?

Rox. Sultan, I have.

Soly. You needed many Tears to wash away
The stains which have defiled this bloody day.
Brave Mustapha, and Zanger too is dead;
These have deserved more Tears than you can shed,
Since all in Honor's list they did excel:
But in their cause full Thirty Thousand fell;
And twice that number were in Battle killed
By those who did deserve to gain the Field.

Rox. Oh, Sultan, do not give me leave to speak;
But give that Heart, which loves you, leave to break!

Soly. Let it entire a while, for my sake, last.
I would not now have mentioned what is past
But that it is justice and some kindness too
To show sufficient cause for what I do,
Which else might cruel seem; for you must dye.

Rox. When you bring death I will not ask you, why?

Soly. It shows the civil greatness of your mind
When to your Punisher you can be kind:
But 'twill oblige me and become you too,
More then your fatal beauty e're did do,
If you so gracefully depart from life
As fits our Childrens Mother and my Wife.

Rox. Perhaps I lived unworthy of your fame,
But none shall Roxolana's dying blame:
Yet I must grieve so as I ought to do
When I, by leaving life, depart from you.

Soly. You may your little debts of kindness pay;
But I must be obliged another way,
Which will be first by your confession shown:
Confessing not what you, but I have done.

Rox. Ah, Sir! most willingly I will confess
You found me in the Region of distress;
A Flower but newly sprung, and in the shade.
My growth I from your shining favor had.

Soly. This, is not the confession I would hear,
It shows untimely gratitude or fear;
And makes me guilty of upbraiding you
With what Love's secret power did make me do.
I am not to be told what I have done
By loves persuasive force, and but to one;
For when you loved me too that debt was paid,
And debts, discharged, none justly can upbraid.

Rox. Ah do not, Sir, forbid my thankfulness!

Soly. You quite mistake the thing you should confess.
It Is not what Love but Honor made me do
For all your Sex, and not alone for you.
Though the strict Laws of Ottoman's high Race
Did not allow our Sultans e're should grace
The Mothers of their Sons with privilege
Of Marriage, yet your Sex I did oblige,
And lifted you above the scorns of life,
When I, by sacred forms, made you my Wife.

Rox. This is but mentioned to augment the sense,
Which you suspect I want, of my offense.
Or else you show me that I useless grow
Whilst I confess but what the people know.

Soly. If what I did was then by Honor done
Let me that Honor keep when you are gone.
Let me the favor of your Sex retain:
Which since I justly did by Marriage gain
I would not lose it now by Deaths divorce,
Whilst they unjustly think I want remorse;
And that my justice is but cruelty,
Because my Wife does by my sentence die.

Rox. Do but instruct me, Sultan, how I may,
In death, for all my life's offenses pay?

Soly. It is not fit our Priesthood or Divan
Should sit to judge the Wife of Solomon.
But yet the blood by your ambition spilt,
Cries out so loud against your audacious guilt,
That now my People, Armies, and the State,
Behold your Beauty with malicious hate:
And no expedient e're can satisfy
The justice they expect unless you die.
You only can to Heaven for mercy trust.

Rox. Sir, I will die, that they may find you just.

Soly. But, that your Sex may ever think me so,
You must a form of process undergo
Which strict necessity does make me use.
You must, under your hand, your self accuse.
Which, as a true Record, may rescue me
From false opinions of my cruelty.

Rox. Ah Sultan! This proceeding is severe!

Soly. You nobly should your own impeachment bear
Least you a ruder from our Bashaws hear.
Go, Roxolana, sit, and write it down.

Rox. I, with my crime, shall make my duty known,

[Leads her to the Table. Soly. Be brief and clear. Posterity should know
The hidden root which made your mischief grow.
When the first causes we of ills discern
We safely and with ease prevention learn.
You had your aids in the conspiracy;
My Viziers else had not been doomed to die.
[He steps to her whilst she is writing. What form do you in your confession
use?

Rox. Sultan! I wholly do my self accuse.
And yet the dying* sure, may blame the Dead
Who safely are by Death from danger freed:
Besides both they and I shall straight appear
Where Heaven's just Monarch will the injured hear.

Soly. Accuse your self and let their guilt alone.

Rox. If the contrivance was by them begun
May I not make of Truth peculiar use
And crimes extenuate when I shun excuse?

Soly. Already is your whole contrition spent.
Leave off if you unwillingly repent.

[He offers to take up the Paper, She rises and holds it aside. Rox. Forgive,
me Sultan, and I will proceed.

Soly. Oh Heaven! when she so much does pardon need
Can I deny it and endure to live?
I cannot be forgiven, if I forgive,
So much her crime all mercy does exceed;
For Mustapha and Zanger too is dead.
Make haste! write fully your ambition down
In changing the succession of my Crown.

Rox* Pardon the Tears I on the Paper shed!
If I have written what you cannot read.

Soly. Forgive her Heaven here take my Handkerche^
Dispatch! why do you pause?

Rox. I Will hasten, Sir.
[She rises again. But whilst I now my crime at full express
Let me a little speak in much distress.

Soly. Your time forbids the tediousness of grief;
Complain not when you cannot have relief.
Yet you may speak. Take courage, but be brief.

Rox. Sir, this confession a Record must be
To save you from imputed cruelty.
Heaven give you, Sir, an everlasting fame,
And Heaven persuade you to prevent my shame.
I have but little through ambition done;
Nature did more, and 'twas to save my Son.

Soly. What did mysterious nature make you do?
Could you at once be kind and cruel too?
Farewell, you are relapsed, worse then before.

Rox. Sultan, I Will write, and I will speak no more.

[She sits down again. Enter Haly. Haly. Sultan, I show my Duty in my haste;
For with new Clouds your Camp is over-cast:
The Bloody business of this fatal day
Grows bloodi'r since the death of Mustapha.
The Janissaries, by their Aga led,
Accuse the Empress, and demand her Head.
They have their grievance by their Aga sent,
Roxolana rises and seems disordered. And he attends at the entrance of your
Tent.

Soly. They trust my yielding but shall feel my force.
Bid Achmat face them with my Syrian Horse.
You must your best disguise of Friendship wear,
And meet the Aga with the looks of fear,
Call him to Council, and disordered seem;
And when he is admitted, strangle him.
[ Exit Haly. These threatening Tumults only dangerous are
To Monarchs who dare less then Subjects dare.
Sit down! is your confession finished yet?

Goes to Roxolana. Rox. Sultan, it is.

Soly. I Will read what you have writ.

Rox. Sir, now I feel the torments of true fear,
She kneeling gives him the Paper. Because your dangers great as mine appear.
Give to rude hands the life which I must lose,
If you defend it you your own expose.

Soly, No, Roxolana, you shall calmly die.
You shall find justice, but no cruelty.
Your Women wait without; the Mufty too:
What must be done they decently shall do.

Enter Haly and kneels. Haly. The sudden Tempest suddenly is past.
[She ris^ No Clouds can long before your luster last.
With Tears the Janissaries now implore
That favor which their rage disdained before.
Sir, Achmat for the Aga's life does sue;
Which he reprieved to have it saved by you:
It will a Triumph to the Army give
Who are with grief subdued.

Soly. Go, let him live.

[Exit Haly. Rox. Ah Solomon! shall she who heretofore,
Still with success, for others did implore
Be now denied when for her self she sues?
I beg not what I ought, Sir, to refuse
If it were granted, your consent to live.
Oh take my life, but my offense forgive.

Soly. Oh why did Heaven such perfect beauty make
Yet let such beauteous things perfection lack?
Love against Justice in my bosom strives.
Let Justice pardon Love what Love forgives.
[He takes her up. Rise, Roxolana, you shall mercy find.
But as when you were cruel you were kind,
So I will deeds by your Example do;
For I will now be kind and cruel too.

Rox. Heaven which begins to take your Clouds away*
Will from departing night make break of day.

Soly. I give you life, and I forgive your crime;
Yet in this kindness I shall cruel seem.

Rox. Oh stay, Sir, and but hear what I Will implore.

Soly. Your doom is sealed, I Will never see you more.

Rox. Ah, Sir, you gave what I can never enjoy;
What you preserved you instantly destroy.

Soly. Zarma! call all to look on my remorse;
And then be witnesses of our divorce.
Enter Zarma, four of Roxolana's Ladies, Achmat, Haly, the three Attendants of
Mustapha and Zanger, eight of the Guard, and six Pages. The number on the Stage
being now twenty four. Take with your life perpetual Banishment.
Long may you live that you may much repent:
But from my sight be still so far removed,
As I may quite forget I ever loved.

Rox. Ah, Sultan, do but hear what I can say!

Soly. Oh cruelty, you kill me if you stay.

Rox. I Will but forgiveness beg for love and grief
Since both offend you when they seek relief.

Soly. Oh Heaven! still will you speak?

Rox. Sir, I Will depart,
And at your feet leave a forsaken heart.
[Exit.
Soly. Farewell for ever, and to Love farewell!
I Will lock my Bosom up where Love did dwell;
I will to Beauty ever shut my eyes,
And be no more a Captive by surprise*
But Oh, how little I esteem a Throne
When Love, the Ornament of Power is gone!

Exeunt Omnes. FINIS.

