Chaucer's GHOAST: Or, A Piece of ANTIQUITY.

Containing twelve pleasant Fables of Ovid penned after the ancient manner of
writing in England.

Which makes them prove Mock-Poems to the present Poetry.

With the History of Prince Corniger, and his Champion Sir Crucifrag, that run
a tilt likewise at the present Historiographers.

By a Lover of Antiquity.

Multa renascentur quae jam cecidere, etc. Hor London, Printed by T. Ratcliff,
and N. Thompson for Richard Mills, at the Pestle and Mortar without Temple Bar,
1672.

TO THE Readers.
NEw Books and Pamphlets, Sirs, now adays thrust so fast out of the Press, that
they will not give the Readers time to breath; this was the misery of Iuvenals
time, and I may cry as he did, Semper ego auditor tantum? But yet there is one
Remedy, periturae non parcere chartae. Yet what shall be the Subject? Novelty.
No. Hang it, then must it be laughed at and jeared in every Coffee-house, and be
subject to the Old men's Tobacco-pipes to bring them fire. But Coffee-houses are
going down, you l say: Faith that is one comfort; for I heard such damming of a
Pamphlet there once, that I thought they had sat on the Life and Death of the
Author: Besides, I know some persons hate new Fashions, as much as an old Don
in the University, hates Burgerdicius Logic; because he was taught in
Sandersons.

Shall the Matter be old then as the Prae-adamites? No, that is foolish too -- O
Gramercy mine old great Granfader, now me seems to think on his wholesome
Saw* In the mid way
it is zafe to play.


So then I must write what is neither new nor old; in a Dialect that is both
dawbed over with Novelty, and has Antiquity for its ground. Have at 'um then,
and let any Novice say what he will; since there is a Temple built to
Antiquity, what ever the World may say of my Superstition, I am resolved to fix
this Tablet there.

Farewell.
Upon the Authors Piece of Anniquity, by his Friend.
NEw Pamphlets every day, new Book's the cry:
The reason (since they are so common) why?
Can that be new whose likeness every day
Appears in the same mode? for shame away.
If this be news, then Pie at Christmas is,
And Pancakes on Shrove-Tuseday are novelties.
But here is a Piece; come quick, before it is sold.
It Is truly new: for why? because it is old.
Argument I.
HOw Pygmalion fell in Love with the Image he made.

Pygmalion niveum mira feliciter art
Sculpsit ebur, formamque dedit, qua foemina nasci
Nulla potest, operisque sui concepit amorem.
Ovid. l. x. Argument II.
How Diana turned Acteon into a Heart, and how he was devoured by his own Dogs.

-- alienae cornua fronti
Addita, vosque canes satiati sanguine herili.
Ovid. l. 3. Arg. III.
How Jupiter and Juno fell at odds concerning Love, and how they chose Tiresias
for their Judge, etc.

Placuit, quae sit sententia docti
Quaerere Tiresiae. Venus huic erat utraque utraque nota.
Ovid. l. 3. Arg. IV.
Of the Love of Apollo toward Coronis; and how the white Bird for discovering
it was turned into a black Raven.

Pulchrior in tota, quam Latissaea Coronis,
Non fuit Amonia; placuit tibi Delphia certe
Dum vel casta fuit vel inobservata: sed ales
Sensit adulterium Phoebius, etc.
Ovid. l. 2. Arg. V.
How the Giant Polyphemus loved the Nymph Galatea.

Nec si qu^sieris odium Cyclopis amorne
Acidis in nobis fucrit praestantior edam.
Ovid. l. xiij. Arg. VI.
The Battle between Hercules and Achelous for the Love of Deianira.

Accipe me generum dixi Parthane nate,
Dixit and Alcides, etc.
Ovid. l. ix. Arg. VII.
Mars and Venus caught together, and chained by Vulcan.

Vt Venere tocum conjux and adulter in unum,
Art viri, vinclisque nova ratione paratis
In mediis ambo deprens^ amplexibus haerent.
Ovid. l. iv. Arg. VIII.
How Jupiter ravished Io; and how she was transformed into a Cow, and how
Mercury slew her Keeper Argus.

Conjugis adventum praesenserat, inque nitentem
Inachidos vultus mutaverat ille juvencam.
Ovid. l. i. Arg. IX.
Leucothea ravished by Phabus.

Victa nitore dei pofita vim passa querela est.
Ovid. l. iv. Arg. X.
Calisto deflowred by Jupiter.

Dum redit itque frequens in virgin Nonacrina.
Haesit, etc.
Ovid. l. ii. Arg. XI.
Of the great patience of the Philosopher Socrates, and how his Wife threw a
pot full of water upon his head.

Diog. Laert. Arg. XII.
Of the excellent Harper Arion.

Carmine vocali sylvas animosque ferarum
Threicius votes, and saxa sequentia traxit.
Ovid. l. xi. This you shall find in the following History of Prince Corniger
and his Champion.

Chaucer's Ghoast OR, A Piece of Antiquity.
Argument I.
Pygmalion niveum mira feliciter art
Sculpsit ebur, formamque dedit, qua faemina nasci
Nulla potest, operesque sui concepit amorem.
Ovid. l. x.
I Find that heretofore was one,
whose name it was Pygmalion,
which was a lusty man of youth,
and at fine warks was very couth
above all other men, as tho,
and through fortune it fell him so.
As he that does in Love travail,
he made an Image of entail;
like to a Woman in semblance
of feature and of countenance.
So fair, yet never was Figure,
right as a living creature
she seemed, for of Ivory white
he has it wrote of such delight.
She was ruddy on the Cheke,
and red on her Lips eke,
whereof then he himself begyl'd,
for with a goodly look she smiled;
so that through pure impression
of his own imagination,
with all the he at of his courage
his love upon this fair Image
he set: and her of love prayed,
but she not one word again said.
All the long day what thing he did,
this fair Image in the same stead
was ever by, so that at meat
he would her serve, and prayed her eat,
and put unto her mouth the cup:
and when the board was taken up,
he led her to his chamber home,
and after when the night was come,
he laid her in bed all naked,
he often wept and often waked.
He kissed her cold lips often and often,
and wished her that they were more soft;
and often he told her in her ear,
and often his arm now here now there
he laid as he would her embrace;
and ever and anon he asked grace,
as though she wist what it meant,
and himself began to torment.
But Venus of her grace him heard
by night, and when that least he feared,
and it lay naked in his arm,
the cold Image began be warm
of flesh and bone, and full of life;
lo thus he wan a lusty Wife,
which obeysant was at his will,
and of his pleasure gave him fill.
But if he would have help him still,
he should have failed of his will;
but 'cause he prayed, his love he sped,
and had all that he would abed;
for e're away they two did go,
a jolly child between them two
they gate: Thus Love is favorable
to them that have been of Love stable.
Argument. 2.
alienae cornua fronti
Addita, vosque canes satiati sanguine herili.
Ovid. l. 3.
OVid in his book he spakes
examples touchen bad mistakes,
and says, how whilome there was one
a worthy Lord, which Acteon
was called, and he was Cousin nigh
to him that Thebes first on high
up set. Acteon 'bove all cheer
had used it form year to year,
with Hounds and with great Horns
amongst the Woods and the Thorns,
to make his Hunting and his Chase,
where he best thought in every place,
to find out Game in a fair way,
there rode he for to hunt and play.
So him befell upon a tide,
on his hunting as he did ride,
in a Forest alone he was,
and saw there upon the green grass
the fair flowers fresh to spring,
he heard amongst the leafs to sing
the Throstel with the Nightingale.
Thus (e're he wist) into a Dale
he came, and in a Plain he lit
all round about which was beset
with bushes green, and cedars high,
and there within he cast his eye;
amidst the Plain he saw a Well
so fair, that there may no man tell.
In which Diana naked stood
to bathe and play her in the Flood,
with many Nymphs which there her served:
but he his eye away never swerved
from her that was naked and tall;
but she was wondrous wrath withal,
and him (as she which was Goddess)
for's hope, anon gave him likeness
of Beasts, and made him be a Heart,
which was before his Dogs to start.
Then ran he busily about
with many a horn, and many a rout,
that made much noise and piteous cry;
and at the last unhappily
this Heart his own Hounds grimly slew,
and to pieces mischievously him drew.
Lo now my Son, what it is
a man to cast his eye amiss.
Arg. 3.
Placuit, quae sit sententia docti
Quaerere Tiresiae. Venus huic erat utraque utraque nota.
Ovid. l. 3.
TRuth it is that good never came of strife,
to seek it in all a man's life,
though it begin upon pure game,
full often it turns into bane,
and does grievance on some side,
whereof the great Clerk Ovide,
after this manner, as I trow,
of Jupiter and's Wife Juno,
makes in his books mention
how they fell at dissension
amongst themselves in unity,
and that was upon this degree;
which of the two more amorous is,
or man or wife; and upon this
they might no ways accord in one,
and took one to judge thereupon,
which called is Tyresias
and bid him deem just in this case;
and he without any avisement
against Juno gave his judgment.
This Goddess upon his answer
was wroth, and would not forbear,
but took away for evermo
the light from both his eyes two.
When Jupiter this hurt had seen,
another benefit then again
he gave, and such a grace him does,
that what he wist he said soth,
a Sothsayer he was for ever;
but yet that other had lever
have had the looking of his eye,
then of his word the Prophecy.
Arg. IV.
Pulchrior in tota, quam Larissaea Coronis,
Non fuit Amonia; placuit tibi Delphia certe,
Dum vel casta fuit vel inobservata: sed ales
Sensit adulterium Phoebius, etc.
Ovid. l. 2.
NOw take a Tale into thy mind,
the which of old ensample I find.
Phoebus, which makes the days light,
a Love he had a handsome W^ite
Coronis, whom aboven all
he pleased, but what shall befall
of Love, there is no man knows;
but as Fortune her happes throws.
So it befell upon a chance,
a young Knight took her acquaintance,
and had of her all that he would,
but a false Bird that was too bold;
though kept in Chamber from pure youth,
discovered all that e're he couth:
the Bird's name was amongst men
Corvus; and the Bird was then
well more white than any Swan:
and he did tell all that he can,
and all her thefts to Phoebus said.
But he for wrath his Swerd out-braid,
and it to Coronis did show,
but after that there was much woe;
and she took full great repentance,
whereof in token and remembrance
of him which used wicked speech,
upon this Bird he took his wrech,
that he which was snow-white before,
was afterward cole-black therefore
transformed; thus his deeds he shows,
and many a man yet him beshreweth;
and calls him unto this day
a Raven, by whom yet men say
take evidence when that he cries,
that some mishap it signifies.
Arg. 5.
Nec si quaesieris odium Cyclopis amorne
Acidis in nobis fucrit praestantior edam.
Ovid. l. xiij.
GReat Polyphemus long since thought,
when that he Galate had besought
of Love, which he might not latch
that made him for to wait and watch
by all ways how she fared,
till at last he knew and heard,
how that another had leave
to love the Nymph, which did him grieve;
so that he know none other read,
as for to speak of any speed,
but for to watch and wait on all,
till he may see the chance befall,
that he her Love might grieve,
which he himself might not achieve.
This Galatea, says the Poet,
above all others was most meet
of beauty, which then all men knew,
and had a lusty Love and true,
a Batchelour in high degree,
right such another as was she,
on which her heart was so fast set,
so that it might by naught be let.
This Knight Acis was very hot,
and she againward also hot
him loved only, and no mo;
hereof was Polyphemus woe.
Through pure envy and ever spied,
and waited upon every side,
when he together might them see,
this young Acis with Galate.
So long he waited to and fro,
till at the last he found them two
in privy place whereas they stood
to speak, and have her words made good:
The place wherein he them did spy,
it was under a bank, nigh
the great Sea, and he above
stood and beheld the lusty Love
which each of them to other made
with goodly cheer, and words full glade.
So all his heart was set on fire
by pure envy and deadly ire;
and then he flew away, I trow,
as arrow flies out of bow;
as though he were for Love start mad,
when as he saw this sight so sad.
This Polypheme a Geaunt was,
and when he saw the soth of the cas
how Galate him did forsake,
and Acis to her Love did take;
his heart no longer might forbear,
but he roared out like any bear,
and ran Aetna the hill about,
where never yet the fire was out,
full filled with sorrow and disease,
'cause he saw Acis weil at ease;
till at the last he him bethought,
as he which all by envy sought,
and turned to the bank again;
where he with Galate had seen
young Acis, whom he thought to grieve,
though he himself might not relieve.
This Geaunt then with his rude might
part of the banck did throw outright;
the which fell just on Acis pate,
and knocked him down (for 'twas his fate)
Thus Polypheme did Acis slay,
but Galate did run away;
and as she fled along the Land,
Neptune took her by the hand,
and kept her in so fast a place
from Polypheme and his menace;
that he for all his false envy
might never enjoy her company.
Arg. 6.
Accipe me generum dixi Parthaone nate,
Dixit and Alcides, etc.
Ovid. l. ix.
OEneus had Calydons Empire,
and had a Daughter Deianyre,
and all men wist that there was none
so fair a Wight as she was one;
and as she was a lusty Wight,
right so was then a noble Knight,
to whom Mercury fader was,
which set up two pillars of brass,
the which as yet a man may find,
set up in the Desert of Inde;
this was the worthy Hercules,
whose name shall be endless
for all the marvails that he wrought.
This Hercules the Love besought
of Deianire, and of this thing
unto her fader which was King
he spoke, touching of Marriage.
The King knowing his high lineage,
and dreadding all his deeds mighty,
never durst his Daughter to deny.
Yet netheless this he him said,
how Achilous, e're he, first prayed
to wed her: and in that accord
they stood as it were on record:
but for all that this he him granted,
that which of them the other daunted
in arms, his Daughter him should take,
and do what she would for his sake.
This Achelous was a Giant,
a subtle man and a deceyvant;
who through Magic and Sorcery
could all the world out-treachery.
And when that he this Tale heard
upon what score the King answered
to Hercules, that he must fight,
he trusted much upon his slight:
And Love that every heart does stear,
made him his life not to forbear;
for his Lady whom he desired,
but with courage his heart it fired:
And so he sent word without fail,
that he would enter the Battle.
At the set day and chosen field,
the Knights both covered under shield,
together came at the time set,
and each one is with other met.
It fell that they fought both on foot,
there was no stone, there was no root
which might let them in their way,
but all was void and taken away.
Truth, they smite strokes but very few.
for Hercules who then would show
his great strength, as for the nonce
he starts upon him all at once,
and caught him in his arms so strong:
the Giant wot he could not long
endure under so hard a bond;
then by some slight for to escape,
as he himself could best mishape,
in likeness of a snake he skipt
out of his hand, and forth he leapt;
and often as he that fight woul,
he turned himself into a Bull,
and 'gan to bellow in such a sound,
as though the skies would fall to ground.
The earth he spurns, and then he pranceth,
and his broad Horns he then advances,
and cast them here and there about.
But he who made of him no doubt,
awaited well, and when he came
by both his Horns he did him tame,
and all at once he did him cast
unto the ground, and held him fast,
that he never might by any slight
out of his hands get up on height,
till he was overcome, and told
that Hercules might what he would.
The King then granted to fulfill
his askings 'cording to his will;
and he that had with danger served,
did think he had her well deserved:
and thus with great desert of Arms,
he wan her for to ligge in arms,
as he which had it dearly bought,
and otherwise he should not.
Argument. 7.
Vt Venere locum conjux and adulter in unum,
Art viri, vinclisque nova ratione paratis,
In mediss ambo deprensi amplexibus haerent.
Ovid. l. iv.
UPon a certain case of Love
amongst the gods that dwell above,
upon a time it fell out thus.
The god of fire which Vulcanus
is hot, and has a craft forthwith
assigned for to be a Smith
to Jupiter, to forge his Thunder,
at which all mortal men do wonder.
This Vulcan^^ in the figure
both of visage and of stature,
is loathly and malgracious,
but yet he has within his house,
as for the liking of his life,
the fair Venus to be his Wife.
But Mars that of all Battails is
the god, an eye had unto this;
and he which was so chivalrous,
it fell him to be amorous;
and thought it was great pity
to see so fair a one as she
be coupled with so foul a Wight:
and she that had so good insight
toward so noble a Knightly Lord,
fell in Love with his accord.
There lacked naught but time and place
for him for to enjoy her Grace.
But when two hearts fall into one,
so wise a wait was never none;
but at some time they two will meet:
and thus this Lady fair and sweet
with Mars had often company;
till at last unkind jealousy,
which evermore the heart opposes,
makes Vulcan that he supposes,
that it is not well over all,
and to himself he said, he shall
epsy better, if that he may;
and so it fell upon a day,
that he this thing so slightly led,
that he did find them both a bed,
all warm each one with other naked,
and he with craft had ready maked
strong chains, and therewithal them bound,
as he together had them found;
and then he left them lying so,
and 'gan to call and cry, ho, ho,
unto the gods that lived about,
and they assembled in a rout;
and came the matter for to see,
but none amend at all had he,
but was rebuked here and there
of all that Venus Lovers were.
Who said that he was for to blame,
if there befell him any shame,
it was through his misgovernance,
and thus he lost his countenance.
Then they them loosed from the bands,
whereof these earthly hunbands
for ever may ensample take,
I such a chance them overtake.
Arg. 8.
Conjugis adventum praesenserat, inque nitentem
Inachidos vultus mutaverat ille juvencam.
Ovid. l. i.
OVid tells in his Saws,
how Jupiter in ancient days
lay by a Maid, which Io
was called, whereof's Wife Juno
was wroth; and as she was Goddess,
of Io turned the likeness
into a Cow, to go throughout
the fields and pastures thereabout,
and get her meat upon the Green;
and thereupon the lofty Queen
betook her Argus for to keep;
for he was seldom wont to sleep,
because he had an hundred eyes,
all were alive, and all-were spies.
Now hearken how he was beguiled
by Mercury, who was affiled
this Cow to steal; he came disguised,
and had a Pipe full well devised
of Music, and thus to the field
he came, where Argus he beheld
with Io, which beside him went.
With that anon his Pipe he bent,
and 'gan to pipe in such manner,
things which were sleepy for to hear;
and in his piping ever among
he sang him such a lulling Song,
that he the Giant brought asleep,
and there was no eye that might keep
his head, which Mercury off smote,
and so away the Cow he got;
the Cow, I say, which Argus kept;
and all this fell for that he slept.
Arg. 9.
Victa nitore dei posita vim passa querela est.
Ovid. l. iv.
VEnus which has the Law in hand,
of that which we cannot withstand,
as she who does the treasure guard
of Love, and has it in her ward;
Phoebus to Love has so constrained,
that without rest he is sorely pained,
with all his watchfulness to wait
to find the Damsels guards less strait,
who was in chamber kept so close,
that she never did her self disclose,
but with her mother for to play,
Leucothea (so as men say)
this Maid was fair, and Orchamus
her Fader was; but it fell thus
to's Daughter, that was kept so dear,
and had been so from year to year,
under her Mothers Discipline
a clean Maid and a fair Virgin:
Upon the whose Nativity
of comeliness and of beauty,
Nature had set all that she may;
that like unto the Month of May,
which all the other Months of the year
surmounteth: So without her peer,
was of this Maiden the feature;
whereof Phoebus without measure
her loved, and on every side
awaited, if so may betide,
that he through any slight might
her lusty Maidenhead unright,
esteemed above all the worlds wealth.
And thus lurking upon stealth,
in his await so long he lay;
till it befell upon a day,
that he throughout the Chamber wall
came in all suddenly, and stall
that thing that was to him so chief,
But woe the while he was a thief.
And Venus who was Enemy
of such Love-treachery,
discovered all the plain case
to Clymene, who then was
toward Phoebus his Concubine;
and when she found the cause in fine
of all the case, then she was wroth,
and for to plague the Maid she goes,
and told her Father how it stood,
who was for sorrow well nigh wood.
And to her Mother thus he said,
Lo what it is to keep a Maid.
To Phoebus dare I nothing speak,
but unto her it shall be wreke.
So that all Maidens after this
now take ensample, what it is
to suffer Maidenhead be lost,
for fear it should their death them cost,
and bad with that to make a pit,
wherein he has his Daughter set,
as he that would no pity have,
so that she was all quick in Grave,
and died anon in his presence.
But Phoebus who had reverence
to her that died for his Love,
has wrought through his power above,
that she spring up out of the mold,
into a flower as bright as Gold.
Arg. 10.
Dum redit itque frequens in virgin No^a. cri^a.
Haesit, etc.
Ovid. l. ii.
KIng Cytheron upon his Wife
a Daughter had, a goodly life,
and clean Maiden of goodly fame,
and Calisto was her right name
called, and she by many a Lord
was often besought, but her accord
to Love might no man win,
as she which had no lust therein;
but swore within her heart, and said,
she would for ever be a Maid.
Wherefore to keep her self in peace
with the Nymphs Amadriades,
upon the Springs and the fresh Wells,
she hopes to dwell, and no where else:
and thus came this Calistona
into the Wood of Tegea,
and thus she came within the sight
of Diana, and there she plight
her troth upon the VVoods so green,
to preserve her Maidenhead clean,
which afterward upon a day
was privily stolen away.
For Jupiter through his quainti^e
from her it took in such a wise,
that suddenly, and forth withal
her womb arose, and she did swall;
so then she could no longer hide,
and thereupon it did betide,
that Diana (the soth to tell)
in privy place unto a Well,
with Nymphs all in her company
was gone, and out of waggery
she said, that she bathe would,
and bad that every Maiden should
with her all naked bathe also,
and then began the privy woe.
And Calisto was red for shame;
but they that never knew the game,
to whom no such thing did befall,
anon they made them naked all,
because that nothing they would hide;
but she withdrew her ever aside;
and netheless into the Flood,
whereas Diana her self stood,
she thought for to come unperceived,
but thereof she was all deceived;
for when she came a little nigh,
and Diana her Womb did spy,
she said, away O thou foul Beast,
for thy estate is not honest;
nor may thou this chaste water touch,
for thou have taken a touch too much,
which never may be whole again.
And thus she goes which was forlain
with shame, and fled away that day
from all the Nymphs, for ever and ay.
Arg. 11.
How Socrates Wife threw a Pot of Water upon his Head, and of his patience.

MY son a man to buy him peace*
behooves to suffer as Socrates;
for amongst men it is evident,
that he was very patient;
for he wedded a wicked Wife,
who gave him much sorrow and strife:
against his ease it was contraire,
but he spoke ever soft and fair;
till it befell, (as it is told)
in Winter when the day is cold,
that his wife was from the Well come,
with a full pot of water home:
and so she brought it in the house,
and saw how that her quiet spouse
was set, and looked on a Book
nigh to the fire, as he who took
his ease, as for a man of age;
but she began her wonted rage,
and asked him what devil he thought,
that he so near the fire him brought:
when as she labor took in hand,
and said that such an Husband
was to a Wife not worth a stre,
but he said neither nay nor ye;
but held him still, and let her chide.
But she which may her self not hide,
began within forthwith to swell,
and that she brought in from the Well,
the water-pot she put aloft,
and bade him speak; but he all soft
sat still, and not a word answered,
with that she asked him how he fared;
and asked him if he be dead?
and all the water on his head
she poured out, and bade him wake*
But he which never would forsake
his patience, did softly spoke,
that he ne wondered what was done,
for now the winter was begun,
and winter as by way of kind,
which stormy is, as men it find,
first makes the winds for to blow,
and after that within a throw
it rains, which reason's well beseen,
to cause me now both vvind and rain
after the season of the year;
and then he set him near the fire.
The Pleasant History of Prince CORNIGER, and his Champion Sir CRUCIFRAG.
SO it befell upon a time after the Death of King Mort, who was wounded in
battle by his Enemies, that he died; when all his good Knights and Barons,
passing stout men of bodies were gedred together in their their Castle, to make
a Counsaile-general and a great Justs, after they were come thider, and lodged
as them seemed best, there came a Damesel which was sent on a message from the
great Lady of the Isle of Witch; and when she came before them, she let her
mantel fall that was very richly furnished, and then was she girded with a
noble Swerd, whereof the Knights had great marvail, and said, Damesel, for what
cause are you girded with this Swerd? it beseems you not. This Swerd, said
the Damesel, that I am girded withal, does me great sorrow and encumbrance:
for I may not be delivered of this Swerd, but by a good Knight, and he must be
a passing brave man of his hands, and of his deeds, and without villainy and
treachery: For I have been with King Palliobarb, 'cause it was told me that
there were passing good Knights with him, but none of them can speed. Then they
all pulled at it eagerly, but the Swerd would not out. Sirs, said the Damesel,
ye need not pull half so hard, for he that shall pull it out, shall do it with
little might, and he must be a clean Knight, of gentle stream both of fader and
mothers side.

Now it happened so at that time, that there was a poor Knight, which had been
prisoner with King Mort half a year, for sleying of a Knight that was his
Cousin; this Knight was named Corniger, ('cause his Crest was a pair of Horns)
and by the good means of the Barons he was delivered out of Prison after the
Kings Death; for he was a passing good Knight. So he went privily to the
Castle, and saw this adventure, whereof his heart rose, and would assail it as
other Knights did; but for because he was poorly arrayed, they put him not far
in price. Netheless he called the Damesel, and said, I pray you of Courtesy to
suffer me as well to assay as these Lords; though I be poor clothed, in my
heart me seems I am fully assured to speed right well. The Damesel beheld the
Knight, but for because of his poor array she thought he should be of no
worship without villainy or treachery. Ah fair Damesel, said Sir Corniger,
worthiness and good deeds are not all only in raiment, but manhood, and
worship, and hardiness is not in clothing. In sooth, said the Damesel, you say
true, therefore you shall assay to do what you will; then he took the Swerd by
the Girdle and Scabberd, and drew it out easily* and when he looked upon the
Swerd, it pleased him much. Then the Barons had great mervail that Sir
Corniger had done the adventure. Truly, said the Damesel, this is a passing
good Knight, and the best man that ever I found, and most of worship without
treachery and villainy; and many mervails shall he achieve. Wherefore all the
Knights and Barons cried all at once, We will have Sir Corniger unto our King:
for we all see that it is Goodness will that he should be our King, and who so
holds against it, we will ^lee him. And thereupon they kneeled down all at
once both rich and poor, and cried Prince Corniger mercy, because he had been
imprisoned; and Prince Corniger forgave it them: And so anon there was
Coronation made, and there was he sworn to the Lords and Commons for to be a
true King, to stand with true Justice from henceforth all the days of his life.
So he became their King, and let cry a great Feast.

But many Complaints were made unto Prince Corniger of great wrongs that were
done by their Enemies, sithen the Death of King Mort, of many Londs that were
bereaved of their Lords, Knights, Ladies, and Gentlemen; wherefore the King
came out of his Tower to the Ambassadors, and there went with him Sir Cruel,
Sir Rasour, and Sir Kilman; these were the men of most worship that were with
him. And when they met togider, there was but little meekness; for there was
stout and hard words on both sides, but always Prince Corniger answered them,
He would make them blow if he lived: wherefore they departed with wrath; and
Prince Corniger bid them keep them well, and they bid Prince Corniger keep him
well. So the Prince returned to his Castle, and armed him and all his Knights;
in the mean while there were three hundred good men of the best that went
strait to Prince Corniger, and that comforted him greatly. And Sir Cruel, Sir
Rasour, and Sir Kilman slew on the right hand and on the left, and did
mervailous deeds of Arms, that the King had great joy of their deeds and
hardiness, But the Enemies came on afresh behind them, and perplexed Prince
Cornigers Knights; wherefore Prince Corniger drew his Swerd which was so bright
in his Enemies eyes, that it gave light like thirty Torches, and therewith he
put them back, and slew much people.

So in little space the Enemy fled, and Prince Corniger returned to his Castle;
where he found a passing fair fellowship, and well beseen, whereof he had great
joy, and victuals they wanted none.

Next day Prince Corniger with his good and trusty Knights set upon his Enemies
so fiercely, that they overthrew their Pavilions on their heads, but by manly
Prowess of Arms they were forced to take a fair field; and when it grew toward
day, Sir Fierce smote down Horse and Man, and Sir Rasour cut an infinite
company of heads off, and Sir Kilman slew many a valiant Knight, so the meddle
waxed passing great and hard on both parties. But when Sir Fierce saw Sir Cruel
on foot, he ran like a Lion upon Sir Meddlemuch his Enemy, and smote him
through the left side, that horse and man fell down to the ground: Then he took
the horse by the Rayns, and led him to Sir Cruel, and said, Have thou this
Horse, mine old Friend, for great need have thou of an Horse. Gramercy, said
Sir Cruel, and lightly mounted. So then he saw Prince Corniger do mervailously,
that all men had wonder thereof; for he smote King Boldenough on the Helm, that
a quarter of the Helm and half the Shield fell down, and so the Swerd carved
down unto the Horse neck; and so both Horse and Man fell to the ground. But
there came fourteen Knights upon him* and then he smote one of them on the
Helm, and it went down to the Teeth; and he rode to another, and smote him that
his Arm flew into the Field; then he went to the third, and smote him on the
Shoulder, that both Shoulder and Arm flew into the Field; and he smote another
Knight on the Neck, that Head and Helm went to the earth: So Sir Cruel, Sir
Fierce, and Sir Rasour, and Sir Kilman by Prince Cornigers example, smote off
Heads, Legs, and Arms wonderfully. So the Battle was passing hardy, that many
Knights shook and trembled for eagerness.

Then Prince Corniger seeing the Battle would not be ended by no manner, he
faced like a Wood Lion, and stirred his Horse here and there, on the right hand
and on the left, that he stinted not till he had slain twenty Knights; so there
was a terrible meddle of breaking Spears and smiting of Swerds, with sleying of
men and horses, and the enemies were at a loss; for there was newly arrived Sir
Bloody as a fierce Tiger, that his strokes redounded again from the Wood and
the Water; so that the Enemies were forced to hurtle together for great dread,
and a great multitude fled, but his blow fell upon Sir Coward, and carved a
cantel of his Shield; and the Swerd slid down by the Hawberk behind his back,
and cut in twain the Trapper of Steel, and the Horse also in two pieces. So he
became so bloody, that no man might know him; for all was Blood and Brains
about him.

Then returned Prince Corniger with his Knights to his Castle, where all his
Barons attended on him, and there came a fair Damesel also which was an Earls
Daughter, and she came thither to do homage as other Lords did after the great
Battle; and Prince Corniger set his Love gretely upon her, so she did upon
him; and the King had a do with her, and that night dremed a mervailous Dreme
whereof he was right sore adradde: for him thought that there was coming in his
Land many Gryssons and Serpents, and him thought he they slew much of his
people; and then him thought he fought with them, and that they did him passing
great demage, and wounded him full sore. So the King awoke, and was passing
heavy and right pensife of his Dreme; and then to put away all thoughts of
Battle, next morning he made him ready with his Knights to ride on Hunting;
and as soon as he came in the Forest, he saw a great Heart before him; this Heart
will I chase, said he; and so he spurred his Horse, and rode along after, and
so by fine force often he was like to have smitten the Heart; whereas his Horse
fell down dead, and he sat him down by a Fountain, and there he fell into great
thoughts: And as he sat there alone, him thought he heard a noise of Hounds to
the number of thirty Couple, and with that he saw coming toward him the
strangest Beast that ever he saw or heard tell of; for the Beast went to the
Fountain and drank, and the noise was in the Beasts Belly like unto the
Questing of thirty Couple of Hounds; but all the while the beast drank, there
was no noise in the beasts belly; and therewith the beast departed with a great
noise, whereof Prince Corniger had gread mervail.

Then the King arose and went forwards a good pace to seek for his Knights, and
so as he went he came to a rich Pavilion; then was he ware where a Knight sat
all armed in his Chair. Sir Knight, said the King, for what cause abidest thou
here, that no Knight may ride this way, said he, before he Just with me? I Will
make thee leave that Custom, said the King. This Custom, replied the Knight,
have I used, and will use, maugre who says nay, and who is grieved with my
Custom, let him amend it that will. I will amend it, said the King, and I
will defend it, said the Knight. So anon he lent the King a Horse, and dressed
his Shield, and took a Spear, and they met so hard either in others Shield,
that they all to shevered their Spears; but the Knight hit him so hard in the
middle of the Shield, that Horse and Man fell to the ground. Then Prince
Corniger was wroth, and dressed his Shield toward him with his Svvord
drawn: When the Knight savv that, he alighted, for him thought it was no
worship to have a Knight at such advantage, he to be on Horseback, and that
other on foot; and so alight and dressed him to Prince Corniger; and there began
a strong Battle with many great strokes: and so they hewed with their Swerds,
that the Cantels flew in the fields, and much blood they bled both. So at the
last they smote together, that both their Swerds met even together; but the Swerd
of the Knight smote the Kings Swerd in two pieces. Wherefore he was full sorry,
and leapt upon the Knight, and took him by the middle, and threvv him down,
and raced his Helm. When the Knight saw that, he was adradde; for he was a
passing big man of might, and anon he brought Prince Corniger under him, and
raced off his Helm, and would have smitten off his head.

Therewithal came the Lady of the Isle of Witch,(for she was an Enchantress)
and said, Knight hold thy hand; for and thou ^lee that Knight, thou put
this Realm in the greatest damage that ever Realm was in, for this Knight is a
man of more worship then thou vvotest of. Why, who is he said the Knight; It
is Prince Corniger, said she. Then would he have slain him for dread of his
wrath, and heved up his Svverd; and therevvith the Lady cast an Enchantment on
the Knight, that he fell to the earth in a great sleep. Then the Lady took up
the King; and as they rode together upon the Knights Horse, Alas, said Prince
Corniger, have thou slain this good Knight by thy crafts? there lived not so
worshipful a Knight as he was. I had lever the stint of my Land a year that
he were on live: Care ye not, said she, for he is vvholler then ye; for he is
but on sleep, and will awake within these three hours.

Right so the King departed, and went unto an Hermitage, whereas was a good
man, and a great Leche. So the Hermit searched all his wounds, and gave him
good Salves; and the King was there three days, and then were his wounds well
amended, that he might ride and go; and so he departed with the Lady. And as
they rode, Prince Corniger said, I have no Swerd, nor wot I where to gain one
so good as that I lost. Here by is a Swerd, said she, that shall be yours, and
I may.

So they rode till they came to a Lake, which was a fair Water, and a broad;
and in the midst of the Lake Prince Corniger was ware of an Arm clothed in
white Satin, that held a fair Swerd in the hand. Lo' said the Lady to the
King, yonder is the Swerd in that Arm which I spoke of. With that he saw the
Damsel that brought him the other Swerd, going upon the Lake. What Damsel is
that, said the King? It is my servant, said the Lady, and she will come to you
anon, and then speak fair to her, that she will give you that Swerd: Therewith
came the Damesel to the King, and saluted him, and he her again. Damesel, said
the King, what Swerd is that which the Arm holds yonder above water? I would
it were mine, for I have no Swerd.

Sir, said the Damesel of the Lake, if you will venture for it, you may have
it; but be advised, that many Knights have perished in the attempt That shall
not make me adradde, said the King; for I wot he is not worthy of a Swerd that
deserves it not. Than, said she, you may go to yonder Barge, and row your
self to the Swerd; and if no tempest arise, it is yours, and take it, and the
Scabberd with it* So than anon he came to the Swerd, and took it up by the
handle, and brought it with him; and the Arm and Hand went under the water, and
so he came to land: But the Lady and her Maid were gone he wist not whither,
which made him passing heavy.

So he rode forth, and came to his Castle, whereof his Knights were passing
glad; and when they heard of his Adventures, they marvailed that he would
jeopard his person alone. But all men of Worship said it was fine to be under
such a Chieftain, that would put his person in adventure, as other poor Knights
did.

The mean while came a messenger hastly from King Palliobarb, and he was King
of many Isles; and this was his message, greeting well Prince Corniger in this
manner wise, saying, that King Palliobarb had discomfited and overcome eleven
Kings, and each of them did him homage, and that was, they gave him their
Beards clean flain off as much as there was: Wherefore the messenger came for
Cornigers Beard; for King Palliobarb had pu^feled a Mantel with Kings Beards,
and there lacked for one place of the Mantel, wherefore he sent for his Beard;
or else he would enter into his Lands, and burn and slay, and never leave till
he have thy Head and thy Beard. Well, said the King, thou have said thy
message, which is the most villainous and lewdest message that ever man heard
sent to a King. Also thou may see my Beard is full young yet for to make a
purfel of. But tell thou the King this, I owe him no homage, ne none of mine
Elders; but e're it be long he shall do me homage on both his knees, or else he
shall lose his Head by the faith of my body; for this is the most shameful
message that ever I heard speak of. I see well King Palliobarb never met with
worshipful man; but tell him I will have his Head without he do homage unto
me: Then the Messenger departed.

And forth vvithall there came a poor man into the Court, and brought with him
a fair young man of eighteen years of age riding upon a lean Mare, for he had
newly sprained his Leg; and the poor man asked all men that he met, Where
shall I find the King? Yonder he is, said the Knights, vvilt thou any thing
with him? Yea, said the poor man, therefore I came hither. Anon as he came
before the King, he saluted him, and said, O Prince Corniger, the Flovver of
all Knights and Kings, I beseech Jesu save thee. Sir, it was told me, that at
this time now you are made King, that within the first year and a day you
would grant any man the gift that he would ask, except it were unreasonable.
That is troth, said the King, such cries I let make, and those will I hold,
so they appair not my Realm nor mine estate. Ye say well and graciously, quoth
the poor man; Sir, I ask nothing else, but that ye will make my Son a Knight.
It is a great thing thou ask est of me, said the King, what is thy name? My
name is Bubulcus the Covvherd, said the poor man. Whither comes this desire of
thee or of thy Son, said the King. Nay Sir, said Bubulcus, this desire comes
of my Son, and not of me; for I shall tell you, I have seven Sons, and all they
will fall to what labor I put them, and will be right glad to do labor; but
this Child will do no labor for me for any thing that my Wife or I may do, but
always he will be shooting or casting Darts, and glad to see Battails, and to
behold Knights; and always both day and night he desires of me to be made a
Knight. What is thy name amongst thy Companions, said the King to the young
man? They call me, said he, Crucifrage ever since I ran so fast to take a Lamb
from a Wolf, that I broke my Leg. Than the King beheld him fast, and saw he was
passingly well visaged, and passingly well made of his years; and he said to
Bubulcus the Cowherd, Where is the Swerd that he shall be made Knight withal?
It is here, said the youth; then take it out of the sheath, said the King, and
require me to make thee a Knight: Then he pulled out his Swerd, and required
the King he would make him a Knight. I will make you, said the King, and
therewith smote him in the neck with the Swerd, saying, Be ye a good Knight,
and so I pray to God ye may be of Prowess and Worthiness* Now, said he to one
of his Knights named Sir Astrolog, that had Skill in Physiognomy, say whether
Sir Crucifrag shall be a good Knight or no? Yea Sir, said Sir Astrolog, he
ought to be a good Knight, for he is come of as good a man as any is o'n live,
and of Kings blood. How so, said the King? I shall tell you, said Sir Astrolog,
this poor man the Cowherd is not his fader. But I suppose nay, said the
Cowherd. Well fetch thy Wife, said Sir Astrolog, before me, and she shall say
nay. Anon the Wife was sent for, which was a fair Housewife; and there she
answered Sir Astrolog full womanly. And there she told the King, that when she
was a Maid, and went to milk Kine, there met her a stearn Knight, and half by
force he got her Maidenhead, and at that time he begat this Youth; and he took
away from me my Greyhound that I had at that time with me, and said that he
would keep it for my Love. Ah, said the Cowherd, I wend not this, but I may
believe it well, for he had never no likeness of me. Sir Astrolog, said Sir
Crucifrag, dishonor not my Mother. Sir, said Sir Astrolog, it is more for your
worship then hurt; for your Fader is a good Knight and a King, and you were
begotten before your Mother was married. That is troth, said the Wife. It is
the less grief to me, said the Cowherd.

Right so the Cowherd departed, and Sir Crucifrag rode forth to seek
Adventures; when as he was aware of a Knight on the other side the Land all
armed save the Head; and on the other side the Land came a Dwarf on Horseback
also all armed, but the Head with a great Mouth and a short Nose: And the Dwarf
when he came nigh the Knight, said, Where is the Lady that should meet us here?
And therewithal she came forth out of the Wood, and they began to strive for
the Lady; for the Knight said that he would have her, and the Dwarf said that
he would have her. Well, ye do well, said the Dwarf, yonder is a Knight at the
Cross, let us put it to his judgment; and as he deemeth, even so be it. I will:
Well, said the Knight. And then they went all three unto Sir Crucifrag, and
told him wherefore they two strove. Well Sir, said he, will ye put the matter
into my hands? Yea Sir, said they both. Now Damesel, said Sir Crucifrag, ye
shall stand between them both, and whether ye list better to go to, he shall
have you. And so when the Damesel was set between them two, she left the
Knight, and went to the Dwarf: and the Dwarf took her, and went his way
singing, and the Knight went his way mourning.

Then came Sir Crucifrag to an Husbandman of the Country who told him how
there was in that place a great Giant, who had slain, murdered, and devoured
much people of the Country, and had been sustained seven years with the
Children of the Commons of that Land, and now of late he had taken a Duchess,
the fairest Woman in the world, and killed her Husband, and had led her to his
Lodging which was in a Mountain, for to ravish her, and lie by her to her lives
end; and many people followed her more then five hundred; but all they might
not rescue her, but they left her shryking and crying most lamentably;
wherefore I suppose he has slain her in fulfilling his foul lust of Lechery.
Alas, said Sir Crucifrag, this is a great mischief, I had lever then the best
Realm, that I had been a furlong way before him, to have rescued her. Now
fellow, said Sir Crucifrag, can thou bring me there where as this Giant
haunteth? Yea Sir, said the poor man, lo yonder whereas you see two great
fires, there shall ye not fail to find him, and more Treasure as I suppose then
is in a great Realm. When Sir Crucifrag had well understood this piteous case,
he made ready his Horse and Harness, and after Evensong he rode forth as fast
as he might, till he came to the Mountain; and so he ascended up the Mount till
he came to a great fire, and there found he a careful Widow wringing her hands,
and making great sorrow, sitting by a Grave new made: And then Sir Crucifrag
saluted her, and demanded her whereof she made so great lamentation: Unto whom
she answered, Sir Knight, speak soft, for yonder is a Monster; if he hear thee
speak he will come and destroy thee: I hold thee unhappy for coming here in
this Mountain, for if ye were such fifty as ye be, ye were not able to make
resistance against this Devil. See where lies a Woman dead, which was the
Sister to a Noble man's Wife, that he has murdered in forceing her. Dame,
said Sir Crucifrag, I come from the great Prince Corniger to treat with this
Tyrant, for his Liege People. Fie upon such Treaties, said the VVidow, he
sets naught by Prince Corniger, ne by no man else. Beware, approach him not
nigh, sor he has over come and vanquished fifteen Kings, and four hundred
Knights, and has made a Coat embroidered with their Beards, which they sent
him to have his love for sparing of their people; but on if thou will speak
with him, at yonder fire he is at supper. Well, said Sir Crucifrag, I will
accomplish my message for all your fearful words, and he went forth by the
crest of that Hill, and saw where he sat at souper knawing on the limb of a
man, beking his broad limbs by the fire, and breechless, and three Damesels
turning three broches, whereon were broched twelve young Children late born
like young birds. When Sir Crucifrag beheld this piteous sight, he had great
compassion on them, so that his heart bled for sorrow, and hailed him, saying
in this wise, He that all the world weldeth give thee short life, and a
shameful death, and the Devil have thy soul; why have thou murdered these young
innocent Children, and this Woman? Therefore arise and dress thee thou Clutton,
for this day shall thou die of my hands. Then anon the Giant started up, and
took a great club in his hand, and smote at Sir Crucifrag, that his Club fell
far into the earth, and Sir Crucifrag, hit him again, that he carved his belly
(for he was breechless for haste) that his Guts and Entrails fell down to the
ground; then the three Damesels kneeled down, and called to our Lord Jesu
Christ for help and comfort of the noble Knight Sir Crucifrag. So Sir Crucifrag
smote off the Giants Head, and the Damesels came and thanked him, and brought
him to the fair Duchess, and many prisoners. These he released, and bid them
divide the Goods amongst them; only he took the Giants head and Club, and the
fair Duchess to himself, and with her he made good cheer, and either drank to
other freely of the Giants good wine; and they thought never drink that ever
they drank to other was so sweet nor so good. But by that their drink was in
their bodies, they loved each other so well, that Sir Crucifrag and the
Duchess Love was not to be parted for well nor for woe.

And so anon they departed, and rode so long, till by fortune they came nigh a
Castle, and there they arrived for to rest them, wening to have had good
harbor. But anon as Sir Crucifrag was within the Castle, they were taken
prisoners; for the Custom of that Castle was, that such that brought any Lady,
must needs fight with the Lord of the Castle, which was high Sir Bullirock, and
he that was weakest should lose his head; and than if his Lady be fowler then
the Lords Wife, she must lose her head; and if she be fairer proved, then the
Lady of the Castle must loose her head. Now so God help me, said Sir Crucifrag,
this is a shameful custom; netheless I have one avantage, for I have a Lady,
fairer saw I never in all my life days, and I doubt not but she shall save her
head. Then he said to the Knight that took them Prisoners, I have great
mervail, Sir, what is the cause that your Lord holds us Prisoners; for it was
never the custom of any place of worship that ever I came in, that when a
Knight and a Lady asked harbor, and were received, and then after they should
be destroyed, it is a foul evil custom by the faith of my body; wherefore tell
your Lord, I will be ready as to morrow with my Lady and my self to Battle,
if it be so that I may have my Horse and my Armor. Sir, said the Knight,
undertake that your desire shall speed right well, and therewith he departed.
And on the morrow betimes that same Knight came unto Sir Crucifrag, and put him
and his Lady out of Prison, and brought him Horse and Armor which was his own,
and bade him make him ready to the Field: For all the Chieftains and Commons of
that Lordship were there ready to behold the Battle, and give judgment. Then
came Sir Bullirock the Lord of the Castle, holding his Lady by the hand all
muffled, and asked Sir Crucifrag where his Lady was, for and thy Lady be fairer
then mine, with thy Svverd smite off my Ladies head, and if my Lady be fairer
then thine, then must I strike off her head; and if my Lady lose her head, yet
shall I slay thee, and have thy Lady. Sir Knight, said Sir Crucifrag, this is a
foul and an horrible custom, and rather then my Lady should lose her head, yet
had I lever lose my head. Nay, said Sir Bullirock, the Ladies shall be first
showed together; then I doubt not, said Sir Crucifrag, but my Lady is fairer
then thine, and that will I prove and make good with mine own hands; and
whosoever he be that will say nay, I will prove it upon his Head: And
therewithal Sir Crucifrag showed his Lady, and turned her thrice about, with
his naked Swerd drawn in his hand. And when Sir Bullirock saw that, he turned
his Lady about in the same wise. But when he beheld Sir Crucifrag's Lady, him
thought he never saw a fairer Lady, and then he did dread that his Ladies Head
should be smitten off: And all the people that were there present, gave
judgment that Sir Crucifrag's Lady was fairer then the Lady of the Castle, and
the better made body. So God me help, said Sir Bullirock, thy Lady is fairer
then mine, and that me sore repents, and therefore slay my Lady, for I doubt
not but thy Lady shall be mine. Thou must win her, said Sir Crucifrag, as dear
as ever Knight won Lady; and because of thine own judgment, as thou would
have done unto my Lady, if she had been fouler then thine; and because of thine
evil custom, give me thy Lady, and therewithal he strode unto Sir Bullirock,
and took his Lady from him, and with an awke stroke he smote off her Head. Now
Knight, said Sir Bullirock, now have thou done me a despite; wherefore take thy
Horse, since I have lost my Lady; for I will win thy Lady, and I may. Then they
took their Horses, and came together as fast as their Horses might run, and both
fell to the ground horse and man. Then Sir Bullirock gave Sir Crucifrag three
or four sad blows before he could recover, and would have slain him, but Sir
Crucifrag was young and nimble, and avoided his Horse, and then they rushed
together like two wild Boar full mightily; for this Sir Bullirock was a proved
Knight, and had been e're then the death of many good Knights, that it was pity
that he had so long endured; and thus they fought hurtling here and there two
hours: So Sir Crucifrag was wroth, and took a mighty blow, for he was a big
and strong Knight, and clove Sir Bullirock from the Crest of his Pate to his
Breast; and then all they that belonged to the Castle came and did him homage,
praying that he would foredo that foul Custom. Sir Crucifrag granted thereto;
then he returned to Prince Corniger with his Lady.

But as he Rode, there met him I trow, the Richest Lady and the Fairest of all
the World, who saluted him, and he her; then she besought him to be her Love,
for she had loved him above all earthly men, and she would make him richer then
ever was man of his age. When Sir Crucifrag heard her words, he was right evil
at ease, for he could not consent before his dear Lady, so wist he not how to
answer. Alas said she I Will you not stay with me one night? Madam said Sir
Crucifrag, there is no Lady in the World whose will I will fulfill as touching
this thing, but this. Then she made much sorrow, as if she would have died. Now
you have brought me to my end said she, and therewith she departed and went up
to a high Battlement, and led with her twelve Gentlewomen and when they were
above, one of them cried, Sir, Gentile Knight, have mercy on us all, and suffer
my Lady to have her will, or we must perish with her from this high Tower. Than
Sir Crucifrag looked up, and they seemed all Ladies of great Estate and Riches,
and well beseen; then had he great pity of them: but he was counseled within
himself, that lever then he forsake his own good Lady, they all died. So they
fell down all at once to the earth, and when he saw that sudden chance, he was
right sore abashed, and had thereof full great mervail; and with that he
blessed his Body and his Visage, and anon he heard a full great noise and a
great cry, as though all the Fiends in Hell had been about him; and therewith
he saw neither Tower nor Ladies, ne Gentlewomen, ne Chapel. Than held he up
both his hands to Heaven, and said, Good Father, I am right well escaped: And
then he took his way strait to Prince Corniger's Castle with his Lady, and
found there a passing fair Fellowship, and well beseen, whereof each other had
great joy. And when he told how he had sped, they had great mervail, that man
on earth might speed so soon, and go and come.

So it drew fast to Michaelmas, and thither came many a noble and Peerless Lady
and good Knights to see the Wedding between Sir Crucifrag and the Duchess; and
so when this Solemnity was done, there came in fourscore Knights and thirty
Ladies, and all these told the King how Sir Crucifrag had delivered them from
the dolorous Giaunt, and slew him without pity; and therefore we and our Heirs
will do homage unto Sir Crucifrag. So then Prince Corniger made him his
Champion that same day; and after that the Earls and Barons, and many stout
Knights went unto meat, and well ye may wite that there was all manner of meat
plenteously, and all manner of Revels, and Games, and Dancing; and the Kings
chief Musician sang on this wise.

O Would to God that now were one,
another such as Arion,
who had a harp of such tempture,
and thereto of so good measure
he sung, that he the beasts wild
made of his note tame and mild.
The Hind in peace with the Lion,
the Wolf in peace with the Mutton,
the Heart in peace stood with the Hound;
and every man on the same ground
which at that time this Harper heard,
as well the Lord as the Shepherd.
He brought them all in good accord,
so that the Common with the Lord,
and Lords with the Common also,
he set in amity both two,
and put away melancholy;
that was a lusty melody,
when every man did the other love.
And if there were the ground above
one which could harp as he did,
he might avail in many a stead,
to make peace where now is hate,
for many men think on debate.
And now God wot upon this tide,
we see the world on every side
in sundry wise so diversed,
that it well nigh stands all reversed.
So were it good at this tide,
that every man on his side
besought, and prayed for the peace,
which is the cause of all increase,
of worship, and of worlds wealth,
of hearts rest, and souls health.
Then pray for Peace ye mortal men.
Amen, Amen, Amen, Amen.
Then after these fine doings, the next day Justed Sir Cruel, and he o'rethrew
thirty Knights, and did passing mavelous deeds of Arms, that all men had
great wonder of his noble deeds. Also the second day Justed Sir Rasour, and he
o'rethrew twenty Knights, and did like a mighty Knight. The third day Justed
Sir Fierce, and he o'rethrew nine and thirty Knights, some Horse and man, and
some the man and not the horse, and there was none but he was hit surely so,
that he bare none Arms that day. But at the last came a strange Knight, and ran
so hard against Sir Fierce, that he bare him down horse and man, that he lay
in a Svvound. Now this stranger, as you shall know hereafter, was King
Palliobarb, which had been esteemed the biggest Knight in the world; for
having heard of Sir Crucifrag, and because Prince Corniger had denied to send
his Beard, he had great despite, and set out from his Castle with two Knights
to come and kill Prince Corniger, or Sir Crucifrag; but in the way he said to
his Knights, Now will I tell you my counsel, for ye be the men that I trust
most on live; and I will that ye wot my going is to this intent, for to destroy
Prince Corniger or Sir Crucifrag, by wiles or by treason; and it shall be hard
if they escape us. Alas, said one of them, what thing mean you to be set in
such a way, ye are shamefully disposed; for Sir Crucifrag and Prince Corniger
are Knights of the most worship that we know now living; and therefore I warn
you plainly, that I will never consent to do him to death; and therefore I will
yield my service and forsake you. When King Palliobarb heard him say so,
suddenly he drew his Swerd, and said, O false Traitor, and smote him on the
head, so that the Swerd went to his teeth: When the other Knight saw him do
that villainous deed, and also the Squires, they said all it was foully done and
mischievously; wherefore we will appeach thee of Treason before Prince Corniger
and Sir Crucifrag. Then was the King wondrous wrath, and would have slain him;
but he and the two Squires held them together, and set naught by his malice; so
he departed from them, and they buried the Body.

Thus came King Palliobarb to Prince Corniger's Castle, and smote Sir Fierce,
thinking by his mervaillous deeds that he was Sir Crucifrag. Beside, he defied
all Prince Corniger's Knights that day, and let cry how he would fight with any
of them body for body, but there could be found no Knight amongst them that
would fight with him that day. The next day (for he might not fight the three
days of his Marriage Feast) Sir Crucifrag offered himself to fight with that
bold Knight. I shall fight with him, said he, or else I will be slain in the
plain Field.

So on the morrow they met to do battle as long as Horse may endure; and after
that to do battle on Foot to their lives end. So when appointment was made,
they departed each from the other, and they came together with all the might
that their Horses might run, and either smote other so hard, that both Horse
and Knights went unto the earth. Then they both lightly arose, and dressed
their Shields on their Shoulders with naked Swerds in their hands, and they
dashed together like as they had been a flaming fire; thus they traced, and
raced, and hewed on Helms, and cut away many pieces and cantels of their
Shields, and either wounded other passing sore, so that the hot blood fell upon
the earth; and by that they had foughten together the maintenance of an hour,
King Palliobarb waxed faint, and gave sore aback, that saw Sir Crucifrag, and
followed fiercely upon him, for he gave him twenty strokes for one, and ever he
cried, yield thee. So King Palliobarb threw away his Swerd, and pulled off his
Helm to breath; but when Prince Corniger and his Barons saw it was King
Palliobarb, they were mervailously astonished: But he fell dead to the earth for
grief and for his wounds. Then did Prince Corniger make great joy for the
Victory, and gave Sir Crucifrag a brave Castle for his reward, for delivering
him from his great Enemy King Palliobarb, who had been counted the most
villainous as well as the stoutest Knight on earthly habitation; and eke also
all the Barons and Knights praised the stern might of Sir Crucifrag, so that he
was counted the worshipfullest Knight of the world: but some were envious. For
at the season of the merry month of May, when every lusty heart flourishes;
for as the season is lusty to behold, and comfortable; so man and woman
rejoice: for Winter with his rough winds and blastes, causes a lusty man to
coure and sit by the fire. So in this month of May it fell out, that there
happened a great Love of the Queen to Sir Crucifrag, the which never stinted
till the Flower of Chivaldry of all the world was destroyed and slain; and this
befell long of two unhappy Knights, who had ever a privy hate unto Sir
Crucifrag's Prowess, and then they said openly, and not in counsel, that many
Knights might hear it, I mervail that we all be not ashamed both to see and
know how Sir Crucifrag lies daily and nightly by the Queen, and all we know it
so, and it is shamefully suffered of us all, that we should suffer so noble a
King as is Prince Corniger, to be shamed; therefore fall of it what fall may, I
will declare it to the King. Ye shall not do so, said the rest; for if there
rise any war and wrath between Sir Crucifrag and us, wit you well, there will
be many Kings and Knights that will hold with Sir Crucifrag; also Sir Crucifrag
has done the King great service, and rescued him from his Enemies; and the
best of us all had been full cold at the heart root, had not Sir Crucifrag been
a better Knight than we. Do you then as you list, said Sir Blaball, (for it was
his name) I will hide so no longer.

With these words came to them the King. Now stint your noise. said they to Sir
Blaball. But I will not, quoth he. Than good speed, said they, for we will not
hear your tales, ne any of your counsel; and therewith they departed, making
great doole.

And then Prince Corniger asked Sir Blaball what noise they made. My Liege,
said Sir Blaball, I shall tell you what I may hold no longer. Here is I and my
Brother Sneeks know all, that Sir Crucifrag holds your Queen, and has done
long, and we your good Friends and Servants may not suffer it any longer; and
therefore we will prove that he is a Traitor to your person. If it be so, said
the King, wit you well he is an hardy Knight, and all know he is the man of
most might among us; and if he be taken with the deed, he will fight with him
that brought up the noise, and I know no Knight is able to match him. But if it
be soth that ye say, I would he were taken in the deed. My Lord, said Sir
Blaball, to morrow shall ye ride on Hunting, and when it draws toward night,
ye may send the Queen word that ye will lie out all that night, and so may ye
send for your Cooks; and then upon pain of death we shall bring him dead or
alive. I will, well, said the King; but bevvare, for ye shall find him mighty
vvyghty. So on the morrow the King rode on Hunting: Then Sir Blaball and Sir
Sneeks did themselves in a Chamber in the Castle. So when night came, Sir
Crucifrag told his trusty Friend Sir Fierce, he would go speak with the
Queen. Sir, said Sir Fierce, I always dread me much of Sir Sneeks and his
Brother Sir Blaball, who vvait you daily to do you shame, and never gave my
heart against any going that ever ye went to the Queen so much as now. Have
ye no doubt, said Sir Crucifrag, I shall go and come, and make no tarrying; and
I will not be so much a Covvard, but that she shall understand I will see her
good grace. Speed you well, said Sir Fierce, and send you safe and sound.

So Sir Crucifrag departed, and took his svverd underneath his arm; and so that
noble Knight went forth in his Mantle, and put himself in great jeopardy, and
so he passed till he came to the Queen. And than the Queen and Sir Crucifrag
were together, and vvhither they were a bed, or at Other manner of sports, me
list not thereof to make mention, (for Love at that time was not as it is now
adays) but thus as they were together, there came Sir Blaball with Sir Sneeks,
and ten more Knights, crying with a loud noise, that all the Court might hear
it, Traitorous Knight, Sir Crucifrag, now art thou taken. Alas, said the
Queen, now are we mischieved both. Madam, said he, have you any Armor here
within your Chamber, that I might cover my body vvithall; and if there be any,
I pray you heartily let me have, and I shall soon stint their malice. Truly,
said the Queen, I have no Armor, ne Shield, ne Svverd, ne Spear; wherefore I
dread me sore our long Love is come to a mischievous end, and therefore ye are
like to be slain, and I shall be brent. Alas, said Sir Crucifrag, in all my
life was I never thus bestead, that I should be thus shamefully slain for lack
of mine Armor; but always Sir Blaball cried, Traitor, come out of the Queens
Chamber. O Jesu, mercy, said Sir Crucifrag, this shameful cry and noise I may
not suffer; for better were death at once, then thus to endure pain; and
therevvithall Sir Crucifrag vvrapped his Mantel round about his Arm well and
surely, and by then they had gotten a great Form out of the Hall, and
therewithal they dashed at the Chamber door. Fair Lords, said Sir Crucifrag,
leave your noise and your dashing, and I shall set open the door, and then may
ye do with me what it likes you to do. Then Sir Crucifrag unbarred the Door,
and with his left hand he held it open a little, so that but one man might come
in at once; and so anon there came striding a good Knight, a big man and a
large, and with a Swerd he struck at Sir Crucifrag mightily; but Sir Crucifrag
put aside the stroke, and gave him such a buffet upon the Helm, that he fell
down dead, grovelling within the door: and then Sir Crucifrag with his stern
might drew in the dead Knight within the Chamber, and with the help of the
Queen and her Ladies was lightly armed in his Armor; and ever stood Sir
Blaball crying, Traitor, come out of the Queens Chamber, we will have thy Head
maugre all thy might, if we please to slay thee; for we will let thee to wit,
that we have the choice of Prince Corniger, to save thee or to slay thee. So
then Sir Crucifrag was wroth, and set open the Chamber door, and mightily and
Knightly he strode amongst them; and anon at the first beset he slew Sir
Blaball, and within a little while after five more; for there was none of all
them that might stand Sir Crucifrag a buffet. Also he wounded Sir Sneeks, and
he fled with all his might, and the rest with him: and then Sir Crucifrag
returned again to the Queen, and he kissed her, and promised to rescue her, and
either gave other a Ring; and so he went to* his Lodging, and told Sir Fierce
all that had happened; so they* fled to Sir Crucifrag's Castle, and many good
Knights cleave to them.

Now when Prince Corniger was advised of what was passed, he commanded his
Knights to be ready in their best Array with their brethren, to bring the Queen
to the Fire; for she shall soon have her Judgment: And then the Queen was led
forth without the Castle, and there she was despoiled to her Smock; and so then
her Ghostly Father was brought to her to be shriven of her misdeeds. Then was
there weeping, and wailing, and wringing of hands of many Lords and Ladies; but
there were but few in comparison that would bare any Armor for to strengthen
the death of the Queen. Then was there one that Sir Crucifrag had sent for to
spy what time the Queen should go to her Judgment; and anon when as he saw
that the Queen was despoiled to her Smock, and and also that she was shriven,
then he gave warning to Sir Crucifrag; then was there hot spurning and plucking
up of Horses, and right so they came to the Fire, and who stood against them
were slain, there might none withstand Sir Crucifrag and Sir Fierce. So all
that bare Arms and withstood them were slain, even many a noble Knight. Then
when Sir Crucifrag had done this, and put to flight all that would withstand
him, he rode straight to the Queen, and made a Gown to be cast upon her; and
then he made her to be set behind him, and prayed her to be of good cheer: Wit
you well, that the Queen was right glad she was escaped from death; and then
she thanked God and Sir Crucifrag, and so he rode away with the Queen, and many
cleave to him. Now when this was known openly that Prince Corniger and Sir
Crucifrag were at debate, many Knights were glad of their debate, and many
Knights were sorry of their debate.

So then Prince Corniger sent Writes, and let cries throughout his Realm in
length and breadth, for to assemble all his Knights, so that he had a great
Host; and when they were assembled, the King told them how Sir Crucifrag had
bereft him of his Queen: Then all made them ready to lay Siege to Sir
Crucifrag, whereas he lay in his Castle. Thereof heard Sir Crucifrag, and
purveyed him of many a good Knight, some for his own sake, and some for the
Queens. Then Prince Corniger made many Knights to blow upon Sir Crucifrag, and
all at once they called him, Traitorous and recreant Knight. At this Sir
Crucifrag was wroth, and all his Knights; and on the morrow either party made
them ready to do Battle, and great purveyance was made on both sides. Then
came forth Sir Hasty on the Kings party, and proffered to Just. So Sir Fierce
ran against him, and smote him through the body. Then there began a great stir
of breaking Spears, and smiting of Swerds; and ever Prince Corniger was nigh to
Sir Crucifrag for to have slain him, and Sir Crucifrag suffered him, and would
not strike again. Wherefore Sir Traitorous encountered with the King unawares,
and there with a Spear he smote him down to the ground; and so he alighted and
drew his Swerd, and said to Sir Crucifrag, Shall I make an end of this War? and
therewith he meant to have slain the King. Not so hardy, said Sir Crucifrag,
upon pain of thy Head, if thou touch him any more: for I will see that the most
noble King that made me Knight, be neither slain ne ashamed, and therewithal
Sir Crucifrag alighted from his Horse, and took up the King, and horsed him
again, and said unto him thus, My Liege Lord, for Gods Love stint the strife,
for ye may get no worship, and I do my uttermost to forbear you, and ye, ne
none of yours forbeareth me: My Liege, remember what I have done for you, and
now am I evil rewarded. So when Prince Corniger was again on Horseback, he
looked upon Sir Crucifrag, and the tears brast out of his eyes, thinking on the
great courtesy that was in Sir Crucifrag more than in any other man; and
therewith the King rode his way, and might no longer behold him, and said to
himself, Alas that ever this War began; and then either party withdrew them for
to rest, and bury the dead bodies, and to the wounded they laid soft Salves;
and thus they endured that night till on the morrow; and then they made them
ready to Battle. Then came Sir Crucifrag as grim as any Bear, in a black
Armor, that he might not be known, with a great Spear in his hand, and he
smote on the right hand and on the left, which astonished Prince Corniger and all
his Knights; so they resolved to set upon that sturdy Knight, but he ran Sir
Killman through the body horse and all, and also with a buffet killed Sir
Rasour; but as he stroke at Sir Ironside, his Swerd brake, and Prince Corniger
slew him. Then he drew away the body, to see who that famous and stern Knight
might be; and when he savv it was Sir Crucifrag, he ran his own Swerd through
his body, and died by him. Thus the dismal War ceased; and when the Queen heard
of all the dolorous case, she poisoned her self. Then was weeping and
vvailing, and great dool, such as was never made, for the Flovvers of Chivalry
were withered and dead. O hone, O hone.

The Authors Friend to the Readers upon his perusal of the Work.
LO here Antiquity, what think you, Sirs,
To see a Poem dressed in Boots and Spur;
A short Cloak, and long Breeches, in the fashion
Of those that lived before us in this nation*
It Is pretty (faith) and pleasant for to see
How we with Antiquity disagree.
And to that purpose here my loving friend
His Conjuring-glass unto the World does lend;
Where both his worth appearing we may find,
And Chaucer's Ghoast, or else we all are blind.
FINIS.

