THE ATHEIST: OR, The Second Part OF THE Soldiers Fortune. Acted at the Duke's
Theater.

Written by THO. OTWAY.

-- Hic noster Authors habet;
Quorum oemulari exoptat negligentiam
Potius, quam istorum obscuram diligentiam.
Dehinc ut quiescant porro moneo, and desinant
Maledicere, malefacta ne noscant sua.
Terence. LONDON, Printed for R. Bentley, and I. Tonson, in Russel Street in
Covent Garden, and the Judges Head in Chancery Lane, near Fleetstreet. M DC
LXXXIV.

TO THE LORD ELANDE, Eldest Son to the Right Honorable the Marquess of
Hallifax.
My Lord,
IT was not without a great deal of debate with my self, that I could resolve
to make this Present to Your Lordship: For though Epistles Dedicatory be lately
grown so Epidemical, that either sooner or later, no man of Quality (whom the
least Author has the least pretense to be troublesome to) can escape them; yet
methought Your Lordship should be as much above the common Perplexities that
attend Your Quality, as You are above the common Level of it, as well in the
most Exalted Degrees of a Noble Generous Spirit, as in a piercing Apprehension,
good Understanding, and daily ripening Judgment, all sweetened by an obliging
Affability and Condescension; of which I have often, in the Honor of Your
Conversation, had particular cause to be proud; and for which therefore, a more
than ordinary reason, now, to be Grateful.

And it is upon that pretense, I here presume to shelter this Trifle under Your
Protection; for indeed, it has great need of such Protection: having at its
first coming into the World met with many Enemies, and very industrious ones
too; but this way I was sure it must live: Would He but once vouchsafe to
espouse its Defense, whose Generosity will overthrow the ignoblest Envy; whose
good Nature, cannot but confound the most inveterate Malice; and whose Wit must
baffle the sauciest Ignorance.

My Lord, It would but argue me of the meanest Impertinence and Formality, to
pretend here an Harangue of those Praises You deserve: For he who tells the
World whose Son You are, has said enough to those who do not know You; and the
happy few, whom You have picked and chosen for Your Conversation, cannot but
every hour You are pleased to bestow upon them, be sensible of more than I
could tell them in a Volume: Your Lordship being the best Panegyric upon Your
self; the Son of that Great Father of his Country, who when all manner of
Confusion, Ruin, and Destruction, was breaking in upon us, like the Guardian
Angel of these Kingdoms, stood up; and with the Tongue of an Angel too,
confounded the Subtleties of that Infernal Serpent, who would have debauched us
from our Obedience, and turned our Eden into a Wilderness. Certainly His Name
must be for ever Honorable, Precious His Memory, and Happy His Generation, who
durst exert his Loyalty, when it was grown almost a reproach to have any, and
stem a torrent of Faction, popular Fury, and fermenting Rebellion, to the
Preserving of the best of Kings in his Throne, and the happiest of People in
their Liberties.

May he live long to complete the Reparations he has made in our Defense; still
by the strength of his Judgment, to foresee those Evils that may yet threaten
us, and by the Power of his Wisdom to prevent them; to root out the Footing and
Foundations of the Kings open (nay, and bosom) Enemies: As a watchful, bold,
and sincere Counselor to his Master; to be a driver of Treacherous, Grinning,
Self-ended Knaves, Insinuating Spies, and useless unprofitable Fools from his
Service: A Patron and and Promoter of Honesty, Merit, and Ability, which else
too often, by neglect, are corrupted to their Contraries.

In fine, to continue (as he is) a kind Indulgent Father to Your Lordship, so
much every way his Son, and fit to Inherit his Honors, as in the strong and
shining Virtues of Your Mind, the fixed and steady disposition of Your Loyalty,
the goodness and obliging temper of Your Nature, is apparent; by which only I
must ever humbly confess, and no presumptive Merit of my own, I have been
encouraged to take this Opportunity of telling the World how much I desire to
be thought,

Your Lordships Humble Servant to be Commanded, Tho. Otway.

PROLOGUE.
THough Plays and Prologues never did more abound,
Never were good Prologues harder to be found.
To me the Cause seems easily understood:
For there are Poets prove not very good,
Who, like base Sign-Post Dawbers, wanting Skill,
Steal from Great Masters Hands, and Copy ill.
Thus, if by chance, before a Noble Feast
Of Generous Wit, to whet and fit your Taste,
Some poignant Satyr in a Prologue rise,
And growing Vices handsomely chastise;
Each Poetaster thence presumes on Rules,
And ever after calls ye downright Fools.
These Marks describe him. --
Writing by rote; Small Wit, or none to spare;
Iangle and Chime's his Study, Toil, and Care:
He always in One Line upbraids the Age;
And a good Reason why; it Rymes to Stage.
With Wit and Pit he keeps a hideous pother;
Sure to be damned by One, for want of The Other:
But if, by chance, he get the French Word Raillery,
Lord, how he fegues the Vizor-Masques with Gallery!
It Is said, Astrologers strange Wonders find
To come, in two great Planets lately joined.
From our Two Houses joining, most will hold,
Vast Deluges of Dullness were foretold.
Poor Holborn Ballads now being born away
By Tides of duller Madrigals than they;
Jockeys and Jennyes set to Northern Airs,
While Lousy Thespis chaunts at Country Fairs
Politic Ditties, full of Sage Debate,
And Merry Catches, how to Rule the State.
Vicars n^gl^ct their Flocks, to turn Translators,
And Barley-water Whey-fac'd Beau's write Satyrs;
Though none can guess to which most Praise belongs,
To the Learned Versions, Scandals, or the Songs.
For all things now by Contraries succeed;
Of Wit or Virtue there is no longer need:
Beauty submits to him who loudliest rails;
She fears the saucy Fop, and he prevails.
Who for his best Preferment would devise,
Let him renounce all Honesty, and rise.
Villains and Parasites Success will gain;
But in the Court of Wit, shall Dullness Reign?
No: Let the angry 'Squire give his Iambicks over,
Twirl Crevat-strings, but write Lampoons no more;
Rhymesters get Wit, ever they pretend to show it,
Nor think a Game at Cramboe makes a Poet:
Else is our Author hopeless of Success,
But then his Study shall be next time less:
He Will find out Ways to your Applause, more easy;
That is, write worse and worse, till he can please ye.
EPILOGUE by Mr. Duke of Cambridge.
IT is not long since in the Noisie Pit
Tumultuous Faction sat the Judge of Wit;
There Knaves applauded what their Blockheads writ.
At a Whig-Brother's Play, the Bawling Crowd
Burst out in Shouts, as zealous, and as loud,
As when some Member's stout Election-Beer
Gains the mad Voice of a whole Drunken Shire.
And yet, even then, our Poet's Truth was tried,
Tho 'twas a Devilish pull to stem the Tide;
And tho he never did Line of Treason write,
Nor made one Rocket on Queen Besse's Night,
Such was his Fortune, or so good his Cause,
Even then he failed not wholly of Applause.
He that could then escape, now bolder grows:
Since the Whig-Tyde runs out, the Loyal flows.
All you who lately here presumed to bawl,
Take warning from your Brethren at Guild Hall:
The Spirit of Rebellion there is quelled,
And here your Poet's Acts are all repealed:
Impartial Justice has resumed again
Her awful Seat, nor bears the Sword in vain.
The Stage shall lash the Follies of the Times,
And the Laws Vengeance overtake the Crimes.
The Perjured Wretch shall no Protection gain
From his dishonored Robe, and Golden Chain;
But stand exposed to all the insulting Town,
While Rotten Eggs bepaw the Scarlet Gown.
Pack hence betimes, you that were never sparing
To save the Land, and dam' your selves, by Swearing.
Should the Wise City now, to ease your Fears,
Erect an Office to Insure your Ears,
Thither such numerous Shoals of Witnesses,
And Juries, conscious of their Guilt, would press,
That to the Chamber hence might more be gained,
Than ever Mother Creswell from it drained;
And Perjury to the Orphans Bank restore
Whatever Whoredom robbed it of before.
THE ACTORS NAMES.
Father to Beaugard. Mr. Leigh. Beaugard. Mr. Betterton. Courtine. Mr. Smith.
Daredevil. Mr. Underhill. Theodoret. Mr. Wilshire. Gratian. Mr. Perin. Porcia.
Mrs. Barry. Lucretia. Mrs. Butler. Sylvia, Courtine 's Wife. Mrs. Currer. Mrs.
Furnish, an Exchange-woman. Mrs. Osborn. Phillis, Porcia's Woman. Mrs.
Percival. Chloris, Lucretia 's Woman. Mrs. Norris. Rosard, Gratian 's Man. Mr.
Saunders. Plunder, Beaugard's Man. Mr. Richards. Six Ruffians. Footmen. Dwarf.
A Page.
THE ATHEIST: Or, The Second Part of the SOLDIER's FORTUNE.
THE FIRST ACT.
Beaugard and his Father. Beaug. SIR, I say, and say again, No Matrimony; I Will
not be noos'd. Why, I beseech you, Sir, tell me Plainly and fairly, What have I
done, that I deserve to be married!


Fath. Why, Sauce-box, I, your old Father, was married before you were born.


Beaug. Ay, Sir; and I thank you, the next thing you did, was, you begot me;
the Consequence of which was as follows: As soon as I was born, you sent me to
Nurse, where I sucked two years at the dirty Dugs of a foul-feeding Witch, that
lived in a thatch't Sty upon the neighboring Common; as soon as I was big
enough, that you might be rid of me, you sent me to a Place called a School, to
be slash't and box't by a thick-fisted Blockhead, that could not read himself;
where I learnt no Letters, nor got no Meat, but such as the old Succubus his
Wife bought at a stinking Price, so overrun with Vermin, that it used to crawl
home after her.


Fath. Sirrah, it was the more nourishing, and made such young, idle Whoresons
as you fat, fat, you Rogue. I remember the young Dog at twelve years old had a
broad, shining, pufft, Bacon-face, like a Cherubim; and now he will not marry.


Beaug. My next Removal was home again; and then you did not know what to do
with me farther, till after Twelve-months Deliberation, out of abundance of
Fatherly Affection and Care of your Posterity, you very civilly and fairly
turned me out of your Doors.


Fath. The impudent, termagant, unruly Varlet rebelled with too much Plenty,
and took up Arms against my Concubine. Turned you out of my Doors!


Beaug. Yes, turned me out of Doors, Sir.


Fath. Had I not reason, Master Hector?


Beaug. As I had then, so have I now too, Sir, more Manners than to dispute the
Pleasure of a Father.


Fath. Nay, the Rogue has Breeding, that is the truth on it; the Dog would be a
very pretty Fellow, if I could but persuade him to marry.


Beaug. Turned out of Doors as I was, you may remember, Sir, you gave me not ^
Shilling; my Industry and my Virtue was all I had to trust to.


Fath. Bless us all! Industry and Virtue, quoth a! Nay, I have a very virtuous
Son and Heir of him, that is the truth on it.


Beaug. Till at last a good Uncle, who now, Peace be with his Soul, sleeps with
his Fathers, bestowed a Portion of Two hundred pounds upon me, with which I
took Shipping, and set Sail for the Coast of Fortune.


Fath. That is to say, You went to the Wars, to learn the Liberal Arts of
Murder, Whoredom, Burning, Ravishing, and a few other necessary Accomplishments
for a young Gentleman to set up a Livelihood withal, in this Civil Government,
where, Heaven be praised, none of those Virtues need grow rusty.


Beaug. Sir, I hope I have brought you no Dishonor home with me.


Fath. Nay, the Scanderbeg-Monkey has not behaved himself unhandsomly, that is
the truth of the Business; but the Varlet will not marry: the Dog has got Two
thousand pound a year left him by an old curmudgeonly moldy Uncle, and I cannot
persuade him to marry.


Beaug. Sir, that curmudgeonly moldy Uncle you speak of, was your Elder
Brother, and never married in all his Life: He, dying, bequeaths me Two
thousand pound a year: You, Sir, the younger Brother, and my honored Father,
have been married, and are not able, for ought I can perceive, to leave me a
bent Ninepence: So, Sir, I wish you a great deal of Health, Long life, and
merry as it has been hitherto; but for Marriage, it has thriven so very ill
with my Family already, that I am resolved to have nothing to do with it.


Fath. Here Is a Rogue! Here Is a Villain! Why, Sirrah, you have lost all Grace;
you have no Duty left; you are a Rebel: I shall see you hanged, Sirrah. Come,
come, let me examine you a little, while I think on it: What Religion are you
of? -- hah? --


Beaug. Sir, I hope you took care, after I was born, to see me Christened.


Fath. Oh Lord! Christened! Here Is an Atheistical Rogue, thinks he has Religion
enough, if he can but call himself a Christian!


Beaug. Why, Sir, would you have me disown my Baptism?


Fath. No, Sirrah: but I would have you own what sort of Christian you are
though


Beaug. What sort, Sir?


Fath. Ay, Sir; what sort, Sir.


Beaug. Why, of the honestest sort.


Fath. As if there were not Knaves of all sorts!


Beaug. Why then, Sir, if that will satisfy you, I am of your sort.


Fath. And that, for ought you know, may be of no sort at all.


Beaug. But, Sir, to make short of the matter, I am of the Religion of my
Country, hate Persecution and Penance, love Conformity, which is going to
Church once a Month, well enough; resolve to make this transitory Life as
pleasant and delightful as I can; and ^or some sober Reasons best known to my
self, resolve never to marry.


Fath. Look me in the Face; stand still, and look me in the Face. So; you will not
marry? --


Beaug. No, Sir.


Fath. Oh Lord!


Beaug. But I Will do something that shall be more for your good, and perhaps may
please you as well. Knowing Fortune of late has not been altogeter so
good-natured as she might have been, and that your Revenues are something
anticipated, be pleased, Sir, to go home as well satisfied as you can, and my
Servant shall not fail to meet you at your Lodgings, with a Hundred smiling
Smock-fac't Guinea's, within this half-hour: Now who the Devil would marry?


Fath. No Body that has half an ounce of Brains in his Noddle: The ungodly
good-natured Rogue is in the right on it; damnably, damnably in the right on it.


Beaug. So, here is your Father for you now!


Fath. But look you Jack now, little Jack, Two thousand pounds a year! Why thou will be a damnable rich Rogue now, if thou do not marry; though I know thou will live bravely and deliciously, eat and drink nobly, have always half a
dozen honest, jolly, true-spirited, spritely Friends about thee, and so forth,
hah! Th^n for Marriage, to speak the truth on it, it is at the best but a
chargeable, vexatious, uneasy sort of Life; it ruined me, Jack, utterly ruined
thy poor old Father, Jack. Thou will be sure to remember the Hundred pound,
Iackie-boy, hah?


Beaug. Most punctually, Sir.


Fath. Thou shall always, ever now and then, that is, lend thy old Father a
Hundred pound, or so, upon a good occasion, Jack, after this manner, in a
Friendly way: You must make much of your old Daddy, Jack: But if thou have no
mind to it, the truth on it is, I would never have thee marry.


Beaug. Not marry, Sir?


Fath. No.


Beaug. No?


Fath. No. A Hundred Pound, Jack, is a pretty little round Sum.


Beaug. I Will not fail of sending it.


Fath. Then, Jack, it will do as well to let thy Man come to me to Harry the
Eighth's Head in the Back Street, behind my Lodgings: There Is a Cup of smart
Racy Canary, Jack, will make an old Fellow's Heart as light as a Feather. Ah,
little Iackie-rogue, it Glorisies through the Glass, and the Nits dance about
in it like Attoms in the Sunshine, you young Dog.


Beaug. Do you intend to Dine there, Sir?


Fath. Ay, Man; I have two or three bonny old Tilbury Roysterers, with delicate
red Faces, and bald Crowns, that have obliged me to meet 'em there; they helped
me to spend my Estate when I was young, and the Rogues are grateful, and do not
forsake me now I am grown poorish and old, --. Almost Twelve a clock, Jack.


Beaug. I Will be sure to remember, Sir.


Fath. And thou will never marry!


Beaug. Never, I hope, Sir.


Fath. Ah, you wicked-hearted Rogue, I know what you will do then, that will be
worse, though, I think, not much worse neither. Would I were a young Fellow
again, but to keep him Company for one Week or a Fortnight. A hundred Guinea's!
eeee! Db'ny Jack. You Will remember? See thee again to morrow, Jack. -- Poor Jack!
Dainty Canary -- and a delicate Black-ey'd Wench at the Bar! Db'uy Jack.


Beaug. Adieu, Father. -- Fourbine.


Fourb. Did your Honor call?


Beaug. Take a hundred Guinea's out of the Cabinet, and carry 'em after the Old
Gentleman to his Place of Rendezvous. This Father of mine (Heaven be thanked)
is a very ungodly Father* He was in his* Youth just such another wicked Fellow
as his Son John here; but he had no Estate, there I have the better of him: for
out of mere Opinion of my Good-husbandry, my Uncle thought fit to disinherit
the extravagant Old Gentleman, and leave all to me. Then he was married, there
I had the better of him again; yet he married a Fortune of Ten thou^^^d pound,
and before I was Seven years old, had broke my Mothers Heart, and spent three
parts of her Portion: Afterward he was pleased to retain a certain Familiar
Domestic, called a Housekeeper, which I one day, to show my Breeding, called
Whore, and was fairly turned a starving for it. Now he has no way to squeeze me
out of Contribution, but by taking up his Fatherly Authority, and offering to
put the Penal Law called Marriage in execution. I must even get him a
Governor, and send him with a Pension into the Country: Ay, it must be so;
For, Wedlock, I deny thee; Father, I Will supply thee; and, Pleasure, I will have
thee. Who Is there?


Enter a Servant. Serve. Oh, Sir, the most fortunate Tidings!


Beaug. What Is the matter?


Serve. Captain Courtine, your old Acquaintance, Friend, and Comrade, is just
arrived out of the Country, and desires to see you, Sir.


Beaug. Courtine! Wait on him up, you Dog, with Reverence and Honor.


Enter Courtine. Court. Dear Beaugard!


Beaug. Ah, Friend! -- from the very tenderest part of my Heart I was just now
wishing for thee. Why thou lookst as like a Married-man already, with as grave
a Fatherly Famelick Counte^ance, as ever I saw.


Court. Ay, Beaugard, I am married, that is my Comfort: But you, I hear, have
had worse Luck of late; an old Uncle dropped into the Grave, and Two thousand
pound a year into your Pocket, Beaugard.


Beaug. A small Convenience, Ned, to make my Happiness hereafter a little more
of a piece than it has been hitherto, in the Enjoyment of such hearty, sincere,
honest Friends, and good-natured Fellows, as thou art.


Court. Sincere, honest Friends! Have a care there, Beaugard. -- I am, since I
saw thee, in a few words, grown an errant Raskal; and for Goodnature, it is the
very thing I have solemnly forsworn: no, I am married, Jack, in the Devil's
name, I am married.


Beaug. Married! That is, thou call'st a Woman thou likest by the name of Wife:
Wife and the other thing begin with a Letter. Thou lie with her when thy
Appetite calls thee, keep the Children thou begettest of her Body; allowest
her Meat, Drink, and Garments, fit for her Quality, and thy Fortune; and when
she grows heavy upon thy Hands, what a' Pox, it is but a Separate-maintenance,
kiss and part, and there is an end of the Business.


Court. Alas, Beaugard, thou art utterly mistaken; Heaven knows it is quite on
the contrary: For I am forced to call a Woman I do not like, by the name of
Wife; and lie with her, for the most part, with no Appetite at all; must keep
the Children that, for ought I know, any Body else may beget of her Body; and
for Food and Raiment, by her good will she would have them both Fr^sh three
times a day: Then for Kiss and part, I may kiss and kiss my Heart out, but the
Devil a bit shall I ever get rid of her.


Beaug. Alas, poor Husband! But art thou really in this miserable Condition?


Court. Ten times worse, if possible: By the virtue of Matrimony, and long
Cohabitation, we are grown so really One Flesh, that I have no more Inclination
to hers, than to eat a piece of my own. Then her Ladyship is so Jealous, that
she does me the Honor to make me Stalion-general to the whole Parish, from the
Parson's Importance in Paragon, to the Cobler's scolding Wife, that drinks
Brandy, and smoaks loathsome Tobacco. In short, Jack, she has so ordered the
Business, that I am half weary of the World, wish all Mankind hanged, and have
not laughed these Six months.


Beaug. Ha, ha, ha!


Court. Why, thou can laugh, I see, though.


Beaug. Ay, Ned, I have Two thousand pound per Annum, Ned, old Rents, and well
Tenanted; have no Wife, nor ever will have any, Ned; resolve to make my Days of
Mortality all Joyful, and Nights Pleasurable, with some dear, lovesom, young,
beautiful, kind, generous She, that every Night shall bring me all the Joys of
a New Bride, and none of the Vexations of a worn-out, insipid, troublesome,
jealous Wife, Wife, Ned.


Court. But where lies this Treasure? Where is there such a Jewel to be found?


Beaug. Ah, Rogue! Do you despise your own Manna indeed, and long after Quails?
Why, thou unconscionable Hobnail, thou Country Cowlstaff, thou absolute Piece
of thy own dried Dirt, would thou have the Impudence, with that hideous
Beard, and grisly Countenance, to make thy Appearance before the Footstool of a
Bona Roba that I delight in? For shame get off that Smithfield Horsecoursers
Equipage; Appear once more like Courtine the Gay, the Wit^y, and Unbounded,
with Joy in thy Face, and Love in thy Blood, Money in thy Pockets, and good
Clothes on thy Back; and then I Will try to give thee a Recipe that may purge
away those foul Humors Matrimony has bred in thee, and fit thee to relish the
Sins of thy Youth again. Bless us! What a Beard's there? It puts me in mind of
the Blazing Star.


Court. Beard, Beaugard! Why, I wear it on purpose, Man; I have wished it a
Furze-bush a thousand times, when I have been kissing my --


Beaug. Whom? --


Court. Wife. -- Let me never live to bury her, if the word Wife does not stick
in my Throat.


Beaug. Then this Peruque! Why, it makes thee show like the Sign of a Head
looking out at a Barbers Window.


Court. No more, no more; all shall be rectified: For, to deal with thee as
honestly as a Fellow in my damned Condition can do, ever I resolved absolutely
to hang my self, I thought there might be some Remedy left; and that was this
dear Town, and thy dear Friendship: So that, in short, I am very fairly run
away; pretended a short Journey to visit a Friend, but came to London; and, if
it be possible, will not see Country, Wife, nor Children again these seven
years. Therefore, prithee, for my better Encouragement, tell me a little what
Sins are stirring in this Noble Metropolis, that I may know my Business the
better, and fall to it as fast as I can.


Beaug. Why, 'faith, Ned, considering the Plot, the Danger of the Times, and
some other Obstructions of Trade and Commerce, Iniquity in the general has not
lost much Ground. There Is Cheating and Hypocrisy still in the City; Riot and
Murder in the Suburbs; Grinning, Lying, Fawning, Flattery, and False-promising
at Court; Assignations at Coventgarden Church; Cuckolds, Whores, Pimps,
Panders, Bawds, and their Diseases, all over the Town.


Court. But what Choice Spirits, what Extraordinary Rascals may a Man oblige
his Curiosity withal?


Beaug. I Will tell thee: In the first place, we are overrun with a Race of
Vermin they call Wits, a Generation of Insects that are always making a Noise,
and buzzing about your Ears, concerning Poets, Plays, Lampoons, Libels, Songs,
Tunes, Soft Scenes, Love, Ladies, Peruques, and Crevatstrings, French
Conquests, Duels, Religion, Snuff-boxes, Points, Garnitures, Milled Stockings,
Foubert's Academy, Politics, Parliament-Speeches, and every thing else which
they do not understand, or would have the World think they did.


Court. And are all these Wits?


Beaug. Yes, and be hanged to 'em, these are the Wits.


Court. I never knew one of these Wits in my Life, that did not deserve to be
Pillory'd; twenty to one if half of 'em can read, and yet they will venture at
Learning as familiarly, as if they had been bred in the Vatican. One of 'em
told me one day, he thought Plutarch well done would make the b^st English
Heroic Poem in the World. Besides, they will rail, cavil, censure, and, what
is worst of all, make Jests; the dull Rogues will Jest, though they do it as
awkerdly as a Tarpawlin would ride the Great Horse. I hate a pert, dull,
Jesting Rogue from the bottom of my Heart.


Beaug. But above all, the most abominable is your Witty Squire, your young
Heir that is very Witty; who having newly been discharged from the Discretion
of a Governor, and come to keep his own Money, gets into a Cabal of Coxcombs
of the Third Form, who will be sure to cry him up for a Fine Person, that he
may think all them so.


Court. Oh, your Asses know one another Nature exactly, and are always ready
to nabble, because it is the certain way to be nabbled again: But above all the
rest, what think you of the Atheist?


Beaug. By this good Light, thou have prevented me: I have one for thee of that
Kind, the most unimitable Varlet, and the most insufferable Stinkard living;
one that has Doubts enough to turn to all Religions, and yet would fain pretend
to be of none: In short, a Cheat, that would have you of opinion that he
believes neither Heaven nor Hell, and yet never feels so much as an Ague-sit,
but he is afraid of being damned.


Court. That must be a very Noble Champion, and certainly an Original.


Beaug. The Villain has less Sincerity than a Bawd, less Courage than a Hector,
less Goodnature than a Hangman, and lest Charity than a Phanatique; talks of
Religion and Church-Worship as familiarly as a little Courtier does of the
Maids of Honor; and swears the King deserves to be Chan'd out of the City, for
suffering Zealous Fools to build Paul's again, when it would make so proper a
Place for a Citadel.


Court. A very worthy Member of a Christian Commonwealth, that is the truth
on it.


Beaug. I am intimately acquainted with him.


Court. I honor you for it, with all my Heart, Sir.


Beaug. After all, the Rogue has some other little tiny Vices, that are not
very ungrateful.


Court. Very probable.


Beaug. He makes a very good odd Man at Ballum-rancum, or so; that is, when the
rest of the Company is coupled, will take care to see there is good Attendance
paid; and when we have a mind to make a Ballum of it indeed, there is no
Lewdness so scandalous that he will not be very proud to have the Honor to be
put upon.


Court. A very necessary Instrument of Damnation, truly.


Beaug. Besides, to give the Devil his due, he is seldom Impertinent; but,
barring his Darling-Topick, Blasphemy, a Companion pleasant enough. Shall I
recommend him to thy Service? I Will enter into Bonds of Five hundred pounds,
that he teaches thee as good a way to get rid of that Whip and a Bell, called
thy Wife, as thy Heart would wish sor.


Court* And that is no small Temptation, I assure you.


Enter Boy, with a Letter. Boy. Sir!


Beaug. My Child!


Court. A Pimp, for a Guiny, he speaks so gently to him.


Beaug. Tell her, she has undone me, she has chosen the only way to enslave me
utterly; tell her, my Soul, my Life, my future Happiness, and present Fortune,
are only what she will make'em.


Boy. At Seven, Sir.


Beaug. Most infallibly.


Court. Ay, ay, it is so: Now what a damned Country-Itch have I, to dive into
the Secret! Beaugard, Beaugard, are all things in a readiness? the Husband out
of the way, the Family disposed of? Come, come, come, no trisling; be
free-hearted and friendly.


Beaug. You are married, Ned, you are married; that is all I have to say: you
are married.


Court. Let a Man do a foolish thing once in his Lifetime, and he shall always
hear of it. -- Married, quoth'a! Prithee be patient: I was married about a
Twelvemonth ago, but that is past and forgotten. Come, come, communicare,
communicate, if thou art a Friend, communicate.


Beaug. Not a Tittle. I have Conscience, Ned, Conscience; tho I must confess
it is not altogether so Gentleman-like a Companion: But what a Scandal would it
be upon a Man of my sober Demeanor and Character, to have the unmerciful
Tongue of thy Legitimate Spouse roaring against me, for Debauching her Natural
Husband!


Court. It has been otherwise, Sir.


Beaug. Ay, ay, the time has been, Courtine, when thou were in possession of
thy Natural Freedom, and might be trusted with a Secret of this dear nature;
when I might have opened this Billet, and showed thee this bewitching Name at
the bottom: But woe and alas! O Matrimony, Matrimony! what a Blot art thou in an
honest Fellows Scutcheon!


Court. No more to be said; I Will into the Country again, like any discontented
Statesman, get drunk every Night with an adjacent Schoolmaster, beat my Wife to
a downright Housekeeper, get all my Maidservants every Year with Bastards, till
I can command a Seraglio five Miles round my own Palace, and be beholden to no
Man of Two thousand pound a year for a Whore, when I want one.


Beaug. Good words, Ned, good words, let me advise you; none of your
Mariage-qualities of Scolding and Railing, now you are got out of the turbulent
Element. Come hither, come; but first let us capitulate: Will you promise me,
upon your Conjugal Credit, to be very governable, and very civil?


Court. As any made Spaniel, or hang me up for a Cur.


Beaug. Then this Note, this very Billet, Ned, comes from a Woman, who, when I
was strowling very pensively last Sunday to Church, watch't her Opportunity,
and poach'd me up for the Service of Satan.


Court. Is she very handsome, Beaugard?


Beaug. These Country Squires, when they get up to Town, are as termagant after
a Wench, as a ty'd-up hungry Cur, got loose from Kennel, is after Crusts. Very
handsome, said you? Let me see: No, not very handsome neither; but she will pass,
Ned, she will pass.


Court. Young?


Beaug. About Eighteen.


Court. Oh Lord!


Beaug. Her Complexion fair, with a glowing Blush always ready in her Cheeks,
that looks as Nature were watching every Opportunity to seize and run away with
her.


Court. Oh the Devil, the Devil! This is intolerable.


Beaug. Her Eyes black, sparkling, spriteful, hot, and piercing.


Court. The very Description of her shoots me through my Liver.


Beaug. Her Hair of a delicate light Amber-brown, curling in huge Rings, and of
a great Quantity.


Court. So.


Beaug. Her Forehead large, Majestic, and generous.


Court. Very well.


Beaug. Her Nose neat, and well-fashioned.


Court. Good.


Beaug. With a delicious, little, pretty, smiling Mouth.


Court. Oh!


Beaug. Plump, red, blub Lips.


Court. Ah h --


Beaug. Teeth whiter than so many little Pearls; a bewitching Neck, and
tempting, rising, swelling Breasts.


Court. Ah h h h h --


Beaug. Then such a Proportion, such a Shape, such a Waste --


Court. Hold: Go no lower, if thou love me.


Beaug. But, by your leave, Friend, I hope to go something lower, if she loves
me.


Court. But art thou certain, Beaugard, she is all this thou have told me? So
fair, so tempting, so lovely, so bewitching?


Beaug. No; for, you must know, I never saw her Face in my Life: But I love my
own Pleasure so well, that I Will imagine all this, and ten times more, if it be
possible.


Court. Where lives she?


Beaug. That I know not neither; but my Orders are to meet her fairly and
squarely this Evening by Seven, at a certain Civil Persons Shop in the Upper
Walk, at the New Exchange, where she promises to be very good natured, and let
me know more of her Mind.


Court. I Will even go home, like a miserable Blockhead as I am, to my Lodging,
and sleep.


Beaug. No, Ned: Thou know my good Chances have always been luckie to thee:
Who can tell but this Lady^ errant that has seized upon my Person, may have a
straggling Companion, or so, not unworthy my Friend's.


Court. It Is impossible.


Beaug. Not at all; for, to deal heartily with thee in this Business, tho I
never saw her Face, or know who she is, yet thus far I am satis^ied, she is a
Woman very witty, very well bred, of a pleasant Conversation, with a generous
Disposition, and, what is better than all, if I am not extremely misinformed,
of Noble Quality, and damnably Rich. Such a one cannot want good, pretty,
little, Under-sinners, Ned, that a Man may fool away an Hour or two withal very
comfortably.


Court. Why then I Will be a Man again. Wife, avaunt, and come not near my
Memory; Impotence attends the very Thoughts of thee. At Seven, you say, this
Evening?


Beaug. Precisely.


Court. And shall I go along with thee, for a small Venture in this Love-Voyage?


Beaug. With all my Heart.


Court. But how shall we dispose of the burdensome Time, till the happy Minute
smile upon us?


Beaug. With Love's best Friend, and our own honest old Acquaintance, edifying
Champagn, Ned; and for good Company, tho it be a Rarity, I Will carry thee to
dine with the best I can meet with, where we'll warm our Blood and Thoughts
with generous Glasses, and free-hearted Converse, till we forget the World, and
think of nothing but Immortal Beauties, and Eternal Loving.


Court. Then here I strike the League with thee: And now
M^thinks we are both upon the Wing together,
Bound for new Realms of Joy, and Lands of Pleasure;
Where Men were never yet enslaved by Wiving,
But all their Cares are handsomely contriving
T'improve the Noble Arts of Perfect Living.

End of the First Act.
THE SECOND ACT.
Courtine and Beaugard. Court. BUt was that thy Father?


Beaug. Yes, that civil, sober, old Gentleman, Courtine, is my Father: And, to
tell thee the truth, as Wicked and as Poor as ever his Son was. I sent him a
Cordial of a hundred (...) this Morning, which he will be sure to lose all
before to morrow Morning, and not have a Shilling to help himself.


Court. Methoughts, as I looked into the Room, he ratled the Box with a great
deal of Grace, and swore half a dozen Rappers very youthfully.


Beaug. Prithee no more on it, it is an irreverent Theme; and next to Atheism, I
hate making merry with the Frailties of my Father.


Court. But then as to the Lady, Beaugard.


Beaug. It Is near the Hour appointed, and that is the Shop we meet at; the
Mistress of it, Courtine, is a hearty Well-wisher to the Mathematics, and her
Influence, I hope, may have no ill Effect over my Adventure.


Court. Methinks this Place looks as it were made for Loving: The Lights on
each hand of the Walk look stately; and then the Rusling of Silk Petticoats,
the Din and the Chatter of the pretty little party-colored Parrots, that hop
and flutter from one side to the other, puts every Sense upon its proper Office,
and sets the Wheels of Nature finely moving.


Beaug. Would the Lady of my Motion would make haste, and be punctual; the
Wheels of my Nature move so fast else, that the Weight will be down before she
comes.


Woman. Gloves or Ribbands, Sir? Very good Gloves or Ribbands, Choice of fine
Essences. Captain Beaugard, shall I fell you nothing to day?


Beaug. Truly, Mistress Furnish, I am come to lay out a Heart at your Shop this
Evening, if my pretty Merchant-Adventurer don't fail to meet me here.


Wom. What she that spoiled your Devotion of Sunday last, Captain?


Beaug. Do thou know her, my little Furnish?


Wom. There is a certain Lady in the World, Sir, that has done me the Honor to
let me see her at my poor Shop sometimes.


Enter Porcia masqu'd, and stands behind Beaugard. Beaug. And is she very
lovely?


Wom. What think you, Sir?


Beaug. Faith, charitably enough.


Wom. I Will swear she is obliged to you.


Beaug. And I would very fain be obliged to her too, if 'twere possible. Will
she be here to night?


Porcia. Yes marry will she, Captain.


Beaug. Are you there indeed, my little Picaroon? What, attaque a Man of War of
my Burden in the Stern, Pirate!


Porcia. Lord, how like a Soldier you are pleased to express your self now! I
warrant you, to carry on the Metaphor, you have forty more merry-things to say
to me upon this Occasion; as, plying your Chase-guns, laying your self athwart
my Harser, boarding me upon the Forecastle, clapping all under Hatches,
carrying of the Prize to the next Port of Security, and there rummaging and
risling her. Alas, poor Captain!


Court. Poor, Madam! He has Two thousand a year, and nothing but an old Father
to provide for.


Porcia. Sir, is this fine, sober, brown-bearded Gentleman to be your Steward,
he understands your Affairs so well already?


Beaug. The truth on it is, Madam, he does wait for an Office under me, and may
in time, if he behave himself handsomely, come to Preferment.


Court. This I have got by my Beard already. If she should but know me now.


Beaug. Well, Madam, are your Commands ready? May I know the Task I am to
undertake, before I lay claim to the Happiness of seeing that handsome, homely,
fair, black, young, ancient, tempting or frightful Face, which you conceal so
maliciously? For hang me, as I have deserved long ago, if I know what to make
of this extraordinary Proceeding of yours.


Porcia. In the first place, Captain, this Face of mine, be it what it will, if
you behave your self as you should do, shall never put you out of Countenance.


Beaug. In troth, and that is said kindly.


Porcia. For I am young, Captain.


Beaug. I am glad on it with all my Heart.


Porcia. And, if the World speaks truth, not very ugly.


Beaug. So much the better still.


Porcia. Next, I Am no Hypocrite.


Beaug. Hah!


Porcia. But love my Pleasures, and will hold my Liberty.


Beaug. Noble.


Porcia. I am rich too.


Beaug. Better and better.


Porcia. But what is worst of all --


Beaug. Out with it.


Porcia. I doubt I am sillily in Love.


Court. With whom, dear Miracle?


Porcia. Not with a Married-man, sweet Monsieur Courtine.


Court. Confound her, but she knows me. -- Why, good Madam --


Beaug. Nay, Friend, no ruffling; keep your Articles, and keep your Distance.


Porcia. Have you then made your Escape, Sir, from your dear Wife, the
Lady-Tyrant of your Enchanted Castle in the Country, to run a wandering after
new Adventures here? Oh all the Windmills about London, beware!


Court. Ay, and the Watermills too, Madam. In the Devil's name, what will
become of me!


Porcia. For the Quixot of the Country is abroad; Murder by his Side,
Enterprises in his Head, and Horror in his Face.


Court. Oh Lord!


Beaug. Do you know this Friend of mine then, Madam?


Porcia. I have heard of such a Hero, that was very famous about two years
since, for selling himself to a Plantation, the Country, for Five thousand
pound: Was not that the Price, Sir?


Court. Your Ladyship is pleased to be very free, Madam; that is all.


Porcia. So were you at that time, Sir, or you had never parted with your dear
Liberty on such reasonable Terms surely. Bless us! Had you but looked about you
a little, what a Market might have been made of that tall, proper, promising
Person of yours! that --


Court. Hell confound thee, heartily, heartily.


Porcia. That Face, which now, o're-grown with ruful Beard, looks as you had
stole it from the Retinue of a Russian Embassy! Fough! I fancy all Fellows
that are married smell of Train-oyl and Garlic.


Beaug. And yet, twenty to one, that is a stinking Condition you will have a
design to seduce some poor doting Monster or another into, one day.


Porcia. Never, by that Badge of Slavery, his Beard ther^.


Beaug. How that dear Protestation has charmed me!


Court. Of My Conscience I my self could be half reconciled to her again too.


Porcia. In short, to give you one infallible Argument, that I never will
marry, I have been married already, that is, sold: for being the Daughter of a
very rich Merchant, who dying left me the only Heiress of an immense Fortune,
it was my ill luck to fall into the Hands of Guardians, that, to speak
properly, were Raskals; for in a short time they conspired amongst themselves,
and for base Bribes, betrayed, sold, and married me to a -- Husband, that is all.


Beaug. In troth, and that is enough of all conscience: But where is this
Husband?


Porcia. Heaven be thanked, dead and buried, Captain.


Beaug. Amen, with all my Heart.


Court. A Widow, by my Manhood, a downright Bawdy Widow.


Porcia. What would your Cream-pot in the Country give for that Title, think
you?


Court. Not more than I would, that thy Husband were alive again, to revenge my
Quarrel on thee.


Beaug. And what is to be done, thou dear One?


Porcia. Look upon me as a Lady in distress, Captain; and by the Honor of a
Soldier consider on some way for my Deliverance.


Beaug. From what? Where is the Danger?


Porcia. Every way it threatens me: For into the very Hands my ill Fortune
threw me before, has it betrayed me again, Friend.


Beaug. Hah!


Porcia. The Principal is an Uncle, old, jealous, tyrannical, and covetous.


Beaug. Hell confound him for it.


Porcia. My Fortune lying most in his Hands, obliged me upon my Widowhood to
give up my self again there too, where he has secured and confined me with more
Tyranny, than if I had been a Prisoner for Murder; guards me Day and Night with
ill-lookt Rogues, that wear long, broad, terrible Swords, and stand Sentinel up
and down the House with Musquetoons and Blunderbusses.


Court. So, here is like to be some Mischief going forward, that is one Comfort.


Porcia. Murder and Marriage are the two dreadful things I seem to be threatened
with! Now guess what pity it is that ever either of those Mischiefs should fall
upon me.


Beaug. By the gallant Spirit that is in thee, I Will fairly be Gibetted first.


Porcia. No need of that, Captain, neither: for, to show you I deserve your
Protection, I have had the Courage to break Gaol, run away, and make my Escape
hither, purely to keep my Word with you. Deal like a Man of Honor by me; and
when the Storm that will follow is a little blown over, here is a white Hand
upon it, I Will not be ungrateful.


Beaug. And in token I believe thee, I Will kiss it most Religiously.


Court. Why the Devil did I marry? Madam, one word with you: Have you never a
married Lady of your Acquaintance, that is as good-natured as you, and would
fain be a Widow as you are, too.


Porcia. Why do you ask, Sir?


Court. Because I would cut her Husband's Throat, and make her one for my own
proper use.


Porcia. I Will ask your own Lady, Sir, that Question next time I see her, if you
please.


Court. Why, do thou know her then?


Porcia. Yes.


Court. Then I may chance shortly to have a fine time on it* I have made a
pretty Evenings Work of this, Heavens be praised.


Enter two Men disguised. 1 Man. Run away lewdly! Damnation!


2 Man. Look!


1 Man. By Heaven, it must be she.


^ Man. The Men are well Armed?


1 Man. No matter; we must carry her, or all is lost else.


2 Man. I Will not shrink from you.


1 Man. That Is well said. Sir, if you please, a Word with you.


Beaug. With me, Sir?


1 Man. Yes.


Beaug. Courtine, be civil a little.


1 Man. Sir, it is my Misfortune to be concerned for the Honor of a Lady that
has not been altogether so careful of it her self as she ought to have been.


Beaug. I am sorry for it, Sir.


1 Man. You being a Gentleman whose Character I have had an advantageous
Account of, I would make it my Petition to you, if she be of your Acquaintance,
not to engage your self in any thing that may give me occasion to b^ your Enemy.


Beaug. Sir, I should be highly glad of any brave Man's Friendship, and should
be troubled if I appear concerned in any thing that may hazard the loss of
yours.


1 Man. That Lady, Sir, you talked withal's --


Beaug. My Mistress, Sir.


1 Man. Mistress!


Beaug. Yes, Mistress, Sir: I love her, dote on her, am damnably in love with
her; she is under my Protection too, and when ever there is occasion, as far as
this sinful Body of mine will bear me out in it, I Will defend her.


1 Man. Do you know her?


Beaug. Not so well as I would do, Sir.


1 Man. What Is her Name?


Beaug. A Secret.


1 Man. She must along with me, Sir.


Beaug. No, that must not be, Sir.


2 Man. This Lady, Sir --


Court. You lie, Sir -- Hah! -- Beaugard!


[Draw, and fight, Porcia runs away squeaking, Courtine disarms his Adversary,
and comes up to Beaugard. Beaug. Stand fast, Ned.


Court. Hold thy dead-doing Hand,
Thou Son of Slaughter.

1 Man. Sir, there may come a time --


Beaug. When you will learn Manners.


1 Man. And teach 'em you too.


Court. We are well known.


1 Man. And shall not be forgotten.
Come, Friend.

[Exeunt two Men. Beaug. Confound 'em! This must be a Brother, a Kinsman, or a
Rival, he plied me so warmly.


Court. It Is a hard case, that a Man cannot hold Civil Correspondence with a
good-natured Female, but presently some hotheaded Fellow of the Family or
other runs horn-mad with Jealousy, and fancies his Blood smarts as often as
the Woman's itches.


Beaug. This Heroic Person's Sister, Kinswoman, his Mistress, or whatever she
be, is like to get much Reputation by his Hectoring and Quarrelling for her;
and he as much Honor, by being beaten for her.


Court. Nay, when Cuckolds or Brothers fight for the Reputation of a
backsliding Wife or Sister, it is a very pretty Undertaking, doubtless. As for
example; I am a Cuckold now.


Beaug. All in good time, Ned; do not be too hasty.


Court. And being much troubled in Spirit, meeting with the Spark that has done
me the Honor, with a great deal of respect I make my Address, -- as thus, --
Most Noble Sir, you have done me the Favor to lie with my Wife.


Beaug. Very well.


Court. All I beg of you, is, that you would do your best endeavor to run me
through the Guts to morrow morning, and it will be the greatest Satisfaction in
the World.


Beaug. Which the good-natured Whoremaster does very decently; so down falls
the Cuckold at Barn-elms, and rises again next day at Hol^orn in a Ballad. But
all this while, what is become of the Widow, Ned?


Court. Faith she has even done very wisely, I think, as soon as she had set us
together by the Ears, she very fairly ran for it.


Beaug. A very noble Account of our first Evenings Enterprise! But a Pox on it,
take Courage; and since we have lost this Quarry, let us even beat about a
little, and see what other Game we can meet with.


Enter Lucrece Masqu'd. Lucr. Sir, Sir! Captain!


Court. With you again, Beaugard. Agare ho!


Beaug. With me, my Mistress?


Lucr. Yes, with you, my Master.


Court. I wonder when, of the Devil's name, it will come to my turn.


Lucr. Being a particular Friend of yours, Captain, I am come to tell you, the
World begins to talk very scandalously of you, Captain.


Beaug. Look thee, Sweetheart, the World's an Ass, and Common Fame a Common
Strumpet: so long as such pretty good-natured Creatures as thou seem to be,
think but well of me, let the World be hanged, as it was once drowned, if it
will.


Lucr. I must let you know too, Captain, that your Love-Intrigues are not so
closely managed, but that they will shortly grow the Subject of all the Satyr
and Contempt in Town: Your holding Conversation with a draggle-tail'd Masque,
in the Church-Cloysters, on Sunday; your meeting with the very Scandal here
again, this Evening; suffering your self to be imposed upon, and Jilted by her;
and at last running the hazard of a damnable Beating, by a couple of plausible
Hectors, that made you believe your Mistress had Honor enough to be concerned
for.


Beaug. Really, my little Wolf in a Sheeps Fleece, this sounds like very good
Doctrine; but what Use must I make of it, Child?


Lucr. Methinks, Captain, that should not be so hard to find out; my setting
upon you in a Masque my self, and railing at the last Woman that did so before
me, might easily inform you, I have a certain Design of trying whose Heart's
hardest, yours or mine.


Court. Then, my little Mischief, you should not enter the Lists upon unequal
Terms, with that Black Armor upon your Face, that makes you look as dreadfully
as the Black Knight in a Romance.


Lucr. Good Captain, what is that sober Gentleman's name? For certainly I have
seen him before now.


Beaug. His name in the Flesh, my pretty one, is Courtine; a very honest
Fellow, good-natured, and wicked enough for thy purpose of all conscience.


Lucr. Courtine! Bless us for ever! What, the Man that is married!


Court. The Man that is married! Yes, the Man that is married. 'Sdeath, though I
be weary on it, I am not ashamed of my Condition. Why the Devil did thou tell
her my name? I shall never thrive with any Woman that knows me. The Man that is
married! 'Zounes, I am as scandalous as the Man that is to be hanged.


Lucr. But you will never be thought so handsome. To make few words with you, Sir,
I am one that mean you fairer play than such an inconstant, sickle,
false-hearted Wanderer as you deserve.


Beaug. Then why do thou conceal thy self? Those whose Designs are fair and
noble, scorn to hide their Faces: Therefore give me leave to tell thee, Lady,
if thou think to make ^se of me only to create some Jealousy in another
Woman, I am no Instrument to be that way managed; no, I am constant, I -- but
if thou love me --


Lucr. Have you any more Doubts that trouble you?


Beaug. None, by this sweet Body of thine.


Lucr. Know then, Sir, it has been my Misfortune to watch you, haunt you, and
dog you these six Months; being, to my eternal torment, jealous of that
ravenous Kite your Widow, your Widow, Captain: nay, since I have confessed my
Weakness, know from this hour I Will defeat all her Ambushes, all the false Baits
she lays to ensnare your Heart, till I obtain the Victory of it my self, much
more my due, in that I Am not beneath her in Beauty, Birth, or Fortune, or
indeed any thing but her years, Captain; therefore if you have that Merit the
World reports of you, make the best use of this present Advice; and so
farewell, till you hear from me further.

[ Exit Lucrece.
Beaug. Now may I do by my Mistresses as the Boys do by their Farthings, hustle
'em in a Hat together, and go to Heads or Tails for 'em. -- Hah! Let me never
see day again, if yonder be not coming toward us the very Rascal I told thee
of this Morning, our faux Atheist; now will I show thee as notable a Spirit as
ever past upon the ignorant World for a fine Person, and a Philosopher. [ Enter
Daredevil. What, Daredevil, a good Evening to thee: Why, where have thou been,
old Blasphemy, these Forty Hours? I shall never be converted from Christianity,
if thou do not mind thy Business better.


Dared. Been, quoth a! I have been where I have half lost my honest Senses,
Man: Would any body that knows me, believe it? Let me be buried alive, if the
Rogues of the Parish I live in have not Indicted me for a Papist.


Beaug. The Devil! a Papist!


Dared. Pox on 'em, a Papist! When the impudent Villains know, as well as I do,
that I have no Religion at all.


Court. No Religion, Sir? Are you of no Religion?


Dared. Is he an honest Fellow, Beaugard?


Beaug. Oh, a very honest Fellow; thou may trust him with thy Damnation, I Will
warrant thee: Answer him, answer him.


Dared. I never go to Church, Sir.


Court. But what Religion are you of?


Dared. Of the Religion of the Inner Temple, the Common Law Religion; I believe
in the Law, trust in the Law, enjoy what I have by the Law: For if such a
Religious Gentleman as you are get Fifty pounds into my Debt, I may go to
Church and pray till my Heart aches, but the Law must make you pay me at last.


Court. It Is certainly the fear of Hell, and hopes of Happiness, that makes
People live in Honesty, Peace, and Union one toward another.


Dared. Fear of Hell! Hark thee, Beaugard; this Companion of thine, as I
apprehend, is but a sort of a shallow Monster. Fear of Hell! No, Sir, it is fear
of Hanging. Who would not steal, or do murder, every time his Fingers itch't at
it, were it not for fear of the Gallows? Do not you, with all your Religion,
swear almost as often as you speak? break and profane the Sabbath? lie with
your Neighbors Wives? and covet their Estates, if they be better than your
own? Yet those things are forbid by Religion, as well as Stealing and Cutting
of* Throats are. No, had every Commandment but a Gibbet belonging to it, I
should not have had Four Kings Evidences to day swore impudently I was a
Papist, when I was never at Mass yet since I was born, nor indeed at any other
Worship these Twenty years.


Court. Why then, Sir, between Man and Man, you are really of no Religion?


Dared. May be I am, Sir; may be I am not, Sir: When you come to know me
better, twenty to one but you will be better satisfied.


Court. Does your Honor think there may be a Devil?


Dared. I never saw him, Sir.


Court. Have you a mind to see him?


Dared. I Would go Fifty miles barefoot to see but a Fiend that belonged to his
Family.


Beaug. That Is a damned Lie, to my Knowledge: For I saw the Rogue so scared,
that his Hair stood upright, but at the sight of a poor Black, Water-Spaniel,
that met him in the dark once.


Court. What think you of Conscience?


Dared. I do not think of it at all, Sir; it never troubles me.


Court. Did you ever do a Murder?


Dared. I will not tell you.


Court. Thou art the honester Fellow for it; I love a friendly Rogue, that can
keep such a Secret at my Heart.


Dared. Do you?


Court. Ay.


Beaug. So, that is well said; now we'll to work with him presently. Do thou
hear, Daredevil, this honest Friend of mine is something troubled in Spirit,
and wants a little of thy Ghostly Advice in a Point of Difficulty.


Dared. Well, and what is it? I shall be civil, and do him all the good I can.


Beaug. In few words, he is married; plagued, troubled, and Hag-ridden by the
eternally-tormenting Witchcraft of a vexatious, jealous Familiar, called a Wife.


Dared. A Wife! That ever any Fellow that has but two Grains of Brains in his
Scull, should give himself the trouble to complain of a Wife, so long as there
is Arsenick in the World!


Beaug. Nay, it is a mere shame, a scandalous shame, when it is so cheap too.


Court. Would you have me poison her?


Dared. Poison her! Ay, what would you with her else, if you are weary of her?


Court. But if I should be called to a terrible account for such a thing
hereafter!


Dared. Hereafter! -- Cross my Hand with a piece of Silver, -- that is to say,
-- give me Three pence, -- Three pence, my Dearest --


Court. Well, and what then?


Dared. Why, for that considerable Sum I Will be security for thee, and bear thee
harmless for Hereafter; that is all.


Beaug. 'Faith, and cheap enough of all Conscience.


Court. This is the honestest Acquaintance I ever met withal, Beaugard.


Beaug. Oh, a very honest Fellow, very honest.


Court. Prithee then, Daredevil, if that be thy Title, since we have so happily
met this Evening, let us grow more intimate, and eat and drink together.


Dared. Faith and troth, with all my Heart: Pox on me, Boy, but I love Drinking
mightily; and to tell ye the truth on it, I am never so well satisfied in my
out-of-the-way Principles, as when I am drunk, very drunk. Drunkenness is a
great Quietter of the Mind, a great Soother of the Spirit.


Beaug. And shall we be very free, my little Atheistical disbelieving Dog? Will thou open thy Heart, and speak very frankly of Matters that shall be nameless?


Dared. Much may be done; I seldom hide my Talent, I am no Niggar^ of my Parts
that way.


Beaug. To tell thee a Secret, then, Daredevil, we two are this Night, for some
weighty Considerations, to give a Treat to the People of the Duke's Theater,
after the Play's done, upon their Stage; we are to have the Music too, and the
Ladies, it is hoped, will not deny us the Favor of their fair Company. Now, my
dear Iniquity, shall we not, think thou, if we give our Minds to it, pass an
Evening pleasantly enough?


Dared. Rot me, with all my Heart: I love the Project of Treating upon the
Stage extremely too. But will there, will there be none of the Poets there?
Some of the Poets are pretty Fellows, very pretty Fellows; they are most of 'em
my Disciples in their Hearts, and now and then stand up for the Truth manfully.


Beaug. Much may happen: But in the next place, after Supper we have resolved
to storm a certain Enchanted Castle, where I apprehend a fair Lady newly
entered into League with an honest Friend of thine, called my self, is kept a
Prisoner, by an old, ill-natured, snarling Dog in a Manger, her Guardian. Thou will make one at it, will thou not, my little Daredevil?


Dared. Dam' me, we'll burn the House.


Court. Dam' me, Sir? Do you know what you say? You believe no such thing.


Dared. Words of course, Child, mere Words of course: We use a hundred of 'em
in Conversation, which are indeed but in the nature of Expletives, and signify
nothing: as, Dam' me, Sir; Rot me, Sir; Confound me, Sir; which purport no more
than So, Sir; And, Sir; or Then, Sir, at the worst: For my part, I always speak
what I think; no Man can help thinking what he does think: So if I speak not
well, the fault's not mine.


Beaug. Distinguished like a Learned School-Divine.


Court. When meet we at the Playhouse then?


Dared. Before the Clock strike Nine.


Beaug. Where we'll have Music, Women, Mirth.


Dared. And very much good Wine.


End of the Second Act.
THE THIRD ACT.
Beaugard, Courtine, and Daredevil. Beaug. IS not this Living now? Who that
knew the Sweets of Liberty, the uncontrolled Delights the Freeman tastes of,
Lord of his, own Hours, King of his own Pleasures, just as Nature meant him
first;

Courted each Minute by all his Appetites,
Which he indulges, like a bounteous Master,
That Is still supplied with various full Enjoyments;
And no intruding Cares make one Thought bitter.

Dared. Very well this; this is all but very well.

Court. Nay, not one Rub, to interrupt the Course
Of a long, rolling, gay, and wanton Life.
Methinks the Image of it is like a Laune
In a rich flowery Vale, its Measure long,
Beauteous its Prospect, and at the End
A shady peaceful Glade; where, when the pleasant Race is over,
We glide away, and are at rest for ever.

Beaug. Who, that knew this, would let himself be a Slave
To the vile Customs that the World's debaucht in?
Who'd interrupt his needful Hours of Rest, to rise and yawn in a Shop upon
Cornhill? Or, what is as bad, make a sneaking Figure in a Great Man's Chamber,
at his Rising in a Morning? Who would play the Rogue, Cheat, Lie, Flatter,
Bribe, or Pimp, to raise an Estate for a Blockhead of his own begetting, as he
thinks, that shall waste it as scandalously as his Father got it? Or who,
Courtine, would marry, to beget such a Blockhead?


Court. No body but such a Blockhead as my self, Beaugard, that is certain; but
I will, if possible atone for that Sin of mine in the future Course of my Life,
and grow as zealous a Libertine as thou would wish thy Friend to be.


Dared. These are Rogues that pretend to be a Religion now! Well, all that I
say is, Honest Atheism for my Money.


Beaug. No, grant me while I live the easy Being I am at present possessed of; a
kind, fair She, to cool my Blood, and pamper my Imagination withal; an honest
Friend or two, like thee, Courtine, that I dare trust my Thoughts to; generous
Wine, Health, Liberty, and no Dishonor; and when I ask more of Fortune, let
her even make a Beggar of me. What say thou to this, Daredevil? Is not this
coming as near thy Doctrine as a young Sinner can conveniently?


Dared. Nay, I have very great Hopes of you, that is my Comfort.


Court. But why did we part with the Women so soon?


Beaug. Oh, Courtine, Reputation, Reputation! I am a young Spark, and must
stand upon my Credit, Friend; the Rogues that cheat all the Week, and go to
Church in clean Bands of Sunday, will advance no necessary Sums upon my
Revenues else, when there may be an Occasion: Besides, I have a Father in Town,
a grave, sober, serious old Gentleman, called a Father.


Dared. One that will Drink, Rant, Whore, and Game, and is as full of Religion
as his Worshipful Son here.


Beaug. Hah! --


[ Enter Father. Fath. Very well, very noble, truly, Son! This is the Care you
are pleased to take of my Family! Sit up all Night, Drink, Whore, spend your
Estate, and give your Soul to the Devil! A very fine -- Hickup -- This
Aquamirabilis and the Old Hock does not agree with my Stomach.


Beaug. Daredevil, stick to me now, and help me out at a dead lift, or I am
lost for ever. -- Sir, I hope my being here, has not done you, nor any Friend
of yours, an Injury.


Fath. Injury! No, Sir, it is no Injury for you to take your swill in Plenty and
Voluptuousness -- Hickup -- while your poor Father, Sirrah, must be contented
to drink paltry Sack, with dry-bon'd, old, battered Rogues, and be thankful.
You must have your fine, jolly, young Fellow, and bonny, buxom, brawny-bum'd
Whores, you Dog, to revel with, and be hanged to you, must you? Sirrah, you
Rogue, I have lost all my Money.


Beaug. I am sorry for it, Sir.


Fath. Sorry for it, Sir! -- Hickup -- Is that all?


Dared. If thou art very poor, old Fellow, take a swinging Dose of Opium, and
sleep upon it; it is the best thing in the World for old Gentlemen that have no
Money. Or will thou be good Company? will thou sit down and crack a Bottle, old
Boy? Hah?


Fath. Heh! crack a Bottle!


Dared. Ay, crack a Bottle: What say thou to that comfortable Proposition?


Court. Come, Sir, here is your good Health, and to your better Fortune.


Fath. A very honest Fellow, Jack: These are very honest Fellows, What is your
name, Friend?


Dared. My name is Daredevil, Friend; of the ancient Family of the Daredevils
in the North, that have not had a Church in their Parish, Chaplain in their
House, Prayers Public or Private, or Graces at Meals, since the Conquest.


Fath. Sir, I have heard much of your Family; it is a very ancient Honorable
Family: and I am glad to find my Son has made choice of such Noble
Acquaintance. -- Sir, my Service to you. -- I protest, a Cup of pretty Clarret,
very pr^tty Clarret.


Court. And he has top't it off as prettily, I Will say that for him.


Fath. Jack, I have lost all my Money, Jack.


Beaug. Have you been robbed, Sir?


Fath. Robbed, Sir! No, Mr. Saucy-face, I have not been robbed, Sir: but I have
been nickt, Sir, and that is as bad, Sir. You are a worthy Person, and I Will make
you my Judge.


Dared. Come along then.


Fath. The Main was Seven, and the Chance Four; I had just Thirty pound upon
it, and my last Stake: The Caster threw, nothing came of it; I changed his
Dice; he threw again, to as little purpose as before.


Dared. Very strange, truly.


Fath. I changed his Dice again, he threw again: So he threw, and I changed;
and I changed, and he threw, for at least half an Hour; till at last -- Do you
mark me? -- the Dice powd'ring out of the Box --


Dared. That Is plain.


Fath. One of 'em trips against the Foot of a Candlestick, and up comes two
Deuces, two Deuces, Sir, do you hear? And so I lost my Money. No, Sir, I was
not robbed, Sir; but I lost it upon two Deuces: and that was so hard Fortune,
that I Will hold you, or any Man living, Fifty pound to Ten, that he does not
throw two Deuces before Seven again.


Dared. Two Deuces before Seven! Two Deuces are not to be thrown, Sir, not to be
thrown.


Beaug. I am glad to hear you are so rich, Sir.


Fath. Rich, quoth 'a! Prithee be quiet, I am not worth a Shilling, Man. But,
Sir, here you are a Lord at large, enjoy your Drink and your Drabs, sit up all
Night in the fullness of Iniquity, with worthy Esquire Daredevil of the North
here, with a Pox to you; whilst I must be kept without a Shilling in my Pocket.
-- But, Sir, --


Beaug. Sir, I sent you a Hundred pound yesterday Morning.


Fath. Well, Sirrah, and I have had ill Luck, and lost it all: What then?


Beaug. Sir, to avoid Dispute, shall I make one Proposition to you?


Fath. Heh! With all my Heart. Look you, Iackie-boy, I am not against thy
taking thy moderate Diversions, so long as I see thou keep good Company,
neither. But -- sneak what Ready-money thou have into my Hand, and send me the
rest of the other Hundred to my Lodging.


Beaug. Do you think it reasonable, that as often as two Deuces are thrown
before Seven, I must advance a Hundred pound to make the Devil's Bones rattle,
Sir?


Fath. Sirrah, you are a Rebel; and I could find in my Heart to cut your
Throat. Sir, have you ever a Father?


Dared. No, Sir.


Fath. No, Sir?


Dared. No, Sir; I broke his Heart long ago, before I came to be at years of
Discretion: I hate all Fathers, and always did.


Fath. Oh Lord! Hark you, Sir, What Is that Fellow's Profession?


Court. Oh, an Atheist, Sir; he believes neither God nor the Devil.


Fath. 'Sbud, I Will brustle up to him: Are you an Atheist, Fellow? hoh?


Dared. Yes, Sir, I am an Atheist.


Fath. And what think you will become of you when you die? hoh?


Dared. I shall be buried six Foot under Ground, to prevent stinking, and there
grow rotten.


Fath. Oh Lord!


Dared. If I chance to be hanged, being a lusty Sinewy Fellow, the Corporation
of Barber-Chirurgeons, may be, beg me for an Anatomy, to set up in their Hall.
I don't take much care of my self while I am living; and when I am dead,
whatever happens to me will never trouble me.


Fath. No more to be said; my Son's in a very hopeful way to be damned, that is
one Comfort. Impudent Rogue! You keep Company with the Devil's Resident! You
converse with Foreign Ministers, and deny your Father a little dirty Money!
Fogh, Poltroon!


Beaug. This is very hard, Sir: But if Ten Guinea's will do you any Service --


Fath. Ten Guinea's? Let me see; Ten Guinea's are a pretty little pidling Sum,
that is the truth on it: But what will it do, Iackie-boy? Serve, may be, to play
at Tick-tack in an Afternoon, three Hits up for a Piece, or so; but when will
that recover my Hundred again? Ten Guinea's! Pox of thy Ten Guinea's. -- Well,
let me see the Ten Guinea's though, -- let me see 'em a little. -- Iackie-boy,
Iackle, Jack, -- You have drunk damnable hard to night, you rogue; you are a
drunken Dog, I believe -- Han'^ you had a Whore too, Iackie? -- eee -- You Will
get the Pox, Sirrah, and then -- But if thou do, I know a very able Fellow,
an old Acquaintance of mine -- Ten Guinea's, Iackie!


Beaug. There they are, Sir; and long may they last you.


Fath. Make 'em Twenty, Iackie-rogue; -- you Plump-cheekt, Merryey'd Rogue,
make 'em Twenty, -- Make 'em Fifteen then, -- Iackie-boy, Iackie, Jack, -- Do
faith.


Beaug. Upon my Duty, you have stripped me, Sir.


Fath. Then do you hear, Friend, you Atheist, that are so free of your Soul?
let us see if you dare venture a litte of your Money now -- Come. [Draws out a
Box and Dice. Seven's the Main: I Will hold you Ten pounds to Two, two Deuces
does not come before Seven.


Beaug. At him, Daredevil; Beggar him once more, and then we shall be rid of
him.


Dared. Done, Sir, done; down with your Money.


Fath. Here, you Blasphemous Dog. -- Do thou love Hazard?


Dared. Dearly, from the bottom of my Heart, Sir.


Fath. I love thee the better for it: Come along. -- Seven. --


Dared. Right.


Fath. Seven.


[Throws two Deuces. Dared. Two Deuces! -- You have lost, Sir.


Fath. Dam' me, Sir, lay your Hand upon my Money!


Dared. Dam' me, Sir, it is my Money; I won it fairly.


Beaug. Now, Courtine, now --


Court. Now look to it, Atheist.


Fath. Son of a Whore, you lie. Thus to my Hat I sweep the yellow Scoundrels,
and draw my Sword in witness they are my own.


Dared. Nay then I Will --


Court. Hold, Sirs, no drawing Swords, no Quarrelling.


Dared. I am glad on it, with all my Heart; for though I am not much afraid of
the Devil, I hate a drawn Sword mortally.


Beaug. Good Sir --


Fath. Stand off. -- Dogs, Atheists win my Money! -- Rascal, -- Good morrow.


Beaug. Till next time two Deuces come before Seven, and then I am sure to see
or hear from you again infallibly.


Court. How do thou intend to dispose of this wild, extravagant, old Father
of thine, Beaugard?


Beaug. I hope to find him run so far in Debt within this Fortnight, that to
avoid the Calamity, he shall be forced to compound with me for his Freedom, and
be contented with a comfortable Annuity in the Country; that is all my hopes of
him.


Court. Which he will sell in one Quarter of a Year, and return to old London
again, for the other Game at Hazard.


Beaug. No, like a wise Guardian, I Will take care of the contrary, lay it too
far out of his reach, and tie it too fast for him. Why how now, Daredevil? What
in the dumps? It Is an unruly old Gentleman, but yet he has some Religion in
him, Daredevil.


Dared. Yes, Pox on him, to cheat me of my Money. It Is well he was your Father,
Sir.


Court. Why?


Dared. Had he been my own, by these Hilts I would have sawed his old Windpipe
asunder upon the Spot. Rob me of my Right!


Court. Does he love Fighting so well then? I thought most of your Atheists had
not much cared for that impertinent Exercise.


Dared. It Is a little impertinent, that I Will grant you, for honest Fellows to
fall out, squabble, and cut one another Throats, to spoil good Company: But
when my Honor's injured --


Beaug. Then, I know, thou art implacable. But for a foolish trifling Sum of
Money --


Dared. Trash, trash, Dunghill, and Filthiness! I give it away to my Wenches and
my Servants; we part with it to every Body, upon all Occasions. He that values
Money, deserves never to have the Benefit of it.


Beaug. A very noble Fragment of Philosophy. But, Courtine, the Morning is new
risen again, and I have received Intelligence this Night, by a certain Minister
I keep for such Offices, where my poor distressed Widow is held in Durance: If
thou think there may be any Hopes for thee upon the Coast I am bound for,
let us embarque together, and good Luck attend us.


Court. No, I have other Projects of foot: Marriage has cracked my Credit so,
that no body that knows my Condition cares to deal with me: Therefore I am
resolved to set out for New Discoveries, and try how ^ can thrive where my
Name's a Stranger.


Beaug. What, this Morning!


Court. This very Morning: Fortified with Bordeaux, as I am, will I issue
forth; and let all straggling Wives, Widows, and Virgins have a care of their
Cargo's.


Beaug. Nobly resolved, and good Fortune guide thee. Thou, Daredevil, wilt not
part with me; thou art more a Friend than to leave thy Disciple, when there is
good substantial Sinning like to go forward. May be we may do a Murder before
we part; something that is very wicked we'll not fail of.


Dared. With all my Heart; let us fire a House or two, poison a Constable and
all his Watch, ravish six Cinder-women, and kill a Beadle.


Beaug. Shall we do all this?


Dared. Do It! I Will do it my self.


Beaug. Thou art the very Spirit of Iniquity.


[Enter Footman. Footm. Sir, Captain Beaugard.


Beaug. With me, Friend?


Footm. Sir, there is a Masqu'd Lady, in a Chair, at the Corner of the Street,
desires a Word with you instantly.


Beaug. Tell her, I Am her Vassal, and will wait on her this Moment. Courtine,
good morrow.


Court. Gone, already?


Beaug. Trading comes in, Friend, and I must mind my Calling, that is all.
Allons, Daredevil.


Dared. Friend, farewell to thee; if either of us are run through the Lungs, or
shot in the Head, before we meet again, let us hear from one another out of the
Lower World, how matters go there, and what Entertainment they give us.


Court. You shall find me a very civil Correspondent, Sir.


Dared. Farewell.


Court. The same good Wish to you, Sir. Now will I out into the middle of the
Street, play at Blind-mans-buff by my self, turn three times round, and catch
who I can.


Scene changes to the Street. Enter Beaugard and Daredevil. Beaug. This should
be the Place, and yet I see no Chair.


Dared. Then let us fall to Mischief.


Beaug. Prithee a little Patience, tho it be a Virtue, dear Temptation.


Enter another Footman. Footm. Sir, is your name Captain Beaugard?


Beaug. Yes, my dear Mercury, I am the happy Man.


Footm. Then, Sir, this Letter is for you.


Beaug. Stay till I read it, Friend.


Footm. Sir, it requires no Answer.


Beaug. What Jilts Trick now! -- Sir, -- to meet us with your Swords in your
Hands this Morning, behind the Corner House of -- By my Stars, a Challenge from
the termagant Sparks that fell upon us last Night. Why, what a deal of Love and
Honor have I upon my Hands now? Daredevil, thou can fight?


Dared. Why, is there any occasion?


Beaug. Only a Challenge, Daredevil, that is all: See, there is a Breakfast for
thee, if thou have any Stomach to it.


Dared. Idle Rogues, Rascals, Hectors! Never mind 'em; hang 'em, these are some
hungry Varlets that want Dinners; let us break the next Windows, and never
think on it.


Enter six Ruffians. 1 Ruff. These are our Quarry; be sure we seize 'em both.
Is the Coach ready?


2 Ruff. At the next Corner.


1 Ruff. Fall on then. Sir, you are our Prisoner.


Beaug. Villains! Rogues! Thieves! Murder! Thieves! Rascals, you will not murder
me?


1 Ruff. Nay, Sir, no noise, no struggling, as you tender your Safety.


Beaug. Daredevil, Dog, Coward, draw thy Sword and rescue me.


Dared. I am terrified, amazed; some Judgment for my Sins is fallen upon me;
alas, I am in Bonds too! Have mercy on my Soul, and don't slay me, Gentlemen.


Beaug. Damnation! Blinded! Rascals, Villains, Ruffians! Murder!


Dared. Oh Daredevil, Daredevil, what will become of thee!


Enter Theodore and Gratian. Theod. This Generosity makes good thy Character,
That thou art the bravest Man, and truest Friend.
How shall I deserve this from thee?

Great. I should be unjust, both to my self, and the dear Memory of thy Noble
Brother, whose Friendship was so dear to me, should my true Sword be idle in
thy Cause. Besides, the Love which I profess to Porcia, tells me a Rival must
not tamely carry her.


Theod. She is thy Right: My dying Brother, her soon-forgotten Husband,
But thy remembered Friend, with his last Breath thus told me;
I have a Friend, Gratian, the Man my Heart
Has cherisht most; we from our Youth were Rivals
For my dear Porica: tell him, if I die,
I left her to him, as the dearest Legacy
I ^ould bequeath: Bid him be tender of her,
For she will deserve it from him. -- Would she did.

Great. Heaven knows, it is my Curse, spite of her Scorn, to love her even to
Madness; nor shall this Man of War, this French-bred Hero, win her with nothing
but his Cap and Feather: I wonder he is not come yet.


Theod. I have heard the Man is Gallant; but in honesty,
As thou art my Friend, I wish thou would hear good Counsel*

Great. Thine must be Noble.

Theod. I Would have thee think no more of this proud Woman.

Great. I wish 'twere possible.

Theod. Their Sex is one gross Cheat; their only Study
How to deceive, betray, and ruin Man:
They have it by Tradition from their Mothers,
Which they improve each day, and grow more exquisite.
Their Painting, Patching, all their Chamber-arts,
And Public Affectations, are but Tricks
To draw fond Men into that Snare, their Love.

Great. Would this could cure mine.

Theod. When we are caught fast, it is then they show their Natures,
Grow haughty, proud, to vex the Wretch they have conquered;
Tho the same Hour they glance abroad for new ones.
Let but a Woman know you are once her Slave,
Give her once Testimony that you love her,
She Will always be thy Torment, Jilt, design,
And practice Ends upon thy honest Nature,
So strong is their Antipathy to Truth.

Great. But let a Fool --

Theod. Oh give 'em but a Fool,
A senseless, noise, gay, bold, bristling Blockhead,
A Rascal with a Feather, and Cravat-string,
No Brains in's Head; a vain, pert, empty Rogue,
That can prune, dance, lisp, or lie very much,
They Are lost for ever: They Will give all they have
To Fools, or for 'em. --

Great. But, my Friend, this granted,
Grant Porica this, and more, as she is the Relict
Of thy dear Brother, and my valued Friend,
The Injury she brings upon thy Honor
Must not be slighted; and that is my Cause now.

Theod. There thou o'recom'st me: Still our Men of Mettle
Delay their Time; the Day grows late; let us walk
Down by yon' Wall; may be they have mist the Place:
Besides, I fancy Company is coming this way, and we may be prevented.
Methinks I would not lose so fine a Morning, and do nothing.

Great. Nor I.

[Exeunt. Enter Sylvia and Lucrece. Sylv. Oh Lucrece, 'twas the Pangs of
Jealousy, cursed Jealousy, that brought me hither.


Lucr. Where lodged you then last Night?


Sylv. Here, in this House, my Cousin Porcia's House: I met her late last
Night, just as I alighted, harrast with my Journey, and the Cause of it: Had
she not took pity of me, Heaven knows how my Perplexities would have disposed
me!


Lucr. What, in this House?


Sylv. Here, in this very House.


Lucr. I Am glad I know it; I Will take such care, it shall not be long a Secret.


Sylv. The Garden opening thus upon the Fields, invited me to take the
Morning-air here; for Sleep's a Guest that stays but little with me. Why
sighest thou, Lucrece?


Lucr. I Am thinking why my Cousin Porcia should choose this Residence.


Sylv. It Is for a Lover, Lucrece; Beaugard courts her, a Friend and lewd
Companion of my false Husband's.


Lucr. I know him but too well.


Sylv. Why, do thou love him?


Lucr. So much, that I can neither eat, drink, nor sleep in peace, for the
tormenting Thoughts of him.


Sylv. By Heavens, I pity thee. Oh have a care of Marriage, Lucrece, Marriage;
'twill be thy Bane, and ruin thee for ever. Marriage spoils Faces; How I look
with Marriage!


Lucr. I see no change.


Sylv. No change! I have not slept six Nights in peace since the cursed Day I
wedded.


Lucr. Will then a Husband spoil ones Sleep so sadly?


Sylv. A Husband's, Lucrece, like his Wedding-Clothes,
Worn gay a Week, but then he throws 'em off,
And with 'em too the Lover: Then his Days
Grow gay abroad, and his Nights dull at home:
He lies whole Months by thy poor longing Side
Heavy and useless, comes faint and loath to Bed,
Turns him about, grunts, snores: and that is a Husband.

Lucr. Is Courtine such a one?


Sylv. It Is pain to tell thee the Life I (...) with him.

He Is colder to me, than Adamant to Fire; but let him loose amongst my
Kitchen-Furniture, my Maids, never was seen so termagant a Towzer: He loves a
nasty, foul-fed, fulsom Drab, and scorns the tender Joys my Arms invite him to.
To be despised at that rate, so dishonored, makes me even curse the Chance
that made me Woman: Would I had been any Creature else. -- See yonder, yonder
he comes: Thy Masque, thy Masque, dear Lucrece.


Lucr. Farewell; I Will away, and leave ye fairly both together.

[ Exit. Lucr.
Enter Courtine. Court. What, fly thy ground, faint Soldier! How, another! Nay
then 'twas nobly done, two to one had been odds else: Had it not pretty one?


Sylv. Why, who are you, Sir.


Court. Even a wandering Knight, that have forsaken my Castle in the Country,
and am come up to Town for Preferment truly.


Sylv. And one would think so proper, lusty, a well-made Fellow as you are
should not be long out of Employment.


Court. Do thou know me, my Dearest?


Sylv. No.


Court. Then I am sure thou can have no Exception against me.


Sylv. But suppose I had a mind to a little farther Acquaintance with you; what
then, Sir?


Court. Why, then thou may reasonably suppose that I Will make no evil Use of
thy good Inclinations; Faith there are very pretty Gardens hereabouts, let us
commit a Trespass for once, break into one of 'em, and ^oll a Camomile-walk
together this Morning.


Sylv. Oh Lord, Sir!


Court. She Is coming already.


Sylv. If I should let you make advantage of my Weakness now, you would be
false afterward, forsake me, and break my heart.


Court. Pretty fool! What innocent scruples she makes!


Sylv. Have you no other Mistress already? have you no Engagements that will
return hereafter upon your heart to my prejudice?


Court. Shall I swear?


Sylv. But have not you truly?


Court. If I have, may that blew Mountain over our heads there, fall down and
crush me like a pelted Toad.


Sylv. To show you then that I desere your Faith --


Court. What will thou show me?


Sylv. A Face which I am not ashamed of, though you will perhaps be scandalized
when you see it.


Court. The Devil take me if I am though, so it prove not very horrible indeed.


Sylv. What think you then, Sir, is it such a one as you looked for?


Court. My own Wife!


Sylv. Yes, thy unhappy Wife,
Thou false, deceitful, perjured, shamles Wretch:
Have I deserved this from thee?

Court. Pox confound her. --

[Takes out a Book and falls to reading. Sylv. Is this the recompense of all my
love?
Did I bestow my Fortune on thy* Wants,
Humble my self to be thy Dove-like Wife?
And is this all I Am worth? --

Court. Wealth is a great
Provocative to amorous heat
[Read^. For what is worth in any thing,
But so much Money as 'twill bring?
Hudibras, Part the 2d, Canto the First.

Sylv. Patience direct me! have I wrought my Nature
To utmost sufferance, and most low contentment,
Set my poor heart to cares! have I been blessed
With Children by thee, to be left with scorn,
Cast off, neglected, and abandoned vilely?
Speak, is not this hard usage? --

Court. Umph!

Sylv. Umph! what is Umph!

Court. Umph, that is I, Child; Umph is I, I, I, my Dear.

Sylv. Death! death and torments! Cut my wretched Throat, don't treat me thus:
By Heaven I Will bear't no longer.


Court. No more.


Sylv. I have done, Sir.


Court. What do you at London!


Sylv. Is it a fault to follow what I Am fond of!


Court. Cannot I enjoy my pleasures, take my freedoms, but you must come, and
spoil the high seasoned dish with your insipid whining senseless Jealousy?


Sylv. Prithee forgive me. --


Court. Where did you lodge last Night?


Sylv. Here with a Kinswoman,
May be you know her not, her name is Porcia.

Court. Death! Beaugard's Widow! now I am finely fitted.
What at this House?

Sylv. This very House, that Door
Opens into the Garden, let us walk there,
Will Not you go with me Courtine?

Court. No.

Sylv. Prithee do, Love.
Don't be thus cruel to me.

Court. Then promise one thing,
And may be my good nature shall be wrought upon.

Sylv. I Will grant thee any thing; speak, try m'Obedience.

Court. then promise me, that during our abode
In this sweet Town, which I love very dearly,
That let me ramble, steer what course I will,
Keep what late hours, and as I please employ 'em,
That you will be still, an humble, civil Doxy,
And pry into no secret to disturb me.

Sylv. Well, it is all granted.

Court. On then, I Will be dutiful.

Sylv. Enter you first.

Court. No. --

Sylv. Oh, then you will forsake me;
You seek but opportunity again to leave me.

Court. Well, since I am trapt thus,
Like a poor Beast that wanted better pasture,
There is no Replevin, and I must to Pound.

[Exe^^^. Enter Theod. Great. and Lucr. Theod. What in this House?

Lucr. Here in this very House,
My Cousin Sylvia, Courtine's Jealous Wife,
Coming to Town, Lodged with her here last Night.

Theod. No more, I guess the cause we are disappointed.
Do thou go Gratian, Muster what Friends it is possible;
I Will try my Interest too; we'll storm your Fortress,
Enchanted Lady, though your Giant guard it.

Scene changes to the inside of a very fair House, adorned with rich Furniture
and Lights. Enter Ruff. with Beaug. and Dared. Beaug. Dogs! Rascals! Villains!
how do you intend to deal with us?


1. Ruff. Much better than your language has deserved, Sir.


[They unblind 'em. Beaug. Sirs for this noble usage, had I a Sword or Pistol
about me, I would reward ye most amply. [They all bow and withdraw. A Plague of
your Civility! where the Devil are we?


Dared. Where are we quotha! why, we are in a Palace Man, prithee look about
thee a little.


Beaug. By Heaven here is a Paradise; hark Daredevil! Music too!


Dared. I Will be hanged if it is not a bawdy Dancing-School, some better Whores
than ordinary designing a private Ballum rancum, have pitched upon our two
proper persons for the business; we are like to have a swinging time on it,
Beaugard.


Beaug. A plague of your Cowardice! you were whining and praying just now, and
be hanged to you.


Dared. I praying! prithee be quiet Man, I never prayed in my life, nor ever
will pray: Praying quotha! that is a merry jest with all my Heart.


Beaug. Impudent Poltroon! he said two dozen of Pater-Nosters within this half
hour, and every jolt the Coach gave was afraid the Devil would have torn him to
pieces.


Dared. Odd I like this contrivance very well: Look, Beaugard, what comes
yonder? 'sheart two Devils in Petticoats, how my Guts shrink together!


[Enter two Black Women. Beaug. Heyday! Lady Blackamores! nay then we are
certainly enchanted. What are you two, Maids of Honor to the Queen of
Pomonkey? and i^ this one of her Palaces? Not a Word! --


Dared. How I long now to be familiar with one of those Sooty-fac'd Harlots! I
would beget a chopping Black Son of a Whore upon her, in defiance to the Prince
of Darkness.


Enter a Dwarf. Beaug. What another too of the same Complexion? this must be
her Majesty's Page.


Dared. A Pimp, I Will warrant him; he is so very little, pert, and dapper, the
Rogue looks as if he could im^^^ate himself through a Keyhole.


Dwarf. Welcome thou best-lov'd Man of the fair World.


Beaug. Well, Sir, and what is the Service you have in order to Command me?


Dwarf. My Orders are to lead you to repose in a Rich Bed prepared for Rest and
Love.


Dared. I said it was a Pimp, what a smooth-tongu'd little Rascal it is?


Beaug. A very pretty sort of an Amusement this: But prithee young Domine, why
to Bed? it is but now Day, and the Sun newly risen; for I have not been a Bed
all Night, my little Monster; I know how the time goes, Child.


Dwarf. Such are the Orders of the Power I serve.
For you are come a long unmeasurable Journey.

Dared. Hah!


Dwaf. Drawn by winged Horses through the untract Air.


Beaug. A Pox upon thee for a little black lying well-instructed Rascal, but
since it is the Custom of the place, and my last Night Fatigue requires it,
I Will accept of the offer, and dispense with an hour or two of sleep to fit me
for better exercise when I wake again.


[Sits down in the Chair to be undrest. Dared. Drawn by Winged Horses through
the Air, said he! if this should be true now, what would become of us!
Methought indeed the Coach whew'd it away a little faster than ordinary.


[While Beaug. is undressing the two Black Women dance. Beaug. A very notable
Entertainment truly, and your little Black Lady-ships have tript it most
featly. -- [The Woe. advance toward him. What, and must you take charge of me
now! -- With all my heart. Daredevil farewell to thee; but that I am in hopes of
a better, I Would invite thee for a Bedfellow.


[Women lead in Beaug. Dared. Bedfellow, quotha! would I were a Bed with any
Bedfellow that I was sure had but flesh and bones about him.


Dwarf. Come, Sir, you are my charge.


Dared. I hope your little Impship will be civil to me: pray, Sir, what place
is this?


Dwarf. A Crystal Castle built by Enchantment in a Land unknown to any but the
fair one that Commands it: The Spirits of the Air keep guard about it, and all
obey her Charms.


Dared. Oh Lord! and what Religion is the Lady off?


Dwarf. That Is a secret, you will know more hereafter.


Dared. Lead on then: Now in the lower World whence I come lately, were this
but known,

How would the fate in Ballad be lamented,
Of Daredevil ^^e Atheist that is Enchanted.

End of the Third Act.
ACT IV.
Enter Gratian and Theodoret. Great. THese are your Men of Honor now: I never
knew a blustering, roaring, swashing Spark, that, at the bottom, was good for
any thing.


Theod. Your faux Braves always put on a show of more Courage than ordinary; as
your beggarly half-Gentlemen always wear tawdry finer Clothes than their
Fortune will afford 'em.


Great. But, to lie concealed in private in the House with her!


Theod. Dam' her, she is a Prostitute; has given her self already to his Arms.


Great. Yet, I Will warrant you, she has an excuse for that too, if it be so; as,
Alas! you know, Woman is but a weak Vessel.


Theod. A Pox of the weakness of her Vessel! Dam' her! Would my Sword were in
her Throat! But will our Friends be ready?


Great. Most punctually. It was an odd old Fellow, that, which we met with. Was
he certainly Beaugard's Father?


Theod. No body can swear that, for his Mother was a Woman; but that merry
conceited old Gentleman has the honor of it: he has the Title, but whose was
the Property, that I dare not determine.


Great. I hope he will be as good as his word with us.


Theod. It will not be amiss if it prove so. See, here he comes too.


Enter Father and Fourbine. Fath. You lie, you Dog; you Scanderbeg Varlet, you
lie. Do not I know that he sat up all Night with a Consort of Whore-masters
and Harlots; and have you the impudence to tell me he is not at home? Do not I
know, you Villain, that, after a Debauch, he will out-snore a
Fleet-street-Cons^able and all his Watch, for six hours; and dare you tell me,
he is not at home, you Caterpillar?


Fourb. Upon the word of a true Valet de Chamber, Sir, I deal sincer^ly and
honestly with you.


Fath. No more to be said: But, Sirrah, do you take notice in his behalf, and
tell him, he shall pay for this; pay for it, do you hear you Mongril? Fob me
off with ten stinking Guinnies, when I had lost a hundred! Fiends and Furies,
I Will not bear it. Good morrow my little Thunderbolts! What say you, my tiny
brace of Blunderbusses? can I be serviceable? shall we about the business while
it is practicable? hah? --


Theod. Have you considered of it thoroughly, Sir?


Fath. Trouble thy head no farther; I Will do it, my Darling.


Theod. Have you considered, Sir, that she is your Son's Mistress?


Fath. So much the better still; I Will swinge her the stoutlier, for allenating
his Affections from his natural Father.


Great. But suppose you should meet him too there in her defense, Sir?


Fath. Still better and better, and better for that very reason; for I would
swinge him too with much fatherly Discipline, and teach him the duty which a
Son, with a great deal of Money, ows an honest old Daddy, that has none.


Theod. Very piously resolved, this; that is the truth on it. But, Sir, I would
have you satisfied, into the bargain, that this will be no trifling matter. No
Boys Play, old Tilbury.


Fath. Boys Play, Sir; Sir, I can sight, Sir: though I am an old fellow, I have
a Fox by my side here, that will snarl upon occasion. Boys Play! I don't
understand your Boys Play, Sir --


Theod. I would not have you take my plainness ill, Sir: I only hinted it, to
deal with you according to an old fashion of sincerity which I profess, Sir. I
hope you are not offended at it.


Fath. Then, to rectify all mistakes, let us fairly have a Breakfast, hoc
Momento. I have a sort of gnawing Courage, that when it is provoked, always
gives me a Stomach to a savoury Bit, and a cheerful Bottle. I hate to be run
through the Guts, with nothing in 'em to keep the Wind out.


Great. Very well proposed, I think; for we have more Fiends to meet us at a
Tavern hard by here, where we Intend to wish our Enterprise well in a bonny
Bottle or two, and then about it as cheerfully as we can.


Fath. Very well said, that: This is a pretty fellow, I Will warrant him. Now, if
my Rebel be run through the Midriff in this business, I am the next Heir at
Law, and the two thousand Pounds a year is my own, declaro. Come along my
little Spit-^res. Nous allons.
Brave strippons.
Sans scavoir on Nous allons.
Six Bumpers in a hand to him that drills the first Whore-Master through the
small Guts.


Great. We'll pledge it heartily, Sir.


Fath. You are both my honest Boys, my best Children: march along then, bravely
and boldly. -- I must borrow Money of these Fellows before I part with 'em.
Nous allons, Brave strippons,


[Exeunt. Enter Courtine. Court. Oh the unconscionable Importunity of an
unsavory, plegmatick, cold, insipid Wife! By this good day, she has kissed me
till I am downright sick; I have had so much of her, that I shall have no
stomach to the Sex again this fortnight.


Enter Sylvia. Sylv. My Dearest, pray ^y Dearest, don't thus leave me: by this
kind kiss I beg is.


Court. Oh, the Devil!


Sylv. Look kindly on me; speak to me. --


Court. Plague intolerable! --


Sylv. Indeed, my Dear, I love you with such fondness! Pray speak.


Court. I cannot.


Sylv. Why? an't you well?


Court. Oh, there is a sudden faintness comes over my Spirits! Oh, I Am very
sick! Leave me, if thou love me, stand off, and give me Air; I die else. Ohh!
--


Sylv. I Will kiss thee then to life again.


Court. Stand off, I say; I Will not be stifled! Murder! Help! Murder! Help!


Sylv. Ill natured Tyrant!


Court. Good natured Devils! Kiss, in the Devil's name! --


Sylv. Come near me, Husband.


Court. Come not near me, Wife. How am I tortured! --


Sylv. You must be kind; indeed, my dear, you must.


Court. Indeed, my Dear, by your good leave, I sha' not, -- Damnation!


Sylv. You long to be rid of me again.


Court. That I do most mightily; but how to bring it about, if I know, I am a
Rascal. Oh! Oh!


Sylv. What Is the matter, Dearee?


Court. Oh, I am sick again of the sudden! Give me the Chair there: Oh! my
Heart beats, and my Head swims! Oh! oh!


Sylv. Alas, I fear you are very sick indeed! if my poor Lovee should die, what
would become of me!


Court. A Plague of your whining! Would I were well out of the House once!


Sylv. Shall I fetch thee some Cordial, my dearest Love, my Joy? Speak to me;
shall I? --


Court. Ay if thou will, my Jewel. Jewel quotha! -- what a plagu's this: Hush,
is she gone? -- Now for a convenient Balcone to venture the breaking of a Neck
at. --


Enter Page. Page. Sir, Sir, a word with you.


Court. With me, Sweetheart; thy business?


Page. A Lady, Sir, that dogged you hither this Morning --


Court. A Lady! --


Page. Yes, a Lady, Sir.


Court. Hist: Get you in, you little Monkey; skip, sculk, or you will spoil all
else. -- Here Is the blessed comfort of a Wife again now: -- Oh, oh! --


Enter Sylvia. Sylv. How is it, my Blessing? Here, take this: Heaven guard thee.!


Court. From thy confo^nded troubl^some Company, if it be possible.


[Drinks. Sylv. How is it, my Dearee?


Court. If I had a little more on it, Dearee.


Sylv. I Will see what is left, my Joy.


Court. Do, prithee do, my Joy then. Joy in the Devil's name. [ Ex. Sylv. Hist,
Sirrah Page, come hither.


Enter Page. Page. Is your Lady gone, Sir?


Court. Yes: But what News of the other Lady, my trusty Mercury?


Page. She Is now below, Sir; and desires to see you.


Court. Is she young? handsome?


Page. I cannot tell that, Sir; but she is rare and fine.


Court. Are her Clothes rich?


Page. Oh Sir, all Gold and Silver; with a deep Point Thingum Thangum over her
Shoulders: and then she smells as sweet as my Ladies Dressing-Box.


Court. Fly little Spright, and tell her, I Am impatient: tell her, I Will wait on
her within a moment: tell her --


Page. But Sir --


Court. Be gone, be gone, you Knave, or you will be caught else. Oh!


Enter Sylvia. Sylv. Here Is all that is left, my Heart.


Court. I am sorry for it, it is very comfortable. [Drinks.] Oh, oh, oh!


Sylv. What ails my Life?


Court. Oh, I have a horrid ^^emor upon my Heart! it is the old Palpitation I
used to be troubled with, returned again. Oh, if I were but --


Sylv. Where, Love?


Court. Oh! but in a condition to go abroad, there is an able Fellow of my
Acquaintance, that always used to relieve me in this extremity.


Sylv. Where does he live? I Will take a Coach my self, and go to him.


Court. The Devil take me if I know. -- Oh! it is a vast way off. -- Oh! now it
kills me again.


Sylv. I shall not think it so, when it is my duty.


Court. That Is but too kind, my Sweetest; though, if I had but one Bottle of
his Elixir. --


Sylv. How is it called?


Court. Specimen Vitae.


Sylv. Specimen Vitae?


Court. Ay, Specimen Vitae: it is a damned hard name, but it is very good.


Sylv. Where is it he lives then? Prithee let me go thither.


Court. Oh, it is a horrid way off! Besides, it would trouble me now, in this
condition, to be so long without thee.


Sylv. Prithee let me go.


Court. Why, it is as far as Grubb-street Child, as Grubb-street?


Sylv. I Will be back again instantly.


Court. I had rather, indeed, thou should go thy self, than send a Messenger,
because the business will be done more carefully.


Sylv. How Is the Direction then?


Court. In Grubb-street Child, at the Sign of the Sun and Phaenix, I think it
is, there lives a Chemist; ask for him, and in my name desire a Bottle of his
Specimen Vitae. Oh!


Sylv. Specimen Vitae?


Court. Ay, Specimen Vitae -- I Will try in the mean time if I can walk about the
Room, and divert the terror of my Fits.


Sylv. Heavens bless my dearest Dearee.


Court. Thank you, my only Joy. -- Would in the Devil's Name she were gone
once, and had her Guts full of that Quack's Specimen Vitae.


Sylv. You Will be careful of your self, Child?


Court. As careful as I can, Child.


Sylv. Good b'w'y Courtee.


Court. B'w'y my Sylvee. -- Oh, oh!
[ Exit Sylvia, Enter Page. Is she gone?

Page. Yes, Sir.


Court. Where Is the Lady?


Page. Here; just entering up the back Stairs.


[Lady appears at the Door. Court. Madam, this Honor done your worthless
Servant --


Enter Sylvia. Sylv. Oh, my dear Heart, I had forgot my Wages. Pray Courtee,
kiss me before I go.


Court. Confound her, Come again! Oh, my Love! I have made hard shift to crawl
to the Door here.


Sylv. Who Is that behind you?


Court. Nothing but a Page, come to know if I wanted any thing. A Plague of her
Hawks eyes! --


Sylv. Good b'w'y my dearest Love.


Court. Good b'w'y my Joy.


Sylv. Nay, give me another. B'w'y Courtee.


Court. B'w'y Sylvee. -- So, is she gone again? -- The Devil take me, if thou
interruptest me any more.


[Locks the Door after her. Enter Lady. Lady. Is that your Lady, Sir?


Court. Yes; but I hope you will not think the worse of me, pretty One, for
keeping a Wife Company now and then, for want of better.


Lady. Can you be so kind, Sir, not to forget me? Do you remember me still,
Captain?


Court^. Remember thee, Child! Is it possible for that Face to be ever blotted
out of my Memory! -- Though, the Devil eat me, if ever I saw it before, to the
best of my knowledge.


Lady. Where is your Lady gone Sir?


Court. To Grubb-street, Jewel, for some Specimen Vitae.


Lady. Specimen Vitae, Sir! Oh dear, what is that?


Court. Oh, come but quietly into the next Room, and I will show thee what
Specimen vitae is presently.


Lady. You may, perhaps think ^ range of this freedom I take with you, Sir.


Court. Not in the least, Child; it shows thy Generosity. -- I love her now,
for understanding her business, and coming close to the matter quickly.


Lady. But, Sir, presuming on your Quondam Favors to me, I am come to beg your
Advice in a matter of Law, which I am at present involved in: and if you please
--


Court. To retire a little in private? -- Oh, thou could not have picked out
such another Man for thy purpose: I am, may be, the best Lawyer in the World
for Chamber-practice. And if I do not find out the Merits of thy Cause as soon
as --


Lady. Really, you are so good natured --


Court. Grubb-street and Specimen Vitae, quotha! He that has the Palpitation of
the Heart, and an Armful of this will not cure him, let him die upon a Dunghill,
and be buried in a Ditch, I say. -- This is the rarest Adventure.


[ Exeunt Courtine and the Lady. The SCENE changes to a Bedchamber. Enter
Beaugard in, as Dressing himself. Beaug. Heigho! Heigho! Boy, Imp, where art
thou?


Dw^rf. Here: Your pleasure? What Is your pleasure, Sir?


Beaug. What is it o'Clock, Boy?


Dwarf. Sir, in your World, by Computation, I guess it may be Afternoon.


Beaug. A very pretty little Rascal, this; and a very extraordinary way of
Proceeding, I am treated withal here: I have been abed, it is true, but the
Devil a wink of sound Rest came near my Senses all the while; but broken
Slumbers, Dreams, Starts, and sprawling from one side to the other, in hopes
the fair Unknown that keeps this Castle might have been so good natured to have
given a Stranger a Visi^. This can be no less than some Romantic design of the
little Fairy, that threatened she would cheat the Widow of me: -- Now will I,
for once, if she does attempt me, put on that monstrous Virtue, called
Selfdenial, and be damnably constant. -- What, Music again! This is a merry
Region, I Will say that for it, where ever it be, Boy!


Dwarf. Did you call, Sir?


Beaug. My Clothes, Monster; my Vestments: I hate a Dis-habiliee mortally: I
long to be rigged, that I may be fit for Action, if Occasion should present it
self.


[ Dwarf dresses him. A SONG.
1.
Welcome Mortal to this place,
Where smiling Fate did send thee:
Snatch thy happy Minutes, as they pass;
Who knows how few attend thee!
2.
Floods of Joy about thee roll,
And flow in endless measure.
Dip thy Wishes deep, and fill thy Soul
With Draughts of every Pleasure.
3.
Feast thy Heart with Love's Desire,
Thy Eyes with Beauties Charms:
With Imaginations fan the Fire.
Then stifle it in thy Arms.
4.
For, since Life's a slippery Guest,
Whose Flight cannot be prevented;
Treat it, whilst it stays here, with the best,
And then 'twill go contented.
Come you that attend on our Goddesses Will,
And sprinkle the Ground
With Perfumes around;
Show him your Duty, and show us your Skill.
Enter four Black Women, that dance to the same Measure of the Song, and
sprinkle Sweets. Circle him with Charms,
And raise in his Heart
Such Alarms,
As Cupid never wrought by the Power of his Dart.
They dance round him. Fill all his Veins with a tender desire,
And then show a Beauty to set 'em a fire;
Till kind panting Breasts to his Wound she apply,
Then on those white Pillows of Love let him die.
[The Dance ends. Beaug. Faith, and with all my heart; for I am weary of the
lingering Disease, and long to taste my Mortality most mightily. Hah! A Banquet
too, ushered in by a couple of Cupids! Pretty innocent Contrivance! Well,
here is no fear of starving, that is one comfort. Two Cupids run in a Table
furnished. Now, my dear Musicians, would ye be but as good as your word, and
show me the Beauty you have so prepared me for! -- But then, my Widow! my Dear,
Generous, Noble-hearted Widow ^ She that loves Liberty as I do. She that defies
Matrimony as I do too. Shall I turn Recreant, and be false to her? Ah
Dardevill, Dardevill! How I want thee to help me out in this Case of Conscience
a little!


Enter Dardevill. Dard. Beaugard, Where art thou?


Beaug. Ah dear Damnation! I was just now heartily wishing for thee.


Dard. Such News! Such Tidings! Such a Discovery!


Beaug. Hah! What Is the matter, Man? --


Dard. Only six and fifty Virgins apiece for us, that is all; pretty little
blushing opening Buds, you Rogue, that never had so much as a blast of
Masculine Breath upon them yet. -- What Is here? A Banquet ready^ Nay, then I am
satisfied. Never were Heroes so enchanted as we are.


Beaug. But where are the Virgins, Dardevill? the Virgins!


Dard. There Is only one of them, Child ^ only one; -- but such a one, my
Soldier. --


Beaug. Is there but one then?


Dard. That Is no matter, Man; I Will be contented till thou have done with her: I
hate a new Convenience that was never practiced upon; it is like a new Shoe
that was never worn, wrings and hurts ones Foot basely and scurvily. I love my
ease, I.


Beaug. But is she very Lovely?


Dard. Such a Swinger, you Dog! she will make thy Heart bound like a Tennis Ball,
at the sight of her: with a Majestic stately Shape and Motion.


Beaug. Well.


Dard. A Lovely, Angelical, Commanding Face.


Beaug. By Heavens.


Dard. With two Triumphant, Rolling, Murdering Eyes, that swear at you every
time you look upon her.


Beaug. Stand off, stand off, I say; she is mine this Minute. But then again, my
Widow! -- Hah! -- Masked too; when the Devil shall I see a Woman with her own
natural Face again? Madam --


Lady. Be pleased, Sir, to repose your self a little; there is a small Account,
Sir, to be adjusted betwixt you and I. Where are my Servants? Who is it waits
there?


[Several Men Vizarded, and Armed, appear at the Doors. Beaug. What the Devil
can be the meaning of this now? I am not to be murdered, I hope, after all this
Ceremony and Preparation.


Dard. Murdered, in the Devil's Name? Here is great fear of being murdered,
truly.


Lady. Come Sir, sit down Sir.


Beaug. Madam, I Will obey you.


Lady. I doubt not, Sir, but, since your coming hither,
You are much surprised, and wonder at your Treatment.

Dard. So, now the Fardle's opened, we shall see what is in it.

Beaug. Madam, 'thas been so very highly generous.

Lady. That you are prepared with Complements to pay me for it.
But, Sir, such Coyn's Adulterate and Base:
I must have honest Dealing from your Heart.

Dard. Swear to her, swear to her a little, Man; pour out a Bushel of Oaths
upon her instantly: Swear, swear, if thou will do any good upon her.


Lady. I know my Rival.


Beaug. Ay, it is so, just so, just as I thought, my poor widow will run a
damnable hazard of losing this sweet Person of mine, if I do not take abundance
of care in the business. Here are Rogues on each hand, with Blunderbusses too:
I shall be ravished.


Lady. She, by her Arts,
And the good fortune to have first attempted it,
I know, 's possessed already of your Heart.
But know too, I Am a Woman loath Refusal.
Scornful Refusal --

Dard. Swear to her, I tell thee: That ever a Fellow should lose all this time
for an insignificant Oath or two!


Lady. Or, if my Fortune,
Which is not despicable, prove too weak
An Argument to tell you I deserve you;
Yet I have this to boast, I never concealed my self,
Either for Shame or Ends; but rather chose
To run the Risque of being denied your Love,
Than win it by base Artifice and Practices.
What think you, Sir? --

Beaug. Hah! --
That, Madam, I Am most miserable,
Unless --

Lady. Your Widow Porcia, Sir, your Widow.

Beaug. Madam, I must confess --

Lady. Well:

Beaug. That I love her, and will for ever. --

Lady. Death! Do you confess it too?
See you not here yourself within my power,
And dare you still confess you love that Creature?
Thus far I Have kept my Word, I Have crossed her Stratagems.
You are here my Prisoner, and by what is past,
You ought to think me capable of more.

Dard. If this Fellow would but swear a little, all this might be rectified.
Madam, to my own knowledge --

Beaug. Fool, stand off.
I Am sensible that you are the loveliest Creature
My Eyes ever gazed on; but --

Lady. But what? --

Beaug. I Am sure
You Would yourself scorn, nor think me worth your Heart,
Could I be faithless, could I be unconstant.
Pity me, fair One; yet, methinks this Hand --

Lady. Should send a Dagger to thy ungrateful Heart.
fly Heaven, I Will never bear it --

Beaug. Madam!

Dard. Madam,
Could you but throw some favor on your Servant.

Lady. By all the fury in a Woman's Heart,
I Will be revenged on his. Make ready, Slaves,
To do your Office --

Dard. Madam --

Beaug. Look you, Madam, your Ladyship may do your pleasure; you may command
half a dozen of Bullets through my Pericranium, if you have a mind to have your
Beauty spoke well of by the Critics of Holborn, that once a Month swarm at
their Windows to spy handsome Faces: Upon that consideration you may murder a
poor constant Monster if you please, Madam.


Lady. Still am I scorned then.

Beaug. Would you kill me barbarously?
Sure those sweet Eyes could not see such a Sight.

Lady. No, take your Life, and with it this satisfaction;
Porcia scorns you, as much as you do me:
And, till thou suest upon thy humble Knees
To me for Pity, Porcia shall despise thee.

Beaug. Madam, I swear!

Lady. No more.

Beaug. By all t^ose Beauties.

Lady. Be gon^, for ever fly this. Ah h! --

[Squeaks. Enter Courtin. Court. Death, Damnation, Devils! How came I hither?
Beaugard!

Beaug. F^iend Courtine! Speak Man: What Is the matter?

Court. Damnation! Jilted, cho^s'd, betrayed! --

Enter Woman. Wom. A Midwife! Run for a Midwife, run for some good Woman.
Oh Madam, an Accident.

Beaug. A Midwife!

Lady. Heavens! a Midwife!
[ Exit Lady.
Court. Yes, Friend, a Midwife. I am sweetly managed, I -- I thought I had been
in private here, in this House, with a civil Person of good Reputation, and it
proves a damned trappanning Strumpet. Just in the middle of all our good
Understanding together, she fetches a great Shreik, and roars out for a
Midwife: The Drab is full gone with Bastard, and swears I am the Father of it.


Beaug. A very great happiness, take my Word for it, Friend; Children bring a
great Honor with them, Courtine: It may grow up to be a Comfort to thee in thy
old Age, Man.


Dar. Oh, Your Olive Branches are unspeakable Blessings, the Gift of Heaven. I
love to see Posterity go forward, and Families increase, with all my heart.


Court. Let me be hanged and quartered, Gentlemen, if ever I set Eyes on the
Harlot in my life before. My sweet Wife, with a Pox to her brought me hither.


Beaug. Why, Is thy Wife in London?


Court. Yes, Hell confound her! she has hunted me full Cry up to Town; s^i^'d
upon me this Morning, and brought me hither, where it seems she lay all the
last night.


Dard. Why then, for ought I know, we may be still enchanted.


Beaug. I am glad to h^ar that, with all my heart. Is she in the House?


Court. No; I was forced to c^unterfeit sickness, 'till I was ^'^n sick indeed,
to get rid of her, upon pretense of going to my Physician, in the Devil's name,
that this confounded Bulker, with her G^^s full of Bastard, and I might console
together for half an hour; and I am sweetly fitted with a Concubin^ that is the
truth on it.


Beaug. This comes of your Whoring, Courtine; if you had kept me company, and
lived virtuously, none of this had happened to you now. But you must be
wandering: No reasonable iniquity will serve your turn.


Enter Lady. Lady. Ha, ha, ha! Well, I Will swear, Captain Courtine, you are the
happiest Gentleman! Yonder Is the finest chopping Boy for you. Why, it will be
able to carry a Musket in your Company within this Fortnight. And then, I am
so obliged to you for bringing the Lady to lie in at my House, that if your
Wife will do me the honor, I Will take it for a favor to stand for Godmother
with her.


Court. And, Madam, to return your Complement, I wish with all my heart you
were pregnant with a Litter of nine such chopping Boys, upon condition that I
were bound to be Godfather to the whole Kennel. -- Confound your being witty,
with a Plague to you.


[Aside. Beaug. That Is something course though, Friend, to a Lady that is so
civil to you.


Enter several Maids of the Family, one with the Child. 1. Maid. See Ienny,
Yon's the Man; that, that is the Father.


2. Maid. I Will swear it is a proper person.


3. Maid. Oh Sir, Heavens bless you, you're the happiest Man! Here is my young
Master, as like you as if you had bore it your self.


1. Maid. What a pretty little Nose it has!


2. Maid. And just its Father's Eyes for all the World.


1. Maid. It would never grieve a Body to have a Child by such a handsome
Gentleman.


Court. Ye Whores! ye Drabs! ye fulsom, slinking Whores! Clusters of Poxes on
ye, and no Hospitals pity ye! -- Confound ye, leave me.


Beaug. Fie upon it, Courtine; fie for shame: give something to the Nurse, Man;
that is but civil.


Enter Sylvia. Sylv. A Bastard! Death, a Bastard! Under my Nose too! Where Is
the vile hateful Monster?


Beaug. Have patience, Lady. --


Sylv. False, loathsome Traitor.


Court. Now my Joy's completed.


Sylv. Let me come at him, let me go. --


Court. Hold her fast, Friend, if thou love me.


Sylv. Thou Devil! -- Thou treacherous, faithless, perjured Wretch^ Thou
Husband! Look in my Face.


Court. Well. --


Sylv. Did I ever deserve this?
Degenerate Brute! Thou, only in Falsehood, Man.
Thou rampant Goat abroad, and Drone at home.

Court. (Sings) Like a Dog with a Bottle, etc.


Sylv. Thou perfect Yoke Fellow! Thou heavy Ox,
That want a Goad to make thee know thy strength!
Death, Fiends and Torments! I could dig those Eyes out!
I Will bear't no longer: Bedla^! Bedlam! Bedlam!

Court. sings, and dances a Iigg. Sylv. No more! I Will stay no more to be his
Triumph.
Be warned by me, ye Virgins that are blessed
With your first native Freedom; let no Oaths
Of perjured Mankind woo ye to your Ruin.
But when a creeping, fawning, weeping Crocodile
Moans at your feet, remember then my Fall:
And when for pity most his Tears implore,
Like me, your Virtue to your Hearts recall;
Resolve to seorn, and never see him more.
[ Exit Sylvia.
Court. With all my heart, thou dear, dear Wife and Plague.


Beaug. Methinks a very pitiful Case, this, Madam.


Lady. If your Widow were but here, Sir, now, she might fairly see what she is
like to trust to.


[Here the Sham Scene. Enter a Woman and Dardevil. Woman. Oh Madam, Madam! What
will become of us all?


Lady. Become of us, Woman! Prithee, what is the matter? are we in any danger?


Dard. Only your Brother in Law, Madam, and his Friend, with about a dozen
Armed Men more, Madam; that is all the matter, Madam.


Lady. My Brother in Law!


Dard. Yes, your Brother in Law, Lady, if your Name be Porcia: such a one they
ask for.


Beaug. Porcia!


Court. Yes, Porcia: I could have told you she was Porcia before.


Porcia. It Is but too true, Sir; my unhappy Name is Porcia.


Beaug. Porcia, my Widow! my dear lovely Widow! What an ill natured trick was
this Concealment!


Porcia. Though, Sir, you never saw my Face before,
If now you think it worth your least Regard,
Protect me; for I dread my Brother's Fury,
Even worse than Matrimony. Here, Sir, I yield my self*
Up yours for ever.

Beaug. And shall I claim thee?

Porcia. From this Hour, for ever.

Beaug. And, by this happy Hour, I Will keep thee mine then.
Secure thy self in the next private Closet.
Peace to thy Heart, poor Widow.
[ Exit Porcia. Give us but Arms! --

Dard. Those I Have provided for you.

I found our Swords in a certain private Corner that shall be nameless, where I
was proposing some civil Familiarities to the Lady Governess of the Family,
just as the Blusterers entered.


Beaug. Are they in the House, then?


Dard. Yes, and have bound the Servants too; the hungry Rogues were all
surprised at Dinner; you will hear more of them presently, I Will warrant you.


Court. Stand to your Arms, Beaugard; the Enemy's upon us.


Dard. We have had a Succession of very pretty Adventures here; first we are
enchanted, then we are fiddled to sleep, then we are fiddled up again: Then
here is a Discovery of a very fair Lady followed by another, of a bouncing brown
Bastard; and when we might have thought all Fortunes Tricks had been over, we
are in a very fair way at last of having our Throats cut: But I Will secure one
life that shall be my care. --


[Is stealing off. Beaug. Dog, stay and fight, or, by Heaven, I Will rip your
Heart out.


Dard. Well then, if I must fight I must: What a Pox, I have two good Seconds
of my side; and that has saved many a Cowards Credit before now.


[Noise within. Theod. Break open the Door there, force the Passage, down with
it.


Enter Theodoret, Gratian and Father. Beaug. Well Gentlemen, what farther? What
means this Violence here?


Theod. I hope, Sir, that is no Secret, when you see who we are.


Fath. We come, Sir, to demand a Lady, Sir; one Porcia.


Beaug. How Is that, my Father!


Fath. Father me no Fathers: I am none of thy Father, Fellow; but I am these
Gentlemen's Friend here. -- Now, Atheist, will I murder thee.


Dard. Oh Law'd!


Fath. Jack, Jack, Jack! Come hither Jack; a word with thee, Jack: Give me a
hundred Pieces now, and I Will be of thy side Jack; and help thee to beat off
these impudent Fellows. Gentlemen, I cannot but own to you that this is my Son.
--


Beaug. Sir, were you nicked to your Shirt, I would not part with a single
Shilling, Sir.


Fath. Though, if he were my Son ten thousand times, in such a Cause as yours,
I Would draw my Sword against him.


[Draws. Beaug. You may remember, Gentlemen, a Challenge.


Great. Which you forgot, Sir.


Court. Hah! A Challenge, Beaugard?


Beaug. I Will tell thee more hereafter. To show you I have not forgot it, the
Lady you thus persecute is now under my Protection, and with my Sword I Will keep
her so.


[Draws. Court. If we don't, may my Wi^e get the better of me, and wear mine
for a Bodkin.


Theod. Come on then, Sir.


Beaug. For the Lady.


Great. For my Honor.


Court. And for my Friend, Sir.


Dard. Old Brimstone-Beard, have at thee.


Fight, The rest of Theodore's Party fall in. Court. Base Traitors! Odds!


Beaug. Confound 'em, thrust.


Beaugard and Courtine driven off. Dard. Oh, I am slain! My Maw runs out: What
will become of me! Oh!


[Gratian and Dardevil fall. Enter Theodoret. Theod. Secure that Passage now:
-- How fares my Friend?


Great. I Am wounded: send for a Chyrurgion quickly, for I bleed much.


Theod. Look to your Master, Sirrah; and you, Fellow, be careful of this Beast
here.


Dard. Oh, a Parson! a Parson! dear Sir, a Parson! Some pious good Divine, if
you have any Charity.


Enter Father with Porcla. Fath. Here, here she is: I have got her for you; let
me alone for ferreting a Female's Quarters out.


Theod. I Would have you, Sir, take care for your Security: There Is mischief done,
Sir.


Fath. The more mischief the better; thou shall find me no Flincher, Boy: here,
here; make sure of her.


Porcia. Inhumane Tyrant! Why am I abused thus? Help! Murder! Help!


Theod. None of your Tricks; no Cries, no Shrieks for Succor:
By Hell, here is that shall silence you for ever.
Thou Woman! Thou young, itching, wanton Devil!
Fly to base Cells of Lust! Give up thy Virtue,
Disgrace thy Name, and triumph even in Infamy.
On what a tottering Point his Honor stands,
That trusts the Treasure in such lavish hands.

End of the Fourth ACT.
ACT V.
Enter Lucrece in Man's Clothes, and Chloris. Lucr. FRom this gay minute
farewell Love and Doting: I have shook the lazy, stretching, wishing Folly out
of my Blood, and now my wandering Heart is at home again. Let me see; I have a
hundred and a hundred times wished my self a Man; and now, in outward
appearance, I am a very Fellow; nay, a very pretty Fellow: for, methinks
Foppery, Impertinence, Self-conceit, and other Masculine Qualities grow upon me
strangely. -- Oh, Mischief, Mischief, Mischief! thou art a very
sweet-Employment: -- But Opportunity! Bewitching, Lovely, Omnipotent
Opportunity! How shall I come at thee? Chloris! --


Chloris. Madam.


Lucr. Give me my Sword.


Chlor. Here Madam: Bless us, What will your Ladyship do with your self in this
Equipage!


Lucr. Ladyship, Huzzy! take notice from this important Moment, I am no more
your Mistress; but that Imperial Creature, your Master: and therefore know too,
I will have my Foeminine Habiliments burnt instantly, and an Operator sent for
to make me a Beard grow. I will learn to Ride, Fence, Vault, and make
Fortifications in Dirt-Pyes: Nay, if the humor hold, I Will go Voluntier into
Germany against the Turk.


Chlor. But what will be the end of all this, Madam?


Lucr. Why, if I go into the War, I shall have the privilege, when I return
home, to talk of Marches, Battles and Sieges, which I never was at, nor
understand any more than the Fools I tell my story to. If I stay at home, with
the privilege of good Clothes, Pertness and much Simplicity, will I set up for
a Spark, grow familiar at White Hall, and impudent with some great Man there or
another; run in Debt with a high Hand, be terrible in eating Houses, and noisy
all over the Town.


Chlor. A very hopeful Resolution.


Lucr. As thus: When I and another Spark meet; Dam me, Jack, says I* What Times
are there stirring? What ready to be had? What Caravans have you met with, or
what Loose lately managed? You Rogue, you look very high upon the Huckle.


Chlor. Well Madam; But what will all this Gibberish signify?


Lucr. Signify, you Fool! why what it signifies already; Wit, Courage, Martial
Discipline, Interest at Court, Pretense to Preferment, Free Quart^r^ in my
Lodgings, and Free Booty in every Cuckold's Shop, who shall trust me against
his palpable knowledge, that I Am not worth a Groat; and never have the
Impudence to hope to be paid.


Chlor. And must your Honor have a Mistress too?


Lucr. Yes Huzzy, and you shall be serviceable to me in the matter: I Will have a
Doxy this very Night; I have singled her out already; Courtin's Wife, that
jealous, raging, insatiable Help-meet of the Captains shall be my Ducinea del
Toboso. She Is in Love with me already, that is my comfort: as I passed through
the Hall just now, she coming into the House to pay a Visit to the Widow
Porcia, (who, by the way, is as wicked as my self, and my great Councellor in
this noble Project) we met: I, you must know, bowed very respectfully; she
^aking me for a Stranger, Curt 'sy'd as low; and viewing me strictly leer'd at
me, as if that Minute she took Aim at my Heart, and designed me for her Quarry.


Chlor. But, Madam, she knows, and must discover you.


Lucr. Thou art a fool: she never saw me till yesterday in her lifetime, then
too disguised: So that if I do not practice on her frailty, and by that means
find a way to revenge my self on that Vizard-monger Beaugard, may I be
condemned to wear Breeches as long as I live, and never know more than the
present use I make of them.


Chlor. Hist Madam, she is returning.


Enter Sylvia. Lucr. Hush then: now my Cause is coming* on, and have at her.


Sylv. Sweetheart, pray oblige me so far to show me the way to the Gardens; I
come to pay a Visit to Madam Porcia, and am informed she is gone there for the
Air. -- A very handsome Youth --


[Aside. Chlor. Madam, this young Gentleman here is com^ hither on the same
kind Errand with your Ladyship, and waits till her Return.


Lucr. But, Madam, the good fortune of seeing you is a happiness would
recompense the being disappointed of all the Conversation of your Sex besides.


Sylv. Indeed, Sir!


Lucr. Yes indeed, Madam.


Sylv. Are you a Relation to this Family, Sir?


Lucr. Madam, the greatest Advantage I hope from the Family is, henceforth to
have oftener the Honor of kissing your fair Hands here: It is an Opportunity I
should make no Ungentlemanly use of.


Sylv. Opportunity, Sir?


Lucr. Yes, Opportunity Madam: I am not ashamed to mention so honest a Friend
as Opportunity, to one that, by her Years and Beauty, should not, methinks, be
a mortal Foe to Opportunity.


Sylv. Do you know me, Sir?


Lucr. Why, Madam; do I treat you like a Stranger? Know you, by this good Hour,
there has not been a Day or Night since I first saw you, that I have thought or
dreamt of any thing else. Are no^ you the Wi^e of a certain swaggering Squire
about this Town, who calls himself Captain Courtine?


Sylv. Yes Sir; such a Friend in a Corner I have, Sir; and what have you to say
to him, Sir? I Will swear, a very handsome Youth still. --


Lucr. What, Madam! what I have to say to you, rather than lose you, I would
say to him: which is, that I like you, love you, languish for you; and would,
with all my Heart, Blood, Spirit and Flesh, ^ --


Sylv. I Will swear, Sir, I am mightily obliged to you, and so is Mr. Courtine;
ha, ha, ha! --


Lucr. Mr. Courtine! Take notice, Madam, I receive that Expression as kindly as
if you had called him what I wish him: for, pretty one, if my Intelligence be
true, he lives with your Ladyship as much like Mr. Courtine, as much like a
Gentleman --


Sylv. Sir!


Lucr. Madam!


Sylv. Oh Gaud! he is very handsome.


Lucr. Shall we walk in these Gardens anon, for I have the priv^lege of a Key
that opens into the Fields: The Moon shines too.


Sylv. Between Ten and Eleven does the Moon shine?


Lucr. As bright as any thing but your self.


Sylv. But you will tell, young Gentleman.


Lucr. Only you how I love you.


Sylv. Eleven's a late Hour.


Lucr. Not too late.


Sylv. Indeed!


Lucr. Take this, and my Word for it.


[Kisses her. Sylv. Fie, how you use me, when you mean to forget me.


Lucr. Hush, no more; Company's coming. Eleven.


Sylv. Ten if you are kind enough.


Lucr. Well said, my chaste Sex.


Enter Porcia. Porcia. Oh Cousin, art thou come! Thou art the welcomest
Creature on the Earth; I have expected thee almost to despair for these three
Hours. Oh, Sir! your Servant.


Lucr. I am here, Madam, in order to your Commands.


Sylv. Her Commands!


Porcia. Oh, Cousin, the prettiest best natured Youth! He is something related
to us a great way off; and by that means has the privilege of Visiting, without
offense to my jealous Brother in Law, and Tyrannical Guardian. Have you
contrived that business?


Lucr. Madam, it is done.


Sylv. Business! What Business, Cousin?
Lord, Cousin, you seem concerned at it.

Porcia. I Will tell thee: Seeing my self here consigned to the Rules and Limits
of a very Prison, I have resolved to put as good a face upon the matter as it
will bear, and make my misfortune as easy as I can. Wherefore, for a little
present diversion, I have contrived a Letter in an unknown name, by this young
Agent here, and conveyed it to thy lewd Husband, with another in my own to
Beaugard; and sent for thee, my Dear, to share in the pleasure of the
Consequence.


Sylv. Ha, ha ha! But what will be this Consequence, Cousin?


Porcia. Twenty to one but it occasions some new Alarm, and Divertisement to my
Jaylours; who are so very capricious, they would fancy a Rat behind the
Hangings for a concealed Lover. It may too, by chance, produce me some lucky
opportunity once more to make my Escape out of their merciless Power. Nay, they
are already half disposed to run away themselves; for by my Woman's interest in
the Surgeon, who has care of the swearing Atheistical Fellow, yesterday hurt
in the scuffle, and afterward conveyed hither, he gives it out, that he fears
his Wounds may be mortal. Upon which, my Lover Gratian sighs, and turns up his
Eyes like a Godly Brother at Exercise. My Brother Theodoret puffs, swells,
grinds his Teeth, and stamps as if he would brain himself against the next
Wall; while poor Beaugard's never be good Father has, with pure fear, lost a
red Nose that has been his fast Friend for these 40 years; and every time he
sees his Face in a Glass, fancies every Wrinkle there has the shape of a Gibbet.


Enter Phillis. Phill. Oh, my dear, dear Lady, what will become of us! the most
unhappy Accident!


Porcia. Hah!


Phill. Indeed Madam, I could not possibly help it: I have lost it.


Porcia. Lost it, lost what? What have thou lost? Would thou had lost thy
self; lost a Leg or an Arm, or any thing, rather than have put me in this
fright. Speak, what is the matter?


Phill. Oh, Madam, the Billet; Madam, the Billet.


Lucr. Sylv. How Is this?


Porcia. What, the Note I sent to Beaugard?


Phill. As I hope to see you happy, Madam, I put it as fast here between these
two poor naked Breasts here, as ever it could stick, so I did, when, just as I
was going forth, who should meet me but the old, wicked, ranting, roaring
Gentleman that lies hid here for fear of hanging, would he had been well hanged
a Twelvemonth since; and there he fell a towzing, and a mowzing, and a meddling
with me; I was never so afraid of being ravished in my life, Gad he knows: So
in the struggle, I guess the Note was lost truly; though, in my heart, I wish I
had been ravished six times over, rather than such a misfortune had happened.
Nevertheless, I have done your business for you, so I have.


Porcia. Business! what Business? Ugliness and ill Reputation light on thee.
Thou have undone and ruined me for ever.


Phill. Why, I have met with the Captain, and told him the whole matter, as
well as if he had read it in the Letter himself. He Is but too kind a Man to
you, and I too faithful a Servant, so I am, to be thus reviled and cursed by
you, for all this.


Porcia. What then did he say? Fool, Beast and Blockhead; tell me.


Phill. Why, he said, he would die a thousand and a thousand times for you, were it
possible, so he did; and that that he will not eat, drink or sleep^till he has
set you at liberty, so he wo'not; and that he will be in the Garden before Ten.


Lucr. What Is in this Case to be done, Madam?


Porcia. O dearest Cousin, retire if you love me; for, should the Lords of my
Liberty get any notice of this Billet, and find a Man here, notwithstanding
your Relation, who knows what ill usage it may aggravate! -- To thy Chamber,
dear Lucrece, ever the Storm comes upon us,


[Aside. Lucr. I am all Obedience. Sweet Creature, you will remember!


[ To Sylvia. Sylv. It is not possible to forget you, surely.


Lucr. Blessings on you for this Goodness.


[Kisses her Hand, and Exit. Enter Theodoret in a Rage. Theod. Double Bar up
all the Doors and Windows: Load all the Arms in the House, and be ready for
Execution instantly, all of ye. By those Devils that dance in your gogling
Eyes, Madam, I Will try if you have given, your self over to Hell so far, that
you can out at a Keyhole.


Porcia. What means the great He Brute?


Theod. To cut off your Intelligence, Lady, and make thee, ever I have done, to
curse thy Father and Mother, that let thee learn to write. See thou this!
thou irreclamable profligate Wretch! Fogh! Send you the draggle-tail'd Minister
of thy lewd Affairs a hunting, full cry about the Town, upon the rank Scent of
a Brawny-back'd Hector! By Heavens! the thought of it makes me loath the House,
and fancy it stinks of the ^oul Sins thou have imagined in it.


Porcia. Thou barbarous, ill manner'd, worse than Beast! Why am I abused thus?
Why made a Prisoner too, at your ^awcy Will? Fettered up, and barred all
Liberty and Converse?


Theod. For the same reason other too hot blooded Females are; because, if
possible, I would not have a good Breed spoiled.


Porcia. What a Load of Dirt is the Thick-Skull crammed withal, if the Tongue
were able to throw it out!


Theod. Filthy, filthy, fulsom filthy! What, be a Doll-Common, follow the Camp!
How lovelily would your fair Ladyship look, mounted upon a Baggage-Cart,
presiding over the rest of the Captain's dirty Equipage!


Sylv. If any thing in the World would make me follow a Camp, it would be a
very strong fancy I have, that I should never see you in one, Sir.


Theod. Your Ladyship has reason to defend the Soldiers Cause: You have
married one, as I take it, Madam. Ha, ha, ha.


Porcia. He in a Camp! He has not Courage enough to animate half a Tailor, no^
good Nature enough to make a Spaniel of, or Sense enough, if he were that
Animal, to learn to fetch and carry.


Theod. This will open no Locks, Lady.


Porcia. But there are Instruments to be had, that will break open Locks, Sir.


Theod. Will you please to retire, and consider farther of that in your Chamber.


Porcia. No, I Will not stir, Sir.


Theod. Nay, by Heaven, but you shall, Madam.


Sylv. Nay, by Heaven, but she shall not, Sir.


[ Father at the Door. Theod. How!


Fath. By Jove, and that is well said, I Will s^and still a little, and see what is
the matter.


Theod. Do not drive me to use Violence.


Fath. How! Violence to a fair Lady! That Is not so well, neither.


Porcia. Hark you, Sir; my Jailer, or my Hangman; for which of the two your
Office will end in, by your proceedings I cannot imagine: do but touch me, or
offer the least force to compel me to a closer Confinement; by this injured
Heart, I Will fire the House about your Asses Ears: I Will sooner burn with you, to
be revenged, than endure such Insolence and Torment any longer.


Theod. Very well.


Fath. I Gad, a brave Girl, a delicate Wench! How my Fingers itch to take her
part now! I have a Months mind to espouse her Quarrel, and make Friends with
poor Iacky again. Honest Iacky! it is the best natured Boy in the World, though
I was such a Beast to fall out with him.


Porcia. Inhumane, cruel Theodoret! Why do you afflict me thus? Why do you
force the Tears from my poor Eyes, and wrack a tender Heart that never wronged
you? --


[Weeps. Theod. For your Souls Health, Lady; and the Welfare of your wasting
Reputation. A Pox o'your Whining! Come, to your Chamber, to your Prayer Book
and Repentance: Fasting and Humiliation will be good for you. To your Chamber.


Porcia. To my Grave first.


Theod. Nay then -- Wha, hoa!


[Offers to lay hold of her. Porcia. Stand off! Murder! Cramps, Rheums and
Palsies, wither thy unmanly Hands.


Theod. By Heaven!


Porcia. You dare not do it.


Theod. Hah!


Sylvia. No Sir, you dare not do it, you dare not.


Theod. Avaunt Pass! Confound me, but I shall be scratched here presently for
my patience.


Sylv. What an ill bred Camel it is!


Fath. Nay, and what is more; you shall not do it, you shall not; Sir Hoh! Is
this the Issue of your honorable Pretensions?


Theod. Et tu Brute!


Fath. Brute, Brute! Brute me no Brutes Friend: Oonds I am a Man, Fellow;
Battoons and Bilboes! Brut^! a Gentleman!


Theod. Your Pardon, Sir!


Sylv. Don't pardon him, Sir.


Enter Gratian leaning on a Staff. Great. Oh, Friend!


Theod. Poor Gratian.


Great. If ever we ought to do any thing for our Safety, let us now prepare, and
look about us: I have made hard shift to hobble hither, my Wound's grown very
troublesome* -- We are all lost.


Theod. I can fear nothing when my Friend's so near me.


Sylv. Now Cousin rebel, and force your Freedom nobly.


Fath. Iacky, I hope. Iacky at the Head of Mirmidons, and declaring for his
Property. Look you, Gentlemen; I must confess, I have Remorse of Conscience,
and am sensible I have been a Rebel: wherefore, if my Liege Son and Heir have
recruited his Power, and be once more up in Arms, Loyalty and Natural
Affection, Friends, will work, I must pronounce for Prince Iacky; and here I
resolve to defend his Territories.


[Draws a broad Sword. Great. If Prince Iacky have Interest enough to get your
Pardon for Murder, Sir, it will be your best way to close with him; for, in
short, the Atheist Dardevill, your Antagonist, is dead Sir.


Theod. Hah! Dead!


Fath. Dead!


Gratian. Yes dead, Sir.


Sylv. So much the better. Porcia, let us run up to the Leads, and cry out
Murder to the Streets this Moment.


Fath. Then I find that I am but a short lived Sinner; farewell for ever old
Hock, Sherry, Nutmeg and Sugar, Seven and Eleven; Sink-Tray, and the Doublets!
Never comes better of rebleting against one's natural born Children. I shall be
hanged one of these Sun-shiny Mornings, and a Ballad come out in the Afternoon
to a lamentable Eighty eight Tune of the careful Son, and prodigal Father. Dead
said you, Sir.


Great. Or, at least, cannot survive half an Hour; therefore it is my Opinion
that we instantly quit the House, and provide all for our Safety.


Theod. Confusion, Devils!


Porcia. Nay, Sir; stand fast! dare but to open a Door, Sir; by Heaven, that
Moment I Will alarm the Town: you shall not think to escape, reeking with a poor
Man's Blood, shed in defense of me.


Theod. Lady, no fooling.


Porcia. No Sir, no fooling: but now, Sir, do you to your Chamber, Sir, to your
Chamber; to your Prayer Book and Repentance; Fasting and Humiliation will be
good for you: To your Chamber, Sir; as you tender your Neck, Sir.


Theod. Damnation! Unhand me!


Porcia. I Will dye ever I Will unhold you. Think you so barb'rously to leave me
here in the House with a dead Wretch, and have the Punishment of his horrid
Murder light on my innocent Head.


Theod. What do you resolve to do, Sir?


Fath. Do, Sir! What can I resolve to do, Sir? I have no means to hope to
escape, Sir: for, in the first place, I have no Money; and a Man that kills
another, without Money in his pocket, is in a very hopeful condition. In the
next place, for a disguise, I have no Clothes but these you see on my Back;
with this Tripe-Buff Belt here, which there is not a Constable in the whole
City but knows, and has had in his Custody, Sword and all. Look you, Gentlemen,
I have civilly killed a Man for your Service; if you will resolve, fairly and
squarely, to hang like Friends together, so: If not, I mutiny; and the word is,
Discover the Plot, the old Boy must impeach.


Enter Rosard. Ros. Oh, Sir! where are you?


Great. Well, Rosard; what is the News now?


Ros. The Gentleman, Heaven be thanked, is revived again, Sir; though the
Doctors say, such another Fit will certainly carry him off. The poor Creature
is very weak, but very penitent.


Fath. In troth, and that is a very ill Symptom; therefore my Opinion is still
-- I am for hanging all together.


Theod. Hark you, old Rust; you say you have no Money, wherefore, during the
present Interval, in the first place, because I will have no Mutiny upon this
occasion; in order to your Escape, there is Money for you: in the next place, as
you want Change of Raiment, here is the Key of a small Wardrobe, at the lower
end of the Gallery above, you will find the Door to it: Equip your self, and
provide for your Security, as your best Discretion shall direct you.


Fath. Look you, Friend, the sooner the better; for, to tell you the truth,
else I shall make but a scurvy matter of it at Tyburn Cross; with a whining,
snivling Account of breaking the Sabbath, and keeping ill Company. Wherefore,
not being good at making Speeches, I will leave the Opportunity to you, of
showing your politer Rhetoric, and save a Member of the Commonwealth --
There Is no great harm in Murder, when it brings a Man Money.


[Aside, and Exit. Porcia. And now, my Tyrant Brother, I hope we stand on even
Terms.


Theod. No, Lady, not yet: There Is Life returned, and therefore hopes still,
though, at present, in some measure to comply with you, and ease your
Apprehensions, within the Limits of the House and Gardens you are at your
Liberty, but no farther this Night: And, for your ampler satisfaction, if I
have any Midnight Alarms from your Correspondent abroad, there is Entertainment
ready for him, which he may not be very fond of; so Good Night, it is almost
Ten. Who waits? What hoa, be ready there. Come Gratian, I Will see you to your
Repose, and then to my Post of Guard.


Porcia. Ten! That was the Hour, Phillis, Beaugard mentioned; was it not?


Phill. It was, Madam.


Pore. Be ready then, all ye propitious Powers, that smile on faithful Love;
Wait, like kind Angels, on him; Establish Conquest in his able Hand, and
Kindness in his Heart. Oh, Sylvia*


Sylv. You are transported, Cousin!


Pore. With hopes of Liberty I am indeed: it is an English Woman's natural
Right. Do not our Fathers, Brothers and Kinsmen often, upon pretense of it, bid
fair for Rebellion against their Sovereign; And why ought not we, by their
Example, to rebel as plausibly against them?


Sylv. Most edifying Doctrine this is, truly.


[A Whi^tle without. Porcia. The Sign! Hark, the Sign! Phillis, heard you
nothing? [Whistle again. It Is there again; he is true, and I am happy. Sylvia,
let us retire our selves; you know your old Apartment, for precious mischief
will be soon on foot; and Action worthy Love's great Cause. Thy Husband too,
may chance to have his share in the business; and, as I have ordered Matters,
meet something in the Adventure, to mortify his roving Humor, and reconcile
him to his Duty and Allegiance. -- Hark: [Whistle again. There, it is once more
a Summons to the Citadel to surrender. This shall, in after Story, be called,
Captain Beaugard's besieging of the Widow.

Which, as it is laid sure, with Success must end,
Since Justice does his Enterprise attend
Without, and powerful Love within's his Friend.

SCENE changed to Fields on the Backside of a Garden Enter Beaugard, with a
Party. Beaug. Hold, stand fast; I have just now received Intelligence over the
Garden-Wall, that our design has taken air, and there will be no easy Entrance.


1. Man. Ah Captain; the time has been, when, under your Command, we should
have had no need of a Council of War for the attacking such a Fortification as
this is.


Beaug. Peace Plunder, Peace you Rogue; no Moroding now: we'll burn, rob,
demolish and murder another time together: This is a Business must be done with
Decency. -- Hark.


2. Man. Some Company coming, Sir, from the Back-Street Ward.


Beaug. Hold then, Plunder: Do you, with your flying Party, hover at a distance
about the Fields; while I, with the rest of the Body, post my self as
advantagiously as I can, to watch the Enemies Motions. --


[Exeunt. Enter Theodoret and his Party. Theod. This way the noise was: Be sure
keep safe the Garden Gate, and follow me carefully.

[ Exit Theod.
Enter Courtine. Court. So, here I am; and now for my Instructions. Let me see.
[Reads the Billet. Pray come disguised, that if the Design should miscarry,
your Retreat may be the easier. Your unknown blushing Servant -- Humph!
Blushing Servant! Passingly modest, I Will warrant you! Pray come disguised! So I
am, or the Devil's in it; for I look more like a Cutthroat, than any thing
else. Let me see; Upon this very Spot, the last time I was here, did I meet my
damned Wife: Avert the Omen, sweet Heaven, I beseech thee. And now, as I am
considering, where can my Friend Beaugard be at present too? With a Whore.
There Is that Question answered. Wherefore, would but my unknown blushing
Servant appear, or give me a kind Sign; would but my little Partridge call,
methinks I could so shuckle, and run, and Bill, and clap my Wings about her.
Hah!


[Turns about. Enter Theodoret. Theod. Stand: Who goes there?


Court. What Is the matter now?


^ Serve. Stand, Sir: What are you, Sir?


Court. What am, I, Sir! A Man, Sir.


Theod. A Man, Sir, we see you are: But what Man are you, Friend?


Court. A Gentleman, Friend; and you had best use me so. -- By Heaven,
Theodoret; and if I am but discovered!


Theod. Hands off, unloose him. You are not him we look for, Sir.


Court. I am glad of that with all my Heart.


Theod. And therefore I ask your Pardon. But, if you are a Gentleman, you will
assist one in me, that have been injured. I have reason to believe, my House is
now beset by Villains, who have base designs upon the Honor of my Family.
Wherefore, if you are what you pretend, you will draw your Sword to do a good
Cause Justice.


Court. Sir, I wear it for no other end; and you shall command it. -- Ay, it is
so Beaugard; upon new Exploits for the Recovery of his Widow. Nothing but
Knight-Errantry stirring this Moon.


Theod. Please you then, Sir, to stay here with my Servants, while I walk to
the Corner of yon Wall, and try what I can discover.

[ Exit Theod.
Court. You may trust me, Sir. Now will I show my self a true Renegado; take
Entertainment in Christian Service, to betray 'em to my Brother Turk, upon the
first opportunity. And so, my blushing Unknown, you may even stay your Stomach
with your Sheets for this Night.


Re-enter Theodoret. Theod. They are here, stand fast; be resolute, and be
rewarded.


Enter Lucrece. Lucr. Now, for a convenient Opportunity to do a mischief:
Beaugard, I find, is come, and my kind Mistress punctual to Appointment in the
Garden. Now, could I but order the Affair so, as to slur Beaugard upon her,
instead of my self; and her upon him, instead of Porcia, my Conscience would be
satisfied; and he, Mr. Courtine, my Rival Widow, and the Wi^e served all in
their kind.


Theod. Hold, Sir; What are you?


[To Beaugard at the Entrance. Court. Ay; Now, now.


Beaug. No matter, Sir; this is not a time of Night to answer Questions.


Theod. Nay, then. --


Beaug. Nay, now Sir; and when else you think fitting, Sir: I am the Man you
look for; and you are him I wished to meet here.


Court. Now how the Devil I shall do to tilt Booty; Hang me like a Dog if I can
imagine.


Beaug. Come on there.


Theod. You pass upon your death.


Beaug. I have learnt to scorn death more since first you threatened it*
I see your Numbers too, and come prepared,
Porcia's my Claim, and here I Will win or lose her.

Theod. Then take thy due; and dye like a midnight Thief. Fall on.


[ Beaug. and Theod. engage, and their Parties. Beaug. and Theod. quit each
other. Beaug. fa^^s upon Courtine, and Theod. upon Beaug. Party; who retire
from him, ^s Court. does from Beaug. off from the Stage. Theod. He runs, he
runs; the Half-bred Hector runs. False Cards and Diee, and Quart-pot
Brothel-Brawles, were ^itter for his Management, than honorable Difference:
Hark, Clashing of Swords still, by Heaven I miss our Friend the honorable
Stranger, that so generously took our Party; if it (...) him, let us out, and
give him succor.


Enter Beaugard driving in Courtine, ^ho retires beyond the reach of his Sword.
Beaug. Base Rascal! Coward fly! --


Court. No, Sir, I stand ^^ock still, and will not stir an Inch; but since you are
so uncivil, resolve not to ^ight a stroke more: So there is my Sword, and here is
your humble Servant.


Beaug. Courtine!


Court. The same.


Beaug. And thou my Enemy too^


Court. No, Sir, your Friend, had you been wise enough to have found it; I came
hither disguised, for a Reason you shall know hereafter; But falling into the
hands of the Enemy, was forced to take Party against you, for fear of being
beaten for you: Yet with a design of revolting would you have given me leave;
but you, when you should have kept at the head of your Friends* took a
particular fancy to be tickling my small guts, and now you s^e what you have
got by it.


Beaug. Then farewell for ever poor Widow. -- But stay, it were base and unmanly
to give it over so -- Let me see -- Lend me thy Disguise, Quickly, quickly,
quickly, my Imagination's warm.


Court. Ay, with all my heart, and glad to be rid of it so --


[ Disguises Beaug. Beaug. Take this, and rally my scattered Forces, [Gives him
his Whistle. They know the sign; and cannot be far off under the conduct of
Plunder that was my Sergeant abroad, thou know'^t him; make what haste is
possible, I Will be hereabouts, and be near me, if any new Disaster should happen.


Court. Well, with all my heart for once, here is a new design in Embrio now,
though I fancy when we have got her, we shall never make of this Widow what she
has co^t us.


Beaug. No more; I hear Company* Vanish. --


[ Exit Court. Enter Theod. Theod. This way I think I heard it: Look, Is not
that he! Oh my dean ge^nerous Friend, let me embrace you: I hope you are come
off well.


Beaug. Very well, Sir, I thank you, if I were but well off from this place; I
fear the man I had to deal withal is fallen, for I left him stagg'ring.
Security were best for us all, Sir.


Theod. My house shall be your Sanctuary, and I Will dye with you but I Will
protect you.


Beaug. I gad, and that is kindly said, as things stand between us, and if he
knew all.


[Aside. Theod. Open the Garden-gate there: You shall rest your self in an
Arbor, while I dispose of the gross of my Family, and prepare an Apartment for
your privacy.


Beaug. If I had died in your Quarrel, Sir, a Generosity like this had
over-rewarded it.


[ Courtine at the Entrance. Court. Stand still ye beaten scattered Scoundrels,
I think that is he, follow me but at a distance.


Theod. Open the Gate I say there, come Sir --


[They enter the Garden. Court. The Stratagem succeeds, and Troy at last is
taken.


Enter Lucrece. Lucr. Oh dear Sir, are not you Captain Beaugard?


Court. The same, my dear Child, the same; Have thou any good tidings for me?


Lucr. The private door of the Garden on the other side is opened, and you may
enter Sir. My poor Lady is dying almost with despair, that she shall never see
you more: Could you now tell me news of Captain Courtine?


Court. Hah! Does then my Blushing unknown belong to these Territories? It must
be so, Captain Courtine is just gone in before Sweetheart, therefore if thou
art a true Friend to Love, quickly conduct me.


Lucr. I Will show you, Sir, into the door where you may conceal your self in one
of the Arbors till I go through the House, and bring you farther intelligence.


Court. And if my Adventure happen really to be at the end of this business, my
Friend and I shall not, I fancy, pass our time very uncomfortably. [Exeunt.
Rogues^follow me, follow me Rogues.


SCENE, The Garden. Beaugard looking out of an Arbor. Beaug. So, so, thus far I
am undiscovered; it is as dark, as if the Devil himself were abroad a solacing
amongst a Company of Northern Witches to Nigh^: if (...) be but entered with my
Mermidons, the Widow's in^allibly all my own. (...)! Who comes here?


Enter Lucrece. Lucr. Sir, Sir, where are you?


Beaug. Here, here, my Friend, I wait you.


Lucr. Friend! Is not your Name? --


Beaug. My Name, what! what can this mean? --


[Aside. Lucr. Beaugard, Come, come, I know you: You need not distrust your
self, my design is to do you service; your Porcia knows you are here, and
expects you with her Arms open, follow me.


Beaug. Be thou my good or bad Angel, at the charm of that name I must follow
thee, though thou lead me to Perdition.


Lucr. Softly, no noise, this way, give me your hand.


[Exeunt. Enter Courtine. Court. Hold, let me see; Ay, there I think is an
Arbor where I will creep in, and lie as close, as a Coward in the Hold at a
Sea Fight.


Enter Theodoret. Theod. Hereabouts it was I left him, it is wonderfully dark:
Friend! Friend! Where are you?


Court. Hah! that is another sort of Voice than the Youngsters I depend on: By
Heaven, Theodoret!


[Aside. Theod. Friend, Friend, I say, where are you?


Court. Ay, but the Devil a word you get of me.


[Aside. Theod. Why, Sir Friend, do not you hear me?


Court. No.


[Aside. Theod. I am sure this must be the Arbor; I Will run and call a Flamb^aux.


Court. That may not be so well neither, my affairs will not agree with the
light as I take it.


[Aside. Theod. May be he is fallen asleep, let me see.
[Gropes into the Arbor, and feels him. It Is even so: What hoa, Sir! --
[ Courtine snores. Friend, Friend, awake, your Chamber's ready, and I stay for
you.

Court. Who Is there? What are you?


[Aloud, as if frighted suddenly. Theod. Hush, make no noise; but come away.


Court. Is it you, Sir? -- He mistakes me for Beaugard, I hope.


Theod. The same: I wait upon you, follow me.


Court. If he discover me, all again is ruined; but Darkness, I hope, and
Impudence, will befriend a good Cause.


SCENE, Dardevill's Chamber, With only one small Lamp burning, and Dardevill on
the Bed. Dard. Oh! oh! oh! my Wounds and my Sins! Conscience, Conscience,
Conscience, how shall I quiet thee!


[Beaug Father at the door. Fath. This cowardly Chicken-hearted Rascal will
dye, and be damned at last. How do you do Sir? How do you find your self?


Dard. Oh very ill, Heaven knows! within few hours of a Grave, and without
great mercy of a deeper place: Who ever you are, if you have any Charity,
procure me some Conscientious Godly Divine to unburden my self of my iniquity
to.


Fath. This puling, whining, repining Rogue, within these two days was
blaspheming: Ought I to be hanged now for such a Varlet! Shall I send you a
Divine, said you Sir?


Dard. It would be a great Favor, and a Comfort to me, Sir.


Fath. I Will try what I can do for you, since I see your condition so dangerous,
a Pox o'yr Queasy Conscience: There is no safety for me in staying here, that is
one thing, the House being certainly beset for the apprehending some body: For
looking out at the Wardrobe Window as I was dressing my self, I observed six or
seven armed Rogues with hangmanly Faces, sneaking and sculking about the
Garden, that is another thing; wherefore I will hasten and finish my disguise,
and if there come an Alarm, take the fairest opportunity to get off in it, and
that for me will be the best thing.

[ Exit Father.
Enter Courtine. Court. To what an insignificant purpose have I taken all this
pains to night, here have I been put into a Room with a Bed in it, with pray,
Sir, will you be pleased to take your rest in the Devil's Name; when my design
has not been to take my rest, but my Recreation: I fancy I heard a kind, small
complaining Voice this way too, and must at present confess my self in a very
good natured humor, very much inclined to succor any distressed Damsel that
wants a Companion to pass away a tedious Night withal.


Dard. Oh! oh! Would but this dear Man come now!


Court. Hah! hark! That must certainly be me she means; nay, I am sure on it:
I Will on a little farther.


Dard. Oh h h!


Court. Where art thou, thou poor Creature? I am come to comfort thee.


Dard. I wish you had come a little sooner, I am very ill.


Court. Alas, kind So^^, she is sick with passionate expectation: This must be
my blushing, unknown Servant at the least.


Dard. Whereabouts are you? Give me your hand hither, will you?


Court. Here, here it is, and my heart too, thou have 'em both: I Will swear she
has a well grown palm, by the Rule of proportion I Will warrant her a Swinger: --
but no matter it is in the dark.


[Aside. Dard. Heart, said you Sir? Alas! my poor heart's breaking.


Court. Breaking, dear Soul! No, no, never fear it, I Will give thee a Re^^pe to
keep it whole. I Will warrant thee: This is the most Romantic Adventure.


[ Falls to undressing himself. Poirca and Phillis at the door. Poirca. Has
then Beaugard gotten entrance art thou sure?


Court. Hah!


Phillis. Madam so sure; that his Valet Fourbine is here in the House, and told
me so himself.


Court. What Is that?


Porcia. Then now my part begins: Was there ever such inhumane Cruelty
committed, a Wretch barbar^usly murdered and exposed, without comfort or succor?


Court. Murder, said they? What, Manslaying! when all my thoughts were upon
nothing but Manmaking. I gad then it is time that I take care for one, and till
a better convenience offer it self, here is my Borough, murder in the Devil's
name. What do they say now?


[Creeps under the Bed. Porcia. No, no, my Conscience will not bear it, I must
proclaim it to the World: What hoa there, Murder, Murder, Murder.


Court. Oh Lord, here is a comfortable Condition that I am got into.


Porcia. But does the Chyrurgeon say there is certainly no danger?


Phillis. Only a thin skin Wound on the outside of his Belly; but that the
force of Fear in the Cowardly-hearted Fellow, will let him think of nothing but
a Grave and Damnation.


Porcia. The present advantage of it then must be improved: wherefore I say the
stinging of my Conscience will not let me rest, I dare not conceal this Murder.
Murder, Murder, Murder! Cry Murder you Witch, and alarm the House.


Phillis. Here is somebody coming already, Madam.


Porcia. Stand still, and observe then.


Enter Beaugard. Beaug. I think it was this way, but no matter, for I am sure I
reign Lord P^^amount of this Castle now: The ang^^ jealous Brother is gone to
Bed, and all his wa^ like Family, where he lies as (...), and snores and gapes
so wide, one might steal the Widow out of his mouth if she were there: Now
could I but find the way to her Ladiship's Chamber, while Plunder is according
to Orders, with his Crew binding the drowzy Rogues of the Family in their Beds!
What an opportunity would that be! For there is but one way of making a
slippery Widow sure to you.


Porcia. No matter, happen how it will, I say again it is a Crying Sin, it is
an Abomination, it is a -- Ah!


[Seeing Beaug. disguised, is frighted, and runs out. Beaug. Hah! What do
Ghosts walk here at this time o'Night, and in Petticoats too; Nay, then have at
you: Ye Airy Forms.


[Going out, is met by his Father, disguised like a Phanatique Preacher. Fath.
Yes, verily, and indeed it is an Abomination, a burning Shame, and a lewd
Abomination.


Beaug. Hell and the Devil! My Spirit in Petticoats that squeak'd Abomination
in Ela, converted to the fleshly ^imilitude of a Holy Brother, that Cants it in
Gamut -- Hoh! Speak, what art thou?


Fath. A Minister of Peace to wounded Consciences; I come here by appointment
with an Olive Branch in my mouth, to visit a mortal Ark tossed and floating in
floods of its own Tears, for its own Frailties.


Beaug. And are you really, Sir, a Man? Really the Godly Implement you appear
to be, for the scowring of foul Consciences.


Dard. Ha! ha! ha! Godly Implement, it has almost made me laugh; that is a merry
Gentleman, I Will warrant him: Oh h h!


Fath. I am, Friend, I tell thee, an instructor of the Chosen: Thou favour'st
of the old Man, stand off, and do not pollute me with too near communication: I
come to convert a Sinner to the Truth, it was I that converted -- as some say
no body; and expounded the groans of the Protestant Board. How fares our
Brother?


Dard. Alas, Sir, very weak; upon the point of Dissolution, and tormented with
the stings of a terrified Conscience.


Fath. Lay then one hand upon thy heart.


Dard. I do so.


Fath. Lend me the other; that in the pouring forth thy sins, thy right hand
may not know what thy left hand does.


Beaug. A very material Point that is truly.


Fath. Thou have lived in Wickedness long.


Dard. From Sixteen to Eight and Forty, without the least Repentance, or a
thought of it.


Fath. A very dangerous state; but for thy darling Sins, Imprimis, what?


Dard. Drunkenness.


Fath. A very pernicious sin, and of the Devil's own institution; for it sets
our Souls a fire: Nay, it sets our Noses o'fire, and sets Houses o'fire.
Drunken^^ss! -- Did you ever burn any Houses?


Dard. Never but three, and they Houses of pollution too: Bawdy-houses, Sir.


Fath. So much the worse: For if Bawdy-houses be burnt, what civil Family in
this City sleeps safe? I never burnt a Bawdy House in my life, that is my
comfort. Item.


Dard. Whoredom, Adultery!


Fath. For Adultery, I mean corrupting of other men's Wives, let me tell you it
is a crying Sin, and a very loud one too; but do you repent?


Dard. From the Bottom of my heart.


Beaug. So, Heaven be thanked, there is no harm in plain Whoredom.


Fath. No more to be said then; be comforted, and I Will absolve thee: But with
whom was this Wickedness committed last?


Dard. With my Bosom Friend's Wife, and one that deserved much better of me.


Beaug. And that was very friendly done of thee truly.


Fath. Impudent Rogue! But was she very young?


Beaug. Ay, now the feeling, circumstantial Questions are starting.


Dard. About Eighteen; and not yet wedded a full year.


Fath. Voluptuous Dog! But handsome too? Was she very handsome?


Dard. Too beautiful, to have had so little Virtue.


Fath. Her Name, her Name! Tell me her Name. Quickly, I say unto thee, let me
know her Name.


Beaug. Well said, well said there, old Fornication!


Dard. That I have promised shall for ever be a Secret, Sir.


Fath. Then thou art damned, and I do not absolve thee. I must know this
precious young Harlot. [Aside.] Once more I say her Name!


Dard. But I have sworn, Sir; you would not have me be forsworn?


Fath. A mortal Sin in it self: Swearing is another Sin. Farewell, I Will have no
more to do with thee: Thy Sins are of too deep a Dye, and Satan be upon thee, a
damned Rogue not to tell me her Name.


Dard. Oh! oh! dear Sir, come back again, and leave me not in this desperate,
desponding, sad condition. [ Exit Father. If he has any mercy in this Case but
upon his own conditions, he is no Father of mine I am sure on it.


[Aside. Enter Lucrece. Lucr. Oh, Sir, I am glad I have met with you, a word
with you in private, turn, turn this way into the next Room quickly, Porcia,
Porcia, your Widow Porcia, Sir.


Beaug. Hah! speak, where is she, thou pretty, smiling Mercury!


Lucr. I am to bring her to you this moment: No more words, but in Sir, in, if
you will be happy.


Court. Porcia, Porcia, said he? Then I am sure it must be Beaugard, a pretty
Pimp that I Will warrant him.


[Aside. Beaug. And shall I trust thee?


Lucr. Why should I deceive you?


Beaug. Be sure thou do not, as thou love the welfare of this soft, tender
outside; adi^u for a minute.

[Exit.
Lucr. That minute gives her to your possession, Sir -- Hist, Madam, Hist! The
Coast is now clear.


Sylvia. Where are you ill nature?


Lucr. Here, tortured with my Longings: Where are you? come, come.


Sylvia. Why do you make me do this?


Lucr. Is that a Question now? Turn, turn into the dark Chamber: I Will but
secure this Door, and then the Night's our own.


Sylvia. Don't stay too long.


Court. How afraid she is, le^t he should come again too soon!


[Aside. Lucr. Be satisfied, I Will fly -- that is from you as fast as I can, for
I hope I have fitted you.


[ Exit Sylvia. Court. Nay, faith, if this be the Custom of the House, I Will
lu^k here no longer: The Devil again!


Re-enter Father. Fath. Trouble me no more, I say I will not be persuaded, I
will know the Adultresses Name, that I may admonish her; for it has been of
ancient practice in these our pious Offices, to make our Converts conf^ss not
only all they know, but all that we have a mind to know.


Dard. Not Sir, I hope, if it be improper.


Fath. No matter for that, proper or improper, right or wrong true or false, if
it be for our use, it must be confessed. Therefore I say, and say again, I do
not absolve thee, thou art in the state of Perdition still; tell me her Name,
or for thy Drunkenness, and burning of Houses; Thy Whoredoms, and Adulteries;
Blasphemy, and Profaness; Thy Swearing, and Forswearing; Thy rubbing out
Milk-scores, and lamb-blacking of Signs in Covent Garden; Thy breaking of
Windows, killing Constables and Watchmen, Beadles, Tailors, Hackney-Coachmen
and Link-Boys: for all these --


[Noises of squeaking from each side of the Stage, one from Sylvia, Hark there
the screaming Fiends are at thy door already. Hark, screame again. Court. Nay,
Madam, if you squeak, and think to alarm the House, I do not behave my self
like a true Friend to Love, I am mistaken, and so here I am posted, and thus
will maintain the Pass.


[Goes to the door where Beaug. and his wife are, and draws his sword to defend
it. Lucr. at the door. Well said, my civil, dear and friendly Cuckold.


Enter Theodoret and Porcia crying. Theod. Come forth thou Strumpet.


Porcia. Nay, cruel Theodoret, do not, do not kill me: here on my knees.


Court. How Is this? Porcia taken there, and my Friend here in private with
Porcia too!


Theod. By Heaven thou dy'st this moment.


Court. By Hell though but she shall not, Sir.


Enter Sylvia, and Beaugard pursuing her. Beaug. Nay, Madam, then! how is this?
My Widow split in twain! My Porcia there, and Porcia here too? Con^ound me
Courtine's Wife* I have done finely.


Theod. You Will justify this usage?


Court. You see, Sir, I am r^sponsible.


[Shews him Beaug. Beaug. By Heaven unhand her, or -- Nay, look Sir well,
you will know me.


[Throws off his disguise. Porcia. My faithful Soldier!


Beaug. My victorious Widow!


[She runs into his Arms. Theod. Call up my Servants there, raise all the
Household.


Beaug. I Will do it Sir -- [Gives the Sign, Plunder and his Party appear. See,
here are those that are ready to wait on you, if you have any service to
command them.


Theod. And I will find'em service that shall warm'em.

[Exit.
Court. Now, I fancy, by this Lady's concealing her self, she may be a
discovery worth the making. Madam, you see here my Friend is unconstant, but
truly nothing could ever wean him from this Widow here -- Sylvia! My Wife! my
rigid virtuous Wife! my damned, confounded, jealous Wife!


Beaug. Now here are very hopeful matters toward.


Court. It was very courteously done of me, Beaugard, was it not, to keep the
door for you, with my own Wife, Sir?


Beaug. Nay, let us not quarrel Ned: I Will give thee a friendly account of this
matter to morrow between our selves, in the mean time be satisfied, I have not
wronged thee.


Porcia. Will you never leave this Foraging into other Folks Quarters, Captain?


Beaug. I am afraid, Widow of mine, you had a finger in the Plot, though --


Sylvia. Indeed, my dearest.


Court. Your humble Servant, my Dearest! I am only glad of this fair
opportunity, to be rid of you, my Dearest: henceforth, my Dearest, I shall
drink my drink, my Dearest, I shall whore my Dearest; and so long as I can pimp
so handsomely for you, my Dearest, I hope if ever we return into the Country,
you will wink at a small Fault now and then with the Dairy-Wench, or
Chambermaid, my Dearest.


Sylv. I always was a Burden to your sight, and you shall be this time eased
on it.

[Exit.
Court. With all my heart! Heaven grant it would last for ever.


Enter Theodoret. Theod. My Doors locked up! My Servants gagged and bound! I am
betrayed, undone, and I Will not live to bear it.


Beaug. Nay, hold, Sir, none of that neither: This Design was not laid for a
Tragedy.


Theod. How do you intend to deal with me?


Beaug. Like a Gentleman, Sir, though you hardly deserve it of me: In short,
this Lady is in my Charge now, and you in my power, and by her Authority, this
being her own House, I have made thus bold with it, and will take care to
dispose hereafter out of the reach of your merciless Tyranny, nay, if this
reverend person will do us the friendly Office, though I have often renounced
it, am ready to do it one way this moment. Dardevil, will thou lend me thy
Chaplain?


Dard. Heh!


Porcia. Rise, Sir! Will Not you rise? If your old Friend and I make a match on it,
I hope you will be so kind to dance at the Wedding.


Dard. Dance, Madam! I am dying.


Phillis. That Is false, to my knowledge, Madam: for the Surgeon told me last
dressing, it was so slight a Wound, he had much ado to keep it from healing.


Dard. Yes, by the same token when he had done with me, he began with you,
forsooth, and said he would show you a little of his operation, for handling
and tampering with his Box of Instruments, and there is the truth-out now.


All. Ha! ha! ha! ha!


Dard. Why Gentlemen, Ladies, Friends, Acquaintance, Am not I dying? Am not I
wounded? Is not there a Hole in my belly, that you may turn a Coach and six in?


Beaug. No, no: Prithee leave raving, and get up for shame, man: Thou an
Atheist, thou believe neither a God nor a Devil, and be afraid of a hurt no
bigger than a Pin-hole! Courtine, lend us thy hand to raise up our old Friend
here: Well, how is it now?


[Set him on his Legs. Dard. Hah! Faith and Troth, I fancy, not so bad as I
thought it was. Methinks I begin to find my self pretty hearty; I can stand, I
can walk too, I have no pain at all. How do thou do, Strikes him on the
Shoulder, which shakes the Disguise from his Face. old Orththodox?


Court. Ah! but you repented, Dardevill; thou did repent, Friend: I am sorry
to hear of it with all my heart, it will be a soul blot in thy Escutcheon: But
thou did repent.


Fath. A Pox on the Block-head, now I shall be known


Fumbling to six his Disguise again. Dard. Repent! Prithee be quiet, Man:
Repent, quotha! Why, do thou think I did not know my old Customer for two
Deuces here, old Anti-Abraham, the Father of Unbelievers?


Fath. My Iacky! my little Rogue! my dainty Boy! Thou Son of thy nown Father, I
can hold no longer; and I must kiss thee, and I will kiss thee, (...) you Dog,
you Dog, you Dog, you little dear damned Dog. [Sing Old Simon. Huzza, the
Widow's our own: There lie Divinity.


Beaug. A very Cutter, as I live, had he but a Tabith^, a perfect Cutter.


Fath. Now, Iacky Boy; Iacky, you Rogue, shall not I have a little spill out of
this Portion now, hah? The jolly Worms that have fatten'd so long in this
Malmsey Nose of mine with the Fumes of Sack will die, and drop out of their
Sockets else. Could thou have the Heart to see this illuminated Nose of mine
look like an empty Honeycomb; Could thou be so hard hearted?


Porcia. Faith, Captain, be mollify'd; the old Gentleman, methinks, proposes
very moderately.


Fath. It shall be so: She shall be my Daughter in Law, though I invert the
Order of Duty, and ask her Blessing.


Beaug. Look you, Sir: Though you have been a very ungratious Father, upon
condition that you will promise to leave off Gaming, and stick to your Who^ing
and Drinking, I will treat with you.


Fath. The truth on it is, I have been too blame, Jack! But thou shall find me
hereafter very obedient; that is, provided I have my Terms: which are these.


Beaug. Come on, then.


Fath. Three Bottles of Sack, Jack, per diem, without Deduction, or false
Measure: Two Pound of Tobacco per Month; and that of the best too.


Court. Truly this is but reasonable.


Fath. Buttock-Beef and March-Beer at Dinner, you Rogue: A young Wench of my
own choosing, to wait on no body but me always: Money in my Pocket: An old
Pacing Horse, and an Elbow-Chair.


Beaug. Agreed. You see, Sir, already, I am beginning to settle my Family; and
all this comes by the Dominion Chance has over us. By Chance you took the
Charge of an old Father off from my Hands and made a Chaplain of him. By the
same sort of Chance I have taken this Lady off from your Hands, and intend to
make her another sort of Domestic. What say you, Sir? Are you contented?


Theod. I cannot tell whether I am or no.


Beaug. Then you are not so wife a Man as I took you for. In the mean time; for
your Liberty, you must dispense with the want of it, till I have this Night
secured the Safety of my Widow. Your Friend Gratian, because of his Wounds, is
only locked in his Chamber, and may take his Rest as otherwise. For the other
part of the Family, I care not to make Excuses.

Thus still, with Power in hand, we treat of Peace;
But when it is ratified, Suspicions cease:
The Conquered to recruiting Labors move.
Like me, the Victor, Cro^ns his Ease with Love.

FINIS.

