A COPY OF VERSES, Presented To all my Loving MASTERS and MISTRISSES, In the
Town of LAMBETH.
By THOMAS OULDMAN, Bel-man For that Part of the Parish.
depiction of bell-ringer

The PROLOGUE.
My Masters all, these lines I do present
In hopes that they will give you all content;
But if I fail in what I do intend,
Next Year i will strive my Verses to amend.
But if these lines from you acceptance find,
'Twill be great satisfaction to my mind;
And to you all I hearty thanks will give,
Remaining your poor Servant while I live.
For Christmas Day.
THe Angels to the Shepherds tidings brings,
In Bethlehem was born the King of Kings:
Shall earthly Monarchs birth-days be esteemd
And shall not this, who all the world redeemd
He who descended from his Heavenly Throne
To save both thee and I and every one.
For Innocents Day.
NO sooner born, but in his infantsie
By cruel Herod he is doomed to dye;
And l^st his bloody hand should miss the right
Slew a^l the Babes in Bethlehem in one night;
Thr^ugh all the world no City can present
So many Martyrs, and so innocent.
LOrd, turn to us thy countenance of Grace,
And with thy Mercy in this our Trials place
Vouchsaf^ to shadow us, and lay not to
^^r charge the sins which we do daily do.
On the Day of Judgment.
GRieve not because the Kingdom is at hand,
It Is said the Righteous before the Lord shall stand.
Upon thy promis^ (Lord) we do depend,
Then teach us for to make an happy end.
On justice.
JUstice gives to every one their due and right,
Judging according un^o reasons right;
Censuring none wi^fully on no condition
Without the Lawful Warrant of Commission.
At any Time.
THe great Creator having made mankind,
Made him acquainted with his will and mind;
Which was to worship, serve him, and obey,
And meditate his Laws both night and day:
Prepare thy self to act what he expects,
He Will call thee to account for thy neglects.
For Christmas Eve.
HEre is old doings Neighbors, such a slaughter
Would make a body wonder what is the matter
The butchers hew their Bullocks out in bits,
Heating of Ovens, cleaning of pots and spits;
The Poulterers as busy as the rest,
With Turkies, Geese, and Capon for the Feast:
Feast did I say; and now it is in my mind,
Pray leave a Bone to pick when you have dined.
On St. Paul's day
IF we believe the Almanacks Assertion,
This was the very day of Paul's Conversion;
He to the Gentiles afterward was sent
To preach the Gospel, teaching to repent.
On St. Matthias Day.
HOly Matthias makes up the twelfth,
Chosen in Judas room, who hanged himself,
Whose Virtuous Piety, and goodness rare,
Though last in number, with the foremost were.
The Fifth of November.
TRaitors conspired and Treason did invent
To ruin Kingdom King and Parliament;
But God in mercy did prevent the same,
Then let us praise and magnify his name.
On a blustering Rainy night.
HArk how it blows and Rains, it is dirty weather,
Therefore be ruled by me, lie close together;
Were I as you are now between the sheets,
I would not rise to walk about the streets.
In Long nights*
I Walk abroad at nights and ring my Bell
To give you notice (Masters) all is well;
Though with the noise some people I offend,
Yet others still my care they will commend:
I hope you will all excuse me for the wrong,
You may have sleep enough the nights ^e long.
On King Charles the I. Martyrdom
HOw, how can Britains Loyal subjects ^leep?
Have you not cause to mourn, lament and weep
For Britains loss? this was the fatal day
When Rebe^s took their Princes life away;
He was both Charles the great, and Charles the good,
He sealed his Princely Virtues with his blood.
O M^n that art oppressed with sad despair,
Strive f^r t^ get the strongest Art of Prayer,
Then pray with fervent faith and not with ceasing,
Restless as Jacob did until you get a Blessing.
UNfit for action are short days and cold,
Rest and warm Diet please the Soldier bold;
The States-mans care no season does neglect
Neither night nor day his designs to effect.
Heavens bless his Projects whose ends are just
And Vengeance blast him that betrays his trust.
SO to conclude, and for to make an end
I hope that God will these bad times amend;
Lord grant that we may see that happy day,
That we the Gospel sweetly may enjoy;
God bless our King and Queen and all the Land
And keep us safe out of our Enemies hands.
The EPILOGUE.
Now noble Masters, e're I do conclude,
Your Servant will express his gratitude;
To serve my Masters both by day and night
Your poor obedient Servant takes delight;
He knowing that he shall requited be,
He doubts not of the generosity
Which you have always strived to make appear;
And so God send you many a happy year.
LONDON: Printed by H. Brugis in Green Arbor Little old Bailey. 1685.


