THOMAS OTWAY


Venice Preserved, OR, A Plot Discovered. A TRAGEDY.

As it is Acted at the DUKE'S THEATER.

Written by THOMAS OTWAY.

LONDON, Printed for Jos. Hindmarsh at the Sign of the Black Bull, over against
the Royal Exchange in Cornhill. 1682.

EPISTLE DEDICATORY To Her GRACE the DUCHESS OF PORTSMOUTH.
MADAM,
WERE it possible for me to let the World know how entirely your Graces
Goodness has devoted a poor man to your service; were there words enough in
speech to express the mighty sense I have of your great bounty toward me;
surely I should write and talk of it for ever: But your Grace has given me so
large a Theme, and laid so very vast a foundation, that Imagination wants stock
to build upon it. I am as one dumb when I would speak of it, and when I strive
to write, I want a scale of thought sufficient to comprehend the height of it.
Forgive me then, Madam, if (as a poor Peasant once made a Present of an Apple
to an Emperor) I bring this small Tribute, the humble growth of my little
Garden, and lay it at your feet. Believe it is paid you with the utmost
gratitude, believe that so long as I have thought to remember, how very much I
owe your generous Nature, I will ever have a heart that shall be grateful for
it too: Your Grace, next Heaven, deserves it amply from me; That gave me life,
but on a hard condition, till your extended favor taught me to prize the gift,
and took the heavy burden it was elogg'd with from me: I mean hard Fortune:
When I had enemies, that with malicious power kept back and shaded me from
those Royal Beams, whose warmth is all I have, or hope to live by; Tour noble
pity and compassion found me, where I was far cast backward from my blessing;
down in the rear of Fortune, called me up, placed me in the shine, and I have
felt its comfort. You have in that restored me to my native Right, for a steady
Faith, and Loyalty to my Prince, was all the Inheritance my Father left me, and
however hardly my ill Fortune deal with me, it is what I prize so well that I
never pawned it yet, and hope I never shall part with it. Nature and Fortune were
certainly in league when you were born, and as the first took care to give you
beauty enough to enslave the hearts of all the World, so the other resolved to
do^ its merit Justice, that none but a Monarch, fit to rule that World, should
ever possess it, and in it he had an Empire. The Young Prince you have given
him, by his blooming Virtues, early declares the mighty stock he cam^ from; and
as you have taken all the pio^ care of a dear Mother and a prudent Guardian to
give him a noble and generous education; may it succeed according to his merits
and your wishes: May he grow up to be a Bulwark to his illustrious Father, and
a Patron to his Loyal Subjects, (...) Wisdom and Learning to assist him,
whenever called to his Councils, to defend his right against the encroachments
of Republicans in his Senates, to cherish such men as shall be able to
vindicate the Royal Cause, that good and fit servants to the Crown, may never
be lost for want of a Protector. May He have courage and conduct, fit to fight
his Battles abroad, and terrific his Rebels at home; and that all these may be
yet more sure, may He never, during the Springtime of his years, when those
growing Virtues ought with care to be cherished, in order to their ripening;
may he never meet with vicious Natures, or the tongues of faithless, sordid,
insipid Flatterers, to blast'em: To conclude; may He be as great as the hand of
Fortune (with his Honor) shall be able to make him: And may your Grace, who
are so good a Mistress, and so noble a Patroness, never meet with a less
grateful Servant, than,

Madam, Your Graces entirely Devoted Creature, Thomas Otway.

PROLOGUE.
IN these distructed times, when each man dr^ds
The bloody stratagems of busy heads;
When we have feared three years we know not what,
Till Witnesses begin to die of the rot,
What made our Poet meddle with a Plot?
Was It that he fansy'd, for the very sake
And name of Plot, his trifling Play might take?
For there is not in it one Inch-board Evidence,
But it is, he says, to reason plain and sense,
And that he thinks a plausible defense.
Were Truth by Sense and Reason to be tried,
Sure all our Swearers might be laid aside:
No, of such Tools our Author has no need,
To make his Plot, or may his Play succeed;
He, of black Bills, has no prodigious Tales,
Or Spanish Pilgrims cast ashore in Wales;
Here Is not one murdered Magistrate at least,
Kept rank like Ven'son for a City feast,
Grown four days stiff, the better to prepare
And fit his plyant limbs to ride in Chair:
Yet here is an Army rai^d, though under ground,
But no man seen, nor one Commission found;
Here is a Traitor too, that is very old,
Turbulent, subtle, mischievous and bold,
Bloody, revengefull, and to crown his part,
Loves fumbling with a Wench, with all his heart;
Till after having many changes passed,
In spite of Age (thanks Heaven) is hanged at last:
Next is a Senator that keeps a Whore,
In Venice none a higher office bore;
To lewdness every night the Letcher ran,
Show me, all London, such another man,
Match him at Mother Creswolds if you can.
Oh Poland, Poland I had it been thy lot,
To Have heard in time of this Venetian Plot,
Thou surely chosen had one King from thence,
And honored them as thou have England since.
EPILOGUE,
THE Text is done, and now for Application,
And when that is ended pass your Approbation.
Though the Conspiracy's prevented here,
Methinks I see another hatching there;
And there is a certain Faction fain would sway,
If they had strength enough and damn this Play,
But this the Author bad me boldly say:
If any take his plainness in ill part,
He Is glad on it from the bottom of his heart;
Poets in honor of the Truth should write,
With the same Spirit brave men for it fight;
And though against him causeless hatreds rise,
And daily where he goes of late, he spies
The scowles of sullen and revengefull eyes;
It Is what he knows with much contempt to bear,
And serves a cause too good to let him fear:
He fears no poison from an incensed Drabb,
No Ruffian's five-foot-sword, nor Rascal's stab;
Nor any other snares of mischief laid,
Not a Rose-alley Cudgel-Ambuscade,
From any private cause where malice reigns,
Or general Pique all Block-heads have to brains:
Nothing shall daunt his Pen when Truth does call,
No not the The Rascal that out the Duke of York's Picture.
Picture-mangler at Guild Hall.
The Rebel-Tribe, of which that Vermin's one,
Have now set forward and their course begun;
And while that Prince's figure they deface,
As they before had massacred his Name,
D^rst their base fears but look him in the face,
They Would use his Person as they have used his Fame;
A face, in which such lineaments they read
Of that great Martyr's, whose rich blood they shed,
That their rebellious hate they still retain,
And in his Son would murder Him again:
With indignation then, let each brave heart,
Rouse and unite to take his injured part;
Till Royal Love and Goodness call him home,
And Songs of Triumph meet him as he come;
Till Heaven his Honor and our Peace restore,
And Villains never wrong his Virtue more.
Personae Dramatis.
Duke of Venice, Mr. D. Williams. Priuli, Father to Belvidera, a Senator, Mr.
Boman. Antonio, A fine Speaker in the Senate, Mr. Leigh. Jaffeir, Mr.
Betterton. Pierre, Mr. Smith. Renault, Conspiratour, Mr. Wilshire. Bedamar,
Conspiratour, Mr. Gillo. Spinosa, Conspiratour, Mr. Percival. Theodore,
Conspiratour, Eliot, Conspiratour, Revillido, Conspiratour, Durand,
Conspiratour, Mezzana, Conspiratour, Bramveil, Conspiratour, Ternon,
Conspiratour, Brabe, Conspiratour, Belvidera, Mrs. Barry. Aquilina, Mrs.
Currer. Two Women, Attendants on Belvidera. Two Women, Servants to Aquilina.
The Council of Ten. Officer. Guards. Friar. Executioner and Rabble.

VENICE PRESERVED OR A Plot Discovered.
ACT I.
Scene I.
Enter Priuli and Jaffeir. Priu. NO more! I Will hear no more; begone and leave.


Jaff. Not hear me! by my sufferings but you shall!
My Lord, my Lord, I Am not that (...) wretch
You think me^ Patience^ where is the distance (throws
Me back so far, but I may boldly speak
In right, though proud oppression will not hear me!

Priu. Have you not wronged me?


Jaff. Could my Nature (...)
Have brook'd Injustice or the doing wrongs,
I need not now thus ^ow have bent my self,
To gain a Hearing from a Cruel father!
Wronged you?

Priu. Yes! wronged me, in the nicest point:
The Honor of my House; you have done me wrong;
You may remember (For I now will speak,
And urge its baseness:) When you first came home
From Travel, with such hopes, as made you look^ on
By all men's Eyes, a Youth of expectation;
Pleased with your growing Virtue, I received you;
Courted, and sought to raise you to your Merits:
My House, my Table, nay my Fortune too,
My very self, was yours; you might have used me
(...) To your best service; like an open friend,
I treated, trusted you, and thought you mine;
When in (...) of my best Endeavors,
You treacherously practiced to undo the,
Seduced the weakness of my Age's Darling,
My only Child, and stole her from my bosom:
Oh Belvidera!

Jaff. It Is to me you owe her,
Childless you had been else, and in the Grave,
Your name E^tinct, nor no more Priuli heard of.
You may remember, scarce five years are past,
Since in your Brigandine you sailed to see
The Adriatic wedded by our Duke,
And I was with you: Your unskilful Pilot
Dash't us upon a Rock; when to your Boat
You made for safety; entered first your self;
The affrighted Belvidera following next,
As she stood trembling on the Vessel side,
War by a Wave (...) off into the Deep,
When instantly I plunged into the Sea,
And Bu^ing the Billows to her rescue,
Redeemed (...) Life with half (...) of mine,
Like a rich Conquest in one hand I bore her,
And with the other (...) the (...) Waves,
That thronged and pressed to rob me of my prize:
I brought her, gave her to your despairing Arms:
Indeed you thank't me; but a nobler gratitude
Rose in her soul: for from that hour she loved me,
Till for her Life she paid me with her self.

Priu. You stole her from me, like a Theif you stole her,
At dead os night; that cursed hour you chose
To rifle me of all my Heart hold dear.
May all your Joys in her prove false like mine;
A steril Fortune, and a barren Bed,
Attend you both: Continual discord make
Your Days and Nights bitter and grievous: Still
May the hard hand of a vexatious Need
Oppress, and grind you; till at last you find
The Curse of Disobedience all your Portion.

Jaff. Half of your Curse you have bestowed in vain,
Heaven has already crowned our faithful Loves
With a young Boy, sweet as his mothers Beauty:
May he live to prove mere Gentle than his (...),
And happier than his Father!

Priu. Rather live
To bait thee for his bread, and din your ears
With hungry Cries: Whilst his unhappy Mother
Sits down and weeps in bitterness of want.

Jaff. You talk as if it would please you.


Priu. 'T would by Heaven.
Once she was dear indeed; the Drops that fell
From my sad heart, when she forgot her Duty,
The fountain of my Life was not so precious:
But she is gone, and if I am a man
I will forget her.

Jaff. Would I were in my Grave.


Priu. And she too with thee;
For, living here, you're but my cursed Remembran^rs
I once was happy.

Jaff. You use me thus, because you know my soul
Is fond of Belvidera: You perceive
My Life feeds on her, therefore thus you treat me;
Oh! could my Soul ever have known satiety:
Were I that Theif, the doer of such wrongs
As you upbraid me with, what hinders me,
But I might send her back to you with (...),
And court my fortune where she would be kinder!

Priu. You dare not do it. --

Jaff. Indeed, my Lord, I dare not.
My heart that awes me is too much my Master:
Three years are past since first our Vows were plighted,
During which time, the World must bear me witness,
I have treated Belvidera like your Daughter,
The Daughter of a Senator of Venice;
Distinction, Place, Attendance and Observance,
Due to her Birth, she always has commanded;
Out of my little Fortune I have done this;
Because (though hopeless e're to win your Nature)
The World might see, I loved her for her self,
Not as the Heiress of the great Priuli. --

Priu. No more!


Jaff. Yes! all, and then adieu for ever.
There Is not a Wretch that lives on common Charity
But's happier than me: for I have known
The Luscious Sweets of Plenty; every night
Have slept with soft content about my head,
And never waked but to a joyful morning.
Yet now must fall like a full Ear of Corn,
Whose blossom escaped, yet's ^^^^^^hed in the ripening.

Priu. Home and be humble, study to ^etrench;
Discharge the lazy Vermin of thy Hall,
Those Pageants of thy Folly,
Reduce the glittering Trappings of thy Wife
To humble Weeds, fit for thy little state;
Then to some suburb Cottage both retire;
Drudge, to feed loathsome life: Get Brats, and Starve --
Home, home, I say. --

Exit Priuli. Jaff. Yes, if my heart would let me --
This proud, this swelling heart: Home I would go,
But that my (...) are hateful to my eyes,
Filled and damm'd up with gaping Creditors,
Watchful as Fowlers when their Game will spring;
I have now not 50 Ducats in the World,
Yet still I am in love, and pleased with Ruin.
Oh Belvidera! oh she is my Wife --
And we will be ^^ our way ward Fate together,
But never know Comfort more.

Enter Pierre. Pierr. My Friend good morrow!
How fares the honest Partner of my Heart?
What, melancholy! not a word to spare me?

Jaff. I Am thinking Pierre, how that damned starving Quality
Called Honesty, got footing in the World.

Pierr. Why, powerful Villainy first set it up,
For its own ease and safety: Honest men
Are the soft easy Cushions on which Knaves
Repose and satin: Were all mankind Villains,
They Would starve each other, Lawyers would want practice,
Cutthroats Rewards: Each man would kill his Brother
Himself, none would be paid or hanged for Murder:
Honesty was a Cheat invented first
To bind the Hands of bold deserving Rogues,
That Fools and Cowards might sit safe in Power,
And lord it uncontrolled above their Betters.

Jaff. Then Honesty is but a Notion.


Pierr. Nothing else,
Like wit, much talked of, not to be defined:
He that pretends to most too, has least share in it;
It Is a ragged Virtue: Honesty! no more on it.

Jaff. Sure thou art Honest?


Pierr. So indeed men think me?
But they are mistaken Jaffeir: I am a Rogue
As well as they;
A fine gay bold faced Villain, as thou see me;
It Is true, I pay my debts when they are contracted;
I steal from no man; would not cut a Throat
To gain admission to a great man's purse,
Or a Whores bed; I Would not betray my Friend,
To get his Place or Fortune: I scorn to flatter
A Blown-up Fool above me, or Crush the wretch beneath me,
Yet, Jaffeir; for all this, I am a Villain!

Jaff. A Villain --


Pierr. Yes a most notorious Villain:
To see the suffring's of my fellow Creatures,
And own my self a Man: To see our Senators
Cheat the deluded people with a show
Of Liberty, which yet they never must taste of;
They say, by them our hands are free from Fetters,
Yet whom they please they lay in basest bonds;
Bring whom they please to Infamy and Sorrow;
Drive us like Wracks down the rough Tide of Power,
Whilst no hold's left to save us from Destruction;
All that bear this are Villains; and I one,
Not to rouse up at the great Call of Nature,
And check the Growth of these Domestic spoilers,
That makes us slaves and tells us it is our Charter.

Jaff. Oh Aquilina! Friend, to lose such Beauty;
The Dearest Purchase of thy noble Labors;
She was thy Right by Conquest, as by Love.

Pierr. Oh Jaffeir! I Would so fixed my heart upon her,
That wheresoever I sram'd a Scheme of Life
For time to come, she was my only Joy
With which I wished to sweeten future Cares;
I fancied pleasures, none but one that loves
And dotes as I did can Imagine like 'em:
When in the Extremity of all these Hopes,
In the most Charming hour of Expectation,
Then when our Eager Wishes soar the highest,
Ready to stoop and grasp the lovely Game,
A Haggard Owl, a Worthless Kite of Prey,
With his foul wings sailed in and spoiled my Quarry.

Jaff. I know the Wretch, and scorn him as thou hat'st him.


Pierr. Curse on the Common Good that is so protected,
Where every slave that (...) up wealth enough
To do much Wrong, becomes a Lord of Right:
I, who believed no Ill could e're come near me,
Found in the Embraces of my Aquilina
A Wretched old but itching Senator;
A wealthy Fool, that had bought out my Title.
A Rogue, that uses Beauty like a Lamb^kin,
Barely to keep him warm: That filthy Cuckoo too
Was in my absence crept into my Nest,
And spoiling all my Brood of noble Pleasure.

Jaff. Did thou not chase him thence?


Pierr. I did, and drove
The rank old bearded Hirco stinking home:
The matter was complained of in the Senate,
I summoned to appear, and (...),
For violating something they call privilege --
This was the Recompense of my service:
Would l'd been rather beaten by a Coward!
A Soldier's Mistress (...) his Religion,
When that is profaned, all other Ties are broken,
That even dissolves all former bonds of service,
And from that hour I think my self as free
To be the Foe as e're the Friend of Venice --
Nay, Dear Revenge, when e're thou call'st I am ready.

Jaff. I think no safety can be here for Virtue,
And grieve my friend as much as thou to live
In such a wretched State as this of Venice;
Where all agree to spoil the Public Good,
And Villains fatten with the brave man's Labors.

Pierr. We have neither safety, Unity, nor Peace,
For the foundation's lost of Common Good;
Justice is lame as well as blind amongst us;
The Laws (corrupted to their ends that make 'em)
Serve but for Instruments of some new Tyranny,
That every day starts up to enslave us deeper:
Now could this glorious Cause but find out friends
To do it right! oh (...)! then might thou
Not wear these seals of Woe upon thy Face,
The proud Priuli should be taught humanity,
And learn to value such a son as thou art.
I dare not speak! But my heart bleeds this moment!

Jaff. Cursed be the Cause, though I thy friend be part on it:
Let me partake the troubles of thy bosom,
For I am used to misety, and perhaps
May find a way to sweeten't to thy spirit.

Pierr. Too soon it will reach thy knowledge --


Jaff. Then from thee
Let it proceed. There Is Virtue in thy Friendship
Would make the saddest T^le of sorrow pleasing,
Strengthen my Const^ncy, and welcome Ruin.

Pierr. Then thou art ruined!


Jaff. That I long finee knew,
I and ill Fortune have been long Acquaintance.

Pierr I past this very moment by thy doors,
And found them guarded by a Troop of Villains;
The sons of public Rapine were destroying:
They told me, by the sentence of the Law
They had Commission to seize all thy fortune,
Nay more, Priuli's cruel hand has signed it.
Here stood a Ruffian with a horrid face
Lording it over a pile of ma^y Plate,
Tumbled into a heap for public sale:
There was another making villainous jests
At thy undoing; he had taken possession
Of all thy ancient most domestic Ornaments,
Rich hangings, intermixed and wrought with gold;
The very bed, which on thy wedding night
Received thee to the Arms of Belvidera,
The scene of all thy Joys, was violated
By the course hands of filthy Dungeon Villains,
And thrown amongst the common Lumber.

Jaff. Now thanks Heaven --


Pierr. Thank Heaven! for what?


Jaff. That I am not worth a Ducat.


Pierr. Curse thy dull Stars, and the worse Fate of Venice,
Where Brothers, Friends, and Fathers, all are false;
Where there is no trust, no truth; where Innocence
Stoop's under vile Oppression; and Vice lords it:
Had thou but seen, as I did, how at last
Thy Beauteous Belvidera, like a Wretch
That Is doomed to Banishment, came weeping forth,
Shining through Tears, like April Sun's in showers
That labor to overcome the Cloud that loads ^m,
Whilst two young Virgins, on whose Arms she leaned,
Kindly looked up, and at her Grief grew sad,
As if they caught the Sorrows that fell from her:
Even the lewd Rabble that were gathered round
To see the sight, stood mute when they beheld her;
Governed their roaring throats and grumbled pity:
I could have hugged the greazy Rogues: They pleased me.

Jaff. I thank thee for this story from my soul,
Since now I know the worst that can befall me:
Ah Pierre! I have a Heart, that could have born
The roughest Wrong my Fortune could have done me:
But when I think what Belvidera feels,
The bitterness her tender spirit tastes of,
I own my self a Coward: Bear my weakness,
If throwing thus my Arms about thy Neck,
I play the Boy, and blubber in thy bosom.
Oh! I shall drown thee with my Sorrows!

Pierr. Burn!
First burn, and Level Venice to thy Ruin,
What starve like Beggars Brats in frosty weather,
Under a Hedge, and whine our selves to Death!
Thou, or thy Cause, shall never want assistance,
Whilst I have blood or Fortune fit to serve thee;
Command my heart: Thou art every way its master.

Jaff. No: there is a secret Pride in bravely dying.


Pierr. Rats die in Holes and Corners, Dogs run mad;
Man knows a braver Remedy for sorrow:
Revenge! the Attribute of Gods, they stamped it
With their great Image on our Natures; dye!
Consider well the Cause that calls upon thee:
And if thou art base enough, dye then: Remember
Thy Belvidera suffers: Belvidera!
Dye -- Damn first -- what be decently interred
In a Churchyard, and mingle thy brave du^t
With stinking Rogues that rot in dirty winding sheets,
Surfeit-slain Fools, the common Dung o'th Soil.

Jaff. Oh!


Pierr. Well said, out with it, Swear a little --


Jaff. Swear!
By Sea and Air! by Earth, by Heaven and Hell,
I will revenge my Belvidera's Tears!
Hark thee my Friend -- Priuli -- is -- a Senator!

Pierr. A Dog!


Jaff. Agreed.


Pierr. Shoot him.


Jaff. With all my heart.
No more: Where shall we meet at Night?

Pierr. I Will tell thee;
On the Ryalto every Night at Twelve
I take my Evening's walk of Meditation,
There we two will meet, and talk of precious
Mischief --

Jaff. Farewell.


Pierr. At Twelve.


Jaff. At any hour, my plagues
Will keep me waking. Ex. Pierr.
Tell me why, good Heaven,
Thou made me what I am, with all the Spirit,
Aspiring thoughts and Elegant desires
That fill the happiest Man? Ah! rather why
Did thou not form me fordid as my Fate,
Base minded, dull, and fit to carry Burdens?
Why have I sense to know the Curse that is on me?
Is this just dealing, Nature? Belvidera! Enter Belvidera.
Poor Belvidera!

Belvid. Lead me, lead (...) my Virgins!
To that kind Voice. My Lord, my Love, my Refuge!
Happy my Eyes, when they behold thy (...):
My heavy heart will leave its doleful beating
At sight of thee, and bound with sprightful joys.
Oh smile, as when our Loves were in their Spring,
And cheer my (...) Soul.

Jaff. As when our Loves
Were in their Spring (...) had then my Fortune changed?
Art thou not (...), (...) the same,
Kind, good, and tender, as my Arms first found thee
If thou art altered, (...) I have harbor (...)
Where ease my loaded Heart? Oh! where complain?

Belv. Does this appear like Change, or Love (...)
When thus I throw my self into thy bosom,
With all the (...) of a strong Truth:
Beat's not my heart, as (...)
To a new Change of bliss; (...),
Than did thy Mother when she hugged thee (...),
And blessed the Gods for all her Travel past.

Jaff. Can there in Woman be such glorious Faith?
Sure all ill stories of thy Sex are false^
Oh Woman! lovely (...)
To temper Man: We had been Brutes without you,
Angels are Painted fair, to look like (...);
There Is in you all that we believe of Heaven,
Amazing (...), (...) and Truth,
Eternal Joy, and everlasting Love.

Belv. If Love be Treasure, we will be (...) rich:
I have so much, my heart will surely break with it;
Vow's cannot express it, (...) declare
How great is my Joy, I am dumb with (...) thought;
I swell, and figh, and labor with (...).
Oh lead me to (...) wide (...),
Barren as our Misfortunes, where (...) Soul
May have its (...), Where I may (...) aloud
To the high Heaven's, (...) every (...) Planet,
With what a boundless stock my bosom's fraught,
Where I may throw my (...) Arms about thee,
Give (...) to Love with (...), kindling Joy,
And let off all the Fire that is in my Heart.

Jaff. Oh Belvidera! double I am a Beggar,
Undone by Fortune, and in debt to thee;
Want! worldly Want! that hungry sneager Fiend
Is at my heels, and chaces me in view;
Can thou bear Cold and Hunger? Can these Limbs,
Framed for the tender Offices of Love,
Endure the bitter Gripes of smarting Poverty?
When (...) by our miseries abroad,
(As suddenly we shall be) to seek out
(In some far Climate where our Names are strange^)
For charitable (...): (...),
When in a Bed of straw we (...),
And the bleak winds shall whistle (...);
Will thou then talk thus to me? (...) thou then
Hush my (...) thus, and shelter me with Love?

Belv. Oh I will love thee, even in Madness love thee:
Tho my distracted Senses should (...),
I Would find some intervals, when (...)
Should swage it self and be let loose to (...)
Though the bare Earth be all our Resting place,
It Is Root's our food, some (...), (...),
I Will make this Arm a Pillow for thy Head;
As thou sighing lie, and swelled with (...),
Creep to thy Bosom, (...) the (...) of Love
Into thy Soul, and (...) thee to thy (...);
Then praise our God, and watch thee ^till the (...).

Jaff. Hear this you Heaven's, and wonder how you made her!
Reign, reign ye Mon^ that d^vide the World,
Busy Rebellion (...) will let you kn^w
Tranquillity and Happiness like (...),
Like gaudy Ships, the (...) Billows fall
And rise again, to lift you in your Pride;
They wait but for a (...) and then (...) you:
I, in my private Bark, already (...),
Like a poor Merchant driven on unknown Land,
That had by chance packt up his (...) Treasure
In one dear Casket, and saved only (...):
Since I must (...) further on (...),
Thus hug my little, but my (...),
Resolved to (...), (...) Ex^.

ACT. II.
Enter Plerre and Aquilina. Aquil. BY all thy Wrongs, thou art de^ to my Arms
Than all the Wealth of (...): Prithee stay,
And let us love to night.

Peirr. No: (...) Fool,
There Is Fool about thee: When a Woman sell^
Her Flesh to Fools, her Beauty's lost to me;
They leave a Taint, (...) where they have past,
There Is such a baneful Quality about'em,
Even spo^ls Complexions with their own Nauseousness,
They infect all they touch, I cannot think
Of tasting any thing a Fool has p^ll'd.

Aquil. I loath and (...) that Fool thou mean, as much
Or more than thou (...) But the Beast has Gold
That makes him necessary: Power too,
To qualify my Character, and poise me
Equal with peevish Virtue, that beholds
My Liberty with (...) In their Hearts
Are loose as I am, (...) Power
Sits in their Faces, and (...) Pleasures from'em.

Pierr. Much good may't do you, Madam, with your Senator.


Aquil. My Senator! why, can thou think that Wretch
E're filled thy (...) Arms with Pleasure (...)
Think thou, because I sometimes give him leave
To foil himself at what (...) for;
Because I force my self to endure and suffer him,
Think thou I love him? No, by all the Joys
Thou ever gav'st me, his Presence is my Penance;
The worst thing an old Man can be's a Lover,
A mere (...) Mori to poor woman.
I never lay by his decrepit side,
But all that night I pondered on my Grave.

Pierr. Would he (...) well sent (...)


Aquil. That'^ (...)
For then, my (...) I. (...) with pleasure
To play the Hypocrite: Oh! how I could weep
Over the dying Dotard, and kiss him too,
In hopes to smother him quite; then, when the time
Was come to pay my Sorrows at his Funeral,
For he has already made me Heir to Treasures,
Would make me out-acta real Widows whining:
How could I frame my face to fit my mourning!
With wringing hands attend him to his Grave,
Fall swooning on his (...): Take mad possession,
Even of the Dismal Vault, where he lay buried,
There like the Ephesian Matron dwell, till Thou,
My lovely Soldier, come to my Deliverance;
Then throwing up my Veil, with open Arms
And laughing Eyes, run to new dawning Joy.

Pierr. No more! I have Friends to meet me here to night,
And must be private. As you prize my Friendship
Keep up your Coxcomb: Let him not pry nor listen,
Nor fisk about the House as I have seen him,
Like a tame mumping Squirrel with a bell on;
Currs will be abroad to bite him, if you do.

Aquil. What Friends to meet? may I not be of your Council^


Pierr. How! a Woman ask Questions out of Bed?
Go to your Senator, ask him what passes
Amongst his Brethren, he will hide nothing from you;
But pump not me for Politics. No more!
Give order that whoever in my name
Comes here, receive Admittance: so good night.

Aquil. Must we never meet again! Embrace no more!
Is Love so soon and ulterly forgotten!

Pierr. As you hence-forward treat your Fool, (...) think on it.


Aquil. Cursed be all Fools, and doubly cursed my self,
The worst of Fools -- I die if he forsakes me;
And now to keep him, Heaven or Hell instruct me. Exeunt.

SCENE The Ryalto.
Enter Jaffeir. Jaff. I am here, and thus, the Shades of Night around me,
I look as if all Hell were in my Heart,
And I in Hell. Nay, surely it is so with me;
For every step I tread, methinks some (...)
Knocks at my Breast, and bids it not be quiet,
I Have heard, how desperate Wretches, like my self,
Have wandered out at this dead time of Night
To meet the Foe of Mankind in his wall^:
Sure I am so Cursed, that, though of Heaven forsaken,
No Minister of Darkness cares to Tempt me.
Hell! Hell! why sleep thou?

Enter. Pierre. Pierr. Sure I have stayed too long:
The Clock has struck, and I may lose my Proselyt^.
Speak, who goes there?

Jaff. A Dog. that comes to howl
At yonder Moon: What Is he that asks the Question?

Pierr. A Friend to Dogs, for they are honest Creatures,
And never betray their Masters; never Fawn
On any that they love not: Well met, Friend:
Jaffeir!

Jaff. The same. Oh Peirre! Thou art come in season,
I was just going to Pray.

Pierr. Ah that is Mechanic,
Priests make a Trade on it, and yet starve by it too:
No Praying, it spoils Business, and time's (...):
Where Is Belvidera?

Jaff. For a Day or two
I Have lodged her privately, 'till I see farther
What Fortune will do with me? Prithee, Friend,
If thou would have me fit to hear good Council,
Speak not of Beldivera --

Pierr. Speak not of her.


Jaff. Oh no!


Pierr. Nor name her. May be I wish her well.


Jaff. Who well?


Pierr. Thy Wife, thy lovely Belvidera,
I hope a man may wish his Friends Wife well,
And no harm done!

Jaff. You Are merry Pierre!


Pierr. I am (...):
Thou shall smile too, and Belvidera smile;
We'll all rejoy^, here is something to buy Pins,
Marriage is Chargeable.

Jaff. I but half wished
To see the Devil, and he is here already.
Well!
What must this buy, Rebellion, Murder, Treason?
Tell me which way I must be damned for this.

Pierr. When last we parted, we had no qualms like these,
But entertained each others thoughts like Men,
Whose Souls were well acquainted. Is the World
Reformed since our last meeting? What new miracles
Have happened? Has Priuli's heart relented?
Can he be honest?

Jaff. Kind Heaven! let heavy Curses
Gall his old Age; Cramps, Aches, rack his Bones;
And bitterest disquiet wring his Heart;
Oh let him live 'till Life become his burden!
Let him groan under't long, linger an Age
In the worst Agonies and Pangs of Death;
And find its ease, but late.

Pierr. Nay, could thou not
As well, my Friend, have stretched the Curse to all
The Senate round, as to one single Villain?

Jaff. But Curses stiek not: Could I kill with Cursing,
By Heaven I know not thirty Heads in Venice
Should not be blasted; Senators should not
Like Dogs on Dunghills; but their Wives and Daughters
Dye of their own diseases. Oh for a Curse
To kill with!

Pierr. Daggers, Daggers, are much better!


Jaff. Ha!


Pierr. Daggers.


Jaff. But where are they?


Pierr. Oh, a Thousand
May be disposed in honest hands in Venice.

Jaff. Thou talk in Clouds.


Pierr. But yet a Heart half wronged
As thine has bin, would find the meaning, Jafferr.

Jaff. A thousand Daggers, all in honest hands;
And have not I a Friend will stick one here?

Pier. Yes, if I thought thou were not to be cherisht
To a nobler purpose, l'd be that Friend.
But thou have better Friends, Friends, whom thy Wrong,
Have made thy Friends; Friends, worthy to be called so;
I Will trust thee with a secret: There are Spirits
This hour at work. But as thou art a Man,
Whom I have picked and chosen from the World,
Swear, that thou will be true to what I utter,
And when I have told thee, that which only Gods
And Men like Gods are privy to, then swear,
No Chance or Change shall wrest it from thy Bosom.

Jaff. When thou would bind me, is there need of Oaths?
(Green Sickness Girls lose Maiden-heads with such Counters)
For thou art so near my heart, that thou may see
Its bottom, sound its strength, and firmness to thee:
Is Coward, Fool, or Villian, in my face?
If I seem none of these, I dare believe
Thou would not use me in a little Cause,
For I am fit for Honor's toughest task;
Nor ever yet found fooling was my Province;
And for a villainous inglorious enterprise,
I know thy heart so well, I dare lay mine
Before thee, set it to what Point thou will.

Pierr. Nay, It Is a Cause thou will be fond of Jaffeir.
For it is founded on the noblest Basis,
Our Liberties, our natural Inheritance;
There Is no Religion, no Hypocrisy in it;
We Will do the Business, and never fast and pray for it:
Openly act a deed, the World shall gaze
With wonder at, and envy when it is done.

Jaff. For Liberty!


Pierr. For Liberty my Friend:
Thou shall be freed from base Priuli's Tyranny,
And thy sequestered Fortunes healed again.
I shall be freed from opprobrious Wrongs,
That press me now, and bend my Spirit downward:
All Venice free, and every growing Merit
Succe^d toits just Right: Fools shall be pulled
From Wisdoms Seat; those baleful unclean Birds,
Those Lazy-Wols, who ((...) near Fortunes Top)
Sit only watchful with their heavy Wings
To cuff down new fledged Virtues, that would rise
To nobler heights, and make the Grove harmonious,

Jaff. What can I do?


Pierr. Cans't thou not kill a Senator?


Jaff. Were there one wise or honest, I could kill him
For herding with that nest of Fools and Knaves;
By all my Wrongs, thou talk as if revenge
Were to be had, and the brave Story warms me.

Pierr. Swear then!


Jaff. I do, by all those glittering Stars,
And yond great Ruling Planet of the Night!
By all good Powers above, and ill below!
By Love and Friendship, dearer than my Life!
No Power or Death shall make me false to thee.

Pierr. Here we embrance, and I Will unlock my Heart.
A Councel's held hard by, where the destruction
Of this great Empire's hatching: There I Will lead thee!
But be a Man, for thou art to mix with Men
Fit to disturb the Peace of all the World,
And rule it when it is wildest --

Jaff. I give thee thanks
For this kind warning: Yes, I will be a Man,
And charge thee, Pierre, when er'e thou see my fears
Betry me less, to rip this Heart of mine
Out of my Breast, and show it for a Cowards.
Come, let us begone, for from this hour I chase
All little thoughts, all tender humane Follies
Out of my bosom: Vengeance shall have room:
Revenge!

Pierr. And Liberty!


Jaff. Revenge! Revenge --


Exeunt. The Scene changes to Aquilina' s house, the Greek Curtezan. Enter
Renault. Renault. Why was my choice Ambition, the first ground
A Wretch can build on^ it is indeed at distance
A good Prospect, (...) to the View,
The Height delights as, and the Mountain Top
Looks beautiful, because it is (...) to Heaven,
But we never think how sandy's the Foundation,
What Storm will better, and what Tempest shake us!
Who Is there?

Enter Spinosa. Spino. Renault, good morrow! for by this time
I think the Scale of Night has turned the balance,
And weighs up Morning: Has the Clock struck Twelve?

Rena. Yes, Clocks will go as they are set: But Man,
Irregular Man's never constant, never certain:
I Have spent at least three pr^tious hours of darkness
In waiting dull attendance; it is the Curse
Of diligent Virtue to be mixed like mine,
With giddy Tempers, Souls but half resolved.

Spin. Hell (...) but Soul amongst us, it can frighten.


Rena. What Is then the cause that I am here alone?
Why are we not together (...)
Enter Eliot. O Sir, welcome!
You are an Englishman: When Treason's hatching
One might have thought you would not have been behind hand.
In what Whore's lap have you been lolling?
Give but an Englishman his Whore and ease,
Beef and a Sea-coal fire, he is yours for ever.

Eliot. Frenchman, you are (...).


Rena. How!


Enter Bedamore the Ambassador, Theodore, Brainveil, Durand, Brabe, Revellido,
Mezzana, Ternon, Retrosi, Conspirators. Bedam. At difference, fie.
Is this a time for quarrels? Thieves and Rogues
Fall out and brawl: Should Men of your high calling,
Men separated by the Choice of Providence,
From the gross heap of Mankind, and set here
In this great assembly as in one great Jewel,
T'adorn the bravest purpose it (...) on;
Should you like Boys wrangle for trifles?

Ren. Boys!


Beda. Renault, thy Hand!


Ren. I thought I Would given my Heart
Long since to every Man that mingles here;
But grieve to find it trusted with such Tempers,
That cannot forgive my froward Age its weakness.

Beda. Eliot, thou once had Vertne, I have seen
Thy stubborn Temper bend with godlike Goodness,
Not half thus courted: It Is thy Nations Glory,
To hugg the Foe that offers brave (...).
Once more embrace, my Friends -- (...) all embrace --
United thus, we are the mighty Engine
Must twist this rooted Empire from its Basis!
Totters it not already?

Eliot. Would it were tumbling.


Bed. Nay it shall down: This Night we Seal its ruin.

Enter Pierre. Oh Pierre! thou art welcome!
Come to my breast, for by its hopes thou look
Lovelily dreadful, and the Fate of Venice
Seems on thy Sword already. Oh my Mars!
The Poets that fust (...) a God of War
Sure prophesied of thee.

Pierr. Friends! was not Brutus,
(I mean that Brutus, who in open Senate
Stabbed the first Caesar that usurped the World)
A Gallant Man?

Rena. Yes, and Cat^ too;
Tho story wrong his Fame: for he conspired
To prop the reeling Glory of his Country:
His Cause was good.

Beda. And ours as much above it,
As Renault thou art Superior to Cethegus,
Or Pierre to Cassius.

Pierr. Then to what we aim at
When do we start? or must we talk for ever?

Beda. No Pierre, the Deed's near Birth: Fate seems to have set
The Business up, and given it to our care,
I hope there is not a heart nor hand amongst us
But is firm and ready.

All. All!
We Will die with Bedamor^.

Beda. Oh Men
Matchless, as wi^ your Glory be hereafter.
The Game is for a Matchless Prize, if won;
If lost, disgraceful Ruin.

Ren. What can lose it (...)
The public Stock's a Beggar; one (...)
Trusts not another: Look into their Stores
Of general safety; Empty Magazines,
A tattered Flee^, a murmuring unpaid Army,
Bankrupt Nobility, a harrast Commonalty,
A Factious, giddy, and divided Senate,
Is all the strength of Venice: Let Us destroy it;
Let Us fill their Magazines with Arms to awe them,
Man out their Fleet, and make their Trade maintain it;
Let loose the murmuring Army on their Masters,
To pay themselves with plunder, Lop their Nobles
To the base Roots, whence most of 'em first sprung;
Enslave the Rowt, whom smarting will make humble,
Turn out their droning Senate, and possess
That Seat of Empire which our Souls were framed for.

Pierr. Ten thousand men are Armed at your Nod,
Commanded all by Leaders fit to guide
A Battle for the freedom of the World;
This wretched State has starved them in its service,
And by your bounty quickened, they 're resolved
To serve your Glory, and revenge their own!
The have all their different Quarters in this City,
Watch for the Alarm, and grumble it is so tardy.

Beda. I doubt not Friend, but thy unwearied diligence
Has still kept waking, and it shall have ease;
After this Night it is resolved we meet
No More, '^ll Venice own us for her Lords.

Pierr. How lovely the Adriatique Whore,
Dressed in her Flames, will shine! devouring Flames!
Such as shall burn her to the watery bottm
And hiss in her Foundation.

Beda. Now if any
Amongst us that owns this glorious Cause,
Have friends or Interest, he would wish to save,
Let it be ^old, the general Doom is Sealed;
But I Would forgo the Hopes of a Worlds Empire,
Rather than wound the Bowels of my Friend.

Pierr. I must confess you there have touched my weakness,
I have a Friend; hear it, such a Friend!
My heart was never shut to him: Nay, I Will tell you,
He knows the very Business of this Hour;
But he rejoices in the Cause, and loves it,
W' have changed a Vow to live and die together,
And He Is at hand to ratify it here.

Ren. How! all betrayed?


Pierr. No -- I Have dealt nobly with you;
I Have brought my All into the public Stock;
I had but one Friend, and him I Will share amongst you;
Receive and Cherish him: Or if, when seen
And searched, you find him worthless, as my Tongue
Has lodged this Secret in his faithful Breast,
To ease your fears I wear a Dagger here
Shall rip it out again, and give you rest.
Come forth, thou only Good I er'e could boast of.

Enter Jaffeir with a Dagger. Beda. His Presence bears the show of Manly Virtue.


Jaff. I know you'^ wonder all, that thus uncalled,
I dare approach this place of fatal Councels;
But I am amongst you, and by Heaven it glads me,
To see so many Virtues thus united,
To restore Justice and dethrown Oppression.
Command this Sword, if you would have it quiet,
Into this Breast; but if you think it worthy
To cut the Throats of reverend Rogues in Robes,
Send me into the cursed assembled Senate;
It shrinks not, tho I meet a Father there;
Would you behold this City Flaming? Here Is
A hand shall bear a lighted Torch at noon
To the Arsenal, and set its Ga^es on fire.

Ren. You talk this well, Sir.


Jaff. Nay -- by Heaven I Will do this.
Come, come, I read distrust in all your faces,
You fear me a Villain, and indeed it is odd
To hear a stranger talk thus at first meeting,
Of matters, that have been so well debated;
But I come ripe with Wrongs as you with Councels;
I hate this Senate, am a Foe to Venice;
A Friend to none, but Men resolved like me,
To push on Mischief: Oh did you but know me,
I need not talk thus!

Beda. Pierre! I must embrace him,
My heart beats to this Man as if it knew him.

Rena. I never loved these huggers:


Jaff. Still I see
The cause delights me not. Your Friends survey me,
As I were dangerous -- but I come Armed
Against all doubts, and to your trust will give
A Pledge, worth more than all the World can pay for.
My Belvidera! Ho! my Belvidera!

Bed. What wonder next?


Jaff. Let me entreat you,
As I have henceforth hopes to call ye friends,
That all but the Ambassador, this
Grave Guide of Councels, with my friend that owns me,
Withdraw a while to spare a Woman's blushes.

Ex. all but Bed. Rena. Jaff. Pierr. Beda. Pierre, whither will this Ceremony
lead us?


Jaff. My Belvidera! Belvidera!


Belvid. Who? Enter Belvidera.
Who calls so loud at this late peaceful hour?
That Voice was wont to come in gentler whispers,
And fill my Ears with the soft breath of Love:
Thou hourly Image of my Thoughts, where art thou?

Jaff Indeed it is late.


Belv. Oh! I have slept, and dreamt,
And dreamt again: Where have thou been thou Loyterer?
Tho my Eyes closed, my Arms have still been opened;
Stretch every way betwixt my broken slumbers,
To search if thou (...) come to crown my Rest;
There Is no repose without thee: Oh the day,
Too soon will break, and wake us to our sorrow;
Come, come to bed, and bid thy Cares good Night.

Jaff. Oh Belvidera! we must change the Scene
In which the past Delights of Life were tasted:
The poor sleep little, we must learn to watch
Our labors late, and early every Morning,
Midst winter Frosts, then clad and fed with sparing,
Rise to our toils, and drudge away the day.

Belv. Alas! where am I! whither is it you lead me!
Methinks I read distraction in your face!
Something less gentle than the Fate you tell me:
You shake and tremble too! your blood runs cold!
Heaven's guard my Love, and bless his heart with Patience.

Jaff. That I have Patience, let our Fate bear witness,
Who has ordained it so, that thou and I
(Thou the divinest Good man e're possessed,
And I the wretched'st of the Race of Man)
This very hour, without one tear, must part.

Belv. Part! must we part? Oh! am I then forsaken?
Will my Love cast me off? have my misfortunes
Offended him so highly, that he will leave me?
Why dragg you from me? whither are you going?
My Dear! my Life! my Love!

Jaff. Oh Friends!


Belv. Speak to me.


Jaff. Take her from my heart,
She Will gain such hold else, I shall never get loose.
I charge thee take her, but with tender'st care,
Relieve her Troubles and assuage her sorrows.

Ren. Rise, Madam! and Command amongst your Servants!


Jaff. To you, Sirs, and your Honors, I bequeath her,
And with her this, when I prove unworthy -- Gives a dagger.
You know the rest: -- Then strike it to her heart;
And tell her, he, who three whole happy years
Lay in her Arms, and each kind Night repeated
The passionate Vows of still increasing Love,
Sent that Reward for all her Truth and Sufferings.

Belv. Nay, take my Life, since he has sold it cheaply;
Or send me to some distant Clime your slave,
But let it be far off, least my complainings
Should reach his guilty Bars, and ^^^ke his peace.

Jaff. No Belvidera, I Have contrived thy honor,
Trust to my Faith, and be but Fortune kind
To me, as I Will preserve that faith unbroken,
When next we meet, I Will lift thee to a height,
Shall gather all the gazing World about thee,
To wonder what strange Virtue placed thee there.
But if we never meet more --

Belv. Oh thou unkind one,
Never meet more! have I deserved this from you?
Look on me, tell me; tell me, speak thou dear deceiver,
Why am I separated from thy Love?
If I am false, accuse me; but if true,
Don't, prithee don't in poverty forsake me.
But pity the sad heart, that is torn with parting.
Yet hear me! yet recall me --

Ex. Ren. Bed. and Belv. Jaff. Oh my Eyes!
Look not that way, but turn your selves a while
Into my heart, and be weaned all together.
My Friend, where art thou?

Pierr. Here, my Honor's Brother.


Jaff. Is Belvidera gone?


Pierr. Renault has lead her
Back to her own Apartment: but, by Heaven!
Thou must not see her more till our work's over.

Jaff. No:


Pierr. Not for your life.


Jaff. Oh Pierre, were thou but she,
How I could pull thee down into my heart,
Gaze on thee till my Eye-strings cra^kt with Love,
Till all my sinews with its fire extended,
Fixed me upon the Rack of ardent longing;
Then swelling, sighing, raging to be blessed,
Come like a panting Turtle to thy Breast,
On thy soft Bosom, hovering, (...) and play,
Confess the cause why last I fled away;
'Own 'twas a fault, but swear to give it over,
And never follow false Ambition more. Ex. Ambo.

ACT III.
Enter Aquilina and her Maid. Aquil. TEll him I am gone to bed: Tell him I am
not (...) home; tell him I Have better Company with me, or anything; tell him in
short I will not (...) the (...) troubles^ vexatious Fool: He Is worse Company
th^n (...) igno^nt Phy^an -- I Will not be disturbed at these unseasonable hours.


Maid. But Madam! He Is hoar already, just entered the doors.


Aq^l. Turn him out (...), you (...), (...), giddy^ brained Ass! if he will
not begone, (...) the (...) fire and burn us both: I had rather meet a Toad
(...) my (...) the (...) old hideous Animal in my Chamber to Night. (...)
Antonio.


(...). Nacky, Nacky, (...) -- how (...) do (...). I am come little Nacky^ past
(...) Clock, a (...) hour; time in all Conscience (...) go to (...) -- (...)
(...) I (...)? Ay Nacky; (...) Aq^llna Naquilina, Naquilina, (...), (...),
(...), (...), (...), (...) Nacky -- come let us to bed -- you (...) you Pugg you
-- you little Pu^ -- (...) -- I am a (...).


Aquil. You are Fool, I am sure.


(...). May be so too sweetheart. (...) the (...) for all that. (...) (...),
(...)


(...). You would do well (...) to be (...) no longer, but leave me to my self,
be (...) go home, Sir.


A^to. Home Madona!


Aquil. Ay home, S^ Who am I?


Anto. Mado^ (...) you are my -- you are -- thou art my little N^cky (...) --
that is all.


Aquil. I find you are (...) to be trouble^ (...) so (...) make short of the
matter in (...) words. I (...) you, (...) you, loath you, (...) am (...) of
(...) of you -- (...) you^, you ^re (...) Old, (...) -- (...) ^ meddling, with
every thing, and if you had not Money (...) you are good for nothing.


A^to. Good for nothi^ Hurry (...) I Will (...) the (...) sently. Sixty one years
(...), and good (...), that is brave.

To the Maid. (...) turn you out for a season; go turn out I say, it is our
will and pleasure to be private some (...) -- out, out when you are bid too --

(...) her (...). Good for nothing you say.


Aquil. Why what are you good for?


Anto. In the first place, Madam, I am Old, and consequently very wise, very
wise, Madona, (...) mark that: in the second place take notice, if you please,
that I am a S^ator, and when (...) think (...) make Speeches Madona. Hurry
durry, I can make a Speech in the Senate House now and then -- would make your
hair stand an end, Ma^na.


Aquil. What (...) I for your Speeches in the Senate House, if you would be
(...) here, I should thank you.


Anto. Why, I can make Speeches to thee too, my lovely (...); for Example -- my
cruel (...) one,

(...) of Gold, and at every (...) shakes it. Since it is my (...), that you
should with your Servant angry prove; tho late at Night -- I hope (...) not
(...) late with this to gain reception for my Love -- there is for (...) my
little Nicky Nacky -- take it, (...) it -- I say take it, or (...) throw it
(...) your head -- how now, (...)


Aquil. Truly, my Illu^ Senator, I must confess your Honor is at present most
profoundly (...) indeed.


Anto. Very well: Come, now let us sit down and think upon it a little -- come
(...) -- sit down by me a little my Nicky (...), (...) --

(...) (...) durry -- good for nothing --


Aquil. No Sir, if you please I can know my distance and stand.


(...). Stand^ How^ Nacky, up and I down! Nay then let me exclaim with the Poet.

Show me a (...), A (...), (...). Hurry durry -- not sit down -- (...) --

You will not sit down?


(...). No (...).


A^to. Then look you now, suppose me (...) Bull; a (...) Bull, the Bull of
Bulls, or any (...) up I get (...) with my brows th^s (...) -- (...) I say
(...), (...), (...). You will not (...) will you^ -- I broo --


(...) like a (...), and drives her about. Aquil. Well, Sir, I must (...). Now
your honor has been a Bull, pray what Beast will your Worship please to (...)


She (...) down. A^to. Now I Will be (...), and thy Lover little Nicky (...)

He (...) (...), (...), toad, toad! spit in my Face a little, Nacky -- spit in
my Face prithee, spit in my Face, never so little: spit but a little bit --
spit, spit, spit, spit, when you are bid I say; do, prithee spit -- now, now,
now, spit: what you will not spit, will you? Then I Will be a Dog.


Aquil. A Dog my Lord?


Anto. Ay a Dog -- and I Will give thee this to'ther purse to let me be a Dog --
and to use me like a Dog a little. Hurry durry -- I will -- here it is. --


Gives the Purse. Aquil. Well, with all my heart. But let me beseech your
Dogship to play your trick's over as fast as you can, that you may come to
stinking the sooner, and be turned out of doors as you deserve.


A^to. Ay, ay -- no matter for that -- that shall not move me -- Now, bough waugh
waugh, bough waugh --


He gets (...) the Table. Barks like a Dog. Aquil. Hold, hold, hold Sir, I
(...) you: what is it you do? If Curs (...), they must (...), Sir. Do you see,
(...).


Anto. Ay with all my heart: do kick, kick on, now I am under the Table, kick
(...) -- kick harder -- harder yet, bough waugh waugh, waugh, bough -- ^odd,
(...) have a (...) at thy shins -- bough waugh wough, waugh, bough -- 'odd she
kicks (...). --


Aquil. Nay then I Will go another way to work with you: and I think here is an
(...) for the purpose

(...) What bite your Mistress, (...)! out, out of (...), you Dog, to kennel
and behang'd -- bite your Mistress by the Legs, you rogue. --


She (...). Anto. Nay pri^ (...), ^ow thou art too loving: Hurry durry, 'odd
I Will be a Dog no longer.


Aquil. Nay none of your ^ing and (...): But be gone, or here is the (...): What
(...) your Mistress by the Legs you mungril? out of doors -- (...), to kennel
(...) go.


Anto. This is very (...): Nacky very (...) look you, I will not go -- I will
not stir (...) the door, that I resolve -- hurry durry, what (...) me out^


She (...) him out. Aquil. Ay, and if you come here any more to night I Will have
my Footmen lug you, you (...): What (...) your poor Mistre^ Nacky, sirrah!


(...) (...) Maid. Heavens Madam! (...) the matter?


He (...) at the (...) like a (...). Aquil. Call my Footmen hither ^tly.


Maid. They are here (...) all (...) with a strange ^olse, that (...) of.


Aquil. Go all of you and tu^ that (...) in (...) next room out of my house --
If I (...) s^ him within these w^lls again, without my leave for his
Admitta^ce, you s^king Rogues -- I Will have you ^oison'd all, poisoned, like R^:
every Corner of the house shall stink of one of you: (...), and l^ hereafter to
^now my pleasure. So now (...) my ^tre:

Thus when Godlike (...),
We Sacrufuc^ (...) Fool (...).

Exeunt. SCENE The Second.
(...) (...). ^elvid. I Am (...) I am ^old! betrayed to (...)!
(...) Ruin has enclosed me!
No soone^ was I to my bed re^d,
To weigh, and (w^ing) (...),
But the old ho^ (...) to (...)
My Peace and Honor (...), c^
(Like Tarq^in) gastely with (...) Lust.
Oh thou Ro^ (...) thou could find friends to vindica^ thy Wrong;
I never had but one, and he is proved false;
He that should g^d (...), (...),
(...) me! undone me! Oh t^ I (...) him!
Where shall I go! Oh (...) whither (...)?

(...) (...) Jaff. Can, ^lvidera want a resting place
When these poor (...) are (...)?
Oh it is in vain to struggle with D^
Strong as my Love to thee, (...) moment
I am from thy sight, the H^rt (...) my (...)
Moans like a tender In^t i^ i^ (...)
Whose Nurse had l^ it: (...), and w^ the Songs
Of gentle Love persuade i^ to (...)

Relvid. I fear the stubborn (...) will not own me,
It Is grown a Rebel to be (...) do long^,
Scor^ns the Indulge^ Bo^ that (...) ^ll'd it,
And like a Disobedie^ Child ^dains
The soft Authority of (...).

(...). There was (...)


(...). Yes, yes, the was^ time,
When (...)'s tears, her cries, and sorrows
Were not de^; when if the chanced to (...),
Or look but ^d; there was indeed a time
When (...) would have (...) in his Arms,
Eased her declining Head upon his Breast,
And never left her 'till he found the Cause,
But let her now w^ (...),
Cry, 'till she rend the Earth; sigh 'till she burst
Her heart asunder; still he bears it all;
Deaf as the Wind, and as the Rocks unshaken.

Jaff. Have I been deaf? am I that Rock unmoved?
Against whose root, T^s beat and sighs a^e (...)
In vain have I (...) thy Sorrows (...)!
Witness against me Heav'^s, have I done this^
Then bear me in a Whirl wind back again,
And let that angry dear one never forgive me!
Oh thou too rashly (...) of my Love!
Could thou but (...) ^ow I have (...) this night,
Dark and alone, no p^ow to my He^d,
Rest in my Eyes, nor quiet in my Heart,
Thou would not Belvidera, sure thou would^ (...)
Talk to me thus, but like a p^tying Angel
Spreading thy (...) come settle on my breast,
And hatch warm comfort there e^re sorrows freeze it.

Belv. Why, then poor (...), in what baleful Cor^
Have thou been talking with that Witch the Night?
On what cold stone have (...) been stretched along,
Gathering the grumbling ^ds about thy Head,
To mix with theirs the Accents, of thy Woes!
Oh now I ^d the Cause my Love forsakes me!
I am no longer fit to bear a share
In his Concernments: My weak female Vi^ue
Must not be trusted; It Is too ^ail and tend^r.

Jaff. Oh (...)! Porcia! What a Soul was thine?


Belv. That (...) was a Woman, and when (...)
Big with the fate of (...), (Heaven guard thy safety!)
Concealed from her the Labors of his Mind,
She let him see, h^ Blood was great as his,
Flowed from a Spring as noble, and a Heart
Fit to partake his Troubles, as his L^ve:
(...), fetch that D^gger back, the (...) dower
Thou gav'st last night in parting with me, stril^ it
Here to my heart, and as the Blood flows from i^,
Judge if it run not (...) as (...) Da^ghter's.

Jaff. Thou ^rt too good, and I indeed unworthy,
Unworthy so much (...)! Teach me how
I may deserve such matc^less Love as thine,
And see with what attention I Will obey thee.

Belv. Do not despise me: that is the All I ask.


Jaff. Despise thee! Hear me --


Belv. Oh thy charming Tongue
Is but too well acquainted with my weakness,
Knows, let it name but Love, my melting heart
Dissolves within my Bre^st, 'till with (...) Eyes
I reel into thy Arms, and all is forgotten.

Jaff. What shall I do?


Belv. Tell me! be just, and tell me
Why dwells that busy Cloud upon thy face?
Why am I made a (...) why that (...),
And I not know the Cau^? Why when the World
Is wrapped in Rest, why chooses then my Love
To wander up and down in horrid darkness,
Loathing his bed, and these desiring Arms?
Why are those Ey^ Blood shot, with tedious watching?
Why starts (...) now? and looks as if he (...)
His Fate were (...)? 'Tell me, ease my (...)!
Least when we next time meet, I want the power
To search into the sickness of thy Mind,
But talk as wildly then as thou look now.

Jaff. Oh Betvider^!


^elv. Why was I last night delivered to a Villain?


Jaff. Hah, a Villain!


Belv. Yes! to a Villain! Why at such an hour
Meets that assembly all made up of Wretches
That look as Hel^ad had drawn 'em into League?
Why, I in this hand, and in (...) Dagger,
Was I delivered with such dre^ Ceremonies?
`` To you, Sirs, and to your Honor I be ^th ^er,
`` And with her this: When e're I prove ^worthy,
`` You know the rest, then strike it to her Heart?
Oh! why's that rest concealed from me? must I
Be made the hostage o^ a (...)?
For such I know I am; that is all my value!
But by the Love and Loyalty I owe thee,
I Will free thee from the Bondage of these Slaves,
Strait to the Senate, tell'em all I know,
All that I think, all that my fears inform me!

Jaff. Is this the Roman Virtue! this the Blood,
That boasts its purity with Cato's Daughter!
Would she have e're betrayed her Brutus?

Belv. No:
For Brutus trusted her: Were thou so kind,
What would not Belvidera suffer for thee?

Jaff. I shall undo my self, and ^ell thee all.


Belv. Look not upon me, as I am a Woman,
But as a Bone, thy Wife, thy Friend; who long
Has had admission to thy heart, and there
Studied the Virtues of thy gallant Nature;
Thy Constancy; thy Courage and thy Truth,
Have been my daily ^esson! I have learnt them,
Am bold as thou, can suffer or despise
The worst of Fates for thee; and with thee share them.

Jaff. Oh you divinest Powers! look down and hear
My Prayers! instruct me to reward this Virtue!
Yet think a litt^, (...) thou tempt me further:
Think I have a Tale to tell, will shake thy Nature,
Melt all this boasted Constancy thou talk o^
Into vile tears and despicable sorrows:
Then if thou should betray me!

Be^. Shall (...) ^wear?


Jaff. No: do not swear: I would not violate
Thy tender Nature with so rude a Bond:
But as thou hop'st to see me live my days,
And love thee long, lock this within thy Breast;
I Have bound my self by all the strictest Sacraments,
Divine and humane --

Belv. Speak! --


Jaff. To kill thy Father --


Be^v. My Father!


Jaff. Nay the Throats of the whole Senate
Shall bleed my Be^videra: He amongst (...)
That spares his Father, Brother, or his ^riend,
Is Damned: How rich and beauteous will the face
Of Ruin look, when these wide street^ run blood;
I and the glorious Partner's of my Fortune
Shouting, and striding over the prostrate Dead:
Still to new waste; whilst thou, far off in safety
Smiling, shall see the wonders of our daring;
And when night comes, with Praise and Love rec^ive me.

Belv. Oh!


Jaff. Have a care, and shrink not even in thought!
For if thou do (...) --

Belv. I know it, thou will kill me.
Do, strike thy Sword into this bosom: Lay me
Dead on the Earth, and then thou will be safe:
Murder my Father! tho his Cruel Nature
Has persecuted me to my undoing,
Driven me to basest wants; Can I behold him
With smiles of Vengeance, butchered in his Age?
The sacred ^ountain of my life destroyed?
And can thou shed the blood that gave me being?
Nay, be a Traitor too, and sell the Count^;
Can thy great Heart de^cend so (...) low,
Mix with hired Slaves, ^ravoes and Common stabbers,
Nose-slitters, Ally-lurking Villians join
With such a Crew, and take a (...) Wages,
To cut the Thro^ of (...) as they (...)

Jaff. Thou wrong (...) me, (...) (...), (...)
With Men of Souls: (...) to reform the ills
Of all Mankind: There Is not a Heart (...) them,
But's as stout as Death, yet honest as the Nature
Of Man first made, e're Fraud, and Vice were fashions.

Belv. What Is he, to whose cursed hands last night thou (...) me?
Was that well done? Oh! I could tell a story
Would rowse thy Lion Heart out of its Den,
And make it rage with terrifying fury.

Jaff. Speak on I (...) t^ee!


Belv. Oh my (...)
Thy Belvidera's Peace (...) thy Care,
Remove me from this place: Last nigh^, last night

Jaff. Distract me not, but give me all the Truth.


Belv. No sooner were thou (...), and I alone,
Left in the power (...) that old Son of Mischief;
No sooner was I (...) on my sad Bed,
But that vile Wretch approacht me; loose, unbutton'd,
Read for violation, (...) Heart
Throbb'd with its ^ears: Oh how I wept and (...),
And shrunk and trembled; (...) in (...) for him
That should protect me. Thou alas! were gone!

Jaff. Patience! sweet Heaven, 'till I make vengeance sure.


Belv. He drew the hideous Dagger forth thou gav'st him,
And with upbra^ding smiles he said, behold it;
This is the pledge of a false Husbands love:
And in my Arms then pressed, and would have clasped me;
But with my Cries I scared his Coward heart,
'Till he withdrew, and muttered vows to Hell.
These are thy Friends! with these thy Life, thy Honor,
Thy Love, all is stak't, and all will go to ruin.

Jaff. No more: I charge thee keep this secret close;
Clear up thy sorrows, look as if thy wrongs
Were all forgot, and treat him like a Friend,
As no complaint were made. No more, retire,
Retire my Life, and doubt not of my Honor;
I Will heal its failings, and deserve thy Love.

Belv. Oh should I part with thee, I fear thou will
In Anger leave me, and return no more:

Jaff. Return no more! I would not live without thee
Another Night to purchase the Creation.

Belv. When shall we meet again?


Jaff. Anon at Twelve!
I Will steal my self to thy expecting Arms,
Come like a Traveled Dove and bring thee Peace.

Belv. Indeed!


Jaff. By all our loves!


Belv. It Is hard to part:
But sure no falsehood e're looked so fairly.
Farewell -- Remember Twelve.

Ex (...). Jaff. Let Heaven forget me
When I remember not thy Truth, thy Love.
How cursed is my Condition, tossed and justl'd
From every Corner; Fortune's Common Fool
The jest of Rogues, an Instrumental Ass
For Villains to lay loads of Shame upon,
And drive about just for their ease and scorn.

Enter Pierre. Pierr. Jaffeir!


Jaff. Who calls!


Pierr. A Friend, that could have wished
To Have found thee otherwise employed: what, hunt
A Wife on the dull ^oil! sure a stanch Husband
Of all Hounds is the dullest? will thou never,
Never be weaned from C^^dles and Confections?
What feminine Tale have thou been listening to,
Of unayr'd shirts; Catharrs and Tooth Ash got
By thin-sol'd shoos? Damnation! that a Fellow
Chosen to be a Sharer in the Destruction
Of a whole People, should sneak thus in Corners
To ease his fulsom Lusts, and Fool his Mind.

Jaff. May not a Man then trifle out an hour
With a kind Woman and not wrong his calling?

Pierr. Not in a Cause like ours.


Jaff. Then Friend our Cause
Is in a damned condition: for I Will tell thee,
That Canker-worm called Letchery has touched it,
It Is tainted vilely: would thou think it Renault,
(That mortified old withered Winter Rogue)
Loves simple Fornication like a Priest,
I found him out for watering at my Wife:
He visited her last night like a kind Guardian:
Faith she has some Temptations, that is the truth on it.

Pierr. He durst not wrong his Trust!


Jaff. 'Twas something late tho
To take the freedom of a Ladies Chamber.

Pierr. Was she in bed?


Jaff. Yes faith in Virgin sheets
White as her bosom, Pierre, disht neatly up,
Might tempt a weaker appetite to taste.
Oh how the old Fox stunk I warrant thee
When the rank fit was on him.

Pierr. Patience guide me!
He used no Violence?

Jaff. No, no! out on it, violence!
Played with her neck; brusht her with his Gray-beard,
Struggled and towz'd, tickled her 'till she squeak'd a little
May be, or so -- but not a jot of Violence --

Pierr. Damn him.


Jaff. Ay, so say I: but hush, no more on it;
All hitherto is well, and I believe
My self no Monster yet: Tho no Man knows
What Fate he is born to? sure it is near the hour
We all should meet for our concluding (...)
Will the Ambassador be here in person?

Pierr. No: he has sent Commission to that Villain, (...),
To give the (...) Charge;
I Would have thee be a Man if (...)
And keep thy temper; (...) a brave (...)
Never comes too late.

Jaff. Fear not, I am cool as Patience:
Had he completed my dishonor, rather
Then hazard the (...) our hopes are ripe for,
I Would bear it all (...).

Pierr. He Is (...) coming this way through the (...);
(...) seem full,

Jaff. Prithee retire, and leave me
With him alone: I Will put him to some trial,
See how his rotten part will bear the (...).

(...). Be careful then.


Ex. (...). Jaff. Nay never doubt, but trust me.
What, be a Devil! take a Damning Oath
For shedding (...)! can there be a (...)
In merciful repentance? (...) this (...).

(...) Renault. Renault. (...)! and (...)! what a slave is Man!
To let his itching flesh thus get the better of him!
Dispatch the Tool her Husband -- that we are well.
Who Is there?

(...). A Man.


Ren. My Friend, my near Ally!
The hostage of your faith, my beauteous Charge, is very well.

Jaff. Sir, are you sure of that?
Stands she in perfect health? beats her pulse even?
Neither too hot nor cold?

Ren. What means that question?


Jaff. Oh Women have fanta stick Constitutions,
Inconstant as their Wishes, always wavering,
And never fixed; was it not boldly done
Even at first sight to trust the Thing I loved
(A (...) Treasure too!) with Youth so fierce
And vigorous as thine? but thou art honest.

Ren. Who dares accuse me?


Jaff. Cursed be him that doubts
Thy virtue, I have tried it and declare
Were I to choose a Guardian of my Honor
I Would put it into thy kee^ing: for I ^now the^.

Ren. Know me!


Jaff. Ay know thee: There Is no falsehood in thee.
Thou look just as thou (...): Let us embrace.
Now would thou cut my Throat (...) I cut thine?

R^n. You dare not do it.


Jaff. You (...).


Ren. How!


Jaff. No more.


It Is a ba^e World, and must reform, that is all.

Enter Spinos^, (...), Eliot, (...), Durand Brainveil, and the (...) of the
(...). Ren. (...)


(...). The same


(...). You are welcome!


Spin. You are (...), (...)


Ren. It Is a cold Night indeed, I am Aged,
Full of decay and natural infirmities, (...) (...)
We shall be (...) Friend, I (...).

(...). 'Twas not well done, thou (...) have (...) him and not have galled him.


Jaff. Damn him, let him (...).
Heaven! where am I? (...) with (...) Fiends.
That wait to Damn me. What Devil's (...)
When he forgets his (...) -- (...) my heart.

Ren. My Friends, it is late: are we assembled all.
Where Is Theodore?

(...). At hand.


Ren. Spinosa.


Spin. (...).


Ren. Brainveil.


(...). I am ready.


Ren. Durand and Brabe.


Dur. Command us,
We are both prepared!

Ren. Mezzana, Revellido,
(...) Retrosi; Oh you are Men I find
(...) to behold your Fate, and meet her Summons,
To morrow's rising Sun must see you all
Decked in your honors are the Soldiers ready?

Omn. All, all.


Ren. You, Durand, with your thousand must possess
St. Marks; You, Captain, know your charge already;
It Is to secure the Ducal Palace: you
Brabe with a hundred more (...) gain the (...).
With the like number Brainveil to the Procuralle.
'Be all this done with the least tumult possible,
'Till in each place you post sufficient guards:
Then sheath your Swords in every breast you meet.

Jaff. Oh reverend Cruelty: Damned bloody Villain!


Ren. During this Execution, Durand, you
Must in the midst keep your Battalia fast,
And ^heodore be sure to plant the Canon
That may Command the streets; whilst Revellido,
M^zzana, Ternon and Retrosi, Guard you.
(This done!) weel give the General Alarm,
App^y Petards, and force the (...) Gates;
Then fire the City round in several places,
Or with our Canon (if it dare resist)
Batte^'t to Ruin. But above all I charge you
Shed blood enough, spare neither Sex nor Age,
Name nor Condition; if there live a Senator
After to morrow, tho the dullest Rogue
That er'e sa^d nothing, we have lost our ends;
If possible, lets kill the very Name
Of Senator, and bury it in blood.

Jaff. Merciless, (...) slave! -- Ay, blood enough!
Shed blood enough, old Renault: how thou charm'st me!

Ren. But one thing more, and then farewell till Fate
Join us again, or separate us ever:
First, let us embrace, Heaven knows who next shall thus
Wi^g ye together: But let us all remember
We ^ear no common Cause upon our Swords,
Let ea^h Man think that on his single Virtue
Dep^ds the Good and Fame of all the rest;
Eter^l Honor or perpetual Infamy.
Let Us rem^mber, through what dreadful hazards
Propitious Fortune hitherto has led us,
How ^ft^n on the brink of some discovery
have we stood tottering, and yet still kept our ground
So w^ll, the busiest searchers never could follow
T^ose subtle Tracks which puzzled all suspicion:
You droop Sir.

Jaff. No: with a most profound attention
I Have hard it all, and wonder at thy virtue.

Ren. Though there be yet few hours twi^t them and Ruin,
Are not the Senate lulled in full security,
Quiet and satisfied, as Fools are always!
Never did so profound repose foretun
Calamity so great: Nay our good Fortune
Has blinded the most piercing of Mankind:
Strengthened the fearfull'st, charmed the most suspectful,
Confounded the most subtle: for we live,
We live my Friends, and quickly shall our Life
Prove fatal to these Tyrants: Let Us consider
That we destroy Oppression, Avarice,
A People nursed up equally with (...)
And loathsome Lusts, which Nature most abhors,
And such as without shame she cannot suffer.

Jaff. Oh Belvidera, take me to thy Arms
And show me where is my Peace, for I Have lost it.

Ex. Jaff. Ren. Without the least remorse then let us resolve
With Fire and Sword (...) these Tyrants,
And when we shall behold those (...) Tribunals,
Stained by the Tears and (...) of the Innocent,
Burning with flames rather from Heaven than ours,
The raging furious and unpitying Soldier
Pulling his reeking Dagger from the (...)
Of gasping Wretches; Death in every (...),
With all that sad disorder can produce,
To make a Spectacle of horror: Then,
Then let us call to mind, my dearest Friends,
That there is nothing pure upon the Earth,
That the most valued things have most allays,
And that in change of all those vile Enormities,
Under whose weight this wretched Country labors,
The Means are only in our hands to Crown them.

Pierr. And may those Powers above that are propitious
To gallant minds record this Cause, and bless it.

Ren. Thus happy, thus secure of all we wish for,
Should there my Friends be found amongst us one
False to this glorious Enterpr^e, what Fate,
What Vengeance were enough for such a Villian?

Eliot. Death here without repentance, Hell hereafter.


Ren. Let that be my lot, if as here I stand
Listed by Fate amongst her darling Sons,
Tho I had one only ^rother, dear by all
The strictest ties of Nature; tho one hour
Had given us birth, one Fortune fed our wants,
One only love, and that but of each other,
Still filled our minds: Could I have such a Friend
Joined in this Cause, and had but ground to fear
Meant fowl play; may this right hand drop from me,
If I Would not hazard all my future peace,
And stabb him to the heart before you: who
Would not do less? Would not thou Pierre the same?

Pierr. You have singled me, Sir, out for this hard question,
As if 'twere started only for my sake!
Am I the thing you fear? Here, here is my bosom,
Search it with all your Swords! am I a Traitor?

Ren. No: but I fear your late commended Friend
Is little less: Come Sirs, it is now no time
To trifle with our safety. Where Is this Jaffeir?

Spin^. He (...) the room just now in strange disorder.


Ren. Nay, there is danger in him: I observed him,
During the time I took for Explanation,
He was transported from most deep attention
To a confusion which he could not smother.
His looks grew full of s^dness and surprise,
All which betrayed a wavering Spirit in him,
That labored with reluctance and sorrow;
What Is requisite for safety must be done
With speedy Execution: he remains
Yet in our power: I for my own part wear
A Dagger.

Pierr. Well.


Ren. And I could wish it!


Pierr. Where?


Ren. Buried in his heart.


Pierr. Away! we are yet all friends;
No more of this, 'twill Breed ill blood amongst us.

Spin. Let us all draw our Swords, and search the house,
Pull him from the dark hole where he sits brooding
Over his cold fears, and each man kill his share of him.

Pierr. Who talks of killing? who is he will shed the blood
That Is dear to me? is it you? or you? or you Sir?
What not one speak (...) how you stand (...) all
On your grave Oracle, your wooden God there,
Yet not a word: Then Sir I Will tell you a secret,
Suspition's but at best a Cowards Virtue!

To Ren. R^n. A Coward --


Handles his Sword. Pier. Put, put up thy Sword, old Man,
Thy hand shakes at it; come let us heal this breach,
I am too hot: we yet may live Friends.

Spino. 'Till we are safe, our Friendship cannot be so.


Pierr. Again: who is that?


Spino. 'Twas I.


Theo. And I.


Revell. And I.


Eliot. And all.


Ren. Who are on my side?


Spinos. Every honest Sword,
Let Us die like men and not be sold like Slaves.

Pierr. One such word more, by Heaven I Will to the Senate
And hang ye all, like Dogs in Clusters,
Why peep your Coward Swords half out their shells?
Why do you not all brandish them like min^?
You fear to die, and yet dare talk of Killing?

Ren. Go to the Senate and betray us, haster,
Secure thy wretched life, we fear to die
Less than thou dare be honest.

Pierr. That Is rank falsehood,
Fear not thou death? fie, there is a knavish itch
In that salt blood, an utter foe to smarting.
Had Jaffeir's Wife proved kind, he had still been true.
Foh -- how that stinks?
Thou die! thou kill my Friend! or thou, or thou,
Or thou, with that lean withered wretched Face!
Away! disperse all to your several Charges;
And meet to morrow where your honor calls you,
I Will bring that man, whose blood you so much thirst f^r,
And you shall see him venture for you fairly --
Hence, hence, I say.

Ex. Renault angrily. Spino. I fear we have been too blame,
And done too much.

Spino. 'T was too far urged against the man you loved.


Rev. Here, take our Swords and (...) 'em with your feet.


Spino. Forgive us, g^liant Friend.


Peir. Nay, now you have found
The way to melt and cast me as you will:
I Will fetch this Friend and give him to your mercy:
Nay he shall dye if you will take him from me,
For your repose I Will quit my hearts Jewel;
But would not have him torn away by Villains
And spiteful villainy.

Spino. No; may you both
For^ver live and fill the world with fame!

Peir. Now you are too kind. Whence rose all this discord?
Oh what a dangerou^ (...) have we (...)!
How near a fall was all we had long been building!
What an eternal blot had stained our glories,
If one the bravest and the best of men.
Had fallen a Sacrifice to rash suspicion!
Butchered by those whose Cause he came to cherish:
Oh could you know him all (...) I have known him,
How good he is, how just, how true, how brave,
You would not leave this place till you had seen him;
Humbled your selves before him, kissed his feet,
And gained remission for the worst of follies;
Come but to morrow all your doubts shall end,
And to your Loves me better recommend,
That I Have preserved your Fame, and, saved my Friend.

(...). The end of the third Act.
ACT IV.
Enter Jaffeir and Belvidera. Jaff. WHere do thou lead me? Every step I move,
Methinks I tread upon some mangled Limb
Of a racked Friend: Oh my dear charming ruin!
Where are we wandering?

Bell. To eternal Honor;
To do a deed shall Chronicle thy name,
Among the glorious Legends of those few
That have saved sinking Nations: thy Renown
Shall be the future Song of all the Virgins,
Who by thy piety have been preserved
From horrid violation: Every (...)
Shall be adorned with Statues to thy honor,
And at thy feet this great Inscription written,
Remember him that prop'd the fall of Venice.

Jaff. Rather, Remember him, who after all
The sacred Bonds of Oaths and holyer Friendship
In fond compassion to a Woman's team
Forgot his Manhood, Virtue, truth and Honor,
To sacrifice the Bosom that relieved him.
Why will thou damn me?

Bell. Oh inconstant (...)
How will you promise? how will you deceive?
Do, return back, re-place me in my Bondage,
Tell all thy Friends how dangerously thou lovst me;
And let thy Dagger do its ^loudy office.
Oh that kind Dagger, Jaffeir, how ^will look
Stuck through my heart, drenched in my blood to th'hilts!
Whilst these poor dying eyes shall with their tears
No more tormen^ thee, then thou will be free:
Or if thou think it nobler, Let me live
Till I am a Victim to the hateful lust
Of that In^ernal Devil, that old Fiend
That Is Damned himself and would undo Mankind:
Last night, my Love!

Jaff. Name, name it not again.
It shows a beastly Image to my fancy;
Will wake me into mad^ess. Oh the (...)!
That durst approach such purity as thine
On terms so vile: (...), (...) destruction
Fall on my Coward-head, and make my Name
The common (...) of Fools if I (...) him,
If I forgiv^ him, if I not (...)
With utmost (...), and most (...),
Thy sufferings thou dear darling of my life (...).

Bell. Delay no longer then, but to the Senate;
And tell the (...) story ever was uttered,
Tell 'em what bloodshed, (...), desolations,
Have been prepared, how near's the fatal hour!
Save thy poor Country, save the Reverend blood.
Of all its Nobles, which to morrows Dawn
Must else see sh^d: Save the poor tender lives
Of all those little Infants which the Swords
Of (...) are whetting for this moment;
Think thou already hearst their dying (...),
Think that thou see their sad distracted Mothers
Kneeling before thy feet, and begging pity
With torn disheveled hair and streaming eyes,
Their naked mangled (...) besmeard with blood,
And even the Milk with which their fondled Babes,
Softly they hushed, dropping in anguish from 'em.
Think thou see this, and then consult thy heart.

Jaff. Oh!


Bell. Think too, If thou lose this present minute,
What miseries the next day bring upon thee.
Imagine all the horrors of that night
Murder and Rapine, Waste and Desolation,
Confusedly ranging. Think what then may prove
My Lot! the Ravisher may then come safe,
And midst the terror of the public ruin
Do a damned deed; perhaps to lay a Train
May catch thy life; then where will be revenge,
The dear revenge that is due to such a wrong?

Jaff. By all Heavens powers Prophetic truth dwells in thee,
For every word thou speak strikes through my heart
Like a new light, and shows it how't has wandered;
Just what thou have made me, take me, Belvidera,
And lead me to the place where I Am to say.
This bitter Lesson, where I must betray
My truth, my virtue, constancy and friends:
Must I betray my friends? Ah take me quickly,
Secure me well before that thought's renewed;
If I relapse once more, all is ^ost for ever.

Bell. Have thou a friend more dear than (...)?


Jaff. No, thou art my Soul it self, wealth, friendship, honor,
All present joys, and earnest of all future,
Are summed in thee: (...) when in thy (...)
Thus leaning on thy breast, one minute's (...)
Than a long thousand years of vulgar hours.
Why was such happiness not given me pure?
Why dashed with cruel wrongs, and bitter wantings?
Come, lead me forward now like a tame Lamb
To Sacrifice, thus in his fatal Garlands,
Decked fine and pleased, The wanton skips and plays,
Trots by the enticing flattering Priestess side,
And much transported with his little pride,
Forgets his dear Companions of the (...)
Till by Her, bound, He Is on the Altar (...)
Yet then too hardly bleats, such pleasure's in the pain.

Enter Officer and 6 Guards Offic. Stand who goes there?


Bell. Friends.


Jaff. Friends, Belvidera! hide me from my Friends,
By Heaven I Would rather see the face of Hell,
Than meet the man I love.

Offic. But what friends are you?


Bell. Friends to the Senate and the State of (...).


Offic. My orders are to seize on all I find
At this late hour, and bring 'em to the Council,
Who now are sitting.

Jaff. Sir, you shall be obeyed.
Hold, Brutes, stand off, none of your paws upon me.
Now the Lot's cast, and Fate do what thou will.

Exeu^t guarded. SCENE The Senate House,
Where appear sitting, the Duke of Venice, Prinli, Antonio, And Eight other
Senators. Duke. Antony, Prinli, Senators of Venice,
Speak; why are we assembled here this night?
What have you to inform us of, concerns
The State of Venice, honor, or its safety?

Prin. Could words express the story I have to tell you,
Fathers, these tears were useless, these sad tears
That fall from my old (...), (...).
We all should weep; tear off these (...),
And wrap our selves in Sackcloth, sitting down
On the sad Earth, and cry aloud to Heaven.
Heaven knows if yet there be an hour to come
Ever Venice be no more!

All (...). How!


Prin. Nay we stand
Upon the Very brink of gaping ruin,
Within this City's formed a dark Conspiracy,
To massacre us all, our (...) and Children,
Kindred and Friends, our (...) and Temples
To lay in Ashes: nay the hour too, fixed;
The Swords, for ought I know, drawn even this moment,
And the wild Waste begun: from unknown hands
I had this warning: but if we are men
Let Us not be tamely butchered, but do something
That may inform the world in after Ages,
Our Virtue was not ruined though we were. A (...) without.
Room, room, make room for some Prisoners --
2 Senate. Let Us raise the City.

Enter Officer and Guard. Prin. Speak there, what diurbance?


Offic. Two Prisoners have the Guard seized in the Streets,
Who say they come to inform this Reverend Senate
About the present danger.

Enter Jaffeir and Belvidera guarded. All. Give 'em entrance --
Well, who are you?

Jaff. A Villain.


Anto. Short and pithy.
The man speaks well.

Jaff. Would every man that hears me
Would deal so honestly, and own his title.

Duke. It Is rumored that a Plot ha^ been contrived
Against this State; that you have a (...) in it too.
If you are a Villain, to redeem your honor,
Unfold the truth and be restored with Mercy.

Jaff. Think not that I to save my life come hither,
I know its value better; but in pity
To all those (...), (...)
Are fixed and (...) before you
The sworn and (...) foe of (...).
But use me as my (...) may deserve
And I may prove a friend.

Duke. The Slave Capitulates,
Give him the Tortures.

Jaff. That you dare not do,
Your fears will not let you, (...) the (...) Itch
To hear a story which you (...) of.
Truth with the fear (...) shall (...) from me.
Cowards are scared with (...) Boys are (...)
Into consessions: but a Steady mind
Acts of its self, never (...) the body Counsel.
Give him the Tortures. Name but such a thing
Again; by Heaven I Will (...) these lips for ever,
Not all your Racks, your Engines or your Wheels
Shall force a groan away -- that you may guess at.

Anto. A bloody (...) fellow I Will warrant;
A damned bloody minded fellow.

Duke. Name your Conditions.


Jaff. For my self full (...).
Besides the lives of two and twenty friends Delivers a list.
Whose names are here (...): Nay, let their Crimes
Be ner so monstrous, I must have the Oaths
And sacred promise of this Reverend Council,
That in a full Assembly of the Senate
The thing I ask be (...). Swear this.
And I Will unfold the secrets of your danger.

All. We Will swear.


Duke. Propose the Oath.


Jaff. By all the hopes
Ye have of Peace and Happiness hereafter,
Swear.

All. We all swear.


Jaff. To grant me what I Have asked,
Ye swear.

All. We swear.


Jaff. And as ye keep the Oath,
May you and your posterity be blessed
Or cursed for ever.

All. Else be cursed for ever.


Jaff. -- Then here is the list, and with it the Delivers another paper.
full disclose of all that threatens you.
Now Fate thou have caught me.

Anto. Why what a dreadful Cata^ogue of Cutthroats is here! I Will warrant you
not one of these fellows but has a face like a Lion. I dare not so much as
read their names over.


Duke. Give orders that all diligent search be made
To seize these men, their characters are public,
The paper intimates their Rendevouz
To be at the house of a famed (...) Curtezan
Called Aquilina; see that place secured.

Anto. What my Nicky Nacky, Hurry Durry, Nicky Nacky in the Plot -- I Will make a
Speech. Most noble Senators,
What headlong apprehension drives you on,
Right noble, wise and truly solid Senators,
To violate the Laws and ^ight of (...)?
The Lady is a Lady of renown.
It Is true, she holds a house of fair Reception,
And though I say it my self, as many more
Can say as well as I.
2 Senate. My Lord, Iong Speeches
Are frivolous here, when dangers are so near us;
We all well know your Interest in that Lady,
The world talks loud on it.

Anto. Verily I have done,
I say no more.

Duke. But since he has declared
Himself concerned, Pray, Captain, take great caution
To treat the fair one, as becomes her Character,
And let her Bedchamber be searched with dece^cy
You, Jaffeir, must with patience bear till mornin^ to be our Prisoner.

Jaff. Would the Chains of death
Had bound me fast ever I had known this m^nute,
I Have done a deed will make my Story hereafter
Quoted in competition with all ill ones:
The History of my wick^ness shall run
Down through the low traditions of the vulgar,
And Boy^ be thought to tell the tale of Jaffeir.

Duke. Captain, withdraw your Prisoner.


Jaff. Sir, if possible,
Lead me where my own thoughts themselves may lose me,
Where I may doze out what I Have left of life,
Forget my self and this days guilt and falsehood.
Cruel remembrance how shall (...) appea^e thee!
Ex. guarded. Noise without. More Traitors; room, room, make room there.


Duke. How Is this, Guards?

Where are our Guards? shut up the Gates, the Treason's already at our Doors.


Enter Officer. Offic. My Lords, more (...):
Seized in the very act of Confultation;
Furnished with Arms and Instruments of mischief,
Bring in the prisoners.

Enter Peirre, Renault, Theodore, Elliot, Revillido and other (...), in (...),
guarded. Peirr. You, my Lords and Fathers,
(As you are pleased to call your selves) of Venice;
If you sit here to guide the course of Justice,
Why these disgraceful chains upon the limbs
That have so often labored in your service?
Are these the wreaths of (...) ye bestow
On those that bring you Conquests home and Honors?

Duke. Go on, you shall be heard, Sir.


Auto. And be hanged too, I hope.


Peirr. Are these the Trophies I Have deserved for fighting
Your Battles with confederated Powers,
When winds and Seas (...) to overthrow you?
And brought the Fleets of Spain to your own Harbors,
When you, great Duke, (...) t^mbling in your Palace,
And saw your Wi^e, (...), plough'd
Like a lewd Whore by bolder Prows than yours
Stepped not I forth, and taught your loose Venetians.
The task of honor and the way to greatness,
Raised you from your capitulating (...)
To stipulate the terms of (...) for peace,
And this my recompense? (...) I am a Traitor
Produce my charge; or show the wretch that is base enough
And brave enough to tell me I am a Traitor.

Duke. Know you one Jaffeir?


All the conspirators murmur. Peirr. Yes, and know his Virtue.
His Justice, Truth, his general Worth and Sufferings
From a hard father taught me first to love him.

Enter Jaffeir guarded. Duke. See him brought forth.


Peirr. My friend too bound? nay then
Our Fate has conquered us, and we must fall,
Why droops the man whose welfare's so much mi^e
They Are but one thing? these Reverend Tyrants, Jaffeir,
Call us all Traitors, art thou one, my Brother?

Jaff. To thee I am the falsest, veryest slave
That ever betrayed a generous trusting friend,
And gave up honor to be sure of ruin.
All our fair hopes which morning was to have crowned
Has this cursed tongue ^rthrown.

Peirr. So, then all is over:
Venice has lost her freedom; I my life;
No more, farewell.

Duke. Say; will you make confession
Of your vile deeds and trust the Senates mercy?

Peirr. Cursed be your Sen^: Cursed your Constitution:
The Curse of growing factions and division
Still vex your Councils, shake your public sasety,
And make the Robes of Government, you wear,
Hateful to you, as these base Chains to me.

Duke. Pardon or death?


Peirr. Death, honorable death.


(...). Death's the best thing we ask or you can give.


All Conspir. No shameful bonds, but honorable death.


Duke. Break up the Council: Captain, guard your prisoners.
Jaffeir, you are free, but these must wait for judgment.

Ex. all the Senators. Peirr. Come, where is my Dungeon? lead me to my straw:
It will not be the first time I Have lodged hard
To do your Senate service.

Jaff. Hold one moment.


Peirr. Who Is he disputes the Judgment of the Senate?
Presumptuous Rebel -- on --

Strikes Jaff. Jaff. By Heaven you stir not.
I must be heard, I must have leave to speak:
Thou have disgraced me, Peirre, by a vile blow:
Had not a dagger done thee nobler justice?
But use me as thou will, thou can not wrong me,
For I am fallen beneath the basest injur^s;
Yet look upon me with an eye of mercy,
With pity and with charity behold me;
Shut not thy heart against a friend's repentance,
But as there dwells a God-like nature in thee
Listen with mildness to my (...).

Peirr. What whining Monk (...) thou? what holy cheat
That would encroach upon my credulous ears
And cant'st thus vilely? hence. I know thee not,
Dissemble and be nasty? leave me, Hippo^.

Jaff. Not know (...), (...)


Peirr. No, know the not: what art (...)?


Jaff. Jaffeir, thy friend, thy once loved, valued friend,
Though now deservedly scorned, and (...) most hardly.

Peirr. Thou Jaffeir! Thou my once loved, valued friend!
By Heavens thou lie; (...) man, (...) called, my friend,
Was generous, honest, (...), (...),
Noble in mind, and in his person (...),
Dear to my eyes and (...) to my (...):
But thou a wretched base, false, worthless Coward,
Poor even in Soul, and (...) in thy (...),
All eyes must shun the, and all (...) thee.
Prithee avoid, nor longer cling thus (...),
Like something banefull, that my nature's chilled at.

Jaff. I have not wronged thee, by these (...) I have not.
But still am honest, true, and hope too, valiant;
My mind still full of thee: therefore (...) noble,
Let not thy eyes then shun me, nor (...) heart
Detest me utterly: Oh look upon me
Look back and fee my sad (...) sub^on!
How my heart swells, as even 'twould burst my bosom;
Fond of its Gaol, and laboring to be at thee!
What shall I do? what say to make thee hear me?

Peirr. Have thou not wronged me? dare thou call thy self
Jaffeir, that once loved, valued friend of mine,
And swear thou have not wronged me? whence these chains?
Whence the vile death, which I may meet this moment?
Whence this dishonor, but from thee; thou false one?

Jaff. -- All Is true, yet grant one thing, and I Have done asking.


Peirr. What Is that?


Jaff. To take thy life on such conditions
The Council have proposed: Thou and thy friends
May yet live long, and to be better treated.

Peirr. Life! ask my life! confess! record my self
A villain for the privilege to breath,
And carry up and down this cursed City
A discontented and repining spirit,
Burdensome to it self a few years longer,
To lose, it may be, at last in a lewd quarrel
For some new friend, treacherous and false as thou art!
No, this vile world and I have long been jangling,
And cannot (...) better terms than now,
When only men like thee are fit to live in it.

Jaff. By all that is just --


Peirr. Swear by some other powers,
For thou have broke that sacred Oath too lately.

Jaff. Then by that hell I merit, I Will not leave thee,
Till to thy self at least, you are reconciled,
However thy resentments deal with me.

Peirr. Not leave me!


Jaff. No, thou shall not force me from thee,
Use me reproachfully, and like a slave,
Tread on me, buffet me, heap wrongs on wrongs
On my poor head; I Will bear it all with patience,
Shall weary out thy most unfriendly cruelty,
Ly at thy feet and kiss'em though they spurn me,
Till, wounded by my sufferings, thou relent,
And raise me to thy arms with dear forgiveness.

Peirr. Art thou not --


Jass. What?


Peirr. A Traitor?


Jaff. Yes.


Peirr. A Villain?


Jaff. Granted.


Peirr. A Coward, a most scandalous Coward,
Spiritless, void of honor, one who has sold
Thy everlasting Fame, for shameless life?

Jaff. All, all, and more, much more: my faults are Numberless.


Peirr. And would thou have me live on terms like thine?
Base as thou art false --

Jaff. No, it is to me that is granted,
The safety of thy life was all I aimed at,
In recompense for faith, and trust so broken.

Peirr. I scorn it more because preserved by thee,
And as when first my foolish heart took pity
On thy misfortunes, sought thee in thy miseries,
Relieved thy wants, and raised thee from thy State
Of wretchedness in which thy fate had plunged thee,
To rank thee in my list of noble friends;
All I received in surety for thy truth,
Were unregarded oaths; and this, this dagger,
Given with a worthless pledge, thou since have stolen,
So I restore it back to thee again,
Swearing by all those powers which thou have violated,
Never from this cursed hour to hold communion,
Friendship or interest with thee, though our years
Were to exceed those limited the world.
Take it -- farewell -- for now I owe thee nothing.

Jaff. Say thou will live then.


Peirr. For my life, dispose it
Just as thou will, because it is what I Am tired with.

Jaff. Oh, Peirre!


Peirr. No more.


Jaff. My eyes will not lose the sight of thee,
But languish after thine, and ache with gazing.

Peirr. Leave me -- Nay, then thus, thus, I throw thee from me.
And curses, great as is thy falsehood, catch thee.

Jaff. Amen.
He Is gone, my father, friend, preserver,
And here is the portion he has left me. Holds the dagger up.
This dagger, well remembered, with this dagger
I gave a solemn vow of dire importance,
Parted with this and Belvidera together;
Have a care, Memory, drive that thought no farther;
No, I Will esteem it as a friend's last legacy,
Treasure it up in this wretched bosom,
Where it may grow acquainted with my heart,
That when they meet, they start not from each other;
So; now for thinking: A blow, called Traitor, Villain,
Coward, dishonorable coward, fogh!
Oh for a long sound sleep, and so forget it!
Down, busy Devil --.

Enter Belvidera. Bell. Whither shall I fly?
Where hide me and my miseries together?
Where Is now the Roman Constancy I boasted?
Sunk into trembling fears and desperation!
Not daring now to look up to that dear face
Which used to smile even on my faults, but down
Bending these miserable eyes to earth,
Must move in penance, and implore much Mercy.

Jaff. Mercy, kind Heaven has surely endless stores
Hoarded for thee of blessings yet untasted;
Let wretches loaded hard with guilt as I am,
Bow the weight and groan beneath the burden,
Creep with a remnant of that strength they have left,
Before the footstool of that Heaven they have injured.
Oh Belvidera! I Am the wretchedst creature
Ever crawled on earth; now if thou have Virtue help me,
Take me into thy Arms, and speak the words of peace
To my divided Soul, that wars within me,
And raises every Sense to my confusion;
By Heaven I am tottering on the very brink
Of Peace; and thou art all the hold I Have left.

Bell. Alas! I know thy sorrows are most mighty;
I know thou have cause to mourn; to mourn, my Jaffeir,
With endless cries, and never ceasing wailings,
Thou Have lost --

Jaff. Oh I have lost what cannot be counted;
My friend too, Belvidera, that dear friend,
Who, next to thee, was all my health rejoiced in,
Has used me like a slave; shamefully used me;
'T would break thy pitying heart to hear the story,
What shall I do? resentment, indignation,
Love, pity, fear and memory, how I Have wronged him,
Distract my quiet with the very thought on it,
And tear my heart to pieces in my bosom.

Bell. What has he done?


Jaff. Thou Would hate me, should I tell thee.


Bell. Why?


Jaff. Oh he has used me! yet by Heaven I bear it;
He has used me, Belvidera, but first swear
That when I Have told thee, thou wilt not loath me utterly,
Though vilest blots and stains appear upon me;
But still at least with charitable goodness,
Be near me in the pangs of my a^iction,
Not scorn me, Belvidera, as he has done.

Bell. Have I then ever been false that now I am doubted?
Speak, what is the cause I am grown into distrust,
Why thought unfit to hear my Love's complainings?

Jaff. Oh!


Bell. Tell me.


Jaff. Bear my failings, for they are many,
Oh my dear Angel! in that friend I Have lost
All my Soul's peace; for every thought of him
Strikes my Sense hard, and deads it in my brains;
Would thou believe it?

Bell. Speak.


Jaff. Before we parted,
Ever yet his Guards had led him to his prison,
Full of severest sorrows for his sufferings,
With eyes o'rflowing and a bleeding heart,
Humbling my self almost beneath my nature;
As at his feet I kneeled, and fu'd for mercy,
Forgetting all our friendship, all the dearness,
In which we have lived so many years together,
With a reproachful hand, he dashed a blow,
He struck me, Belvidera, by Heaven, he struck me,
Buffeted, called me Traitor, Villain, Coward;
Am I a Coward? am I a Villain? tell me:
Thou Art the best Judge, and made me, if I am so.
Damnation; Coward!

Bell. Oh! forgive him, Jaffeir.
And if his sufferings wound thy heart already,
What will they do to morrow?

Jaff. Hah!


Bell. To morrow,
When thou shall see him stretched in all the Agonies
Of a tormenting and a shameful death,
His bleeding bowels, and his broken limbs,
Insulted or by a vile butchering villain;
What will thy heart do then? Oh sure 't will stream
Like my eyes now.

Jaff. What means thy dreadful story?
Death, and to morrow? broken limbs and bowels?
Insulted o'r by a vile butchering Villain?
By all my fears I shall start out to madness,
With barely guessing if the truth's hid longer.

Bell. The (...) Senators, it is they have decreed it:
They say according to our friends request,
They shall have death, and not ignoble bondage:
Declare their promised mercy all as forfeited,
False to their oaths, and deaf to intercession;
Warrants are passed for public death to morrow.

Jaff. Death! doomed to die! condemned unheard! unpleaded!


Bell. Nay, cruel'st racks and torments are preparing,
To force confessions from their dying pangs;
Oh do not look so terribly upon me,
How your lips shake, and all your face disorderd!
What means my Love?

Jaff. Leave me, I charge thee leave me -- strong temptation^
Wake in my heart.

Bell. For what?


Jaff. No more, but leave me.


Bell. Why?


Jaff. Oh! by Heaven I love thee with that fondness
I would not have thee stay a moment longer,
Near these cursed hands: are they not cold upon thee?

Bell. No, everlasting comfort's in thy arms,
To lean thus on thy breast is softer ease
Than downy pillows decked with leaves of roses.

Pulls the daggerhalf out of his bo^ and (...) it (...) Jaff. Alas thou
think not of the thorns it is filled with,
Fly ever they call thee: there is a lurking serpent
Ready to leap and sting thee to thy heart:
Art thou not terrified?

Bell. No.


Jaff. Call to mind
What thou have done, and whither thou have brought me.

Bell. Hah!


Jaff. Where Is my friend? my friend, thou smiling mischief?
Nay. shrink not, now it is too late, thou should have fled
When thy Guilt first had cause, for dire revenge,
Is up and raging for my friend. He groans,
Hark how he groans, his screams are in my ears
Already; see, they have fixed him on the wheel,
And now they tear him -- Murder! perjured Senate!
Murder -- Oh! -- hark thee, Traitress, thou have done this;
Thanks to thy tears and false persuading love,
How her eyes speak! Oh thou bewitching creature! Fumbling for his Dagger.
Madness cannot hurt thee: Come, thou little trembler,
Creep, even into my heart, and there lie safe;
It Is thy own Citadel -- hah -- yet stand off,
Heaven must have Justice, and my broken vows
Will sink me else beneath its reaching mercy;
I Will wink and then it is done --.

Bell. What means the Lord
Of me, my life and love, what is in thy bosom,
Thou graspst at so? nay, why am I thus treated?
What will thou do? Ah, do not kill me, Jaffeir, Draws the dagger, offers to
stab her.
Pity these panting breasts, and trembling limbs,
That ^'d to clas^ thee when thy looks were milder,
That yet hang heavy on my unpurg'd Soul,
And plunge it not into eternal darkness.

Jaff. No, Belvidera, when we parted last
I gave this dagger with thee as in trust
To be thy portion, If I ever proved false.
On such condition was my truth believed:
But now it is forfeited and must be paid for. Offers to stab her again.

Bell. Oh, mercy!


Kneeling. Jaff. Nay, no struggling.


Bell. Now then kill me. Leaps upon his neck and kisses him.
While thus I cling about thy cruel neck,
Kiss thy revengefull lips and die in joys
Greater than any I can guess hereafter.

Jaff. I am, I am a Coward; witness't, Heaven,
Witness it, Earth, and every being Witness;
It Is but one blow yet: by immortal Love,
I cannot longer bear a thought to harm thee,
The Seal of providence is sure upon thee. He throws away the dagger and
embraces her.
And thou were born for yet unheard of wonders:
Oh thou were either born to save or damn me!
By all the power that is given thee o'r my soul,
By thy resistless tears and conquering smiles,
By the victorious love that still waits on thee;
Fly to thy cruel Father: save my friend,
Or all our future Quiet's lost for ever:
Fall at his feet, cling round his reverend knees;
Speak to him with thy Eyes, and with thy tears,
Melt thy hard heart, and wake dead nature in him,
Crush him in th'Arms, and torture him with thy softness:
Nor, till thy Prayers are granted, set him free,
But conquer him, as thou have vanquished me. Ex. ambo.

The end of the fourth Act.
ACT V.
Enter Prinli solus. Prin. WHY, cruel Heaven, have my unhappy days
Been lengthened to this sad one? Oh! dishonor
And deathless infamy is fallen upon me.
Was it my fault? Am I a traitor? No.
But then, my only child, my daughter, wedded;
There my best blood runs foul, and a disease
Incurable has seized upon my memory,
To make it rot and stink to after ages.
Cursed be the fatal minute when I got her;
Or would that I Would been any thing but man,
And raised an issue which would never have wronged me.
The miserablest Creatures (man excepted)
Are not the less esteemed, though their posterity
Degenerate from the virtues of their fathers;
The vilest Beasts are happy in their offsprings,
While only man gets traitors, whores and villains.
Cursed be the names, and some swift blow from Fate
Lay his head deep, where mine may be forgotten.

Enter Belvidera in a long mourning Veil. Bell. He Is there, my father, my
inhumane father,
That, for three years, has left an only child
Exposed to all the outrages of Fate,
And cruel ruin -- oh! --

Prin. What child of sorrow
Art thou that come thus wrapped in weeds of sadness,
And mov'st as if thy steps were toward a grave?

Bell. A w^tch, who from the very top of happiness
Am fallen into the lowest depths of misery,
And want your pitying hand to raise me up again.

Prin. Indeed thou talk as thou had tasted sorrows;
Would I could help thee.

Bell. It Is greatly in your power,
The world too, speaks you charitable, and I,
Who never asked alms before, in that dear hope
Am come a begging to you, Sir.

Prin. For what?


Bell. Oh, well regard me, is this voice a strange one?
Consider too, when beggars once pretend
A case like mine, no little will content 'em.

Prin. What would thou beg for?


Bell. Pity and forgiveness; Throws up ^er Veil.
By the kind tender names of child and father,
Hear my complaints and take me to your love.

Prin. My daughter?


Bell. Yes, your daughter, by a mother
Virtuous and noble, faithful to your honor,
Obedient to your will, kind to your wishes,
Dear to your arms; by all the joys she gave you,
When in her blooming years she was your treasure,
Look kindly on me; in my face b^hold
The lineaments of hers you have kissed so often,
Pleading the cause of your poor cast off Child.

Prin. Thou art my daughter.


Bell. Yes -- And you have often told me
With smiles of love and chaste paternal kisses,
I Would much resemblance of my mother.

Prin. Oh!
Had thou inherited her matchless virtues
I Would been too blessed.

Bell. Nay, do not call to memory
My disobedience, but le^ pity enter
Into your heart, and quite deface the impression;
For could you think how mine is perplexed, what sadness
Fears and despairs distract the peace within me,
Oh, you would take me in your dear, dear Arms,
Hover with strong compassion o'r your young one,
To shelter me with a protecting wing,
From the black gathered storm, that is just, just breaking.

Prin. Don't talk thus.


Bell. Yes, I must, and you must hear too.
I have a husband.

Prin. Damn him.


Bell. Oh, do not curse him!
He would not speak so hard a word toward you
On any terms, oh! ever he deal with me.

Prin. Hah! what means my child?


Bell. Oh there is but this short moment
'Twixt me and Fate, yet send me not with curses
Down to my grave, afford me one kind blessing
Before we part: just take me in your arms
And recommend me with a prayer to Heaven,
That I may dye in peace, and when I Am dead --

Prin. How my Soul's caught?


Bell. Lay me, I beg you, lay me
By the dear ashes of my tender mother.
She would have pitied me, had fate yet spared her.

Prin. By Heaven, my aching heart forebodes much mischief,
Tell me thy story, for I Am still thy father.

Bell. No, I Am contented.


Prin. Speak.


Bell. No matter.


Prin. Tell me.
By you, blessed Heaven, my heart runs o'r with fondness.

Bell. Oh!


Prin. Utter't.


Bell. Oh my husband, my dear husband
Carries a dagger in his once kind boso^e
To pierce the heart of your poor Belvidera.

Prin. Kill thee?


Bell. Yes, kill me, when he passed his faith
And covenant, against your State and Senate,
He gave me up as hostage for his truth,
With me a dagger and a dire commission.
When ever he failed to plunge it through this bosom,
I learnt the danger, chose the hour of love
T'attempt his heart, and bring it back to honor,
Great love prevailed and blessed me with success,
He came, confessed, betrayed his dearest friends
For promi^'d mercy; now they are doomed to suffer,
Galled with remembrance of what then was sworn,
If they are lost, he vows to appease the Gods
With this poor life, and make my blood the atonement.

Prin. Heavens!


Bell. Think you saw what passed at our last parting;
Think you beheld him like a raging lion,
Pacing the earth and tearing up his step^,
Fate in his eyes, and roaring with the pain
Of burning fury; think you saw his one hand
Fixed on my throat, while the extended other
Grasped a keen threatening dagger, oh 'twas thus,
We last embraced, when, trembling with revenge,
He dragged me to the ground, and at my bosom
Presented horrid death, cried out, my friends,
Where are my friends? swore, wept, raged, 'threaten'd, loved,
For he yet loved, and that dear love preserved me,
To this last trial of a father's pity.
I fear, not death, but cannot bear a thought
That that dear hand should do the unfriendly office;
If I was ever then your care, now hear me;
Fly to the Senate, save the promised lives
Of his dear friends, ever mine be made the sacrifice.

Prin. Oh, my hearts comfort!


Bell. Will you not, my father?
Weep not but answer me.

Prin. By Heaven, I will.
Not one of 'em but what shall be immortal.
C^st thou forgive me all my ^ollies past,
I Will henceforth be indeed a father; never,
Never more thus expose, but cherish thee,
Dear as the vital warmth that feeds my life,
Dear as these eyes that weep in fondness o'r thee,
Peace to thy heart. Farewell.

Bell. Go, and remember,
It Is Belvidera's life her father pleads for.
Ex. severally. Enter Antonio. Hum, hum, hah,

Seignior Prinli, my Lord Prinli, my Lord, my Lord, my Lord: Now, we Lords love
to call one another by our Titles. My Lord, my Lord, my Lord -- Pox on him, I
am a Lord as well as he, And so let him fiddle -- I Will warrant him he is gone to
the Senatehouse, and I Will be there too, soon enough for somebody. Odd -- here is
a tickling speech about the Plot, I Will prove there is a Plot with a Vengeance --
would I had it without book; let me see --

Most Reverend Senators,

That there is a Plot, surely by this time, no man that has eyes or
understanding in his head will presume to doubt, it is as plain as the light in
the Cowcumber -- no -- hold there -- Cowcumber does not come in yet -- it is as
plain as the light in the Sun, or as the man in the Moon, even at noon day; It
is indeed a Pumpkin-Plot, which, just as it was mellow, we have gathered, and
now we have gathered it, prepared and dressed it, shall we throw it like a
pickled Cowcumber out at the window? no: that it is not only a bloody, horrid,
execrable, damnable and audacious Plot, but it is, as I may so say, a saucy
Plot: and we all know, most Reverend Fathers, that what is sauce for a Goose is
sauce for a Gander: Therefore, I say, as those bloodthirsty Ganders of the
conspiracy would have destroyed us Geese of the Senate, let us make haste to
destroy them, so I humbly move for hanging -- hah, hurry durry -- I think this
will do, tho I was something out, at first, about the Sun and the Cowcumber.


Enter Aquilina. Aquil. Good morrow, Senator.


Anto. Nacky, my dear Nacky, morrow, Nacky, odd I am very brisk, very merry,
very pert, very jovial -- haaaaa -- kiss me, Nacky; how do thou do, my
little Tory, rory Strumpet, kiss me, I say, hussy, kiss me.


Aquil. Kiss me, Nacky, hang you, Sir, Coxcomb, hang you, Sir.


Anto. Hayty tayty, is it so indeed, with all my heart, faith -- Hey then up go
we, faith -- hey then up go we. dum dum derum dump.


Sings. Aquil. Seignior.


Anto. Madona.


Aquil. Do you intend to die in your bed --?


Anto. About threescore years hence, much may be done, my dear.


Aquil. You Will be hanged, Seignior.


Anto. Hanged, sweet heart, prithee be quiet, hanged quo h-a, that is a merry
conceit, with all my heart, why thou jok'st, Nacky, thou art given to joking,
I Will swear; well, I protest, Nacky, nay, I must protest, and will protest that
I love joking dearly, man. And I love thee for joking, and I Will kiss thee for
joking, and towse thee for joking, and odd, I have a devilish mind to take thee
aside about that business for joking too, odd I have, and Hey then up go we,
dum dum derum dump.


Sings. Aquil. See you this, Sir?


Draws a dagger. Anto. O Laud, a dagger! Oh Laud! it is naturally my a version,
I cannot endure the sight on it, hide it, for Heavens sake, I cannot look that
way till it be gone -- hide it, hide it, oh, oh, hide it!


Aquil. Yes, in your heart, I Will hide it.


Anto. My heart; what, hide a dagger in my heart's blood!


Aquil. Yes, in thy heart, thy throat, thou pampered Devil;
Thou have helped to spoil my peace, and I Will have vengeance
On thy cust life, for all the bloody Senate,
The perjured faithless Senate: Where Is my Lord,
My happiness, my love, my God, my Hero,
Doomed by thy accursed tongue, amongst the rest,
TO a shameful wrack? By all the rage that is in me
I Will be whole years in murdering thee.

Anto. Why, Nacky,

Wherefore so passionate? what have I done? what is the matter, my dear Nacky?
am not I thy Love, thy Happin^ss, the Lord, thy Hero, thy Senator, and every
thing in the wo^ld. Nacky?


Aquil. Thou! think thou, thou art fit to meet my joys;

To bear the eager clasps of my embraces?

Give me my Peirre, or --


Anto. Why, he is to be hanged, little Nacky,

Trust up for Treason, and so forth, Child.


Aquil. Thou lie, stop down thy throat that hellish sentence,

Or it is thy last: swear that my Love shall live,

Or thou art dead.


Anto. Ah h h h.


Aquil. Swear to recall his doom,
Swear at my feet, and tremble at my fury.

Anto. I do, now if she would but kick a little bit, one kick now Ah h h h.


Aquil. Swear, or --


Anto. I do, by these dear fragrant foots
And little toes, sweet as, e e e e my Nacky Nacky Nacky.

Aqu^. How!


Anto. Nothing but untie thy shoe-string a little faith and troth,
That Is all, ^hat's all, as I hope to live, Nacky, that is all.

Aquil. Nay, then --


Anto. Hold, hold, thy Love, thy Lord, thy Hero
Shall be pr^serv'd and safe.

Aquil. Or may this Poniard
Rust in thy heart.

Anto. With all my soul.


Aquil. Farewell --


Ex. Aquil. Anto. Adieu. Why what a bloudy-minded inveterate, termagant,
Strumpet have I been plagued with! oh h h yet more! nay then I die, I die -- I
am dead already.


Stretches himself out. Enter Jaffeir. Jaff. Final destruction seize on all the
world:
Bend down, ye Heavens, and shutting round this earth,
Crush the Vile Globe into its first confusion;
Scorch it, with Elemental fl^mes, to one cursed Cindar,
And all us little creepers in it, called men,
Burn, burn to nothing: but let Venice burn
Hotter than all the rest: Here kindle Hell
Never to extinguish, and let souls hereafter
Groan here, in all those pains which mine feels now.

Enter Belvidera. Bell. My Life --


Meeting him. Jaff. My Plague --


Turning from her. Bell. Nay then I see my ruin,
If I must die!

Jaff. No, Death's this day too busy,
Thy Father's ill time'd Mercy came too late,
I thank thee for thy labors tho and him too,
But all my poor betrayed unhappy friends
Have Summons to prepare for Fate's black hour;
And yet I live.

Bell. Then be the next my doom.
I see thou have passed my sentence in thy heart,
And I Will no longer weep or plead against it,
But with the humblest, most obedient patience
Meet thy dear hands, and kiss 'em when they wound me;
Indeed I am willing, but I beg thee do it
With some remorse, and where thou giv'st the blow,
View me with eyes of a relenting love,
And show me pity, for 'twill sweeten Justice.

Jaff. Show pity to thee?


Bell. Yes, and when thy hands,
Charged with my fate, come trembling to the deed,
As thou have done a thousand thousand dear times,
To this poor breast, when kinder rage has brought thee,
When our sting'd hearts have leaped to meet each other,
And melting kisses sealed our lips together,
When joys have left me gasping in thy arms,
So let my death come now, and I Will not shrink from't.

Jaff. Nay. Belvidera, do not fear my cruelty,
Nor let the thoughts of death perplex thy fancy,
But answer me to what I shall demand
With a firm temper and unshaken spirit.

Bell. I will when I Have done weeping --


Jaff. Fie, no more on it --
How long is it since the miserable day
We wedded first --

Bell. Oh h h.


Jaff. Nay, keep in thy tears,
Lest they un-man me too.

Bell. Heaven knows I cannot;
The words you utter sound so very sadly
These streams will follow --

Jaff. Come, I Will kiss 'em dry then.


Bell. But, was it a miserable day?


Jaff. A cursed one.


Bell. I thought it otherwise, and you have often sworn
In the transporting hours of warmest love
When sure you spoke the truth, you have sworn you blessed it.

Jaff. It Was a rash oath.


Bell. Then why am I not curss'd too?


Jaff. No, Belvidera; by the eternal truth,
I dote with too much fondness.

Bell. Still so kind?
Still then do you you love me?

Jaff. Nature, in her workings,
Inclines not with more ardour to Creation,
Than I do now toward thee; man never was blessed,
Since the first pair first met, as I have been.

Bell. Then sure you will not curse me.


Jaff. No, I Will bless thee.
I came on purpose, Belvidera, to bless thee.
It Is now, I think, three years we have lived together.

Bell. And may no fatal minute ever part us,
Till, reverend grown, for age and love, we go
Down to one Grave, as our last bed, together,
There sleep in peace till an eternal morning.

Jaff. When will that be?


Sighing. Bell. I hope long Ages hence.


Jaff. Have I not hitherto (I beg thee tell me
Thy very fears) used thee with tender'st love?
Did ever my Soul rise up in wrath against thee?
Did I ever frown when Belvidera smiled,
Or, by the least unfriendly word, betray
A bating passion? have I ever wronged thee?

Bell. No.


Jaff. Has my heart, or have my eyes ever wandered
To any other woman?

Bell. Never, never -- I were the worst of false ones should I accuse thee.
I own I Have been too happy, blessed above
My Sexes Charter.

Jaff. Did I not say I came to bless thee?


Bell. Yes.


Jaff. Then hear me, bounteous Heaven,
Pour down your blessings on this beauteous head,
Where everlasting sweets are always springing.
With a continual giving hand, let peace,
Honor and safety always hover round her,
Feed her with plenty, let her eyes never see
A sight of sorrow, nor her heart know mourning,
Crown all her days with joy, her nights with rest,
Harmless as her own thoughts, and prop her virtue,
To bear the loss of one that too much loved,
And comfort her with patience in our parting.

Bell. How, parting, parting!


Jaff. Yes, for ever parting,
I have sworn, Belvidera; by yon Heaven,
That best can tell how much I lose to leave thee,
We part this hour for ever.

Bell. Oh, call back
Your cruel blessings, stay with me and curse me!

Jaff. No, It Is resolved.


Bell. Then hear me too, just Heaven,
Pour down your curses on this wretched head
With never-ceasing Vengeance, let despair,
Danger or infamy, nay all (...) me,
Starve me with wantings, let my eyes never see
A sight of comfort, nor my hear^ know peace,
But dash my days with sorrow, nights with horrors
Wild as my own thoughts now, and let loose fury
To make me mad enough for what I lose,
If I must lose him; if I must, I will not.
Oh turn and hear me!

Jaff. Now hold, heart, or never.


Bell. By all the tender days we have lived together,
By all our charming nights, and joys that crowned 'em,
Pity my sad condition, speak, but speak.

Jaff. Oh h h.


Bell. By these arms that now cling round thy neck,
By this dear kiss and by ten thousand more,
By these poor streaming eyes --

Jaff. Murder! unhold me:
By the immortal destiny that doomed me Draws his Dagger.
To this cursed minute, I Will not live one longer,
Resolve to let me go or see me fall --

Bell. Hold, Sir, be patient.


Jaff. Hark, the dismal Bell Passing. bell towles.
Towles out for death, I must attend its call too,
For my poor friend, my dying Peirre exp^cts me,
He sent a message to require I Would see him
Before he died, and take his last forgiveness.
Farewell for ever.

Bell. Leave thy dagger with me.
Bequeath me something -- Not one kiss at parting? Going out looks back at her.
Oh my poor heart, when will thou break?

Jaff. Yet stay,
We have a Child, as yet, a tender Infant.
Be a kind mother to him when I am gone,
Breed him in virtue and the paths of Honor,
But let him never know his father's story;
I charge thee guard him from the wrongs my Fate
May do his future fortune or his name.
Now -- nearer yet -- Approaching each other.
Oh that my arms were rivetted
Thus round thee ever! But my friends, my oath!
This and no more.

Kisses her. Bell. Another, sure another,
For that poor little one you have ta'n care of,
I Will giv't him truly.

Jaff. So, now farewell.


Bell. For ever?


Jaff. Heaven knows for ever; all good Angels guard thee.


Bell. All ill ones sure had charge of me this moment,
Cursed be my days, and doubly cursed my night^,
Which I must now mourn out in widdow'd tears;
Blasted be every herb and fruit and tree,
Cursed be the rain that falls upon the earth,
And may the general Curse reach man and beast;
Oh give me daggers, fire or water,
How I could bleed, how burn, how drown the waves
Huzzing and booming round my sinking he^d,
Till I descended to the peaceful bottom!
Oh there is all quiet, here all rage and fury,
The Air's too thin, and pierces my weak brain,
I long for thick substantial sleep: Hell, Hell,
Burst from the Center, rage and roar aloud,
If thou art half so hot, so mad (...) I am.
Enter Prinli and Servants. Who Is there?


They seize ^er. Prin. Run, seize and bring her safely home,
Guard her as you would life: Alas poor creature!

Bell. What? to my husband then conduct me quickly,
Are all things ready? shall we dye most gloriously?
Say not a word of this to my old father,
Murmuring streams, soft shades, and springing flowers,
Lutes, Laurells, Seas of Milk, and ships of Amber.

Ex. Scene opening discovers a Scaffold and a Wheel prepared for the executing
of Peirre, then enter Officers, Peirre and Guards, a Friar, executioner and a
great Rabble. Offic. Room room there -- stand all by, make room for the
Prisoner.


Peir. My friend not come ye^?


Father. Why are you so obstinate?


Peirr. Why you so troublesome, that a poor wretch cannot dye in peace?
But you, like Ravens will be croaking round him --

Fath. Yet, Heaven --


Peir. I tell thee Heaven and I are friends,
I never broke Peace with it yet, by cruel murders,
Rapine, or perjury, or vile deceiving,
But lived in moral Justice toward all men,
Nor am a foe to the most strong believers:
How ever my own short-sighted Faith confine me.

Fath. But an all-seeing Judge --


Peir. You say my conscience
Must be mine accuser: I have searched that Conscience,
And find no records there of crimes that sc^e me.

Fath. It Is strange you should want faith.


Peir. You want to lead
My Reason blindfold, like a hampered Lion,
Checked of its nobler vigor then, when baited,
Down to obedient tameness, make it couch,
And show strange tricks which you call signs of Faith.
So silly Souls are gulled and you get money.
Away, no more: Captain, I would hereafter
This fellow write no lies of my conversion,
Because he has crept upon my troubled hours.

Enter Jaffeir. Jaff. Hold: Eyes, be dry;
Heart, strengthen me to bear
This hideous sight, and humble me, take
The last forgiveness of a dying friend,
Betrayed by my vile falsehood, to his ruin.
Oh Peirre!

Peir. Yet nearer.


Jaff. Crawling on my knees,
And prostrate on the earth, let me approach thee,
How shall I look up to thy injured face,
That always used to smile, with friendship, on me?
It darts an air of so much manly virtue,
That I, methinks, look little in thy sight,
And stripes are fitter for me than embraces.

Peir. Dear to my Arms, though thou have undone my fame,
I cannot forget to love thee: prithee, Jaffeir,
Forgive that filthy blow my passion dealt thee;
I am now preparing for the land of peace,
And fain would have the charitable wishes
Of all good men, like thee, to bless my journey.

Jaff. Good! I am the vilest creature, worse than ever
Suffered the shameful Fate thou art going to taste of,
Why was I sent for to be used thus kindly?
Call, call me villain, as I am, describe
The foul complexion of my hateful deeds,
Lead (...) to the Rack, and stretch me in thy stead,
I Have crimes enough to give it its full load,
And do it credit: Thou will but spoil the use on it,
And honest men hereafter bear its figure
About 'em, as a charm from treacherous friendship.

Offic. The time grows short, your ^riends are dead already.


Jaff. Dead!


Peir. Yes, dead, Jaffeir, they have all died like men too,
Worthy their Character.

Jaff. And what must I do?


Peir. Oh, Jaffeir!


Jaff. Speak, aloud thy burdened Soul;
And tell thy troubles to thy tor^ur'd friend.

Peir. Friend! Could thou yet be a Friend, a generous friend,
I might hope Comfort from thy noble sorrows,
Heaven knows I want a Friend.

Jaff. And I a kind one,
That would not thus scor^ my repenting Virtue.
Or think when he is to dye, my thoughts are idle.

Peirr. No! live, I charge thee, Jaffeir.


Jaff. Yes, I will live,
But it shall be to see thy fall revenged
At such a ra^e, as Venice long shall groan for.

Peirr. Will thou?


Jaff. I will, by Heaven.


Peirr. Then still you are noble,
And I forgive thee, oh -- yet -- shall I trust thee?

Jaff. No: I Have been false already.


Peir. Do thou love me?


Jaff. Rip up my heart, and satisfy thy doubtings.


Peir. Curse on this weakness.


He weeps. Jaff. Tears! Amazement! Tea^s!
I never saw thee melted thus before;
And know there is something ^'ring in thy bosom
That must have vent: Though I Am a Villain, tell me.

Peir. See thou that Engine?


Pointing to the Wheel. Jaff. Why?


Peir. Is It fit a Soldier, who h^ lived with Honor,
Fought Nations Quarre^, and bin Crowned with Conquest,
Be exposed a common Ca^ on a Wheel?

Jaff. Hah!


Peir. Speak! is it fitting?


Jaff. Fitting?


Peir. Yes, Is It (...)?


Jaff. What Is to be done?


Peir. I Would have thee (...)
Something that is Noble, ^o preserve my Memory
From the disgrace that is ready to attaint it.

Offic. The day grows late, Sir.


Peir. I Will make haste! oh Jaffeir,
Though thou'st betrayed me, do me some way Justice.

Jaff. No more of that: Thy wishes shall be ^tisfi'd,
I have a Wife, and she shall bleed, my Child too
Yield up his little Throat, and all t'appea^ (...) --

Going away Peir. holds him. Peir. No -- this -- no more!


He whispers Jaffeir. Jaff. Hah! is it then so?


Peir. Most certainly.


Jaff. I Will do it.


Pier. Remember.


Offic. Sir.


Pier. Come, now I Am ready. He and Jaffeir ascend the Sciffold.
Captain, you should be a Gentleman of honor,
Keep off the Rabble, that I may have room
To entertain my Fate, and dye with Decency.
Come!

Takes off his Gown. Executioner prepares to bind him. Fath. Son!


Peir. Hence, Tempter.


Offic. Stand off, Priest.


Peir. I thank you, Sir,
You Will think on it.

To Jaffeir. Jaff. 'Twon't grow stale before to morrow.


Pier. Now, Jaffeir! now I am going, Now; --


Executioner ^ving bound him. Jaff. Have at thee,
Thou honest heart, then -- here -- S^bs him.
And this is well too.

Then stabs himself. Fath. Damnable Deed!


Peir. Now thou have indeed been faithful.
This was done Nobly -- We have deceived the Senate.

Jaff. Bravely.


Peir. Ha ha ha -- oh oh --


Dies. Jaff. Now, ye cursed Rulers,
Thus of the blood you have shed I make Libation,
And sprinkl't mingling: May it rest upon you,
And all your Race: Be hence^orth Peace a (...)
Within your Walls; let Plagues and Famine waste
Your Generations -- oh poor Belvidera!
Sir, I have a Wife, bear this in safety to her.
A Token that with my dying breath I blessed her,
And the dear little Infant left behind me.
I am sick -- I Am quiet --

Jaff. dies. Offic. Bear this news to the Senate,
And guard their Bodies till there is farther order:
Heaven grant I dye so well --

Scene shuts upon them, Soft Music. Enter Belvidera distracted, led by two of
her Women, Prinli and Servants. Prin. Strengthen her heart with Patience,
pitying Heaven.


Belv. Come come come come come. Nay, come to bed!
Prithee my Love. The Winds! hark how they whistle!
And the Rain beats: oh how the weather shrinks me!
You are angry now, who cares? pish, no indeed.
Choose then, I say you shall not go, you shallnot;
Whip your ill nature; get you gone then! oh, Jaffeir'^ Gho^ rises.
Are you r^n'd? See, Father, here he is come again,
Am I to blame to love him! oh thou dear one. Ghost sinks.
Why do you fly me? are you angry still then?
Jaf^eir! where art thou? Father, why do you do thus?
Stand off, don't hide him from me. He Is here somewhere.
Stand off I say! what gone? remember't, Tyrant!
I may revenge my self for this trick one day. Enter Officer and others.
I Will do it -- I Will do it. Renaulis a nasty fellow.
Hang him, hang him, hang him.

Prin. News, what news?


Offic. whispers Prinli. Offic. Most sad, Sir.
Jaffeir upon the Scaffold, to prevent
A shameful death, stabbed Peirre, and next himself:
Both fell together.

Prin. Daughter.


The Ghosts of Jaff. and Peir. rise together both bloody. Bell. Hah, look there
(...)
My Husband bloody, and his friend too! Murder!
Who has done this? speak to me thou sad Vision, Ghosts sink.
On these poor trembling Knees I beg it, Vanished --
Here they went down; Oh I Will dig, dig the Den up.
You shall not delude me thus. (...), Jaffeir, Jaffeir.
Peep up and give me but a look. I have him!
I Have got him, Father: Oh now how I Will smuggle him!
My Love! my Dear! my Blessing! help me, help me!
They have hold on me, and drag me to the bottom.
Nay -- now they pull so hard -- farewell --

She dies. Maid. She Is dead.
Breathless and dead.

Prin. Then guard me from the sight on it:
Lead me into some place that is fit for mourning;
Where the free Air, Light and the cheerful Sun
May never enter: Hang it round with Black;
Set up one Taper that may last a day
As long as l've to live: And there all leave me.
Sparing no Tears when you this Tale relate,
But bid all Cruel Fathers dread my Fate.

Curtain falls, Ex. omnes. FINIS.

