TITUS OATS D.D. the first discoverer of the Popish Plott.


THE Witch of Endor; OR THE WITCHCRAFTS OF THE Roman Jesebel: In which you have
an Account of the EXORCISMS or CONJURATIONS OF THE PAPISTS, As they be set
forth in their Agends, Benedictionals, Manuals, Missals, Journals, Portasses,
which they use in their Churches concerning the Hallowing of Water, Salt,
Bread, Candles, Boughs, Fire, Ashes, Incense, Pascal Lamb, Eggs, Herbs, Milk,
Honey, Apples, Wine, Cheese, Butter, new Baked Bread, Flesh, Font, Marrying
Ring, Pilgrims Wallet, Staff, Cross, Sword, etc.

Proposed and Offered to the Consideration of all Sober PROTESTANTS.

By TITUS OTES, D. D.

What Peace, so long as the Whoredoms of thy Mother Jesebel and her Witchcrafts
are so many?

2 Kings, 9.22. LONDON: Printed for Thomas Parkhurst, and Thomas Cockeril, at
the Bible and Three Crowns at the lower end of Cheapside, and at the Three Legs
in the Poultry, near the Stocks-Market. 1679.

I DO Appoint Thomas Parkhurst and Thomas Cockeril, to Print this my Book,
Entitled, The Witch of ENDOR.

TITUS OTES.

To the Right Honorable ANTHONY EARL of SHAFTSBURY, Baron Ashly of Wimbourne
St. Gyles; Lord Cooper of Pawlet.
My Lord,
I Confess the Obligations that your Lordship has laid upon this Kingdom in
general, and upon my self in particular, call for greater Acknowledgments than
have yet been paid by the one or the other. As for my self, my Lord, I have had
nothing but Affronts and Afflictions, and your Lordship has vouchsafed to
stoop to share with me in them; and since your Lordship has been pleased to
own me in my Sorrows and Cares, I am thereby encouraged to Address my self to
your Honor for your Patronage and Protection. This Book, my Lord, is another
demonstration of Rome's detestable Practices, under which we must again groan,
if we do not with one Consent oppose Popery, to cut it off Root and Branch, and
use all lawful means to prevent its introduction into this our native Country.
We have again detected the Contrivances of the Romish Interest against our
Religion and Liberties, therefore, my Lord, I humbly conceive, That those that
appear for a Popish Successor, are for Popery by wholesale, let their Pretenses
be what they will against it by retail, and would at once betray our Land to
Rome's Tyranny and Witchcrafts, and are content for the Gust of a sweet Morsel
to sell all, even God, their King, Religion, and every thing that may conduce
to the Peace, Welfare and Advantage of King and Kingdom: all which appears by
their slighting, nay opposing the kindness of God our Savior in this great
Discovery of their intended Malice against us, and by their fawning and
flattering with Jesebel, whose Whoredoms and Witchcrafts are many: they
encourage and abet the devilish Interests both of Rome and France, to the great
Confusion of Prince and People, by which means the Gospel of our Lord Christ is
more affronted in the Houses of those that profess and call themselves
Christians, than by the Congregation of those Blasphemers, who from a Principle
of Ignorance do with the loudest Calumnies reproach it. These, my Lord, are the
Traitors whom Judgment does follow in this World, and Eternal vengeance in the
next. My Lord, I am sure your good Lordship has not been unacquainted how the
People have been deceived by these false Prophets, therefore once more I pray
your Lordship still to continue your Zeal and Affection to the Protestant
Cause, and the Interest of your Country, in which Harvest your Lordship
heretofore has been and now appears to be a true labourer, not only in Word,
but by your Lordship's Care, Diligence and unwearied Activity.

To this end God Almighty bless your Lordship with all Blessings both of Heaven
and Earth, Body and Soul, so that both King and Kingdom may joy and rejoice in
you. I shall say no more, but protest I will in all good Conscience do my part;
I will appear more Loyal to my Prince than those who by their accustomed Oaths
say they are so, and will from my Heart, and with all the skill I have, oppose
this Romish Dragon, and all its Votaries. I shall now humbly take leave to
subscribe my self,

My Lord, Your Lordship's most humble and most obedient Servant, TITUS OTES.
WHITEHALL, Nov. 5. 1679.
The Exorcisms or Conjurations of the Papists, as they be set forth in their
Agends, Benedictionals, Manuals, Missals, Journals, Portasses, etc. which they
use in their Churches, concerning the hallowing of Water, Salt, Bread, Candles,
Bows, Fire, Ashes, Incense, Pascal Lamb, Eggs, Herbs, Milk, Honey, Apples,
Wine, Cheese, Butter, new Baked Bread, Flesh, Font, Marrying Ring, Pilgrims,
Wallet, Staff, Cross, Sword, etc. with Confutations of the same.
Of HOLY WATER.
IN the Exorcism or Conjuration of the Holy Water, which is mingled together
with Water and Salt, the Papists speak first of all to the Salt, which can
neither speak, nor hear, nor have any sense in it, on this manner:

I conjure thee, thou Creature of Salt, by the living God, by the true God, by
the holy God, even by the God which through Elisha the Prophet commanded thee
to be cast into the Water, that the barrenness of the Water might be healed; to
the intent that thou may be made a conjured or bewitched Salt unto the
salvation of them that believe: and that unto all such as receive thee thou
may be health of soul and body: and that from out of the place wherein thou
shall be sprinkled, may flee away and depart all fantasy and wickedness or
craftiness of the Devils subtilty, and every unclean spirit may give place,
being conjured by him who shall come to judge both the quick and the dead, and
the World through fire. Amen. To speak nothing of the Papists Exorcisms or
Conjurations, which they most wickedly use in charming the good Creatures of
God, against the Doctrine of the holy Ghost, persuading the simple Multitude,
that through these Benedictions, Crossings, Conjurings, etc. they be holier
than when God at the beginning made them, notwithstanding Moses writes, That
God beheld all the things that he had made, and they were excellently good.
What Christian heart can suffer such and so great Blasphemies, that that Virtue
and Power should be attributed to a Creature without life, which is only due to
the only begotten Son of the living God? Is Salt now through their bewitchings
become of such force, might, and strength, that it brings Salvation to them
that believe, and health both of body and soul? St. Peter says, There is
Salvation in none other but in Jesus Christ. Neither is there any Name under
heaven given unto Men wherein they may be saved, but only the Name of Jesus. Is
not Christ called Jesus, that is to say, a Savior, at the appointment of God
the Father, to declare, That he alone saves his People from their sins? Does
not all the Scripture testify, That by Christ only and alone we are justified
and saved, yea, and made inheritors of everlasting glory? Why then do the
blasphemous Papists steal away the glory of our Salvation from Christ, and give
it to Creatures? Is Christ's ear so stopped that it can no more hear? Is
Christ's hand so shortened, that it can no more help? Ah cursed is that Man that
puts his trust in any Creature, and suffers his heart to depart from the
Lord.

Moreover, They give such virtue to their bewitched Salt, that it is able to
drive away Devils and unclean Spirits, wheresoever and whenever it be
sprinkled. O blasphemous Priests! When Christ sent forth his Disciples into the
World to Preach the Gospel, he said, that they should cast out Devils by his
Name, that is to say, by his power and might. He says not by the sprinkling of
holy Water. And St. Paul exhorts us to put on the shield of Faith, and with
that to quench the fiery darts of Satan: so likewise does St. Peter, saying, Be
ye sober and watch, for your adversary the Devil goes about like a roaring
Lion, seeking whom he may devour, whom see that ye resist with a strong faith.
In the History of the Gospel we read, that Christ drove away the Devil with the
word of God. And in another place of the Gospel he speaks of a certain kind
of Devils which are not cast out but by Prayer and Fasting. Thus are we taught
in the Word of God, that by the Name of Christ, by Faith, by the holy
Scripture, by Prayer and Fasting, the Devil is expelled and put out: But that
he is driven away by holy Water, we find in no place.

And in the Prayer that follows, the Popish Conjurer desires of God, that
the conjured and bewitched Salt may be unto all such as receive it, salvation
of mind and body, so that whatsoever shall be touched or sprinkled by it, may
be void of all uncleanness, and of every assault of spiritual wickedness.

Here sings the conjuring Papist one and the same song; as before, so
likewise here he goes about to bring salvation both of mind and body to the
People from his bewitched Salt, when, as we have heard, all salvation comes
from God alone, through faith in the blood of Christ, as St. Paul says, By
grace are you saved through faith, yea and that not of your selves. It is the
gift of God, and comes not of works, because no man should rejoice.

If salvation come not unto us through those good Works which we work at the
appointment of God, but is the free gift of God alone, as the same Apostle
says also in another place, Everlasting life is the gift God, through Jesus
Christ our Lord; With what face than do our Popish sacrificers attribute the
virtue of salvation to a beggarly Ceremony, invented by the idle brain of some
enemy of God, and no where commanded, but rather condemned in the holy
Scripture, as our Savior Christ says in the Gospel, They worship me in vain,
teaching Doctrins which are the Commandments of men.

And whereas the Mass-monger prays, That whatsoever be touched or sprinkled
by it may be void of all uncleanness: we shall understand, that it is God
alone, which through Faith purifieth and cleanses us both in body and soul.
Therefore David prays unto God, saying, A clean heart create thou in me, O
God, and a right spirit renew thou in my innermost parts. And God himself by
the Prophet says, I will pour upon you clean water, and ye shall be cleansed
from all your iniquities, yea from all your Idols will I cleanse you: And I
will give you a new heart and put a new spirit in you, etc. This clean Water
which God promises here to pour upon his People, is not the conjured Water of
the Papists, seasoned with Salt, but it is the holy Ghost which by Faith is
received of the true Christians. And are not these the words of blessed St.
Luke, By faith has he purified and cleansed their hearts?

As touching the avoiding of every assault of spiritual wickedness, whereby is
understood the work of Satan and of his infernal Army employed unto the
destruction of the faithful: We have before heard, that neither Salt nor Water,
nor any thing of like condition, although never so much blessed, crossed,
exorcised, conjured and bewitched, is of such force, that they may be able to
resist, and so quench the fiery darts of Satan. By the Name of Christ, by
Faith, by the Word of God, by Prayer, and Fasting, is this brought to pass, so
that by this means we obtain and get glorious Victories over all Spiritual
Wickedness, as it is written, O Hell, I will be thy destruction: O Hell, where
is thy victory? God be thanked which has given us the Victory through our Lord
Jesus Christ.

Moreover, As they handle the Salt, so do they likewise the Water: They bless,
they sanctify, they exorcise, they conjure, they charge, they command, they
charm, they bewitch the Water, speaking unto it as a thing having life, on this
manner:

I conjure thee, thou Creature of Water, in the Name of God the Father
Almighty, and in the Name of Jesus Christ his Son our Lord, and in the virtue
of the holy Ghost, that thou be a conjured Water, to expel all Power of the
Enemy, and that thou may be able to root out and utterly to displace the
Enemy himself with his Apostatick Angels, by the virtue of the same our Lord
Jesu Christ, who shall come to judge the quick and the dead, and the World,
through fire. As before in the Conjuration of the Salt, the Exorcist and Conjurer
went about by charming, to make it of sufficient virtue to expel and drive away
Satan and all his Ministers, so likewise does he here in the exorcising of the
Water. But how wickedly and foolishly he does this, we have before sufficiently
heard.

In the Prayer unto God, that follows immediately after, the Conjurer is more
mad, and as one out of his wits, he prays God, that his bewitched Water may
be of such virtue and strength, that whatsoever this Water shall sprinkle in
houses or places of the faithful, may be void of all uncleanness, and delivered
from harm. That no noisome spirit remain there, nor no corrupt air, but that
they may avoid all the laying in wait of the privy Enemy: and that if there be
any thing that is contrary to the health and quietness of the Inhabitants, it
may, through the sprinkling of this Water, depart away, etc. And in the Prayer
which he makes after he has mingled the Water and Salt together, he
beseeches God, that wheresoever this Water thus conjured be sprinkled, all
noisomness of the unclean spirit may be cast out, and the terror of the
venomous serpent expelled far away, and the presence of the holy Ghost may
vouchsafe to be present.

And in the next Prayer following, he desires of God, that he will grant by
the sprinkling of this bewitched Water, health of mind, safety of body,
conservation of health, security of hope, and strength of faith.

Who sees not how this Popish Exorcist and wicked Conjurer goes about by this
heathenish Ceremony to obscure the glory of Christ and his death, while he
goes about to attribute that to the idle invention of Man, which is only given
to the faithful of God alone, through the Lord Christ his dearly beloved and
only begotten Son. For what can Christ bring unto us, but free deliverance from
Satan and his Ministers, freedom from all sin and uncleanness, health of body
and mind, quietness of Conscience, security of hope, strength of faith, and in
fine, everlasting Life? All these things bring the bewitched Water, by the
Doctrine of the Papists, to them that be sprinkled with it. And is this any
other thing than to make Christ Jack out of Office, and to place a new Savior
in his stead? Woe unto thee thou Pope and thou Devil: Ah thou Antichrist, who in
thy Antichristian Doctrine teach thy Captives and Bondslaves to seek
salvation in this thy beggarly Ceremony, and to say these words, when they take
this thy conjured and bewitched Water, Aqua benedicta sit mihi Salus and Vita:
that is to say, This blessed (or rather bewitched) Water be unto me Salvation
and Life. O blasphemy passing all blasphemies! Water utterly abused to bring
Salvation and everlasting Life! O damnable Doctrine! Salvation comes by none
but by him alone who is the Savior of the World, even the Lord Jesus, who only
and alone saves his People from their sins: as St. Peter says, There is
Salvation in none other but in the Lord Jesus. Neither is there any other Name
given unto Men, wherein they may be saved, but only the Name of the Lord Jesus.
And as concerning everlasting Life, says not the Lord Christ of himself in
this manner? I am the resurrection and the life; he that believes in me,
although he were dead, yet shall he live, and every one that lives and
believes in me, he shall never die. Again he says, I am the way, the truth,
and the life: no man comes unto the Father, but by me. Likewise says St. John
Baptist of this Christ the Lord, He that believes on the Son of God has
everlasting life, but he that believes not on the Son of God has not life,
but the wrath and vengeance of God abides upon him. He says not, He that
sprinkleth himself with holy Water has everlasting Life, but he that believes
on the Son of God has everlasting Life. Neither says he, He that sprinkleth
not himself with holy Water has not Life, but the wrath of God abides upon
him: but he says, He that believes not on the Son of God has not life, etc.
And St. John the Evangelist, speaking of Christ, says, This is the true God,
and everlasting life. And are not these the words of blessed St. Paul,
Everlasting life is the gift of God through Jesus Christ our Lord. He says
not, Through the sprinkling of holy Water.

Hence it evidently appears how greatly the wicked Papists in times past, (and
still do in some places) have abused the simple Christians, while by this and
such other like Ceremonies, they have taught the People to seek Salvation both
of Body and Soul, Victory over Satan, and all his infernal Army, quietness of
Conscience, freedom from all Sin and Uncleanness, security of Hope,
corroboration and strength of Faith, and, in fine, what not? Is not this to
deny the Lord that bought them? Is not this to make Merchandise of the People?
Is not this to tread the blood of Christ under foot, and to count it of no
force? God destroy thee and thy Kingdom, O Antichrist, that the glory alone may
be the Lord's. But let us behold more of their wicked Exorcisms and
Conjurations.

Of HOLY BREAD.
AS the Papists teach their Captives to seek salvation both of body and soul in
their conjured Water, so likewise do they in their bewitched Bread: for in the
Exorcising or Conjuring thereof they use these words:

Bless thou O Lord this Creature of Bread, as thou did bless the five Loaves
in the Wilderness, that as many as taste of it may receive health both of Body
and Soul. Here have we the very same sour and stinking leaven of the Papistical
Pharisees that we had before. The crafty Conjurer and subtle Sorcerer, to cloak
his wicked doings, puts Christ in remembrance how he blessed five Loaves in
the wilderness, when he fed five Thousand People, as we read in the Gospel. And
he means by blessing, nothing else than the wagging of the two fore-fingers
of the right hand, as the manner of the Popish Bishops is to bless the People,
and to make them never the better. But Christ's blessing was Prayer and
Thanksgiving to his heavenly Father for the benefits which he bountifully does
daily bestow upon his Creatures, but especially upon Mankind.

And methinks that the Prayer of the Popish Priest is very large, in that he
desires of God, that as many as taste of that conjured Bread may receive health
both of Body and Soul. What if Mag Pie, or Jack Daw, or Philip Sparrow, should
chance to eat of it, as it may happen (has it not been known that the little
god of the Altar has been eaten and devoured of Mother Mouse and Will. Worm)
should they also, through the tasting and eating thereof, receive health and
salvation both of body and soul? A foul and a great oversight. The almighty God
ordained this his Creature of Bread for the sustentation and preservation of
the body, and the Papists utterly abusing it, transpose it unto the salvation
both of body and soul, and teach us to seek health both of body and mind in
this beggarly Ceremony, being an idle invention of their most idle brain: When
we are sufficiently taught in the holy Scriptures, That all our Salvation
comes from God, through Faith in Christ, and not from holy Bread and holy
Water.

But the Papists have another Blessing of Bread, which is this:

O Lord, holy Father, almighty eternal God, vouchsafe to bless this Bread with
thy holy spiritual Benediction, that unto all those which receive it, it may be
salvation of mind and body, and a safeguard against all Diseases, and all
laying wait of the Enemy. In this Prayer we have not only, that the Popish holy
Bread brings salvation of mind and body unto all those which receive it, but
also that it is a safeguard against all Diseases, and a defense against all
layings in wait of the Enemy.

Will any Man be free from the Pox, the Piles, a Fever, or any other kind of
Disease? let him eat holy Bread, and by the Doctrine of the Pope, he shall be
free from all evil Maladies. If this were true, as it is most false, it were a
very ready way and of little charge to cure Diseases: And by this means also
should we not only chase away all Infirmities out of the Country, but also be
free from the torments of Chyrurgions, and the heavy Counsels of Physicians,
and from the Charges of them both. This is therefore a false fancy of the
Papists, to teach the simple and ignorant People to believe, that by eating
this their Bread, they shall be free from all Diseases. Hence it has come to
pass in times past, that many would carry home part of the holy Bread in their
Napkin, and put it in their Pottage, believing that that part of the holy Bread
which they did eat dry in the Church, should stand instead of their Table Bread
all the week after, if they should chance to die. Again, that that part which
they carried home, and did put in their Pottage, should preserve them from all
Sickness and Diseases. O blindness, rather worthy to be lamented than to be
laughed at! And whereas they attribute to their holy Bread power to deliver the
receivers thereof from all lying in wait of the Enemies, who knows not what a
slender defense a morsel of bread is against our Enemies, whether we respect
the spiritual or the corporal? Satan is a mighty Prince, and in working
mischief is more subtle and more crafty than to be resisted with a morsel of
bread. The same may we say of our bodily adversaries. A Man of credit, dead
some years since, says, That when he was a Child, he knew certain old women in
his Country which always carried about them certain pieces of holy Bread in the
Ears of their Caps, being certainly persuaded, and assuredly believing, that
carrying that Bread about with them, they should easily avoid the danger of evil
Spirits, and be free from the wicked Arts of their Enemies, so that no harm
should chance to them that day, neither spiritually nor corporally. The younger
sort of Women and Maids, for the like purposes, carried the holy Bread about
their Necks, with St. John's Gospel sown in a piece of Silk or Velvet, hanging
upon St. Audries Lace, which, as they said, was very profitable for the pain in
the Throat, and a present Remedy against the Chin-Cough. Thus the subtle
Papists deceived the simple People, and made them plain ridden fools. But let
us behold more of their Conjurations.

Of HOLY CANDLES.
IN the hallowing of Candles, upon Candlemas-day, the Priest being arraied with
his Priestly Apparel, and turning himself to the South, among other things, in
his first Prayer desires God, that his Candles which he has there in hand,
may receive such a strength and blessing, through the token of the holy Cross,
that in what place soever they be lighted or set, the Devil may avoid out of
those habitations, and tremble for fear, and fly away discouraged, and presume
no more to disquiet them that serve him. Is not this a wonderful Prayer, and
well framed according to the Will of God? Is not this a new kind of saving
health, that Candles blessed of a Popish Priest, without the Commandment of
God, being lighted or set in a place should drive away the Devil, and make him
to tremble for fear, as one altogether discouraged or dismayed, etc. yea, and
that by virtue of the sign of the Cross? If the Cross whereon Christ died were
then present, it could give no such strength as the Papists require, much less
can the Sign thereof. The Devil fears as much the Sign of the Cross, as he
fears the turning the Weathercock of Paul's when the wind blows. The Name
of Christ, and constant Faith in the same, expels Satan, and not the Sign of
the Cross. Afterward, in the same Prayer, he beseeches God, That he will send
down his holy Angel Raphael, that he which plucked out and put away from Tobias
and Sarah, the pestilent and noisome Devil which troubled them, may by the
sanctification and hallowing of the Candles, tread Satan down, and chase him
away out of all the Houses of them that honor God; out of the Churches, out of
the Mansions, out of the Beds, out of the Refectories, and out of all places
wherein such as serve God do dwell and rest, do sleep and watch, do walk and
stand: and that that malignant Spirit may no more be bold to trouble or to make
them afraid whom thou have defended with the holy Unction of thy holy Chrism.

Here this blesser and sanctifier prays God to send down the Angel Raphael to
dispatch the Devil out of the way, that he trouble us no more; not considering
whether God has in the mean season appointed him to any other service. The
Angels are not appointed by God to wait upon Candles at the request of sinful
men, but are ordained of God to attend upon his elect and chosen People: as St.
Paul writes.

And it is not a little to be marvelled at, that the Popish Priest is so
without all shame, that he would have the Angel of God do all these things
through the hallowing and sanctification of the Candle, as though there were
more virtue and strength in a Wax Candle than in an Angel of God, which by the
power of God has not only expelled many Devils, but has also in one night
slain many thousands of People. But the Papists are like to an Ape, which
likes no kind of Beasts but her own Whelps, thinking them most fair, most
well-favoured, most amiable, etc. when, notwithstanding, who knows not what
deformed things they are? After this manner play the Papists, they like no kind
of Justification and Sanctification that God has appointed in his holy Word:
but whatsoever they devise of their own-authority, without the authority of
God's Word, that they extol and magnify above the Stars: That justifies, that
sanctifies, that saves. And to bring this thing to pass, they abuse the good
Creatures of God, by taking upon them to make them more holy and better than
ever God made them: which is an Antichristian presumption.

After these things, as a man out of his wits, the Popish blesser turns him
to the Candles, and says:

I bless thee, O thou Creature of Wax, in the Name of the holy Trinity, that
thou be in all places a chacing away of the Devil, and an utter destruction and
rooting out of all his Companions, etc. Here does the Popish Priest attribute
Power to the Wax for to chase away the Devil and all his Companions. But I
marvel why the Hemp, whereof the Wiek is made, is not also spoken unto and
blessed, as well as the Wax, seeing that that also is part of the Candle? It is
to be thought that the Papists had rather twice deal with Wax than once with
Hemp, for fear of hanging. In the second Prayer, after that the Priest himself
has blessed the Candles, as a man remembering his duty, he beseeches God, That
he also will vouchsafe to bless those Candles, prepared unto the uses of Men,
and health of Bodies and Souls, as well on the Land as in the Waters, yea, and
that by the invocation of his holy Name, and by the intercession of his holy
Mother, and by the Prayers of all the Saints. To make this Merchandise
saleworthy, he is not content with his own blessing of the Candles, but he also
prays God to put to his blessing, that they may bring unto men health both of
body and soul, not only upon the Land but also upon the Water; that is to say,
in every place, that the sanctified Candle may be known to be a perfect Savior
in all places universally. O abomination! O blasphemy! The mean to bring this
matter to pass, he allegeth to be the invocation of God's most holy Name, as
the Charmers, Conjurers and Witches do likewise. But lest that the invocation
of God's most holy Name should not seem to suffice in this behalf, as though
there were an insufficiency in the same, he straightway subjoineth and adds
the intercession of our Lady, and the Prayers of all the Saints in Heaven. But
where has the Papist learned in God's Book the Intercession of Saints? Or
where has he any Scripture to show that they Pray either for us or for the
Candles. God alone is to be invocated and called upon in the Name of our only
alone Mediator, yea, and that according to his Will, and not after the foolish
fancies of Men. And as God alone is to be called upon in spirit and truth, so
likewise he alone hears our Prayers, and grants our Petitions. All other
Invocations and Intercessions are but the idle inventions of Men, sprung up of
a blind Zeal, without authority of God's Word, and to say truth, mere Idolatry.
After these, and such like Benedictions and Prayers, the Candles are sprinkled
with holy Water, and incensed, that nothing should want unto the perfect
salvation of them. But whether this be false Worshipping, or Conjuring, or
Idolatry, or Superstition, or Foolishness, to incense dead Creatures, and to
make sweet Perfumes to them that smell nothing, let others judge. All these
things I am sure are but apish toies, devised only to blear the simple peoples
eyes, and to keep them still in blindness, that they being occupied about such
trifles may have no leisure to spy out the juggling of the Papists. God confound
Antichrist, with his whole Generation. These things being dispatched, the
Candles are lighted, and every man taking his Candle, and the Priest his, with
merry singing of Lumen ad revelationem gentium, and Nunc Dimittis servum tuum,
domine. Then the Priest holds up his Candle, and all the People their Candles,
and about the Churchyard they go, the Prior of Prickelingham and his Covent,
merely singing and talking, as merry as Pope John with all his College of
Cardinals. After Even-song, the same day, distribution is made of the Priest's
Candle, by the Priest to the People, every one taking their Portion in a fair
Napkin, as a Relic and Jewel, so holy, so precious, and of so incomparable
virtue, that they think themselves unworthy to touch it with their bare hands.
These pieces of the Candle they bear home, and lay up daintily in their Coffers.

If any Thunder or Lightning, or any other grievous Tempest arise, then
straightway they light their Candles, with this faith and persuasion, That that
Candle being once lighted, drives away the Devil, quieteth the Tempests, and
brings health and safeguard to so many as are in the house.

Again, When any sick person is like to depart, then this Candle is also
lighted, and the sick man blessed therewith, with this belief, That if he be
blessed with that holy Candle before he depart, he shall be free from all the
Assaults of the Devil, and the sooner, come unto everlasting joy.

Of Holy Boughs, otherwise called Palms.
NOw as touching the Boughs, Branches, and Flowers, which on Palm Sunday are
exorcised, conjured, bewitched and charmed in the Churches of the Papists.
First of all, before this matter be enterprised, because all things should
orderly be done, the sacrificing Priest is commanded to array himself with a
red Cope, and then to stand upon the third step of the Altar, turning him
toward the South. Secondly, the Palms with the Flowers that shall serve for the
Clerks, shall be laid aside upon the Altar, as for persons of a greater
dignity, and more excellency than the common sort of People. Thirdly, as
touching the other Palms and Flowers, which shall serve for the Laity, they
shall be laid on the step of the Altar on the South Side. All these things set
in most comely order, at last the Sorcerer falls to his business, and says,

I conjure thee, thou Creature of Flowers and Branches, in the Name of God the
Father Almighty, and in the Name of Jesus Christ his Son our Lord, and in the
virtue of the holy Ghost. Therefore be thou rooted out and displaced from this
Creature of Flowers and Branches, all the strength of the adversary, all thou
Host of the Devil, and all thou power of the Enemy, even every assault of
Devils: That thou overtake not the footsteps of them that have unto the Grace
of God. Through him that shall come to judge the quick and the dead, and the
World by fire. Amen. As we have before heard in the Conjurations of Salt and
Water, how busy the sacrificing Sorcerer was to dispatch the Devil and all his
power out of the aforesaid Salt and Water, through his wicked and divelish
Incantations, even so plays he now with the poor Boughs and silly Flowers. I
conjure thee, says he. But, I beseech you, where ever did Christ ordain the
Ministers of the New Testament Conjurers? Antichrist indeed has his Conjurers,
Sorcerers, Charmers, Witches, South-sayers, Enchanters, Sacrificers, etc. but
Christ in his Ministry knows no such. Therefore whereas the Popish Priests
take upon them to Conjure, they show themselves to be not the Ministers of
Christ, but the Bondslaves of Antichrist. But what fault find they in the
Branches and Flowers, which are the good, fair, sweet, and pleasant Creatures
of God, that they must be conjured? We see in them the great Power and mighty
Work of God. These Boughs which not long before seemed to be dead, are now
green and flourishing. The Flowers which of late were not, are now most goodly
and pleasant to behold. Beholding them we are forced to praise God in his
Creatures: neither do we see any imperfection in those Creatures, that they
should need such Conjurations. Has the Devil entered into the Branches and
Flowers since they were brought into the Popish Temples? For before they were
good and undefiled, and needed no such Conjurations and Charms. But what
conjure they? the Devil and all his power out of the Flowers and Branches. But
the holy Scripture says, God beheld all things that he had made, and they were
exceeding good. Flowers, Boughs, Branches, are the Creatures of God, therefore
are they good: If good, what place has the Devil in them? Can that which is
good, and the Devil, dwell together? What fellowship has Christ with Belial?
Light with Darkness? Righteousness with Unrighteousness? But it is to be
thought that whatsoever thing it be, although never so good, that comes into
the Popish Priests hands, it is straightways defiled, or else they would never
use such Benedictions, Consecrations, Sanctifications, Conjurations, etc. But
by whose power do they conjure the Devil and all his Host out of these Branches
and Flowers? Because they will make fair work and praiseworthy in the eyes of
the simple, they conjure the Devil, not in their own name (for that might seem
too great a presumption) but in the Name of God the Father, and in the Name of
Jesus Christ his Son, and in the virtue of the holy Ghost. And in thus doing
they show themselves right Conjurers and Sorcerers: For of all such, that is
the property. They must blasphemously abuse the Name of God, while they apply
it to such Incantations. The Name of God is with all reverence to be called on
in things lawful, and not in things unlawful. And such things are to be
required of God as he commands us to ask, and not such as we, after our
fleshly imagination, fancy. God likewise is to be honored with such Works as
he has prescribed, and not with such doings as blind Zeal devises: As it is
written, That I command thee, that do thou only, neither put thou any thing
thereto, not yet pluck ought therefro. Again, Ye shall not do every one of you
what you think good, but what I command you, that shall ye do. Now where has
God at any time commanded his Ministers to conjure the Devil and all his Army
out of Salt, out of Water, out of Boughs, out of Flowers, etc. Or where has he
commanded that such Works should be done in his Name? O Antichristian Arts!

After the Conjuration of the Flowers and Branches, the Priest falls to
Prayer, yea and that without Dominus vobiscum, but only with Oremus, and
entreats God, that it will please him, seeing the Devil and all his Host is
conjured out, to bless and sanctify these Flowers, branches, slips of Palms,
or boughs of Trees, which they offer before the presence of his glory, that the
devout people bearing them in their hands, may merit and deserve to obtain the
grace of his Benediction.

The Conjurer, after that he has conjured the Devil out of those Flowers and
branches, desires God to sanctify them, and to make them holy, as though the
Workmanship of God expressed in them before, were unholy and imperfect, when,
notwithstanding we have before said, that all the Creatures of God are
exceeding good, and therefore consequently good and perfect in their kind. He
says moreover, That they offer these Flowers and branches before the presence
of God's glory. But I would fain know where God has commanded in the New
Testament, that such things should be offered unto him? To offer the sacrifice
of praise, and to offer our bodies a lively and acceptable sacrifice unto God,
we are taught in the holy Scriptures; but to offer to God Boughs, Branches and
Flowers, that we read not. Verily to offer up these things in sacrifice to God,
is none other thing than to set up an Idol of our own making, and to bring
strange fire before the Majesty of God.

But to what end would this crafty Conjurer have God to sanctify these flowers
and branches? Verily, that the people bearing them in their hands may merit and
deserve to obtain the Grace of God's benediction. Behold this Antichrist,
whereas before he so vilely judged of these branches and flowers, that he
thought them to be altogether unholy and unclean, and therefore he fell to the
conjuring of the Devil and all his Army out of them, now he esteems them to
be of so great price, that the carrying them about in peoples hands, deserves
the Grace of God's benediction, that is to say, God's favor, remission of
sins, quietness of Conscience, and in fine, everlasting Life. O new kind of
meriting! Is the wrath of God, kindled against sin, waxen so cold, that the
carrying about of a few flowers and branches is able to quench it? Is remission
of Sins, quietness of Conscience, everlasting Life, etc. so slender gifts, and
of no price, that they may easily be obtained with carrying about a few Palms
or Willow-branches? If great Oxen, fat Calves, mighty Bullocks, young Doves,
tender Chickens, being sacrificed and offered up unto God, if Incense and other
sweet perfumes offered unto the Almighty God of Israel (which notwithstanding
were done of the People of God at God's appointment) could not bring these
heavenly benefits to Mankind, is it to be thought that the bearing of a few
flowers and boughs in men's hands, which are now conjured and turned to a
superstitious use, not commanded of God, but invented of Man, is able to bring
this to pass? No Ceremony commanded and ordained of God is able to justify
Man; and shall Ceremonies devised by Man work Justification? Nay, moreover, no
Work that God has commanded in his Moral Law, otherwise called The Ten
Commandments of Almighty God, is able to justify the doer thereof: For no man
does the works of the Law with such perfection as the Law requires, for as
much as the Law is spiritual and we are carnal, as our Savior Christ says,
Moses gave you a Law, and none of you all fulfilleth it; And shall works done
at the prescription and appointment of man, bring to pass a matter so weighty
and of so great importance? Verily our works, even our best works, are so
imperfect and so estranged from all true righteousness, that they are not
without a cause resembled by the Prophet to a menstruous Cloth. Enter not into
judgment with thy servant, O Lord, says the Psalmist, for no man that lives
shall be found righteous in thy sight. Again, If thou, O Lord, shall narrowly
look upon our wickednesses, O Lord, who is able to abide it? Are not these the
words of the Apostle? If Righteousness come by Works, then died Christ in vain.
He speaks not of Popish and Superstitious Works, but of Works commanded of
God. And he says plainly, That those Works do not justify, that is to say, do
not bring God's favor, remission of sins, the gift of the holy Ghost,
quietness of Conscience, and everlasting Life to the doers of them, of their
own dignity and worthiness, of their own perfection and holiness: but they be
freely given to us of God the Father, for his dear Son's sake, Jesus Christ our
Lord, through faith in his blood. So that every one of us may worthily say with
St. Paul, God forbid I should rejoice in any thing but in the Cross, that is to
say, in the Passion and Death of our Lord Jesus Christ. Where is Merit and
Desert now then become, which the Papists brag we shall obtain by carrying
about their bewitched Flowers and Branches. The Death of Christ is the alone
Merit of the faithful: whereof God alone for his mercy sake make us all
partakers, and shortly confound the Kingdom of Antichrist. Amen.

In the second Prayer, which orderly follows, the sorcering Papist beseeches
God, That all they which shall bear those Branches of Palm and other Trees, may
be replenished with the gift of his Benediction.

St. Paul says, God has blessed us with all spiritual blessing through
Christ: and not by bearing of Palms. For he is the blessed seed of Abraham, in
whom all Nations of the earth are blessed, that is to say, favored of God.
Whosoever therefore will get the blessing of God, he must seek it in Christ,
and not in bearing of Palms.

In the third Prayer he beseeches once again Almighty God, to take so much
pains as to bless those branches of Palms and other Trees, that into what place
soever they be brought, all the Inhabitants of the same place may obtain his
blessing, so as all sickness being chased away, his right hand may defend them
whom it has redeemed.

In this Prayer the sacrificing Papist does not only crave of God, through
these branches and flowers, his blessing, but also, that all the Inhabitants of
those houses into which those branches and flowers shall be brought, may be
free from all sicknesses and diseases, and preserved in health. And here this
marked Merchant marvelously sets forth his Merchandise, as things, of great
price and dignity, of much virtue and force, profitable not only for the
salvation of the soul, but also for the health of the body. And here is the
matter that makes their Merchandise so plausible, so acceptable, and so
greatly to be desired, chasing away of diseases, and who desires not health of
body, especially when it costs nothing? As though he should say, Ye Idiots and
lewd People, Why do ye consume and wast your selves, your money, your
substance, in running hither and thither for the safeguard and health of your
body? Make haste and come hither. Here is present remedy against sickness, and
a most precious preservative of health. Take these Palms, bear them in your
hands, wear them on your Caps, pin them up at your Bed's-head, and my body for
yours, health and wealth enough. And verily this was the dotage of the simple
people in times past, through the false persuasion of these Popish Hypocrites,
even to look for all these Commodities appertaining to the body or soul,
through the virtue of those conjured Palms. And therefore on Palm Sunday they
did not only most joyfully carry them about in Procession, but also at the time
of the Gospel they made of the Bark of those Boughs certain knots, which they
did always carry about with them either in their Bosoms, or else in their Caps.
And of the very Wood they made Crosses, and some used to pin them upon their
Caps, some to set them at their Bed's-head, with this faith and persuasion,
That by the virtue of those Knots and Crosses they should be preserved from all
evil, and obtain all good things. Their Houses should be free from burning and
spoiling. They themselves should dwell safely and sleep sweetly, free from all
Diseases, free from Thunder and Lightning, etc.

But to whom is it unknown, That every good and perfect gift is from above, and
comes down from the Father of lights. To this heavenly Father therefore must
we resort, when we lack any good thing appertaining either to the soul or body,
and not unto the hallowed Flowers and Palms, or unto Knots and Crosses made of
the same.

In the fourth Prayer the Sorcerer has these words:

Vouchsafe to bless and sanctify these Branches of Palms, and other Trees and
Flowers, that whosoever in the service of thy virtue shall take any thing
thereof, being sanctified with the Benediction of Heaven, may deserve to enjoy
Remission of Sins, and the Rewards of everlasting Life. Here we see to what
point at the last the Conjurer is come with his conjured stuff. Verily even to
this end, That so many as take and carry about any portion of those Branches
and Flowers, may deserve to enjoy Remission of Sins, and the Rewards of
everlasting Life.

What will ye have more? Ye have here remission of Sins, ye have everlasting
Life: Is there any other thing behind? O blasphemous Papists! We are taught in
the holy Scripture to seek remission of sins, not from Palms and Flowers, but
from the hands of our heavenly Father, through faith in the blood of Christ.
And as touching everlasting Life, it is the frank and free gift of God to the
faithful, through Jesus Christ our Lord, as the Apostle says. But Antichrist
goes on still to be Antichrist.

After these things, the branches and flowers are sprinkled with holy Water,
and incensed solemnly, because they should be holy and holy again. This thing
done, the Priest and all the People take the Palms and boughs in their hands,
and away they go together for company about the Churchyard. This Procession is
so full of mysteries, that not one Papist of a thousand understands them.

On Palm Sunday the flies are more afraid than they are all the year after.
But the Idolatry that is committed afterward with the Rood at their return into
the Church, is most damnable, God destroy all Idols with their Idolatry.

Of Hallowing the Fire on Easter-Eve.
HEre follows more work for the Tinker. Now must he fall in hand with
hallowing of the Fire. For although the Fire by nature is of all the four
Elements most subtle, pure, and most estranged from corruption, yet when it
comes into the Papists hands, it is not so pure, but it must be made more pure,
not so holy and good, but it must be made more holy and good. Therefore must he
fall in hand with this matter also, yea and that on this manner:

First of all, The Fire once made, the Priest must stand by the Fire, turning
himself Eastward. Secondly, The Deacon must stand on the Priests left hand, and
the Subdeacon on the left hand of the Deacon. Thirdly, One Taper-bearer must
stand against the Priest, and at the right hand of the Taper-bearer there must
stand a Child, holding the Book near to the Priest. Fourthly, Another
Taper-bearer must stand behind the Priest, and at the right hand of the same
Taper-bearer must he stand that carries the holy Water near unto the Priest.
Fifthly, In the last place, behind all, on the West Side, must he stand that
bears the long Staff with the Taper. Sixthly, Beside the Fire, namely on the
South Side, must he stand that shall cast Incense, to take fire into the Censer
after benediction. Seventhly, All these Ministers being turned toward the
Priest, the Quire in the mean season standing round about, namely on the
North-side, there shall follow a blessing of the Fire solemnly, the Priest
saying thus: Dominus vobiscum, and Oremus.

Among all other things in the blessing and hallowing of the Fire, the Popish
Priest has these words:

O Lord, holy Father, Almighty and everlasting God, in thy Name, and thy Son's,
our Lord Jesus Christ, and the holy Ghosts, We bless this Fire, and sanctify
it with the Wax, and all the nourishments of the same, and we mark it with the
Sign of the Cross of thy most high Son Christ Jesus, that whether it be kindled
within or without, not only that which now it kindles and sets on fire, but
that it may also kindle, make warm, or lighten, all things necessary for the
use of men, and that all things which shall be kindled or made warm of this
Fire, may be blessed and profitable to the health of all men, etc. Here we see
of what great virtue this Fire which the Papist has now consecrated,
sanctified, and blessed, is. Verily of so great force, that whatsoever be
kindled or made warm by this Fire, should straightway be profitable to the
health of all men, that is to say, drive away all corrupt, pestiferous, and
evil Airs, and preserve the health of all them that receive any heat by it. O
the marvelous strength of this sanctified Fire! Hence it was, that in times
past, so soon as the Paschal was lighted, every Woman of the Parish should
strive who might come first to the Fire, and carry home some part of it, and
kindle their Wood with it, and so smoke and smother every part of the House
therewith, with this faith and persuasion, That this perfuming of their House
with the smoke of this Fire, did not only drive away all wicked Spirits and
pestiferous Airs out of their Houses, with all kind of Diseases, but also bring
assurance of health to all the Inhabitants of the same for all the year after.
O vain Faith! O foolish Pesuasion.

In another Prayer the Popish Priest beseeches God, That into whatsoever place
this blessed and hallowed Fire be brought, it may expel the wickedness of the
Devils deceit, and make the power of God's Majesty to be present, even Jesus
Christ our Lord. Is not the virtue, power, and force of this Fire wonderful and
marvelous? It does not only drive away the Devil, but it also brings Christ
unto us. But as touching the Devil, we have before heard, That it is neither
Salt, Water, Bread, Candles, Boughs, Palms, Flowers, etc. that can drive him
away, but only the Name of Christ, Faith, Prayer, God's Word, and Fasting. And
as concerning Christ, no man can come by him, but only through the singular
benefit and unspeakable Gift of God, as our Savior Christ himself says, No
man comes unto me, except my Father, which sent me, draw him. Foolish
therefore, vain and superstitious is the Doctrine of the Papists, concerning
this their sanctified and hallowed Fire.

Of Holy Ashes.
THese Ashes, whereof we must now entreat, are made of the hallowed Palms of
the year past: And the Mass Book says, That upon Ash Wednesday, when the
Priest has absolved the People, etc. then must there be made a Blessing of the
Ashes (without Dominus vobiscum, and without Oremus) by the Priest, being
turned toward the East, and standing in the midst of the Quire, before the
Altar. Notwithstanding the Roman use says, That the Priest shall say Dominus
vobiscum, and Oremus also: so little do the holy Fathers agree among themselves.

After that the Popish Priest has set himself in a comely order for the
dispatching of this matter, he begins on this manner, and says, as we read
in the Roman Manuale, otherwise called the Benedictionale.

O Almighty and everlasting God, spare them that fear, be merciful to them that
make supplication, and vouchsafe cross; to send thy holy Angel from Heaven,
which may bless and sanctify these Ashes, that they may be an wholesome Remedy
to all that weekly call upon thy holy Name, and accuse themselves for the
Conscience of their Sins, and lament their wickedness before the sight of thy
divine Clemency, or that meekly and humbly desire thy most excellent Majesty:
And grant through the invocation of thy holy Name, that so many as shall
sprinkle these Ashes upon them for the redemption of their sins, may receive
health of Body and safeguard of Soul. In this Petition the Priest requires of
God, That he will send down his holy Angel from Heaven to bless and sanctify
those Ashes, mistrusting, as it may seem, his own blessing and sanctifying, as
a thing of no great force and virtue. But I believe, that he may pray to God
for this matter twice, before it be granted him once. Where has this Papist
learned, That the Office of Angels is to hallow Ashes? The holy Scriptures
testify, That Angels, at the appointment of God, have many times come down
from Heaven to the consolation and comfort of God's Elect and chosen People:
but that they at any time came down to hallow Ashes, that is in no place read.
And how dare the Papist ask that of God, for which he has not one jot nor one
tittle in the holy Scripture? We are taught to ask according to the Will of
God, and not against the Will of God. That is the Will of God, which he has
manifested, declared and opened in his Word. All other things are fancies,
dreams and idle imaginations of men. And as they are asked without, yea
contrary to the will of God, so are they never granted of God. And thus may we
well think of this Petition of the Priest, wherein he asks, That God would
send down his holy Angel from Heaven to bless and sanctify the Ashes. Without
doubt a worshipful office, more meet for the Angel of Antichrist than for the
Angel of Christ. The Office of Gods Angel and Ambassador is, to execute Gods
Will, to do Gods message to such as he sends them, to take care of Gods
Elect, to defend him from the violence of Satan, to preserve them in the
obedience of Gods Will, to nourish Concord, Peace, Amity, Virtues, good
Studies, Arts, Policy, etc. and in fine, at the day of Judgment to gather
together Gods Elect into that Heavenly Kingdom, and to commit the Reprobate
unto Everlasting Fire. Of this we read in the holy Scripture; but that it is
their Office to bless and hallow Ashes, that read we not. Therefore as the
Popish Sacrificer does evil to put the Angels of God to such an Office as is
not allotted unto them by the holy Scripture; so likewise do they wickedly
require such a thing of God as is contrary to his Blessed Will. God has
appointed his Angels to serve him, and to attend upon his elect and chosen
People for their Safeguard, and not to sanctify and hallow Ashes.

But let us see to what end this Papist would have Gods holy Angel come down
from Heaven and hallow these Ashes: verily says he, That they may be an
wholesome remedy to all that meekly call upon thy holy name, and accuse
themselves for the conscience of their sins, and lament their wickedness.

What wicked Doctrine is this of the Devil and the Pope, to teach that their
abused Ashes should be not only a remedy, but also an wholesome remedy to such as
have offended? The holy Scripture teaches far otherwise: That plainly
declares, that when we have sinned against the Lord our God, the next and best
remedy is to turn again unto him whom we have offended: to repent us of our
former wikedness, to crave mercy at our Heavenly Fathers hand, in the name of
our only Mediator Christ Jesus: To believe that our sins shall be forgiven us,
if we ask in Faith: and in fine, to take upon us a new life, and above all
things to take heed that we fall no more into a lewd life, lest the last be
worst than the first, and so this common Proverb be verified of us, The Sow
being washed is returned to her wallowing in the mire, and the Dog unto his
vomit.

But afterward, the Papist makes it more plain, and desires of God, that so
many as shall sprinkle those Ashes upon them for the redemption of their sins,
may receive health of Body and Safeguard of Souls. Here is a plain Doctrine of
the Papists, That by sprinkling those Ashes upon them, they believe to have
redemption of their sins. What is Blasphemy if this be not Blasphemy? What is
it to work ignominy and dishonor to the precious blood of Christ, if this be
not? Who denies the Lord that bought them, if the Papists do it not? Is it
come to pass now, that Ashes work the redemption of our sins? We hitherto
believed that Christ alone has wrought our Redemption by his Passion and
Death. For so are we taught in the Word of God. Christ, says St. Paul, died
for our sins, and rose again for our justification. Again there is one God and
one Mediator, the man Christ Jesus, which gave himself a Ransom for all.
Likewise says St. John, The Blood of Jesus Christ purges us from all sin.
Also in another place, Christ has loved us and washed us from our sins by his
Blood, and has made us Kings and Priests to God his Father: To him be praise
and rule for ever. Amen.

And as concerning health of Body and safeguard of Soul, who knows that they
come not from Ashes, but from the Mighty God of Israel, from whom every good
and perfect Gift comes, as we have before heard. Of him therefore must we ask
whatsoever good thing we intend to obtain.

But we shall note also, that in the prayer which follows, it is plainly
declared, That the Popes Captains suffer the Ashes to be laid upon their heads,
to this end, That by that means they may deserve to have forgiveness of their
sins: when notwithstanding we have before abundantly heard, that forgiveness of
sins comes only from God, through Faith in the name of his Son Christ, and not
by reason of any work, although commanded in the Law of God, much less by any
ceremony invented by man, as it is written. Be it known to you, (ye men and
Brethren) that through this man (Christ) is preached unto you the forgiveness
of sins: and that by him all that believe are justified from all things, from
which we could not be justified by the Law of Moses. Again, Why tempt ye God
that ye would put a Yoke on the Disciples necks, which neither our Fathers nor
we we were able to bear. But we believe that through the Grace of our Lord
Jesus Christ we shall be saved, etc. And in the Service after Salisbury use,
(as they term it) we read these words. Grant that through the Invocation of thy
holy name, all they that bear these Ashes upon their heads for the obtaining of
thy mercy, may merit of thee to receive forgiveness of all their Trespasses. Are
not these words all one in effect with the other which we heard before? Verily
there is neither barrel better herring. Whether use we follow, both rob Christ
of his glory.

After these benedictions and sanctifications, these Ashes must be sprinkled
with Holy Water to make up the matter. Which thing dispatched, certain Anthems
must be sung, and in the mean season the Ashes must be received of so many as
are present. First of all, the Priest that shall say Mass must have the Ashes
laid upon his head by another Priest, if he be present. But if there be no more
Priests, then must he kneel down meekly before the Altar, and lay Ashes upon
his own head. Afterward must the other Ministers come, if any be present, and
kneeling down before the Altar, receive Ashes of the Priest. They being served,
the Brethren and Sisters shall come bini and bini, two and two together, like
Friars of one Cloister, and meekly kneeling upon their marrow bones before the
Altar, receive Ashes in like manner of the Priest. And in distributing these
Ashes, the Priest must say to every one of them on this wise, Memento homo quod
cinis es, (here must the Priest make a Cross with the Ashes upon the top of the
Crown, if he be a Man, but if a Woman, upon her forehead) and in cinerem
reverteris. That is to say, Remember man that thou art Ashes, and into Ashes
thou shall return.

These Ashes in times past, through the wicked Doctrine of the most wicked
Papists, have been counted of the common People to be of so great virtue, that
the receiving of them brought unto them Gods favor, and a worthy preparation
unto the forgiveness of their sins. And contrariwise, that without them,
neither Confession, Contrition, Penance, Absolution, Fasting, Prayer, nor any
other good work profited them any thing at all. O lamentable blindness!

Of hallowing Incense, Myrrh, and other Perfumes.
NOw that we have passed over Salt, Water, Bread, Candles, Boughs, Flower,
Fire, and Ashes, we are at last come to our Perfumes, as Incense, Myrrh, etc.
Neither are they so sweet, nor their savours so pleasant, but that the Papists
find fault in them; so that they also have need of their Exorcisms,
Conjurations, Sanctifications, Benedictions, Crossings and Blessings. Therefore
in falling in hand with that matter, the Popish Priest begins to Conjure in
this manner, speaking to the Devil as one not unacquainted with his doings.

I Conjure thee, thou most unclean Spirit, and every phantasy of the Enemy, in
the Name of God the Father Almighty, and in the name of Jesus Christ his Son,
and in the virtue of the Holy Ghost, That thou with all thy false Subtilty and
Wickedness, go forth and depart from this Creature of Perfume or Incense, that
this Creature may be Sanctified in the name of our Lord Jesus Christ, that all
they which taste, touch, or smell it, may enjoy the virtue and help of the Holy
Ghost; so that wheresoever this Incense or Perfume shall be, thou in no wise be
bold to approach near there, nor presume to trouble: But what foul Spirit
soever thou art, thou with all thy crafty falsehood flee and dapart far from
thence, being straightly charged by the name and virtue of God the Father
Almighty, and of his Son our Lord Jesus Christ, who in the Holy Ghost shall
come to judge the quick and the dead, and thee thou traitorous Offender, and
the World through Fire. Amen. Here is much work and little help. The poor Devil
is here so handled and so straightly Conjured, that he knows not whither to
turn him. First of all this Conjurer rateth him beyond all measure, and calls
him most unclean Spirit, foul Spirit, and traitorous Offender, and charge him
not in the name of Robinhood or little John, nor yet in the name of Friar Tuck
and maid Marion, but in the name of God the Father Almighty, and in the name of
Jesus Christ his Son, and in the virtue of the Holy Ghost, That he with all his
false Subtilty and Wickedness, and with all his crafty Falsehood, depart from
that creature of Incense or Perfume.

There is no remedy, but the Devil must now needs trudge, being so straightly
Conjured. But it is mavelous that such Perfumes should make so sweet savours,
if the Devil were in them, as the Popish Conjurer fancieth. If one Devil be in
so little portion of Incense, what a number of Devils be there in all the
Apothecaries Shops that are in Bucklersbury, and elsewhere? I wonder how they
can sleep in the night season, having so many Devils in their Houses. If the
Doctrine of the Papists be true, it were high time, yea, and more than time,
that these Conjuring Priests were sent for, and set a work to Conjure such
unclean and foul Spirits; yea, and such traitorous Offenders, lest they make
havoc of all Apothecaries and Grocers Houses, and all others also wheresoever
any Incense, myrrh or any other Perfume is. If Incense were possessed with the
Devil, as the Papists teach, I much marvel that the Holy Ghost would by the
mouth of the Psalmist compare Prayer unto it. Again, if Incense were possessed
with so foul and unclean Spirits, it is much to be marvelled that it should
have so sweet a savor, seeing the Devil corrupts all things that he
possesses. But let us consider why this Papist takes so great pains to
Conjure the Devil out of the Incense. Some urgent, grave, weighty, and
necessary cause moves him thus to do, otherwise he would never be so earnest
in the matter. Forsooth Sir, and it please you, The cause that moves him to
take all these pains in Conjuring and dispatching the Devil is, that this
Creature of Perfume or Incense may be sanctified in the name of our Lord Jesus
Christ; yea, and that unto this end, That all they who taste, touch, or smell
it, may enjoy the virtue and help of the Holy Ghost; so that wheresoever this
Incense or Perfume shall be, the Devil in no wise may be bold to approach near,
nor presume to make any hurly burly; but that he with all his crafty Falsehood
fly and depart far from thence. O notable Virtues! O wonderful Works! Of this
Exorcism we learn, that so many as taste, touch, or smell of this Perfume or
Incense, do enjoy the virtue and help of the Holy Ghost. To taste, that is to
say, to eat of Incense or any other Perfume, is rare; but to touch or to smell
thereof, is daily and common. But that this should bring the virtue and help of
the Holy Ghost, is of all things most rare, and almost incredible. To have the
Holy Ghost is the mere and only gift of God, as he himself testifies by the
Prophet, saying, I will pour out my Spirit upon all Flesh, and your Daughters
shall Prophecy. Again he says, I will pour clear Water upon you, and ye shall
be clean, yea, from all your uncleanness, and from all your Idols shall I
cleanse you. A new heart also will I give you, and a new Spirit will I put into
you, etc. I will give my Spirit among you, and cause you to walk in my
Commandments, to keep my Laws and fulfill them. And our Savior Christ says, If
ye being evil can give good Gifts to your Children, how much more shall your
Heavenly Father give the Holy Ghost to them that ask it of him?

Again, I will pray my Father, and he shall give you another Comforter, that he
may abide with you for ever, even the Spirit of truth, whom the World cannot
receive; for it sees him not, neither has it known him.

Here have we in manifest and plain words, that the Holy Ghost is the gift of
God only, and that it comes not unto us by Conjured Incense and and other
bewitched Perfumes, but by Prayer alone, which God has appointed the mean to
obtain his blessed Spirit.

Moreover in this Exorcism or Conjuration, the Exorcist or Conjurer attributes
so much to these bewitched Perfumes, that they be able, wheresoever they be
kindled or set on Fire, to drive away the Devil with all his Craft and
Falsehood. This is an old juggling of the Papists, so to esteem their Sorceries,
that they may be able to move Mountains, yea, to drive Devils away. But we have
before heard, that the Devil is more mighty and of greater force and strength,
than that the smoke of a little Incense can be able to drive him away. We have
heard also, that by Faith, Prayer, Fasting, and by the Word of God, Satan is
expelled and put out, and not by dumb Ceremonies. For this purpose, says St.
John, has the Son of God appeared, even to dissolve, loosen, break, and
destroy the works of the Devil.

In the Prayers that follow, the Sorcerer prays God that the Incense may be
to his Servants or Handmaids a Defense and Safeguard, that the Enemy the Devil
enter not into their bowels, nor have any entrance or seat in them. Again, That
all Diseases and deceits of the Devil, feeling the savor of this Incense, may
flee away, so that the People be not hurt through the biting of the old
Serpent, but that it may expel and drive away all fantastical assaults of
unclean Spirits, and expel all Infirmities, Sicknesses and Diseases: and in
fine, health being restored, smell to the Lord our God a most pleasant odor
with perpetual sweetness.

The Papists sing always one manner of song, that which only is due to the
Creator, they attribute to Creatures, after they have once exorcised, conjured
or bewitched them. But we have before abundantly heard, That no man can be
delivered from the assaults of Satan and other wicked Spirits, and from
sicknesses and diseases, nor obtain any health, but only by the power of
Almighty God, as it is written, Neither Herb nor Emplaister has healed them, O
Lord, but thy Word, which heals all things. And whereas they will have their
Perfumes to be a sweet savor in the Nostrils of God, we know that there is
nothing that smells sweetly before God but the Sacrifice of Christ's death:
As the Apostle says, Christ loved us, and gave himself for us an Offering and a
Sacrifice of a sweet savor unto God. Again, By Christ do we offer up Sacrifice
of praise always to God; that is to say, the fruit of those lips which confess
his Name.

After these solemn Prayers, the Exorcist, devoutly looking upon his new
bewitched stuff, speaks on this manner:

The blessing of God Almighty the Father, the Son, and the holy Ghost, descend
and come down upon this Creature of Incense, Myrrh and Perfume, and abide upon
it always. Amen. These things dispatched, he puts some of the new Perfumes in
the Censer, so that now by the virtue hereof, the Devil trudgeth with all his
craft and falsehood: All diseases flee away, health comes, and all good things
besides. O the wonderful power of these Perfumes! Yea, O Antichrist, who so
wickedly abusest the good Creatures of God!

Of hallowing the Pascal.
FOr the full furniture of this Ceremony, I mean the Pascal or great Taper,
which is wont to be hallowed in the Popish Churches on Easter-Even, which was
the device of Pope Zosimus. it is appointed, That the Deacon, having on decent
Apparel, and meet for the purpose, shall take this matter in hand, yet so, that
he first of all receive blessing of him that executes, otherwise unapt to
enterprise so weighty a matter, with Jube, Domine, benedicere. The blessing
once taken, this Deacon, standing beneath the steps of the high Altar, and
turning himself Northward, having the Taper-bearers standing by him, the one on
the right hand, the other on the left, and the Subdeacon right over against
him, by whom he that carries the long Staff must also stand, etc. sings on
this manner in the Latin Tongue, Exultet jam angelica, etc. Now let the
angelical Company of Heaven rejoice, etc. That done, he sings certain other
things, which, if they were not used to an evil end, might seem not only
tolerable, but also commendable, namely, if they were pronounced in a Tongue
that the People understands.

After these things, the Deacon puts Incense upon the Taper or Pascal in
manner of a Cross. Immediately after, this Taper is lighted, and no more put
out before Compline be ended the day following. And straight-ways all the
Candles in the Church are lighted with great solmnity. Afterward he prays for
the Clergy and People, but especially for the most blessed Father and Lord the
Pope, etc. And so ends the hallowing of the Pascal.

Of hallowing the Pascal Lamb.
IN hallowing the Pascal Lamb, among other things, the Popish Priest desires
God, That he will vouchsafe to bless and sanctify the Pascal Lamb which is
there present, that all such of the People as faithfully shall eat thereof,
being filled with all heavenly benediction and grace, may be replenished in
goodness. There is nothing so holy that ever God made, but coming into the
Papists hands, it is either profane, or else must needs be made more holy. And
being so hallowed, it brings sanctification, health of soul and body,
heavenly benediction, grace, goodness, and what not?

The hallowing of Eggs.
IN the hallowing of Eggs the Popish Sacrificer beseeches God to pour the
grace of his blessing upon the Creature of Eggs, that it may be made an wholesome
meat to all such as eat of it, and that they may receive by it health of body
and safeguard of soul.

He ought rather to have desired God to pour his blessing upon the People, than
upon the Eggs, which are Creatures without all sense and feeling, without all
life and motion. And whereas he desires of God, that the Eggs may be made an
wholesome meat to all such as eat them; this Prayer is foolish and vain: For if
Eggs be not rotten, unsavory, or otherwise estranged from their natural
property, they be good and wholesome of their own kind. And although the Papists
have forbidden them to be eaten of the faithful, certain times of the year, as
a kind of meat unlawful, yet we know, that to the pure all things are pure, and
that nothing is to be cast away that is received with thanksgiving: For it is
sanctified by the Word of God and Prayer. Whatsoever God has purified and made
clean, no man ought to call common and unclean. That which enters into the
mouth defiles not man. The Earth is the Lord's, and all that is contained in
it. But as to the pure all things are pure, so likewise to the unpure and
unfaithful nothing is pure, but both their mind and conscience is polluted and
defiled: neither can any thing be clean to them, though it were conjured,
sanctified, consecrated and blessed a thousand times.

And whereas the sacrificing Priest would have his hallowed Eggs to be health
of body and safeguard of soul, we know that both these things are the gift and
blessing of God, as it is written, Domini est Salus. Health and Salvation
comes from the Lord. Therefore the Prophet prays unto God in this manner,
Heal thou me, O Lord, and I shall be made whole. Save thou me, and I shall be
saved.

The hallowing of Herbs.
IN the Benediction and Blessing, in the Consecration and Hallowing of Herbs,
the massing Priest beseeches God, That the Herbs which he sanctifies may be
unto them that shall eat of them, health both of body and soul. Again, That
they may drive away from Beasts and Cattle all Rot and Murrain: and expel all
fantasies of the Devil, and all Diseases, and all Pestilences, and all other
kinds of naughtiness. And that whosoever shall use any of them, they may be
unto him Physic for the Body and Strength for the Soul: And in fine, That
whosoever, being sick, eats of them, may out of hand receive the benefit of
Health.

What precious Jewels and incomparable Treasures are here set forth unto us,
yea, and that through a few hallowed Herbs! Health both of Body and Soul;
driving away of all Rot, Murrain and noysomness from Cattle; expelling of all
devilish fantasies; putting out of all Diseases and Pestilences; Physic for
the Body and Strength for the Soul, etc. What will ye have more? Here is goodly
Ware. Come see for your Love, and buy for your Money. Never was there so good
and substantial Ware offered by any Chapman to be sold, as these massing
Merchants bring forth here. If the virtue of this their stuff were as good as
they brag, without all doubt we should have no need either of God, or of any
good Saint. But we know all these things aforesaid to be the Gifts of God, and
that they come not from Herbs sanctified by the Papists, but from above, even
from the Father of lights. To whom alone be glory for ever. Amen.

The hallowing of Milk and Honey.
IN this Benediction and Hallowing, the blesser and hallower desires God to
bless his Creatures of Milk and Honey, which are there present, that so many as
eat of them may receive health of body and safeguard of soul, and at the last,
everlasting salvation. Afterward he concludes with these words, and says: And
the blessing of God the Father, and of the Son, and of the holy Ghost, descend
upon these Creatures, and remain always.

The hallowing of Apples, and other new Fruits.
IN the sanctification of Apples and other Fruits of the Earth, which the
Papists also use in their Churches, because nothing coming into their hands is
so pure but it needs a new blessing, that by this means it may be holier than
ever God made it, the sacrificing Mass-monger beseeches God, That at his
instance and desire, He will vouchsafe to bless and sanctify the new Fruit of
Apples, and such like Fruits of the Earth, as Pears, Plumbs, Peaches, etc. that
the Devil with all his wicked Army being dispatched, those Creatures may be
received unto the Consecration both of Body and Soul. And afterward he
concludes on this manner, and says; O Lord bless this new Fruit of the Trees,
that they which eat of it may be whole in Body, and holy in Soul.

The Papists are but slender Musicians, for, like the Cuckoo, they sing always
one Song. Whatsoever virtue, might, and power they attribute to one Ceremony,
the same, for the most part, do they give unto all. There is no Ceremony which,
after their Conjuration, has not power to drive away the Devil, to put away
Diseases, to bring health to the Body, and salvation to the Soul. In so great
admiration have these Apes their little ones, although never so deformed and
evil favored. But whilst this their Doctrine is received and believed, the
bounteous liberality of God is unknown and unthanked. And the benefits of his
Son's Passion and Death not a little obscured and blotted. God destroy the
Kingdom of Antichrist, yea and that shortly.

The hallowing of Wine.
THe Papists are very busybodies, and love to meddle with all kind of
matters, that they may seem able to do somewhat in all things. It is not
sufficient that they have to do with Water, Salt, Bread, Candles, Palms,
Boughs, Fire, Ashes, Incense, Myrrh, Pascal, Pascal Lamb, Eggs, Herbs, Milk,
Honey, Apples, etc. except they also meddle with Wine, it being a Liquor
wherein they greatly delight, and therefore they daily use to sacrifice unto
the great god Bacchus, that they may be made the more meet to serve Lady Venus.
This Creature of Wine is not so pure in their sight, but it has also need of
their sanctification and hallowing, of their benediction and blessing. And
therefore they pray the Lord Jesus Christ, who at a Marriage of Cana in Galilee
turned Water into Wine, that he would vouchsafe to bless and sanctify this
Creature of Wine, that all that taste of it may be replenished and filled with
the riches of his blessing.

If the Prayer which the Papists here make, were heard and granted, it were
very profitable that the People should always be tippling this new sanctified
Wine, that by this means they might be replenished with the riches of Christ's
blessing. But as their Prayer is not grounded on Gods Word, nor framed
according to his Will, so is it neither heard nor granted: And therefore they
pray in vain, promising the simple People Mountains, performing Molehills. We
are not enriched with Gods blessing, for drinking the hallowed Wine, but for
Christ's sake, for Christ's dignity and worthiness, for Christ's merits and
deserts; as the Apostle says, Blessed be God the Father of our Lord Jesus
Christ, who has blessed us with all manner of Spiritual blessings in Heavenly
things by Christ.

What wickedness then is this of the Papists, to attribute that to a Cup of
bewitched Wine, that is only the gift of God? In thy Seed, said God to Abraham,
speaking of Christ, shall all the Nations of the Earth be blessed, as St. Paul
expounds it in his Epistle to the Galatians.

It is appointed moreover, That on the Feast of St. John the Evangelist, the
Wine especially should be blessed and hallowed; for what cause I know not,
except it be on that time of the year that men use to drink more largely, and
to be more merry than any other time of the year. Now for the perfect furniture
of this matter, it is commanded, that first of all the Mass-monger shall say
the beginning of St. John's Gospel, In principo erat verbum, etc. That once
done, he must pray on this manner,

By these words of the holy Gospel, and by the merits of John the Apostle and
Evangelist, vouchsafe, O Lord, to bless and consecrate this Cup of Wine with
thy right hand, and grant that all that believe in the drink of this Cup, may
be blessed and defended. And as St. John drinking poison out of the Cup was not
hurt; so they that drink this day of this Cup, in the honor of Thee and blessed
St. John, may be delivered through the merits of the same St. John, from all
sickness and poison, and be absolved both in Body and Soul from all faults. The
Papist in this his Prayer, Conjureth God to bless and sanctify his Cup of Wine
by the words of the holy Gospel, and by the merits of St. John the Evangelist,
as though God were so indebted and bound unto them, that he could do no
otherwise than grant his request. But as touching the words of the Gospel;
Where have the Papists learned thus to abuse them? Where have they read that
the words of the Gospel should help unto the hallowing and sanctifying of Wine?
The Papists play here with this piece of St. John's Gospel, as the simple People
in the time of darkness were wont to do with hanging St. John's Gospel, as they
call it, about their necks upon St. Audries lace, thinking themselves safe from
all danger, both Bodily and Ghostly, and free from all Devils and wicked
Spirits. But this is to abuse, and not to use the words of the Gospel. The
Gospel is a joyful Message, wherein is contained most present consolation and
ready comfort for all Sinners that repent in Faith, freely offered of God the
Father for his Son Christ's sake, to all that believe and embrace it. And this
Gospel helps not because it is read, but because it is believed; as St. Paul
the Apostle says, The Gospel of Jesus Christ is the power of God, to save so
many as believe: For Man and his Salvation was the Gospel written, and not for
Wine and for Wines satisfaction: As St. John himself testifies, saying, These
are written that ye might believe that Jesus is Christ the Son of God: and that
in believing ye might have Life through his name.

And as concerning the merits of St. John the Evangelist; Where have the
Papists learned to lay them before the Majesty of God, as things of such purity
and excellency, that for the worthiness of them, he is bound to grant their
desire, seeing it is written, That all our righteousnesses are as a menstruous
Cloth? Seeing also that before God, not the Angels in Heaven are clean; much
less man, who is Earth, Ashes, Dust and Dung. What St. John thought of his
merits, may easily be perceived by these words. If we say we have no sin we
deceive our selves, and the truth is not in us: But if we confess our sins, he
is faithful and just to forgive us our sins, and to cleanse us from all
unrighteousness. If we say we have no sin, we make him a liar, and his word is
not in us.

Here St. John puts himself in the number of Sinners; so far is he from
cracking and boasting of his good deeds and merits. And in the Chapter
following he says, If any man sin we have an advocate with the Father, Jesus
Christ the Righteous. And He it is that obtains mercy for our sins. Here St.
John likewise lays not forth his own merits and deserts before the Judgment
Seat of God, but the righteousness of Christ, that pure and undefiled Lamb,
that takes away the sins of the World. For whose sake also God is well pleased
with man. The merits both of St. John and of all the Saints, are the mercies of
God, as it is written, which crowns in mercy and loving kindness. When ye
have done (says Christ) all that ye ought to do, say, we are unprofitable
Servants, there is no difference, all have sinned and want the Glory of God.

Again, the Papist prays, That so many as drink of that hallowed Wine, may be
blessed, defended, delivered from all sickness and poison, and in fine, be
absolved both in Body and Soul from all sins and faults; yea, and that by the
merits of St. John the Evangelist. Of St. John's merits we have before heard.
But that the hallowed Wine should give to so many as drink of it, Gods
blessing, Gods defense, deliverance from all sickness and poison, and at the
last absolution from all sins and faults, it is more than any man may be bold
justly to look for at a Cup of Wine. It is God that blesses and defends us
his People. It is God that delivers his Servants from all evil and noisome
things. It is God that forgiveth sin, and saves both Body and Soul: as the
Psalmist says, Salvation comes from the Lord, and his blessing is upon his
People.

If this new sanctified Wine being drunk in the honor of St. John the
Evangelist, be of such force and strength, that it saves the drinkers thereof
from poisoning, How comes it to pass, that that Wine which is Consecrate in
the Blood of Christ, yea, which is the natural Blood of Christ, as the Papist
teach, could not keep and defend Pope Victor, the third of that name, from
poisoning, which as Chronicles record, was poisoned at Mass by drinking that
mystical Wine out of the Chalice?

And as touching the absolution of sins, I marvel greatly that the Papists
would so overshoot themselves, that they would desire of God, that so many as
drink of that Wine, might be absolved and delivered from all their sins. Verily
this thing does not a little diminish their Authority. If men might be absolved
from their sins by drinking a Cup of Wine, what should be come then of Ego
absolvo te? Then also were all the confessional pens dispatched and gone; yea,
then should the holy Fathers Indulgences and Pardons a paena and a culpa toties
quoties, be utterly neglected and nothing at all regarded. I wonder they were
so uncircumspect in this matter, where most circumspection ought to have been
had. But this we know and are fully persuaded, that neither drinking of the
hallowed Wine, nor the Pope himself can forgive us our sins, but God alone, as
it is written, No man can forgive sins but God alone. And as God himself says
by the Prophet, I am he; yea, I am he indeed which puts away thy sins, and
that for my own sake, and I will remember thy wickedness no more.

In another Prayer, the sanctifying Papist beseeches God to bless this
Creature of Wine, that whosoever tastes of it may obtain Everlasting Life,
through the intercession of St. John.

Here we may say to the Papists, as the Fletcher says to his bolt, Fly and be
naught. Here is de malo inpejus, venite adoremus, as Skeleton says, It was very
naught that we heard before in hallowing the Wine, but this of all naught, is
most naught. For now we are come to this point, that the drinking of this
hallowed Wine brings Everlasting Life; when notwithstanding the Apostle
says, Everlasting Life is the Gift of God through Jesus Christ our Lord. And
Christ himself says, I am the way, the truth, and the life. No man comes unto
the Father, but by me. Again, I am come that they might have life, and that
they might have it more abundantly. For I am the Resurrection and Life. He that
believes on me, though he were dead, yet shall he live, and whosoever lives
and believes on me shall never dye. St. Paul says, If Righteousness come by
the Law, then died Christ in vain. What is meant by Righteousness in this
place, but the grace, favor and mercy of God, remission of sins, the gift of
the Holy Ghost, quietness of Conscience, and in fine, Everlasting Life? Now,
says the Apostle, None of all these things come by the Law; that is to say, by
those works of the Law, which not man but God has prescribed and appointed.
For if they did, it should truly follow that Christ died in vain. But Christ
died not in vain, therefore Righteousness and Everlasting Life comes not by
works, as it is written, No Flesh shall be justified by the Works of the Law.
If therefore our Justification and Salvation come not by those works which God
has appointed, shall we obtain so noble and excellent benefits at the hand of
God through drinking of Wine, lately blessed by an unblessed Papist?
Everlasting Life is the gift of God, through Jesus Christ our Lord.

Moreover, This sacrificing Sorcerer desires of God, that these things may be
brought to pass so much the sooner, through the intercession of St. John. A new
kind of Intercession. Is it to be thought that St. John being now a glorified
Saint in Heaven, and following the Lamb whither-soever he goes, has so much
idle leisure, as to attend upon such trifling suits and requests? What other
thing were it, to crave of God, that all such as drink of that new hallowed
Wine, might obtain Everlasting Life by the means thereof; than to spit in
Christ's face, to set Christ at naught, to contemn and utterly despise the
inestimable merits of his Passion and Death, and in all points to deny him to
be a Savior? For whosoever seeks any part of his Salvation at any Creature,
either in Heaven or in Earth, except only at the hand of Christ, he has
utterly forsaken the Lord Jesu, and his saving health. Far therefore be it from
so holy an Apostle to attempt such wickedness.

And whereas the Papists make him an Intercessor unto God, I know not for what
trifles, we shall understand that we are not taught by any part or parcel of
the holy Scripture, that the Saints departed do make any intercession for us
that live in this World. Neither is it probable by the Word of God, that they
either pray for us, or that they hear our prayers, as the Prophet Isaiah says,
Thou art our Father. For Abraham knows us not, neither is Israel acquainted
with us. But thou Lord art our Father and Redeemer, and thy name is everlasting.

When we will obtain any thing at the hand of God, St. John sets not forth
himself, nor any of his fellow Apostles, no nor yet the Virgin Mary to be our
Mediator, Advocate, or Intercessor unto God the Father; but he appoints Jesus
Christ, who for his dignity and Righteousness is found alone worthy to offer up
our prayers before the Throne of Gods Majesty. He alone is our Mediator, He
alone is our Advocate, He alone is our Intercessor, as the holy Scripture
abundantly testifies. Whatsoever we ask of God the Father in the name of this
our Mediator, Advocate, and Intercessor, so that it be agreeable to the will of
God, we may be sure to obtain it, as that self truth testifies, saying, Verily
verily I say unto you, Whatsoever ye shall ask the Father in my name, he shall
give it you. Ask and ye shall receive, that your joy may be full.

After diverse other vain words, which I gladly pass over, the Popish Sanctifier
concludes with these words,

And the blessing of God Almighty, the Father and the Son and the Holy Ghost,
descend and come down upon this Creature of Wine, that it may be to so many as
take of it a remedy against all peril of Body and Soul, and a foretasting to
Everlasting Life. Amen. What an wholesome Conclusion this is, who sees not? But
what care the Papists what they say, so that it may advance their own idle
inventions, although it obscure the Glory of God and Merits of Christ's death
never so greatly? The defense both of Body and Soul against all evil comes
from God alone, and not from an hallowed Cup of Wine. The Lord, says David, is
my stony rock and my defense, my Savior, my God, and my might, in whom I will
trust, my Buckler, the horn also of my Salvation, and my refuge. I will call
upon the Lord who is worthy to be praised, so shall I be safe from mine
Enemies, etc.

And as touching Everlasting Life, we have before heard that it is the free
gift of God through Jesus Christ our Lord. To have a foretasting of this
Everlasting Life, there is no other way but by Faith only: as it is written, He
that believes on the Son, has Everlasting Life, but he that believes not on
the Son, shall not see Life, but the wrath of God abides upon him.

The hallowing of Cheese and Butter.
IN the Benediction of Cheese and Butter, the Sanctifier uses these words,

Vouchsafe O Lord God Almighty, to bless and sanctify these Creatures, (Cheese
and Butter) which thou have vouchsafed to bring out of the fat of Beasts; and
grant, we beseech thee, that so many of thy faithful People as shall eat
thereof, may be replenished with all Heavenly benediction, and with the
holiness of thy Grace.

At the beginning God blessed all his Creatures, and beholding them, he saw
that they were wonderfully good. This his blessing abides still upon his
Creatures so firm and constant, that they need no man's blessing, much less a
Papists. And these things which he has prepared to be received of the faithful
with thanksgiving, he has already so sanctified and made pure by his Word,
that they have no need of a new sanctification. Notwithstanding the Papists
after their old manner, go forth to abuse the good Creatures of God, and to
think those unclean which God has purified; and therefore they new bless and
sanctify them. Moreover, they desire of God, that so many as eat of this their
hallowed Cheese and Butter, may be filled with all Heavenly blessing, and with
the holiness of Gods grace. Great must the virtue of this hallowed Cheese and
Butter be, seeing it brings to the Eaters thereof, abundance of all Heavenly
blessing, and the holiness of Gods grace. But the Papists may ask these things
twice of God, before they obtain them once. All Heavenly blessing and the grace
of God, comes not by eating sanctified Cheese and Butter, but they be freely
given of God to the faithful, for his Son Jesus Christ's sake, as is above said.

The hallowing of new baken Bread that lately came out of the Oven.
IN hallowing the new baken Bread, the Papists use these words.

O Lord holy Father, Almighty everlasting God, vouchsafe to bless this Bread
with thy holy and Spiritual benediction, that it may be to all men health of
mind and Body, and a defense against all Diseases, and against all the crafty
assaults of their Enemies. As in all other his benedictions, so likewise in
this, the sacrificing Papist beggeth of God, that he will vouchsafe to bless
the new Bread; yea, and that unto this end, that it may be unto all men (he
means so many as shall eat of it) health of mind and Body, and a defense
against all Diseases, and against all the crafty assaults of their Enemies.

Here the Papist lays on load, and beggeth much, because he may seem to
obtain somewhat. But if this his request were granted of God, (as it is most
certainly denied) then should we neither have need of the Corporal Physician
for the health of the Body, nor yet of the Spiritual Physician, that is to say
Christ, for the Salvation of the Soul. For both these things are gotten by
eating this new sanctified Bread. But how false and slight Merchandise these
false Merchants bring forth and utter to the simple Idiots and unlearned
People, the learned know. For as touching the health of the body, who knows
not, that although the sick Person have his gorge crammed full of this hallowed
new baken Bread, yet is he never the nearer to health, but remains still sick
and diseased? And as touching the health and salvation of the Soul, to whom is
it unknown that Christ alone is the Author thereof? Thou shall call his name
(said the Angel to Joseph) Jesus, that is to say, a Savior. For he shall save
his People from their sins. Likewise says St. Peter, There is Salvation in
none other. Neither is there any other name given to men under Heaven, wherein
they must be saved. And our Savior Christ himself says by the Prophet, I am
the Lord, there is no Savior besides me. A God that saves, there is none but
I alone. Vain therefore is the salvation that is looked for through Popish
Ceremonies. And cursed is he that makes flesh his arm, and suffers his heart
to depart and go away from the Lord. For the Lord shall destroy all them that
run a whore-hunting from God after vile and strange Idols, which are nothing
else than the idle inventions of idle and wicked men.

Again, As concerning defense against all Diseases, and against all the crafty
assaults of our Enemies, either corporal or spiritual, we are well assured,
that it comes only from God. He only with his mighty hand and outstretched arm
defends his People from all evils both bodily and ghostly. And as he
defends us from all sicknesses, diseases, and all other misfortunes, so
likewise does he only preserve and keep us from all such as go about to molest
and trouble us either in body or in soul. So far is it off that these benefits
come unto us from a piece of new baken Bread, sanctified by a Popish Priest,
Antichrist's Chaplain.

The hallowing of Flesh.
IN hallowing and blessing Flesh, the Popish Priest uses diverse Prayers. In
the first he has these words:

We beseech thee, that thou will vouchsafe to bless and to sanctify this
Flesh: that it may be to all that eat of it strength of body and pureness of
mind. In the second Prayer he says thus:

Vouchsafe, O Lord God Almighty, to bless and to sanctify these Creatures of
clean Flesh, that whosoever among thy faithful People shall eat them, may be
replenished with all heavenly benediction and healthful grace. In the third
Prayer he has these words:

We meekly beseech thee, that thou will vouchsafe to bless and to sanctify
this Flesh of four-footed Beasts and Birds, that it may be to all us that
receive it, the blessing of the soul and the defense of the body, and a most
sure stablishment to all the bowels. In the fourth Prayer he speaks on this
manner:

We humbly beseech thee, O Almighty God, That thou will vouchsafe to bless and
sanctify these Creatures which are the Flesh of clean Birds, that whosoever
shall eat of them, may he replenished with the abundance of thy blessing, and
deserve to come unto the pastures of everlasting life. In the first of these
Prayers, after the Massing-Priest has beseeched God to bless and sanctify
that Flesh there present, as though the blessing he gave to all his Creatures
at the beginning were now worn out, or else so old that it needs to be
renewed, he desires also, That it may be to all that eat of it, strength of
body and pureness of mind.

The Meat received and well digested of an hungry stomach, brings, through
God's blessing, to the body of the eater strength, no man doubts, but that it
brings pureness of mind to such as eat it, is very strange, nay it is
directly against the Word of God. In the Old Law the Jews at the Commandment of
God did both offer and eat diverse kinds of Beasts and Fowls: yet read we not,
that they were made holy and purified thereby.

When Noah after the Flood built an Altar unto the Lord, and took of every
Beast, and of every clean Fowl, and offered Sacrifices on the Altar, the
Scripture says, That the Lord smelled a sweet savor. It is not said, That the
offering of that Flesh purified and cleansed the minds of Noah and his Family.
Meats are ordained of God not to purify the mind, but to comfort and cherish
the body. The minds and hearts of the faithful are purified by Faith, and not
by corruptible Meats, which perish and come to naught. Spiritual Diseases are
cured with Spiritual Medicines, and not with gross and outward Emplaisters. The
evil and wicked affections of the mind are more privy and subtle Diseases than
can be healed with eating a piece of flesh. Vain therefore is this their Prayer
unto God in this behalf. The holy Apostle says, That such Offerings as were
offered in the old Law at the commandment of God, could not purify the
Consciences of men, but of necessity it behoved Christ to offer himself a sweet
smelling sacrifice, that by the virtue thereof, both body and soul of the
faithful believer might be purged and purified. And is it to be thought that
flesh eaten is able to cleanse the minds of the eaters! O new Divinity!

In the second part he desires God, That whosoever among the faithful people
shall eat those Creatures of clean flesh, may be replenished with all heavenly
benediction and healthful grace.

To be replenished and filled with all heavenly benediction and healthful
grace, comes not by eating of flesh, although never so clean, and never so often
purified, cleansed, sanctified, blessed and hallowed of the Popish Priest.
These benefits are obtained only at the hand of God, through faith in the seed
of Abraham, that is to say, Christ, in whom all Nations are blessed: as we have
before heard.

In the third Prayer he humbly beseeches God to bless and sanctify the flesh
of four-footed Beasts and Birds, that it may be to all them that receive it,
the blessing of the soul, and the defense of the body, etc.

What blessing the soul has (I speak of the inward Man, of the spirit which is
born only of God) or can have by eating flesh, I see not. But that the soul is
many times accombred through the abuse of flesh, superfluity, banqueting,
surfeting and rioting, daily experience does sufficiently declare. In
consideration whereof, St. Paul, giving himself to abstinence, says, I
chastise my body, and bring it unto bondage. If the holy Apostle had known that
he might have received the blessing of the soul by eating, he would not have
given himself so much to abstinence and fasting. Meats are ordained, says St.
Paul, for the belly, (he says not for the soul) and the belly for meats, but
God shall destroy both it and them. Again he says, The Kingdom of God is not
meat and drink, but righteousness, and peace, and joy in the holy Ghost. For he
that in these things serves Christ, pleases God, and is commended of men. And
where he prays, That the meat may be the defense of the body, and a most sure
stablishment to all parts of the same, he prays not indiscreetly. For who
knows not, That good meat is a good defense against hunger, and against
certain diseases of the body? But if he means any other defense, that by
eating that hallowed meat he should be defended from his Enemies, either bodily
or ghostly, he utterly deceives both himself and the people. For this defense
comes to the faithful from God alone, who has numbered all the hairs of their
heads, keeps all their bones, so that none of them shall be broken, and
sends his Angel to pitch his Tent in the midst of them that fear him, that he
may deliver them from all danger and peril, and defend them against all their
Enemies.

In the fourth Prayer, the Sacrificer goes forth to disclose and utter his
madness, and beseeches God, that whosoever shall eat the Flesh of the clean
Birds there sanctified and blessed, may be replenished with the abundance of
his blessing, and deserve to come unto the Pastures of everlasting life.

St. Paul says, Meat makes us not acceptable to God. Neither if we eat, are
we the better, nor if we eat not, are we the worse. Again, The Kingdom of God
is not meat and drink, but Righteousness and Peace and joy in the Holy Ghost.
As the meat that enters into the mouth, does not defile a man; so likewise
does it not sanctify nor justify man; so far is it from replenishing and
filling us with the abundance of Gods blessing.

And as touching that they which eat of this hallowed Flesh, should thereby
deserve to come unto the Pastures of Everlasting Life: Who sees not that this
is a new kind of Divinity? Where was it ever read or heard before, that men by
eating Flesh hallowed of a Papist, should deserve to come unto Everlasting
Life? Verily if this Doctrine were true, it were a very easy thing to enter
into Heaven. We should not need to Pray, nor Fast, nor give Alms, nor to do any
other good work, but only to eat and drink, and to be merry, according to the
old saying, Dum sumus in mundo, vivamus cord jucundo. But our Savior Christ
teaches us far otherwise, saying, Enter in at the strait Gate: for wide is the
Gate, and broad is the way that leads to destruction, and many there be which
go in thereat. But strait is the Gate, and narrow is the way which leads unto
Life, and few there be that find it. The Apostle says, That by many
tribulations we must enter into the Kingdom of Heaven.

Of merits and deserts we have before spoken. And as touching Everlasting life,
we are taught by the holy Apostle, that it is the free gift of God through
Jesus Christ our Lord, to whom be glory for ever.

The hallowing of the Font.
THe hallowing of the Font solemnly is used in the Popish Churches twice in the
Year, that is to say, on Easter-Even, and Whitsunday-Even. At other times
secretly (if necessity requires) they use also to have it, but not with so
great solemnity and pomp. Now that this matter may be done formally, it is
appointed that at both these times, the Priest shall furnish himself after the
best manner; put on his Surplice, his Stole and his Cope. He must also have one
with him that shall bear the Tar-box, otherwise called the Chrismatory, wrapped
in a Towel; another to carry the Censer; a third to bear the Ship; and two more
to carry the two Candlesticks burning, to light him that he stumble not by the
way, besides the whole Quire. All these being set in a most seemly order, they
take their Journey out of the Chancel unto the Font, merrily singing the Kyrie,
and calling upon a number of Saints; as Angels and Archangels, Patriarchs and
Prophets, Apostles and Evangelists, Martyrs, Widows and Virgins, with all the
company both of he Saints and she Saints, with Omnes Sancti orate pro nobis,
desiring them to take so much pains for them, as to pray for them. When they
have once done with the Saints, they return unto God, and desire him to be
favorable unto them, and to grant them their Petitions, which be diverse and
many. Among all, that he will vouchsafe to keep the Apostolic Lord, (that is
to say the Pope) and all the Ecclesiastical Degree in holy Religion. They pray
also for the Bishop of the Diocese: But as touching either King or Queen, they
are past over with silence. These things dispatched out of the way with a Pater
noster and a Credo; the Priest falls in hand with the consecration or
hallowing of the Mass, and desires God to command, that all unclean Spirits
may depart out of that Water, and that all the wickedness of the Devils deceit
may stand far off, etc. That it may be an holy and an innocent Creature, free
from all invasion of the Enemy, and purged through the departure of all
wickedness. Again, That it be a living Fountain, a Water that regenerateth and
begets anew, purifying Water, etc. And while he is singing these things, it
is appointed in the Book, that besides diverse others, to the number of six, he
make two solemn Crosses in that Water with his right hand, dividing the water
in the manner of a Cross.

After these things, he speaks to the Water on this manner,

Wherefore I bless thee thou Creature of Water, by the living God, by the true
God, by the holy God: who at the beginning separated thee from the dry Land:
whose Spirit moves upon thee: which commanded thee to flow out of Paradise,
and in four Floods to water the whole Earth, etc. Here must the Priest make the
third Cross in the Water, after the manner before appointed. Then goes he
forth again to speak to the Water on this wise,

I bless thee by Jesus Christ his only Son our Lord, who in Cana of Galilee, by
his wonderful power, turned thee into Wine: who walked on foot upon thee: and
was baptized in thee of John in Jordan. Who brought thee forth out of his side
with Blood also, and commanded his Disciples, that they that believe should be
baptized in thee, saying, Go teach all Nations, Baptizing them in the name of
the Father, and of the Son, and of the Holy Ghost. Here must the Priest cease
his singing, and read these words,

O Almighty God, be thou mercifully present with us that keep these
Commandments. Lovingly breath. (Here must the Priest breath into the Font three
times in the manner of a Cross) Bless thou these simple waters with thy mouth,
that besides the natural cleansing which they may show in washing the bodies,
they may also be of strength to purify the minds. Here the Priest is commanded
to take the burning Candle, and to drop of it into the Font, after the manner
of a and holding the Candle still in the Font, to sing with a lusty and
courageous voice on this manner,

O let the virtue of the Holy Ghost descend and come down into this fullness of
the Fountain, and make all the substance of this Water fruitful with the effect
and power of regenerating or begetting anew. Here must the Priest divide the
Water with the Candle, and afterward pluck it out, and give it again to the
Minister. After these things he must breath thrice into the Font, and so after
a few words he makes an end of singing.

When he has once done the Consecration and Blessing of the Font, he is
commanded to put Oil into the Water, making a of the Oil with the Bullion which
is in the Vessel of the Oil, otherwise called the Chrifmatory, saying on this
manner:

The commixtion or mingling together of the Ointment of Oil, and of the Water
of Baptism: In the Name of the Father; and of the Son, and of the holy Ghost.
This thing being dispatched out of the way, the Priest must put Cream into the
Font, making a cross of the Cream with the Bullion that is in the Vessel of
Cream, and say,

This Font be made fruitful and sanctified with this healthful Cream to all
that be born a new of it. In the Name of the Father, and of the Son, and of the
holy Ghost. These things thus finished, the Priest with all his Trinkets and
Accomplices must return into the Quire, merrily singing Rex Sanctorum, etc. Then
also for joy and glee must all the Bells be rung that are either in the
Steeple, Church, or Chancel. And thus ends the sanctifying and hallowing of
the Font according to the Pope's appointment.

Here has been much ado about a thing of nothing, I mean about the
Consecration of the Font. But what needs all this reckoning? To what end has
the Popish Priest been so busy with his Exorcisms and Conjurations, with his
Sanctifications and Consecrations, with his Blessings and Crossings, with his
Gapings and Breathings, with his Oylings and Creamings? To make the Water more
holy? But who can make the Water more holy than God himself has already made
it? To make the Sacrament of the more efficacy, virtue and strength? But Christ
instituting the holy Mystery of Baptism, makes no mention of all these
trifling Ceremonies, which without all doubt he would have done, if he had
thought them necessary for the due administration of Baptism. When John Baptist
baptized in the Wilderness, he used simple and natural Water, without blessing
or crossing. So likewise did the Apostles of Christ, as Philip, when he
baptized the Eunuch, and others. Many years also after Christ's ascension the
holy Fathers of Christ's Church baptized with Water simply, without any
addition of such Consecrations and Blessings. The more simple and the nearer to
Christ's Institution their Administration of the Sacrament was, the better was
it allowed of all true Christians. They knew not this pomp, this pride, this
magnificence, and this solemnity that is now used in Popish Churches. The Devil
and the Pope, that Antichrist of Rome, invented all those trifles, and thrust
them into the Church of Christ, unto the great obscuring and utter defacing of
the purity of Christ's holy and blessed Mysteries. And notwithstanding, into
such ignorance and blindness are both the Priests and People come, through the
wicked traditions of men, that if any of the least of these frivolous
Ceremonies be left out, they think the Baptism to be nothing worth, and the
Children not to be christened. O lamentable blindness! But let all true
Christians persuade themselves, that pure and simple Water, coupled with the
Word, makes the Sacrament of Baptism sufficient and perfect, as St. Austin
says, The Word is joined to the Element, and thereof is made a Sacrament.

As touching the Consecrations, Blessings, Crossings, Gapings, Breathings,
Oylings, Creamings, Perfumings, and such other trifling Ceremonies, they are
the drousie dreams and foolish fancies of Hypocrites, and therefore not to be
regarded nor frequented, but rather to be neglected and omitted, as things
nothing appertaining unto the substance and matter of Baptism. But let us
consider certain things used of the Papists in the Consecration of their Font.

First the Priest desires God to command, that all unclean Spirits may depart
out of that Water, and that all the wickedness of the Devils deceit may stand
far off, etc.

There is no Creature that ever God made, be it never so pure and clean, but if
it come once into the hands of these sacrificing Papists, it is straight-ways
not only unpure and unclean, but also full of Devils and wicked Spirits. When
notwithstanding God at the beginning pronounced the Water, as all his other
Creatures, to be very good, and no evil in them: yea, the Lord our God so
esteems this Creature of Water, that by it he has not only wrought many
wonderful Miracles, but also in his holy Scriptures compares his holy and
blessed Spirit to this Element of Water. One also of the principal and chief
Mysteries which he has left to his holy Congregation for their comfort, and to
express therein his singular good will toward them, is set forth in Water, as
an Element most apt to set forth our Regeneration and New Birth in Christ. But
the Papists, as we have before heard, find fault not only with the Water, but
with Salt, Bread, Wax, Fire, and what not? But this their doing is well known
to be nothing else than plain juggling. St. John Baptist knew no Devil nor evil
Spirit in the Water when he baptized in the Wilderness. Christ's Apostles
judged the Water pure and clean and the good Creature of God when they
baptized. Philip baptizing the Eunuch used the Water that was next at hand. If
Christ had known the Devil to be in the Element of Water, he would never have
made it a Sacrament of Regeneration. St. Paul does so greatly esteem this
Mystery of Baptism, which partly consists of Water and partly of the Word, that
he calls it the Fountain of the new Birth, and renewing of the holy Ghost.
And in his Epistle to the Ephesians he has these words; Christ loved the
Congregation and gave himself for it to sanctify it, and cleansed it in the
Fountain of Water, through the Word, to make it unto himself a glorious
Congregation, without spot or wrinkle, or any such thing, but that it should be
holy and without blame. Does not our Savior Christ say plainly, That except a
man be born of Water and of the Spirit, he cannot enter into the Kingdom of
God. If Devils or wicked Spirits had been in the Water, as the Papists dream,
the holy Ghost would never have beautified this Element of Water with such
praises and commendations in the holy Scriptures. And who knows not that of
all the four Elements none is more necessary than Water, neither have we any in
more use. God give us grace to use this and all other Creatures unto his glory
with thanksgiving. Amen.

Now let us see to what end the Papists would have the Devil and all wicked
Spirits driven out of the Water. It is forsooth, that it may be an holy and an
innocent Creature, free from all invasion of the Enemy, and purged from all
wickedness. And that it be a living Fountain, a Water that regenerateth and
begets anew, a purifying Water, etc.

The Creature of Water is already Holy, sanctified of him who is Holiness it
self; and therefore has no need of the Popish sanctifications and hallowings.
It is also of it self innocent and harmless, created of God for the use and
commodity both of Man and Beast, as all other Creatures of God are. If at any
time we be plagued either with Water or Fire, or with any other Creature of
God; the fault is not in those good and innocent Creatures of God, but in our
selves, who through our manifold wickedness, provoke God unto anger; as we may
see in the Histories of the Flood, and of the Destruction of Sodom and
Gomorrah, etc.

Whereas they desire of God that it may be a living Fountain, a Water that
regenerateth and begets anew, etc. we grant that Baptism is an holy
Sacrament; but that the outward Water gives life, begets anew, and
purifieth the heart, we utterly deny; It being not in the power of a lifeless
Element to do this. It is the work of the Holy Ghost alone: as our Savior
says, It is the Spirit that quickens and makes alive. When Christ talked
with Nicodemus of our regeneration and new birth, he made mention not only of
Water, but of the Spirit also: to declare that the chief worker of our
regeneration and new birth, is the Holy Ghost, without whose Grace and secret
Inspiration, the outward washing profits nothing. Judas Iscariot, Simon
Magus, Ananias and Saphira, with diverse others, were Baptized with the outward
Baptism of Water, and yet are they now damned Souls in Hell Fire. They had the
Water, but they had not the Spirit. Their Bodies were outwardly washed, but
their Souls were not cleansed by the Holy Ghost; their hypocrisy so deserving.
Now if the Water of Baptism by it self were of such virtue and power, that it
could give life, purify and beget anew; then should all false Christians and
Hypocrites become the Children of God, and Heirs to Everlasting Glory. But it
is truly said of St. Paul, They that are led with the Spirit of God, are the
Sons of God. If any man has not the Spirit of Christ, he is none of his.
Though the blessed Apostle calls Baptism the Fountain of the new birth, yet,
he immediately adds the renewing of the Holy Ghost: declaring hereby, That
although Baptism be the Fountain of the new birth, that so many as be washed
with that Water, have put off Adam and be born anew in Christ; yet, that our
renovation comes by the Holy Ghost. He alone quickneth and makes us alive in
Christ Jesus. He alone regenerateth and begets us anew. Without this
outward washing many have been and are daily saved; but without the inward
washing of the Holy Ghost no man can be saved. As St. Paul says, If any man
has not the Spirit of Christ, he is none of his. Not to the Water therefore,
ought the Papists to attribute the virtue and power of making alive in Christ,
of regenerating, purifying, etc. but to the Holy Ghost, whose Office alone it
is to work all these good things in the hearts of Gods Elect and chosen People.

Moreover, Whereas the Priest turns him to the Water and says, I bless thee
thou Creature of Water, by the living God, by the true God, by the holy God,
etc. Yea, I bless thee by Jesus Christ, his only Son our Lord, etc. Who sees
not his madness? Will any man count him sober or in his right mind, that shall
speak to a thing without life? This do the Popish Priests in the presence of
God, his blessed Angels, and of his holy Congregation. If this stuff had been
spoken in a known tongue, as it was uttered in a strange Language, the People
many years ago would have hissed those Antichristian Sacrificers out of their
Temples, and not have suffered themselves to be deluded and mocked by them. But
what needs this Popish Priest to bless the Water by the living God, by the
true God, by the holy God, and by Jesus Christ the Son of God, seeing that the
blessed Trinity so many hundred years past, has already sufficiently and
abundantly blessed the Waters? O the vain dreams of men!

After these things, the Priest in a Prayer whispered out by him, desires God
to bless those Waters with his mouth. Verily, this is a new kind of blessing,
as blessing is commonly taken among us. Men use, and the Papists themselves
also use to bless with their fingers and not with their mouth. When the simple
People see a Bishop riding gorgeously upon his Mule, more like to Simon Magus
than to Simon Peter, they use to cry out, My Lord, your blessing; My Lord, your
blessing for St. Charity: thinking to receive some great benefit by that means,
both to their Body and Soul; when notwithstanding in my Country, the Bishops
blessing would not go for Horse meat. Does the Bishop gape upon them? or rather
does he lift up his hand and so bless them? But wherefore would the Priest have
God to bless those Waters? Verily, that besides the natural cleansing which
they show in washing the Bodies, they may also be of strength to purify the
Minds.

That the natural property of Water is to cleanse the Body and all outward
things, no man that has reason will deny. But that Water, although never so
much Consecrated, Sanctified and Blessed, purifieth the mind, Soul, Spirit or
inward Man, neither reason nor Scripture does allow. For what is it to purify
the mind, but to forgive sins, to give the Holy Ghost, to engraff new and
spiritual motions, to alter the whole man, and to be clothed with Holiness,
Righteousness and Truth? This is not the work of any man in Earth, nor yet of
any Angel in Heaven; much less of a Creature that is without all sense and
feeling. If the Water sanctified by Man, purifieth the mind, much more should
the Man that sanctifies the Water do the same. But Man does it not, neither
is it done by the Water. It is God alone by his holy Spirit, that purifieth the
mind, and searches the reins and hearts. Man is the Minister, Water the thing
ministered, but God is he that works all: as the Apostle says, Paul planteth,
Apollo waters, but God gives the increase. Therefore neither he that
planteth, nor he that waters, is any thing worth, but God which gives the
increase. It is truly said of St. Cyprian, Whether Judas or Paul Baptizeth,
Christ washes and puts away the sin. St. Ambrose says, To forgive sins in
Baptism, and to give the Holy Ghost, is the Office of God alone. If therefore
God gives the effect of health, there is no glory of man in this behalf. For
we know that the Holy Ghost is given of God, without imposition or laying on of
hands, and that he who was not Baptized, obtained remission of sins. Hereto
agrees the saying of St. Austin. As concerning the visible Ministry, both
good and bad do Baptize; but he does inwardly Baptize by them, whose both the
visible Baptism and invisible grace is. Therefore both good and bad may
Baptize, but none can wash and purify the Conscience, but he only who is
always good. Hence it follows that the Papists teach false Doctrine, when they
hold that the Sacraments give grace, purify the mind, wash the Conscience, and
change the whole man. Indeed the Sacraments represent and preach these things
to the outward man, but it is God alone that gives these things by his holy
Spirit, that he which rejoices might rejoice in the Lord.

Now as touching the foolish Ceremonies which the Popish Priest uses in the
Consecration of the Font; as making Crosses, dropping Candle into the Font,
dividing the Water with Candle, putting Oil and Cream into the Water, breathing
into the Font, and such like beggarly Trifles, they are more worthy to be
derided than confuted, being indeed nothing else than childish Plays and apish
Toys. Thus much concerning the Popish consecrations of the Font.

Of hallowing the Marrying-Ring.
FOr hallowing the Woman's Ring at her Wedding, this Prayer following is
appointed to be said of the Priest.

Thou maker and Conserver of mankind. Giver of Spiritual grace, Granter of
Eternal Salvation: Lord send thy blessing upon this Ring, that she which shall
wear it may be armed with the virtue of Heavenly defense, and that it may
profit her to Eternal Salvation. Another Prayer.
Hallow thou Lord this Ring which we bless in thy holy name, that what Woman
soever shall wear it, may stand fast in thy Peace, and continue in thy Will,
and live and grow and wax old in thy Love, and be multiplied into the length of
days.

Then let holy Water be sprinkled upon the Ring, and all is well. Who can
otherwise than laugh at the folly of these foolish Papists, who not being
content to show their fondness in certain trifling matters, must desire God to
send his blessing on a poor Ring? What kind of Prayers are these unto God? Are
they worthy of Gods Majesty? Is this to ask according to the will of God? God
ought not to be called upon in vain and trifling matters, but in grave and
weighty Causes, in affairs that appertain unto his glory, and to the salvation
of our Souls. The very Heathen in times past would have been ashamed to offer
up their Prayers to their false Gods, for such foolish and childish things. And
to say the truth, this kind of praying is nothing else than a plain mocking of
God. The Papists might with as good a Conscience pray to God, to make the
weathercock of Paul's a Preacher; for this Prayer would please God as soon as the
other. But let us see to what end the Papist desires God to send his blessing
upon the Ring: It is, says he, That she which shall wear it may be armed with
the virtue of Heavenly defense, and that it may profit her to eternal
salvation. Here be two goodly matters if they might be obtained. But where has
God promised, that the wearing of a Ring hallowed by a Popish Priest, should
bring to the wearer, the virtue of Heavenly defense and everlasting salvation?
What if an Heathen Woman and an Idolatress should wear this sanctified Ring,
should she also enjoy these two Commodities? For the words are general, That
she which shall wear it, etc. But to be short, we shall note that the virtue of
Heavenly defense comes not by the wearing of a Ring, but by the mighty
protection of God; wherewith, both by his Grace and Spirit, and by the
Ministry of his Angels he defended his Elect and chosen People, as it is
written, The poor cries, and the Lord hears him, and delivers him out of
all his troubles. The Angel of the Lord pitcheth his Tent round about them that
fear him, and delivers them.

And as touching eternal Salvation, who knows not that it is the free gift of
God, given to the faithful for Christ Jesus sake? Therefore to ascribe these
heavenly Treasures to the wearing of a poor Ring, does not a little obscure the
Grace of God, and the Merits of Christ's Death and Passion.

The Hallowing of the Pilgrims Wallet and Staff.
THe Pilgrims that intend to go on, Pilgrimage either to St. Peter and Paul at
Rome, or to St. James of Compostella, or to any other Saints, must first of all
be blessed of the Priest in this manner:

First the Pilgrims must come devoutly unto the Church, and make their
Confession humbly to the Priest, and gladly receive of him Penance and
Absolution. Afterward they shall come into the Chancel, reverently prostrating
themselves, and lying flat upon the ground before the Altar. Then the Priest
shall say these Psalms, Miserere, Deus misereatur, Qui habitat, Nunc dimittis,
with Kyrie eleyson, Christ eleyson, Kyrie eleyson, Pater noster, Ave, etc.
After these things shall follow the hallowing of the Pilgrims Wallet and Staff.

In the hallowing of this Staff, amongst many other words, the Popish Priest
has these:

O Lord Jesu Christ, we humbly call upon thee that thou will vouchsafe to bless
this Wallet and Staff, that whosoever for the love of thy Name does endeavor
himself to take the same by his side as an Armor of humility, and to hang it
about their necks, or to carry it in their hands, and so going on Pilgrimage
(having meek Devotion for a Companion of their Journey) to seek the helps of
Saints, they being preserved with the defense of thy right hand, may merit to
come to the joys of the eternal vision. Here is more work for the Tinker. A new
Master, a new, and hang up the old, as the Porters cry in Sturbridge-Fair. Here
is a sudden fall even out of the Hall into the Kitchen, as they use to say. Our
Papist is suddenly come from his golden Rings to Scrips, Wallets, and Staves,
and now he sanctifies and blesses them, yea and that so much the more,
because they are but vile Pedlary Ware, and serve only for Rome-runners, and
Pilgrimage-gadders. In this his Consecration he humbly beseeches God to bless
the Wallet and the Staff. Without doubt God is not a little bound to the
Papists. For as they are busybodies themselves, so will they not suffer God
to be unoccupied. The Epicures fain that God is idle in Heaven, and takes no
care of his Creatures, but suffers all things to go which way they will:
Fortune, and not God's Providence, bearing rule. The Papists therefore, as it
may seem, fearing that God should fall into idleness and forget his Creatures,
appoint him to work: But, what work I pray ye? Verily to hallow and bless
Water, Salt, Bread, Candles, Palms, Fire, Ashes, Incense, Pascal, Pascal Lamb,
Eggs, Herbs, Milk, Honey, Apples, Wine, Cheese, Butter, new baken Bread, Flesh,
Font, and I know not how many things besides. And now at the last they appoint
him to consecrate, bless, and sanctify vile beggarly Wallets and Staves for
Rome-runners and Pilgrimage-gadders. Is not God much bound to these Papists
that appoint him so vile an Office? And is not God worthy to tender these their
requests? And are not these requests of the Papists meet to be granted?

But let us see why the Papists are so desirous that God should bless these
Wallets and Scrips, these Staves and Sticks. Because, say they, that whosoever
endeavors to take the same Wallet and Staff by his side, or to hang it about
his neck, or to carry it in his hand, and so go on Pilgrimage to seek the helps
of Saints, may merit to come to the joys of the eternal vision.

Is not here a good work in hand think you? Ought not God even of duty to put
to his helping hand, and to put this good deed forward? An idle, lend, lasie
Lubber is determined to wander and gad abroad with his Wallet and Staff, and to
live of the sweat of folks hands, and God must be a Cloak of his idleness. Is
it not well appointed? Why do they not also appoint God to bless the Pilgrims
Breeches, Hose, Shoes, etc. For he has as much need of all these things in his
Journey, as of the Wallet and the Staff, except he has made a vow to go his
Pilgrimage breechless and bare-arsed, bare-legged and barefooted, as many do.
And what other thing is it to go on Pilgrimage to seek the helps of Saints,
than to play the Idolaters, and to run away from God, that fountain and
wellspring of all goodness, and to commit Whoredom, I mean Idolatry, with
Creatures, which of themselves were never able to help themselves, and to beg
of them that they cannot give? Is it any other thing to seek the help of
Saints, than to distrust God, and to think him either not to have a will, or
else not to have power to help? For if they believed sufficient ability in God
for to help, and a will agreeable to the same, they would never run a whoring
from God, and follow strange Lovers. And who knows whether all they to whom
these Idolaters run on Pilgrimage, be Saints in Heaven, or rather many of them
Devils in Hell. Again, If they be able to help their Clients, why do they not
show their power universally, as well as in one place, but rather compel men to
take many weary Journeys upon them to seek their helps, and to forsake Country,
Father, Mother, Friends, Wife, Children, House, Land, etc. That Saint which is
not able to help in all places alike, is able to help in none. Therefore they
that seek the helps of Saints more in one place than in another, do nothing
else but deceive themselves, and walk the ways of weariness and wickedness.
When the Saints themselves lived in this World, they by no means could abide
that any glory or honor should be ascribed to them, but with heart and voice
they cried unto God, and said, Not unto us, O Lord, not unto us, but to thy
Name give the glory. And as they themselves did not trust in their own
righteousness, but in the Merits of Christ's Death only, so likewise taught
they all other so to do. And is it to be thought that they are now become so
ambitious and desirous of vain glory, that being glorified in Heaven, and free
from all mortal affections, and following the Lamb whithersoever he goes, they
should now arrogate and challenge to themselves the Office and Power of God.
These Pilgrimage-gadders therefore and Rome-runners in running hither and
thither to seek the helps of Saints, do not only provoke the hot wrath and
great indignation of God against them, but also deserve no thanks at all of the
Saints, whose honor they seem greatly to seek. It were much better for them to
tarry at home, to labor according to their Vocation, and in their necessities
to call upon God, who according to his promise both will and can help, desiring
God to give them grace to follow and practice in their conversation and living
in the virtuous and godly manners which the true Saints of God expressed and
showed when they lived in this World: and also to set continually before their
eyes, that in this World they have no dwelling City, but are here as Strangers
and Pilgrims, and that therefore they ought to make preparation for the World
to come, that whenever the good Man of the house comes, he may find them
watching.

Now after that the Priest has hallowed the Wallet and the Staff, he must
sprinkle them both with holy Water, and put the Wallet about the Pilgrim's
Neck, saying,

In the Name of our Lord Jesus Christ, take this Wallet, the Habit of thy
Pilgrimage, that being well chastned and saved, thou may deserve to come to
the places of the Saints, thither as thou desire to go, and that when thy
Journey is done, thou may return, unto us safe and sound. Behold with what
Solemnity this Wallet is put on: even in the Name of our Lord Jesus Christ, as
though some great Miracle should be wrought. As in many other things, so
likewise in this, the Papists do utterly abuse the Name of the Lord Christ. The
Name of Christ ought with all reverence to be named, yea and that not in
trifles, but in serious, weighty, and necessary matters. And whereas they make
the Wallet to be the Habit of a Pilgrim, and that he should be known by that
Wallet to be a Pilgrim: I say plainly, that by this Argument, all Beggars
should be Pilgrims, for they also wear Wallets, and whithersoever they go they
shall go on Pilgrimage, by reason of their Wallet, seeing that the Wallet is
the Habit of a Pilgrim.

This Wallet is put on about the Pilgrim's Neck, to this end, as it may seem,
not only that by it he should be known to be a Pilgrim, but also that by the
virtue thereof he may merit and deserve to come to the places of the Saints,
whither he intends to go. Such Saints, such Relics. Such Works, such
Merits. Such Lettice, such Lips. Such Carpenter, such Chips. Verily as the
Dignity of the Wallet is nothing worth, so likewise the Pilgrim meriteth
nothing by his Pilgrimage, but the wrath and vengeance of God, for as much as
he forsaking the Lord his God, who is present in all places with his most
present help, hunteth after Creatures, and at their hands seeks all good
things both for Body and Soul, when all good and perfect gifts come down from
God alone, as St. James says.

After that the Wallet is most Solemnly thus put on about the Pilgrim's Neck,
then must the Priest also deliver to him a Staff, saying on this manner unto
him;

Take this Staff to hold thee by in thy Journey and Travel of thy Pilgrimage,
that thou may be able to overcome all the rabbles of the Enemies, and come
without fear to the places of the Saints, whither thou desire to go, and that
when the course of obedience is finished, thou may return to us again with
joy. The hallowing of a Sword.
O Lord, holy Father Almighty bless thou this Sword, through the invocation of
thy Name, and by the coming of thy Son, our Lord Jesus Christ, and by the gift
of the holy Ghost the Comforter: that he, which this day is girded, with it, in
thy mercy, may tread under his feet the visible Enemies, and at all times
enjoying the victory, may remain unhurt, through Christ our Lord. Amen. Here
the Popish Priest lays hard to God's charge, and wills him to bless the
Sword by the Invocation of his holy Name, by the coming of his Son Christ, and
by the gift of the holy Ghost. Who doubts of the hallowing of this Sword,
seeing that God is so straightly conjured? God has much to do with these
Papists. They, by no means, will suffer him to be at quiet. But to what end
would they have this Sword blessed? Verily, that he which is girded with it,
may tread under his feet the visible Enemies, and at all times enjoy the
victory, and remain unhurt.

When David should fight with Goliath, that proud Philistim, he said unto him,
Thou come to me with a Sword, and a Spear, and a Shield: But I come to thee
in the Name of the Lord of Hosts, the God of the Host of Israel. Likewise says
David in another place, Some put their trust in Chariots, and some in Horses,
but we will call upon the Name of the Lord our God. They are brought down and
fallen, but we are risen and stand upright. It is neither the Sword, nor the
Bow, nor any other kind of Armor that can give us the Victory over our
Enemies, but the mighty Power of God alone. The Horse is prepared unto the
battle, says Solomon, but the Lord gives the Victory. And the Psalmist says,
There is no King that can be saved by the multitude of an Host, neither is any
man delivered by much strength. The Papists, according to the Doctrine of the
holy Ghost, should rather teach the People to seek for help against their
Enemies, at the hand of God, by faithful and fervent Prayer, than of Wallets,
Staffs, Crosses, Swords, etc. For the Name of the Lord, as Solomon says, is a
strong Tower: unto that does the righteous flee, and finds succor. O blessed
is that man, says David, which has set his hope in the Lord, and has not
turned unto vanity. Where God is Enemy, nothing can prevail. There is no
wisdom, no forecast, no counsel can prevail against the Lord. But where God
favors, all things have good success: as the Apostle says, If God be on our
side, who can be against us? If we therefore desire to have victory over our
Enemies, and to enjoy quiet days on the Earth, let us, above all things, study
to have God our Friend, and to be at peace with him, and so shall all things
prosper whatsoever we take in hand. This shall come to pass, if we will
endeavor our selves to cast away all confidence in Creatures, repose all our
affiance in the Lord our God, earnestly call upon his holy Name, and train our
Lives according to his blessed Word and Ordinance, as God himself says, O that
my People would have hearkened unto me! For if Israel had walked in my ways, I
should soon have put down their Enemies, and turned mine hand against their
Adversaries.

The hallowing of Beads to say our Lady's Psalter on.
O Lord, the large infuser and liberal impourer of all Blessings; and the
inspirator and inbreather of every good act, who with thine own mouth
commandedst, that all the Ornaments of the Tabernacle of Witness should be made
unto the Devotion of the People: We, with humble Prayer, beeseech thee, that
thou will, with thy benediction and blessing replenish these Beads, outwardly
pretending and showing a face of holiness, and appointed to pray devoutly unto
the most blessed Virgin Mary, the Mother of God, and made and prepared to say
the Psalter of the same most holy Virgin, wherewith in times past by the hands
of the Priests thou did replenish and fulfill the Vessels and Ornaments of the
Temple. And grant that so many as will endeavor themselves in these Beads
meekly to honor that most glorious Virgin, or do determine upon these Beads, in
whatsoever place it be, to say their Prayers before her Image, or require her
help, may, through her Prayers and Intercession, after their departure from
this present Life, obtain Grace and Glory, and purchase the favor of thy
merciful goodness, through our Lord Jesus Christ. O Almighty God, the alone and
unspeakable and incomprehensible Creator and Maker, by whose Word and Power all
things are made: through whose Gift we have received those things which we
possess for the sustentation and comfort of our Life: we, with most humble and
fervent Prayer, beseech thee, that thou will vouchsafe from the seat of thy
Majesty with thy blessing and heavenly sanctification to replenish and fulfill
these Beads which are apt and meet for the Devotion of thy faithful Servants,
that by this means thou may thankfully take and acceptably receive the gift
of them that pray on these Beads. O grant that the Prayers made upon these
Beads may gladly be accepted in the sight of thy clemency and merciful
goodness, as the gifts of thy Servants, Abraham and Melchisedec pleased thee,
that whosoever goes about to garnish, honor and glorify with their holy
Devotions the most blessed Mother of God, Mary, upon the Beads, her Son our
Lord Jesus Christ may recompense him great things for small things, accept his
Devotion, forgive him his Sins, replenish him with Faith, nourish him with
Favor, defend him with Mercy, destroy all adversity, and give him all
prosperity. Grant also that in this World he may have the Doctrine of
well-doing, the study of Charity, the effect of holy Love, and that in the
World to come he may obtain with the holy Angels, everlasting Joy, through our
Lord Jesus Christ.

The Christning or Hallowing of Bells.
FIrst of all the Bishop or Suffragan shall put upon him a Surplice, and a
Stole about his Neck, and having the Cross born before him, he being
accompanied with the Clergy and with the People, shall go with all solemnity
unto the place where the Metal shall be shed, whereof the Bell is to be made.
And while the Bell is casting, that it may have right shape, and afterward come
unto Christendom; the Bishop or Suffragan shall begin this Hymn, Veni Creator,
with the Verse and Collect of the holy Ghost: and all the Clergy shall proceed
and sing forth merrily. When the Bell is once cast and come to his perfect
shape, then shall the Bishop or Suffragan begin with a merry voice, Te Deum
laudamus, and all the Clerks with one voice shall sing joyfully together the
whole Hymn unto the end. After that they shall sing, Da pacem, etc. Then shall
the Bishop or Suffragan say, A Domino factum est istud. And the Clerks shall
answer, Et est mirabile in oculis nostris. Then shall the Prelate say, Dominus
vobiscum: The Clerks answering, Et cum Spiritu tuo. Then shall he rehearse this
Collect, Actiones nostras, etc. That is to say, We beseech thee, O Lord,
prevent our doings by thine inspiration, and persecute them with thy help: that
all our praying and working may always begin of thee, and being so begun, may be
finished by thee, through Christ our Lord.

Now may they hang up the Bell when they will. But it must first be Blessed,
Hallowed and Consecrated after this manner that follows:

The Blessing or Hallowing of the Water wherewith the Bell must be sprinkled.
ADjutorium nostrum, etc. sit Nomen Domini, etc.

The Prayer.
Let us Pray.

O Lord bless this Water with thy heavenly blessing, and let the virtue of the
holy Ghost be put upon it, that when this Bell, which is prepared to call thy
Children unto the Church, be dipped in it, wheresoever the noise and sound
thereof shall be heard, the power of the Enemies, the imaginations of
Fantasies, the violence of boisterous Winds, the hurt of Thundrings, the
calamity of Tempests, and all stormy Spirits, may depart and go far away.
Again, That when the Children of the Christians shall hear the noise of this
Bell, the increase of Devotion may grow in them, that they may make haste unto
the bosom of the godly Mother (he means the Church) may sing unto thee in the
Congregation of the Saints, bringing in the sound of a Trump, praise; melody
through the Harp; mirth through the Organs: sweetness through the Tympan; joy
through the Cymbal. So that with these their Services and Prayers they may
allure unto thy holy Christ our Lord. Amen.

Afterward they must sing these six Psalms, Lauda anima mea Dominum. Laudate
Dominum quoniam bonus est. Lauda Jerusalem Dominum. Laudate Dominum de Coelis.
Cantate Domino Canticum novum. Laus ejus in Eclesia Sanctorum. Laudate Dominum
in Sanctis ejus.

And while they sing these Psalms, the Bishop or Suffragan must wash the Bell
with the aforesaid hallowed Water, and anoint it with holy Oil, and also rub it
over with Salt, which Salt must be hallowed in such sort as the use is upon the
Sunday when they make holy Water: Exorcizo te, Creatura salis per Deum vivum,
per Deum qui te per Helizeum Prophetam, etc. After all these things be
dispatched out of the way, let him say this Prayer following.

The Prayer.
Let us Pray.

O God, who by blessed Moses the Lawgiver, commandedst Trumpets of Silver to
be made, which, while the Levites or Ministers of the Sacrifice did blow, the
People being admonished with the sound of their sweetness, might be prepared to
adore and worship thee: Again, Through whose noise the People being excited and
stirred up unto battle, might the more valiantly express and overcome the
Weapons of their Enemies; Grant that this Bell, being ordained and prepared for
thy Church, may be sanctified and hallowed of the holy Ghost, that by the sound
thereof the faithful may be invited, provoked, and pricked forward unto the
reward. Grant also that when the melody of this Bell dath sound in the ears of
the People, the Devotion of Faith may increase in them, and that all the lying
in wait of the Enemy may be far put back again, that the beating of the Hail,
the storm of Winds, the violence of Tempests, may be mitigated and assuaged.
Moreover, That the fierce Thunderings and boisterous Storms may be measured,
that they do no harm, nor hurt thy Creatures. In fine, Vanquish and throw down
the Powers of the Air with the right hand of thy strength, that they, hearing
this Bell, may tremble and shake for fear, and flee before the Banner of the
holy Cross, through our Lord Jesus Christ.

Then must the Bishop or Suffragan wipe the Bell with a Linen Towel, and say
this Psalm, all the Clerks accompanying him. Vox Domini super aquas. Deus
Majestatis intonuit. Dominus super aquas multas. Vox Domini in virtute. Vox
Domini in magnificentia. Vox Domini confringentis Cedros, etc. unto the end of
the Psalm, with Gloria Patri, and Sicut erat, etc.

After these things the Bishop or Suffragan must anoint the outside of the Bell
seven times with Oil and Cream, and four times within, saying on this wise:

The Prayer.
Let us pray.

O Almighty and Everlasting God, who before the Ark of the Covenant, through
the noise of the Trumpets made the Walls of Stone to fall down, wherewith the
arms of thine Enemies were enclosed and encompassed round about: vouchsafe to
replenish this Bell with thy heavenly blessing, that before the noise or sound
thereof, the fiery darts of the Enemy, the striking of the Lightnings, the
violence of Stones, the hurting of Tempests, may be chaced far away: That to
the demand of the Prophet, Wherefore did thou flee, O thou Sea? And thou
Flood of Jordan turn back with all thy Waves? It may be answered, The Earth was
moved at the face of the Lord, at the face of the God of Jacob: Which turns
the hard Rock into Rivers of Water, and the Flint-stones into watery streams.
Not unto us therefore, O Lord, not unto us, but to thy Name give the glory of
thy mercy and truth; that when this present Bell (as the other Vessels of thy
Altar) is touched with the holy Chrism, and anointed with thy holy Oil, all
they that come and draw near unto the sound thereof may be free from all
temptations of the Enemies, and continually follow the documents of the
Catholic Faith, through our Lord Jesus Christ. Amen.

After this Prayer the Bishop or Suffragan shall take the Censer into his hand,
and cause Fire, Incense, Myrrh, and such other sweet Perfumes to be put into
it. Then shall the Bell be lifted up, and the Censers set under the Bell, that
all the fume and smoke of those sweet favors may go into the Bell. In the mean
season shall they say this Anthem, Deus in sancta via tua: Deus magnus sicut
Deus noster. Then immediately shall they sing this Psalm, Viderunt te aquae,
Deus, Viderunt te aquae and timuerunt, etc. with Gloria Patri, and Sicut erat,
etc. Afterward the Bishop or Suffragan shall say, Domine exaudi, and Dominus
vobiscum, with this Prayer following:

The Prayer.
Let us Pray.

O Christ, that Almighty Lord and Ruler, which after thou had taken the
Nature of Man upon thee, and did sleep in the Ship when a great Tempest
arose, marvelously troubling the Seas, and being awake did forthwith put away
these cruel storms, help for thy mercies sake the necessities of thy People.
Pour out the dew of the holy Ghost upon this Bell, that before the sound
thereof the Enemy may evermore flee away, Christian People be invited and
provoked unto Faith, the Army of the Enemies may be made afraid, the People
that be called out by it may be made strong in the Lord, and the holy Ghost
being delighted with the sound thereof, as with David's Harp, may come down
upon it. And as when Samuel slew the Lamb, and offered it up for a Sacrifice,
the King of the Eternal Empire, through the noise of the weather that came down
from Heaven, did put to flight the Company of the Enemies; so likewise grant
thou, that while the sound of this Bell passes through the Clouds, the hand of
thy Angel may keep the Company or Assembly of thy Church and Congregation, and
thy everlasting protection save and defend the fruits of them that do believe,
with their souls and bodies: who live and reignest one God with the Father
and the holy Ghost, World without end. Amen.

This done, let the Bishop or Suffragan sprinkle the Bell with holy Water, and
all the People there present likewise. Then the Godfathers and Godmothers,
laying their hands upon the Bell, the Bishop or Suffragan shall say to them:
Name the Bell. The Godfathers and Godmothers shall give the Bell such a Name as
they think good. When the Bell is thus Christened, the Bishop or Suffragan, with
the Godfathers and Godmothers, shall put upon the new baptized Bell a Linen
Vesture, white and large. And thus ends the Christning of Bells.

But when the Bells thus baptized shall be brought unto Confirmation, and to
render an account or reason of their Faith, I find not in all the Popish Books
I have read. But, O God, what a dishonor is this to thy holy Name? What a
corruption to thy blessed Doctrine? What a mocking to thy holy Mysteries? What
an abuse of thy Creatures? What a maintenance of Superstition and Idolatry?
What a deceiving of thy People?

A Blessing for sore Eyes, taken out of an old Mass Book; very profitable for
that Disease, as teaches Wilielmus de montibus, matricis Ecclesiae
Lincolniensis Cancellarius.
THe blessing for sore Eyes, says he, necessity brings in, and the devotion
of them that ask it: and it ought to be done on this manner:

First, The Priest that sings Mass, after he has received the body and blood
of our Lord, and after the first and second washing of his fingers, shall cause
his Parish-Clerk to pour into his Chalice the third ablution, not of Wine, but
of Water. And this Water must the Priest in his Chalice reserve and keep till
Mass be done. And when Mass is once done, the Priest, before he put off his
sacerdotal Vestiments, shall take of this Water, and sprinkle it upon the sore
Eyes, and he shall say this Prayer following, with Dominus vobiscum: Et cum
Spiritu tuo: and with Oremus.

The Prayer.
O Lord Jesu Christ, who openedst the Eyes of the man that was born blind, keep
the Eyes of this thy servant, giving him sight, clear, sufficient, meet, and
competent to serve thee withal, by the virtue of this Sacrament, and by this
sign of thy holy Cross.

Here let the Priest cross the diseased person with the Chalice, and with the
Corporass Cloth. And let him to handle the matter, that with his Crossing he
may cause some wind to go from the Chalice and Corporass Cloth into the sore
Eyes, while he says, In nomine Patris, Filij, and Spiritus sancti. Amen.

Then shall the Priest say the beginning of St. John's Gospel: In principio
erat Verbum, etc.

These things done, let the diseased person rise up, kiss the Altar, and offer
something to the blessed Sacrament, and so depart. And undoubtedly, with the
help of God and of our blessed Lady, he shall shortly have remedy of his
Disease. Probatum est.

A general Blessing for all things.
O Thou Creator and Consecrator of Mankind, the giver of Spiritual Grace, the
granter of Everlasting Health: O Lord send thy holy Spirit upon this Creature
M. that it may profit them unto everlasting salvation, which, being armed with
the virtue of heavenly defense, do taste of it. And the blessing of God the
Father, and the Son, and the holy Ghost, descend upon those Creatures, and
abide upon them for ever. Here is Everlasting Salvation set forth again, to be
obtained by every Rag and Clout, or whatsoever other vile thing is hallowed by
the Popish Priest. But since such blasphemous Baggage is sufficiently confuted
before, I will here end with this protestation, That Christ alone is our
Wisdom, Righteousness, Sanctification and Redemption, that as it is written, He
that rejoices should rejoice in the Lord: To whom be all Honor and Glory,
both now and for ever. Amen.

FINIS.

