Titus and Berenice, A TRAGEDY, Acted at the DUKE's THEATRE^ With a FARCE
called the Cheats of Scapin. By Tho: Otway.

Grandis Oration non est Turgida
Sed Naturali pulchritudine exsurgit.
Pet. Arb. Licensed

Febr. the 19th. 1676/7. Roger L'Estrange.

LONDON: Printed for Richard Tonson at his Shop under Grays-Inn-Gate, next
Grays-Inn-Lane. 1677.

TO THE RIGHT HONORABLE* JOHN EARL of ROCHESTER. One of the Gentlemen of his
Majesty's Bedchamber, etc.
My Lord,
DEdications are grown things of so nice a Nature, That it is almost impossible
for me to pay your Lordship those Acknowledgments I owe you, And not (from
those who cannot Judge of the Sentiments I have of your Lordships Favors)
incur the Censure either of a fawner or a flatterer. Both which ought to be
as hateful to an Ingenuous Spirit as Ingratitude. None of these would I be
guilty of, and yet in letting the World know how Good and how Generous a Patron
I have, (in spite of Malice) I am sure I am honest.

My Lord,

Never was Poetry under so great an oppression as now, as full of Phanaticism's
as Religion, where every one pretends to the Spirit of Wit, sets up a Doctrine
of his own, and hates a Poet worse then a Quaker does a Priest.

To examine how much goes to the making up one of those dreadful things that
resolve our dissolution. It is for the most part, a very little French breeding
much assurance, with a great deal of talk and no sense.

Thus he comes to a New Play, Enquires the Author of it, and (if he can find
any) m^kes ^^s personal misfortunes the subject of his ^alice ^o some of his
Companions, who have as ^^ttle ^^it and as much ill Nature as himself; and so
to ^e sure (as far as he can) the Play is damned.

At night he never fails to Appear in the Withdrawing room, where he picks out
some that have as little to do there as himself, who mustring up all their puny
Forces damn as possitively, as if like Muggleton it were their gift, when
indeed they have as little right to Wit, as a Journey man Tailor can have to
Prophecy.

Wit, which was the mistress of former Ages, is become the Scandal of ours;
Either the Old Satyr to let us understand what he has known Damns and decryes
all Poetry, but the old; or else the young affected Fool that is impudent
beyond Correction, and ignorant above instruction, will be Censuring the
present; tho he misplace his wit as he generally does his Courage, and ever
makes use of it on the wrong occasion.

How great a Hazard then does your Lordship run in so steadfastly protecting a
poor Exiled thing that has so many Enemies! B^t that your Wit is more Eminent
than all their Folly or Ignorance, and your Goodness greater than any Malice or
Ill Nature can be. I am sure (and I must own it with gratitude) I have tasted
of it much above my Merit, or what even Vanity might prompt me to expect;
Though in doing this, I shall at best but appear an humble debtor, who
acknowledges honestly what he owes, though to keep up his Credit he must be
forced to borrow more; For my Genius always led me to seek an interest in your
Lordship; and I never see you, but I am fired with an Ambition of being in your
Favor: for all I have received, the highest return I am able to make, is my
acknowledgment, in which I can hardly distinguish whether my Thankfulness or my
Pride by the greater, when I subscribe my self

Your Lordships Most Obliged and most Devoted Servant, THO. OTWAY.

PROLOGUE.
Spoken by Mr. Underhill. GAllants our Author met me here to day,
And begged thas I Would say something for his Play.
You Waggs that Judge by Roat, and damn by Rule,
Taking your measures from some Neighbor fool,
Who has Impudence a Coxcombs useful Tool;
That always are severe you know not why,
And would be thought great Critics by the By:
With very much ill Nature, and no Wit,
Just as you are, we humbly beg you would Sit,
And with your Silly selves divert the Pit.
You Men of Sense, who heretofore allowed,
Our Author's Follies; make him once more proud;
But for the Youths, that newl' are come from France,
Who Is Heads want Sense, though heels abound with dance:
Our Author to their Judgment will not submit,
But swears that they who so infest the Pit,
With their own Follies, never can Judge of Wit.
It Is thence he Chief^y favor would Implore,
[to the Boxes. And Fair Ones pray oblige him on my Score.
Confine his Foes, the Fops within their Rules,
For Ladies you know how to manage Fools.
Persons Represented in the Tragedy By
Titus Vespatian, Emperor of Rome -- Mr. Betterto^. Antiochus, King of
Comagene -- Mr. Smith. Paulinus, The Emp^rors Confident -- Mr. Medbourn.
Arsac^s, Antiochus his Confident -- Mr. Crosby. Rutilius, A Trib^ne -- Mr.
Gil^o^. Berenice, Queen of Palestine -- Mrs. Lee. Phenice, Her Confident --
Mrs. Barry.
The SCENE ROME. Persons Represented in the Farce. By
Thrift Gripe. Two old Merchants. -- Mr. Sandford. Mr. Noakes. Octavian,
Leander, Their Sons -- Mr. Norris. Mr. Percivall. Scapin, A Cheat -- Mr. Anth.
Leigh* Shift, Sly, Scapins Instruments -- Mr. Richards, Mr. -- ^uc^a, Thrifty's
Daughter, -- Mrs. Barry. Clara, Gripe's Daughter. -- Mrs. Gibbs.
The SCENE DOVER. TITUS and BERENICE.
ACT. I.
SCENE I.
A Palace.
Enter Artiochus and Arsaces. Antiochus. THou my Arsaces art a Stranger here,
This is the Apartment of the Charming Fair,
That Berenice, whom Titus so adores,
The Universe is his, and he is hers:
Here from the Court himself he often conceals,
And in her Ears his charming story tells*
Whilst I a Vassal for admittance wait,
And am at best but thought importunate.

Arsac. You want admittance! who with generous care
Have followed all her Fortunes everywhere,
Whose Fame throughout the World so loudly rings,
One of the greatest of our Eastern-Kings.
As on^e you seemed the Monarch of her Breast,
Too firmly seated to be dispossessed,
Nor can the pride she does in Titus take,
Already so severe a distance make.

Antio. Yes! still that wretch Antiochus I am.
But Love! oh how I tremble at the name;
And my distracted Soul at that does start*
Which once was all the pleasure of my heart,
Since Berenice has all my hopes destroid,
And an Eternal silence on me laid.

Arsac. That you resent her pride, I see with Joy,
It Is that which does her gratitude destroy;
But ^riendship wronged should into hatred turn,
And you methinks might^learn her Art to scorn.

Anti. Arsaces, how false Measures do thou take,
Remove the Poles, and bid the Sun go back:
Invert all Natures Orders, Fates Decrees,
Then bid me hate the Charming Bere^^c^.

Arsac. Well, love her still, but let her know your pain,
Resolve it you shall ^ee, and speak again;
Urge to her face your rightful Claim aloud,
And court her haughtily, as she is proud.

Antio. Arsaces, No, she is gentle as a Dove,
Her Eyes are Tyrants, but her Soul's all Love,
And owes so little for the Vows I Have made,
That if she pity me, I Am more than paid.
[ Enter Rutilius. But see the man I sent, at last returns;
Oh how my heart with Expectation burns.
Rutilius, have you Berenice seen?

Rut. I have.

Antio. Oh speak! what says the Charming Queen?

Rut. I pressed with difficulty, through the Crowd,
A throng of Court-Attendants round her stood.
The time now past of his servere retreat,
Titus laments no more his Fathers fate.
Love takes up all his thoughts, and all his cares,
Whilst he to meet these mighty Joys prepares:
Which may in Berenices arms be found,
For she this day will be Romes Empress crowned.

Anti. What d^ I hear? Confusion on thy tongue!
To tell me this, why was thy speech so long?
Why did not Ruin with more speed afford?
Thou might have spoke and killed me in a word.
But may I not one Moment with her speak,
And my poor heart disclose before it break?

Rut. You shall; for when I told her what you designed,
She sweetly smiled, and her fair head inclined:
Titus never from her had a look more kind.
[ Enter Berenice and Phaenicia. She Is here.

Berenice, At last from the rude Joy I Am freed,
Of those new Friends whom my new fortunes breed.
The tedious form of their respect I shun,
To find out him whose words and heart are one.
Antiochus, for I Will no flattery use
Since your neglect I justly may accuse,
How great your Cares for Berenice have been,
Even all the East, and Rome it self have seen,
In my worst fate I did your friendship find,
But now I grow more Great, you grow less kind.

Antio. Now durst I hope, I would forget my smart,
So well she understands to sooth my heart.
But, Madam, its a truth by Rumor spread,
That Titus shall this night possess your bed.

Ber. Sir, All my Conflicts I Will to you reveal,
Though half the Fears I Have had, I cannot tell;
So much did Titus for his Father mourn,
I almost doubted Love would never return;
He had not for me that Assiduous heat
As when whole days fixed on my Eyes, he sat.
Grief in his Eyes, Cares on his Brows did dwell;
Often came and looked, said nothing but farewell.

Ant. But now his kindness he renews again,

Ber. Oh! he will doubly recompense his pain
For that, if any Faith may be allowed,
Two thousand Oaths, two thousand times renewed;
Or any Justice in the Powers Divine,
Antiochus, He Will be for ever mine.

Antio. How she insults and triumphs in my ill,
She Has with long practice learnt to smile and kill.
Oh Berenice, Eternally farewell.

Ber. Farewell! good Heaven! what Language do I hear;
Stay! I conjure you Sir -- by all is that dear.
Antiochus, What is it I have done?
Why don't you speak?

Antio. Madam I must be gone.

Ber. How Cruelly you use me! I implore
The Reason --

Ant. I must never see you more.

Ber. For Heavens sake tell, you wound me with delay.

Ant. At least remember I your Laws obey.
Why should I here wretched and hopeless stay?
If the remembrance be'nt Extinguished quite,
Of that blessed place where first you saw the light;
'Twas there, oh there began my Endless smart,
When those dear Eyes prevailed upon my heart,
Then Berenice too, my Vows approved,
Till happy Titus came and was beloved.
He did with Triumph and with Terror come,
And in his hands bore the Revenge of Rome.
Judea trembled, but 'twas I alone
First felt his weight, and found my self undone.

Ber. Hah!

Antio. You too, then t'encrease the pains* I bore,
Commanded me to speak of Love no more.
So on your hand I swore at last to obey;
And for that taste of Bliss gave all away.

Ber. Why do you study ways t'afflict my mind,
You believe Sir, I am not unkind.
Alas I Am sensible how well you have ser^'d,
And have been kinder much than I deserved.

Antio. Why in this Empire should I longer stay,
My Passion and its weakness to betray.
Others, though I retire, will bring their Joys,
To Crown that Happiness which mine destroys.

Ber. You triumph thus, because your power you know,
Or if you did not, you would not use me so.
Though Crowned Romes Empress, I the Throne ascend;
What pleasure in my Greatness can I find,
When I shall want my best and truest Friend.

Ant. I reach your purpose, you would have me there,
That you might see the worst of my despair.
I know it, the Ambition of your Soul;
It Is true, I Have been a fond obedient Fool.
Yet came this time but to new freight my heart,
And with more Love possessed than ever part.

Ber. Though it could never enter in my mind,
Since Caesar's Fortunes must with mine be joined.
That any Mortal durst so hardy prove,
T'invade his Right, and talk to me of Love.
I bear the unpleasing Narrative of yours,
And Friendship, what my Honor shuns, endures.
Nay more; Your parting, I with trouble hear,
For you next him, are to my Soul most dear.

Antio. In Justice to my Memory and Fame,
I fly f^^m Titus, that unlucky Name.
A name which every Moment you repeat,
Whilst my poor heart lies bleeding at your feet.
Farewell: Oh be not at my Ravings grieved,
When of my death the news shall be received,
Remember why I di'd, and what I lived --
[ Ex. Antioch*
Phaen. I grieve for him, a Love so true as this,
Deserved, methinks, more fortunate success.
Are you not troubled Madam --

Ber. Yes, I feel
Something within me difficult to quel.

Phaen. You should have staid him.

Ber. Who, I stay him? no,
From my Remembrance rather let him go.
His Fancy does with wild Distraction rove,
Which thy raw ignorance, interprets Love.

Phaen. Titus his thoughts, yet to unfold, denies.
And Rome beholds you but with jealous eyes.
Its rigorous Laws, create my fears for you;
Romans no Foreign Marriages allow
To Kingly Power still enemies they have been,
Nor will, I fear, admit of you a Queen.

Ber. Phaenicia, no, my time of fear is past,
Me Titus loves, and that includes the rest.
The splendour of this night thou have beheld*
Are not thy Eyes with his bright Grandeur filled?
These Eagles fasces, marching all in state:
And crowds of Kings that with their Tributes wait.
Triumphs below, and Blessings from Above,
Seem all at strife to grace this Man of Love.
Away Phaenicia, let us go meet him strait,
I can no longer for his coming wait.
My Eager wishes drive me wildly on;
Nor will be temp^r'd till my Joy's begun.

[Exeunt. SCENE II.
Enter Titus Paulinus, Attendants. Titus. TOth' Syrian King, did you my Message
bear?
And does he know that I expect him here?

Paul. Sir, in the Queens appartment, He alone
Was seen, but ever I there arrived, was gone.

Tit. It Is well Paulin^s for these ten days past.
I have to Berenice a stranger been:
But you can tell me all -- how does the Queen?

Paul. She does, what speaks, how much she values you;
When you mourned for your Father, she mourned too.
So J^st a Sorrow in her face was shown,
It seem^d as if the Loss had been her own.

Tit. Oh lovely fair one, little do thou know
[aside. How hard a Trial thou must undergo.
Heaven! oh my heart!

Paul. What is it your Grief should raise
For her whom almost all the East obeys.

Tit. Command Paulinus that these retreat,
Paul. moves his hand and all the rest exti. R^m^ of my purposes uncertain yet,
Exp^cts to know the fortune of the Queen;
Their Murmurings I have heard, and Troubles seen.
The business of our Love, is the Discourse,
And expectation of the Universe.
And by the face of my affairs, I find,
It Is time that I resolve and fix my mind.
Tell me Paulinus, justly, and be free,
What says the World of Berenice and me?

Paul. In every heart you Admiration raise:
All, Your high Virtues, and her Beauty praise.

Tit. Alas! Thou answerst wide of my desire,
Paulinus, be my Friend, and come yet nigher
How do they of my sighs and vows approve?
Or what expect they from so true a love?

Paul. Love or not love, Sir, all is in your power,
The Court will second still the Emperor.

Tit. Courtiers Paulinus seldom are sincere
To please their Master they have too much care.
The Court did Nero's horrid Acts applaud,
To all his lusts subscribed, and called him God.
The Idolatrous Court shall never judge for me,
No, my Paulinus, I rely on thee:
What then must Berenice expect? declare,
Will Rome be gen^le to her, or severe?
My happiness is placed in her alone.
Now they have raised me to the Imperial Throne,
Where on my head continual cares must fall,
Will they deny me what may sweeten all?

Paul. Her virtues they acknowledge and desert
Proclaim indeed she has a Roman heart:
But she is a Queen, and that alone withstands
All which her beauty and her worth demands.
In Rome the Law has long unaltered stood,
Never to mix it is race with strangers blood.

Tit. It is sign they are capricious grown,
When they despise all virtues but their own.

Paul. Julius, who first subdued her to his Arms,
And quite had silenced Laws with Wars alarms,
Burning for Cleopatra's love; to Fame
More just fled from her eyes, and hid his flame.

Tit. But which way from my heart shall I remove*
So long established and deep rooted love?

Paul. The Conflict will be difficult I guess,
But you your rising sorrows must suppress;
Who can a heart that is not his own control?
Her presence was the comfort of my Soul.

Tit. After a thousand Oaths confirmed in tears,
By which I vowed my self for ever hers,
I hoped with all my Love and all her charms,
At last to have her in my longing Arms.
But now I can such rare perfections crown,
And that my love's more great than overgrown,
When in one hour a happy Marriage may
Of all my five years vows the tribute pay*
I go Paulinus -- how my heart does rise.

Paul. Whether?

Tit. To part for ever from her eyes,
Tho I required the assistance of thy zeal,
To crush a passion that is so hard to quell.
My heart had of it is doom resolved before,
Yet Berenice does still dispute the war.
The conquest of so great a flame must cost
Conflicts, in which my soul will often be tossed.

Paul. You in your birth for Empire were designed,
And to that purpose Heaven did frame your mind;
Fate in that day wise providence did show,
Fixing the destiny of Rome in you.

Tit. My youth rejoiced in love and glorious wars,
But my Remains of life must waste in cares.
Rome, my new Conduct, now observes 'twould be
Both ominous to her, and mean in me,
If in my Dawn of power to clear my way
To happiness, I should her Laws destroy:
No, I Have resolved on it, Love and all shall go;
Alas! it must, since Rome will have it so.
But how shall I poor Berenice prepare?

Paul. You must resolve to go and visit her,
Sooth her sad heart* and on her patience win,
Then by degrees --

Tit. -- But how shall I begin?
Oh my Paulinus, I have often designed
To speak my thoughts, but still they stayed behind.
I hoped as she discerned my troubled Breast,
She might a little at the cause have guest;
But naught suspecting, as I weeping lay,
With her fair hand she would wipe the tears away,
And in that m^st never the loss perceived
Of the sad Heart she had too much believed;
But now a firmer constancy I take,
Either my heart shall vent its grief, or break.
I thought to h^ve met Antiochus, and here
All I e're loved surrendered to his care.
To morrow he conducts her to the East,
And now I go to sigh, and look my last.

Paul. I never expected less from that Renown,
Which all your Actions must with glory crown*

Tit. How lovely's glory, yet how cruel too!
How much more fair and charming were she now,
If through eternal dangers to be won!
So I might still call Berenice my own.
In Nero's Court where I was bred, my mind
By that example to all ills inclined,
The loose wild paths of pleasures I pursued,
Till Berenice first taught me to be good.
She taught me Virtue, but oh! cursed Rome!
The good I owe her, must her wrong become.
For so much Virtue and Renown so great;
For all the Honor I did ever get;
Her for whose sake alone* I same pursued,
I must forgo to please the Multitude.

Paul. You cannot with Ingratitude be charged,
You have the ^ounds of Pales^i^e ^^larg'd.
Even to Euphrates, her wide power extends;
So many Kingdoms Berenice commands.

Tit. Weak Comforts* for the Griefs must on her dwell*
I know fair Berenice, and know too well;
To greatness she so little did incline,
Her heart asked never any thing but mine.
Let Us talk no more of her, Paulinus.

Paul. Why!

Tit. The thought of her, but shakes my co^st^ncy,
Yet in my heart if doubts already ri^e,
What will it do when I behold her eyes?

Enter Rutilius. Rutil. Sir, Berenice desires admittance here --

Tit. Palinus -- Oh!

Paul. Can you already fear?
So soon are all your resolutions shook?
Now, Sir, 's the time --

[Ex. Rut. Enter Berenice, Phaenicia and attendants. Tit. I have no power to
look.

Ber. Sir, ben't displeased, that I thus far presume,
It is to pay my gratitude I come.
Whilst all the Court assembled in my view,
Admire the Favor you on me bestow;
It were unjust, should I remain alone,
Silent, as though I had a sense of none.
Your mourning 's done, and you from griefs are free.
Are now your own, and yet not visit me?
Your present of new Diadems I wait.
Oh! g^ve me more content, and less of state.
Give me a word, a sigh, a look at least,
In those the Ambition of my Soul is placed.
Was your discourse of me when I arrived?
Was I so happy may it be believed?
Speak, tell me quick, is Berenice so blessed;
Or was I present to your thoughts at least?

Tit. Doubt it not, Madam, by the Gods I swear't;
That Berenice is always in my heart.
Nor time, nor absence, can you thence remove.
My heart's all yours, and you alone I love.

Ber. You vow your Love perpe^^al and ^incere,
But it is with a strange coldness that you ^wear.
Why the just Gods to witness did you call?
I don't pretend to doubt your faith at all.
In you I trust, would only from you live;
And what you say I ever must believe.

Tit. Madam!

Ber. Proceed: Alas, whence this surprise!
You seem confused to turn away your eyes.
Nothing but trouble in your face I find,
Does still a Fathers death afflict your mind?

Tit. Oh, did my Father good Vesp^s^an live!
How happy should I be!

Ber. Ah, cease to grieve!
Your tears, have reverenc't his memory now.
Cares are to Rome, and your own glory due.
A Father you lament, a feeble grief,
Whilst for your absence I f^^d no relief.
But in your presence only take delight,
I, who shall dye, i^ but deb^rr'd your sight.

Tit. Madam, what is it that your griefs declare?
What time d' you choose? For pitty's fake for^ear.
Your Bounties my Ingratitude proclaim.

Be^. You can do nothing that deserves that name;
No Sir, you never can ungrateful prove.
May be I Am fond, and tire you with my Love.

Tit. No Madam! No, my heart (since I must speak)
Was never more full of Love or half so like to break.
But --

Ber. What?

Tit. Alas!

Ber. Proceed.

Tit. The Empire Rome --

Ber. Well.

Tit. Oh, the dismal secret will not come --
Away Paulinus, e're i am quite undone.
My Speech forsakes me and my heart's all stone.

[ Ex. Tit. Paul. Ber. So soon to leave me, and in trouble too?
Titus how have I this deserved from you?
What have I done, Phaenicia? tell me, speak.

Phaen. Does nothing to your memory appear:
That might provoke him --?

Ber. By all tha'ts to me dear,
Since the first hour I saw his face, till now,
Too much of Love, is all the guilt I know.
Thus silence is too rude, and racks my breast,
In the uncertainty I cannot rest,
He knows, Phaenicia, all my moments past.
Perhaps he 's jealous of the Syrian King;
It Is that is the root whence all this change must spring.
Titus, this Victory I shall not boast.
I wish the Gods would try me to the most.
With a more potent Rival, tempt my heart,
One that would make me greater than thou art.
Then my dear Titus, should thou soon discern,
How much for thee I all mankind would scorn.
Let Us go, Phaenicia, with one gentle word
He will be satisfied, and I restored:
" My Injured truth by my compliance find,
" And if he has a heart he must be kind.

Exeunt Omnes. Ends the first Act.
ACT II.
SCENE I.
Enter Titus, Antiochus and Arsaces. Tit. ANtiochus! you have done your
Friendship wrong,
In that you have kept this Secret hid so long.
What is it that your departure does incite,
Which not unjustly, I may call a Fright?
Tho on the Imperial Throne I Am placed,
So highly seem with Fortunes favor graced;
As if the nothing further had to grant:
I more than ever, do your friendship want.

Ant. Sir, your great kindness I so well did know,
I durst not stay where I so much did owe.
When first Iudaea heard your loud alarms,
You made me your Companion in your arms.
Nay, nearer to you did with friendship join,
And lodged the secrets of your Breast in mine.
Yet all this goodness but augments my sin,
For I have false and most ungrateful been.

Tit. I cannot forget that to your arms alone,
I owe the half of all I ever won:
Witness those precious Spoils you hither brought,
Won from the Jews when on my side you fought.
To all those Purchases I lay no claim;
Your heart and friendship are my only aim.

Ant. My Heart! my Friendship! Heaven, how you mistake!
On my deceit how weak a glos^ you make!
When first you thought your self of me possessed,
You took a very Serpent to your breast.

Tit. Antiochus, I find where thou art stung,
Tell me the officious Slave that does me wrong.
Some base Detractor has my Honor stained,
And in your easy heart a Credit gained.
Ab^s'd and told you Titus is unjust;
But I will know the tr^acherous Fiend, I must.
Tho you unkindly from your friend would run,
And own the unjustice which you think I Have done.

Ant. Oh Titus, if I durst but speak my heart;
But it is a Secret hard from thence to part.
It Is not from you, it is from Rome I fly,
There Is a Disease in it, I must ^hun or dye.
Seek then no more what is dangerous to know,
When most your friend, I shall appear your foe.

Tit. I either to your heart a stranger am,
Or sure Antiochus is not the same:
What else should make you not your mind declare?
What is it that you dare say, I dare not hear?

Ant. If then, what ever I utter, you dare hear,
Receive the fatal Secret in your Ear.
But arm your heart with Temper; well it is this:

Tit. Go on,

Anti. I love the charming Berenice.

Tit. Hah!

Ant. Yes, nor was I hateful to her Eyes,
Till you came on and robbed me of the prize.
When at your Armies head you did appear,
You sacked Jerusalem and conquered her.

Tit. A braver Rival I Would not wish to find,
Than him that dares be just and tell his mind.
So far's Resentment from my heart removed;
That Berenice is by my friend beloved.
That, I Antiochus, the thing extol,
For she was made to be adored by all:
And happy he that shall possess her;

Ant. True,
But it is fit none should be so blessed but you,
And Berenice for none could be designed,
But him that is the Delight of all Mankind.
It Is for this cause to Syria I repair,
For when you 're blessed no envy should be near.

Tit. O my Antiochus, when thou shall see,
How small's the happiness in store for me:
Thou needst not fear thy Envy, let me have
Thy pity and thy aid, it is that I crave.
My best and truest friend, you must be so,
For there is none fit for it in the World but you.
None but a King, my Rival and my friend,
Is (...) to speak the torments of my mind.
In (...) behalf you Berenice must see.

Antio. Is that an office, Titus, fit for me?
I^'^ not enough her Cruelties I bear,
But yo^ must too solicit my despair?
I (...) for ever from her to depart;
Ala^! and dare not trust again my he^rt.
Your passion by another may be shown,
I have enough to do to rule my own.

Tit. He that so well his own misfortunes bears,
(...) b^st instruct her how to temper hers.
Nay, my Antiochus, you must not start.
I know by mine, your news will shake her heart,
For I m^st too, for ever from her part.

Antio. Yo^ part?

Tit. Yes! cursed necessity! it is true,
She that both conquered me and fettered you;
In whom alone I sum'd up all Delight,
Must be for ever banished from my sight.

Antio. It cannot be. No Slave that wears her Chains,
Upon so e^sie terms his Freedom gains.

Tit. Lord of the World my Empire wide does flow,
I can m^ke K^^gs, and can depose 'em too*
The (...) hearts must to my power bow down,
And yet I ^m not Master of my own.
(...) that to Kings so long a foe has been,
(...) not (...) my marriage with the Queen.
If (...) to morrow be not gone,
(...) will to her Palace run;
(...) t^^ir rude outrageous tougues, she will hear
(...) to tell, and you to hear.

(...). Now if my heart was to Revenge allied,
How mi^^t I triumph in her falling Pride!
To (...) her Cruelties to me repaid,
A^^ ^ith ^em all her tortured soul upbraid.
(...), Titus, I Am more just, and rather moved,
That ^v'n, Sir, you dare wrong the thing I Have loved.

Tit. When I the Imperial Power did first assume,
I firmly swore t'uphold the Rights of Rome;
Should I to follow Love, from Glory fly,
Forsake my Throne, in every Vassal's eye,
How mean and d^spicable must I prove!
An Emperor led about the World by love!
No, Prince, the fatal story you must tell,
And bid from me, poor Berenice farewell.
But if the hopes of reigning in my heart
May any ease to her sad mind impart;
Swear, friend, by all that to my Soul is dear,
Entire I will preserve her ever there.
Mourning at Court, and more exiled than she,
My Reign but a long Banishment shall be,
(...) those Joys that wait on Pomp and Power.
(...) she her journey hence must take,
(...) that ever I loved, forsake.
(...) Care and Conduct I commend,
(...) my Rival as a King and Friend,
T^^ ^earest Treasure I dare with you trust;

Antio. Sir, do not tempt me, lest I prove unjust:
Her charms that mad^ me my own Fame forgo,
Will be too apt to make me false to you.

Tit. No more; I know thee, have thy Honor tried,
Firm still in Dangers found thee by my side.
Thou knew'st my Love, whilst thine was yet concealed,
When all thy hopes by my success were quelled:
Even at that time thou did no falsehood show,
[ Exit. Titus* And wilt not wrong me on advantage now.

Antio. No, I Will not see her, neither dare I go:
Too soon from others her hard lot she will know.
Do thou not think her Fat^'s enough severe,
Unless that I the unwelcome Message bear?
I who'm her hate, enough have felt before,
And need not seek new ways to purchase more.

Arsa. See, she approaches, now the Coward play,
And when you might have Conquered run away.

Enter Berenice and Phaenicia. Antio. Oh Heaven!

Ber. My Lord, I see you are not gone,
Perhaps it is me alone that you would shun.

Antio. You came not here Antiochus to find,
The visit to another was designed.
Caesar, and it is on him the blame must light,
If now my presence here offend your sight.
The are his Commands, are guilty of the sin:
It may be else I had at Ostia been.

Ber. His friends are always with his presence Graced,
'T^s I alone that cannot be so blessed.

Antio. Too much his prejudice upon you gained:
'Twas for your sake alone I was detained.

Ber. For mine? away.

Antio. Tyrannick fair, it is true,
He kept me here only to talk of you.

Ber. Of me, my Lord forbear this courtly art,
Y' are brave and should not mock an easy heart.
In my distress, what pleasure could you see?
Alas! or what could Titus say of me?

Antio. Better a thousand times than I can tell,
So firm a passion in his heart does dwell.
When you are named, he is from himself transformed,
And every way betrays how much he is charmed.
Love in his face does like a Tyrant rise,
And Majesty's no longer in his eyes.
But there are things behind I dare not speak:
For at the news your tender heart would break.

Ber. How Sir?

Antio. Ere night the truth of what I Have said you will know,
And then, I doubt not, Justify me too.
Farewell.

Ber. Oh, Heaven what can this Language mean!
You see before your eyes a wretched Queen.
Sir, of my quiet, if you have such care,
Or if my self your eyes held ever dear,
Dispel this mist of trouble from my Soul.

Antio. Madam, your self excuse,
For your own sake it is that I refuse.
'Twill not be long before the doubt's removed.

Ber. You told me once Antiochus, you loved;
But sure'twas only that you might betray;
Or else you more would fear to disobey.

Antio. I disobey you, ask my life and try,
How gloriously I for your sake can dye.
It would by far, be the more welcome fate.
Then now to speak, and ever gain your hate.

Ber. No Sir, you never shall my hatred find,
It Is my desire, and you must be so kind.
Will you? --

Antio. Heaven this constraint is worse than death,
You drive, and will not give me time to breath.
Oh, Madam! put me too no further pain.

Ber. Must I then ever beg, and beg in vain?
Hence forward Prince, either the truth relate,
Forbear or be assured for ever of my hate.

Antio. My heart was always yours, and is so still:
For ever must depend upon your Will.
I wish another way, your power you would tried:
But you 're resolved, and must be satisfied;
Yet flatter not your self, I shall declare,
Those horrors which perhaps you dare not hear.
You cannot but believe I know your heart,
Look then to feel me strike its tender'st part.
Titus has told me.

Ber. What? fear no Surprise.

Antio. That he must part for ever from your eyes.

Ber. We part! can things another nature take?
Or Titus ever Berenice forsake?

Antio. Perhaps it is strange that I should tell you so,
But you shall find I Will do him Justice too,
What ever in a heart both kind and great
Love with despair most dreadful could create.
I saw in his he weep's, laments, and more,
Then ever dos fair Berenice adore.
But what avails it, that such love he shows?
A Queen suspected to Romes Empire grows.
And Titus cannot with her Laws dispense,
For therf^ore it is you must be banished hence.

Ber. What do I hear, alas (...)!

Antio. Nay, to morrow is your last and utmost day,
In bearing this the Courage well you will prove
Of that great haughty Soul which scorned my love.

Ber. Will Titus leave his Berenice forlorn?
He who so many Oaths, so often has sworn?
I Will not believe't, his love and faith's more strong,
I Am sure he is guiltless and you do him wrong.
This is a snare to disunite us laid,
Titus, thou love me, do not wish me dead.
No, strait I Will see him, and secure all fear.
Let Us go.

Antio. Too well you may behold him here;

Ber. Too well you wish it to persuade it, No;
In this your base degenerate Soul you show.
When you no other stratagem could find,
TO abuse my heart you would betray your friend.
How e're he prove, Know I your sight abhor,
And from this minute never see me more.

Antio. Oh Berenice! remorseless cruel fair*
Born only for my torment and despair,
Was it for this so faithfully I served?
Is this the recompense I have deserved?
I who for you did all Ambition wave,
And l^ft a Kingdom to become your Slave.
Curse on my Fate*

Ber. If 're my heart you prized,
You never h^d this cruelty devi^'d.
Never to work my Torment, been thus bold;
And ^o Triumphantly the story told.
Away Phaenicia no more I Will hear him speak.

Ex. Ber. Phae. Antio. Now, my Arsaces, would my heart but break
But yet I hope in part I Have freedom won.
And what love would not, by her hate she has done.
The pain I lately endured thou have beheld,
I left her all Enamored, Jealous, Wild*
But now pe^forming this Ignoble part,
Perhaps, I Will ever bani^^ her my heart.
She left me cruelly, and let her go;
My Honor and Repose command it too,
For ever to my eyes a stranger be,
Till I have learned to scorn as well as she.

[Exeunt. ACT III.
SCENE I.
Enter Berenice in disorder. Ber. I Of my wrong too well am satisfied;
To see the perjured Titus, twice I tried.
Twice for admittance to him begged in vain:
Nor is Phaenicia yet returned again.
Phaenicia has no answer to bring back.
In^gateful Titus will not hear her speak:
But hides himself and from my fury flies:
Nor will have sense, though Berenice dies.
[ Enter Phaenice. Phaenice, Well, my Titus have thou seen?
What will he come and make me live again?

Phae. Madam* the Emperor I alone did find;
And saw in his the trouble of your mind;
I saw the tears he would have hid run down.

Ber. But was he not ashamed they should be shown*
Looked he not as he th^ught his Love disgrace?
And was not all the E^p^r^r in hi^ face?

Phae. Doubt it not, Madam, he will soon be her^,
But wherefore will you this disorder wear?
Your rifl'd dress let me in order place,
And these disheveled lo^^s that hide your fac^.

Ber. Forbear, Phaenice, let it all alone*
No, he shall see the triumph (...) has w^n;
How vain those foolish ornam^n^s (...) p^ove*
If neither faith nor tears nor means can move!
Enter Antiochus, Arsaces. Oh, my unruly sorrows! Oh, my fears!
Who Is here?

Antio. Arsaces, Berenice in tears;

Ber. Antiochus! Phaenice, let us away,
To let him see my torments I Will not stay.
[Ex.
Anti^. Now whither's all my resolutions gone?

Arsaces, who could se^'t and be his own?
I said I^d never see her sace again:
But come and ^ind my boastings all were vain;
Seeing her sufferings, all her scorn forget,
And lose at on^e my vengeance and my hate.
VVretched Antiochus! with how much care
And labors, my own mischiefs I prepare!
How poorly all my injuries have born!
Hopeless, undo^e and to my self a scorn,
Leave me alone unhappy as I am:
I would not have a witness of my shame.

Enter Titus Attended. Tit. 'Twas cruel not to see her, Oh my heart!
And now I go to see her, but to part.
^utilius, fly and sooth the Queens despair,
And for our meeting Ber^nice prepare.

Antio. What have you done, Sir? Berenice will dye
I saw her hence with hair disheveled fly.
It Is only you her fury can surcease.
When e're you ^re named she is instantly at peace.
Her eyes still bent to your apartment were,
And every moment seemed to wish you near.

Tit. Antiochus, assist me what to do.
I Am not prepared, for the sad Interview.
I have not yet consulted well my heart,
And doubt it is no^ strong enough to part.
Since first I took possession of the Throne,
What is it for my honor I have done?
My love and folly only I Have disclosed,
And nothing but my weaknesses exposed.
The golden days where are they to be found,
So much expected, when this head was Crowned?
Whose tears have I dried up? or in what face
Can I the fruits of any good act trace?
Know I what years Heaven has for me decreed?
And of these few, how few are to succeed?
And yet how many have I spent in wast!
But now to honor I Will make greater have.
Alas! it is but one blow and all is past.

Enter Berenice, pressing from Rut. and Paul. Ber. Let me alone, your counsels
all are weak.
See him I must, he is here, and I will speak.
Has Titus then forsook me? is it true?
Must we too part, does he command it too?

Tit. Oh! stop the deluge, which so fiercely flows;
This is no time to allay each others woes.
Enough I feel my own afflictions smart,
And need not those dear tears to damp my heart.
But if we neither can our griefs command,
Yet with such honor let 'em be sustained.
As the whole World to hear it told shall smart;
For dearest Berenice we must part.
And now I would not a dispute maintain,
Whether I loved, but whether I must Reign.

Ber. Reign (Cruel) then and satisfy your pride,
And for your Cruelties be deifi'd.
I Will never dispute it farther, I but stayed
Till Titus who so many vows had made,
Of such a Love as nothing could impair.
Should come himself and tell how false they were,
Now I believed, enough I Have heard you tell,
And I am gone -- eternally farewell,
Eternally -- Ah, Sir, con^ider now,
How harsh that word is and how dreadful too.
Consider, Oh the Miseries they bear,
That are for ever robbed of all that^s dear.
From this sad Moment never more to meet,
Is it for day to dawn* and day to set,
In which I must not find my hopes still ^oung,
Nor yet once see my Titus all day long?
Heav^^s how I wildly rave -- to lose my pains
O^ him ungra^eful that my tears d^sdains!
Of all those days of absence I shall count,
With him, the number will to nothing mount.

Tit. Doubt it not, Madam, there will be no need
To count the days that shall your loss suceed.
I hope e^re long that you will hear from ^ame,
How very wretched and how just I am.
My heart bleeds now, I feel the drops run down*
Nor can it be long dying when you 're gone.

Ber. Ah why, Sir, must we part if this be true?
My cl^ims to Marriage I Will no more renew.
Will ^ome accept of nothing but my death?
Or why d' ye envy* me the air you breath?

Tit. M^dam, you are too powerful every way*
Shall I withstand it? no, for ever stay.
Then I from bliss must always be debarred,
And on my heart for ever keep a guard.
With fears through all my cours^ of Glory move,
L^st e^re aware I lose my self and Love.
Even ^ow my heart is from my bosom strayed,
And a^l its swellings on a sudden laid.
Bent thus to you by all Loves softest powers,
And only this remembers that it is yours.

Ber* O Titus, whilst this charming tale you tell*
Do You see the Romans ready to reb^l?

Tit. How they will look on the affront who knows,
If on^^ they ^urmur and then fall to blows:
Must I in Battle j^stifie my Ca^se;
Or if they should submit and set their Laws;
How must I be exposed another day;
And for their Patience too, how* largely pay!
With Grievances and wild Demands still c^^st,
Shall I dare plead the Laws that break '^m first?

Ber. How much you are an Empe^or now I find,
^Tis plain in your unsteady anxious mind*
You weigh your Peoples Rights to your own ^ears*
But never value Berenices tears?

Tit. Not value 'em* Why are you so unjust?
Now by the honor of my Father's dust,
By Heaven and all the gods that govern there,
If to me any thing be half so dear;
May I be as a Slave, deposed and serve,
Or else forlorn in some wild Desert starve,
Till I Am as wretched as my ills deserve.

Ber. Laws you may change, why will you for their sake,
Into your breast eternal sorrows take?
Rome has her Privileges, have not you
Your Interests, your Rights as sacred too?
Say, speak.

Tit. Alas! how do you rend my breast!
I know indeed I never can have rest;
And yet the Laws of Rome I cannot change,
Do, break my heart and take your full Revenge.

Ber. How weak a Guard does now your Honor keep!
You are an Emperor, and yet you weep*

Tit. I grant it, I am sensible I do,
I weep, alas! I sigh and tremble too.
For when to Empire first I did attain,
Rome made me swear I would her Rights maintain.
I did, and must perform what I then vowed,
Others before me to the Yoke have bowed:
And it is their Honor: yet in leaving you;
All their Austerest Laws I shall outdo.
And an Example leave so brave and great,
As none shall ever after imitate.

Ber. To your Barbarity there is nothing hard,
Go on, and Infamy be your reward.
Long since my fears your falsehood had displ^y'd;
Nor would I at your Suit have (...) stayed.
Would I the base Indignities had born,
Of a rude People, public Hate and Scorn?
No, to this breach I would have spurred you on,
And I am pleased it is already done.
No longer shall the fear of me prevail;
Alas! you must not think to hear me rail*
Or Heaven invoke, its vengeance to prepare;
No, for if Heaven vouchsafe to hear my Prayer,
I beg no memory may there remain,
Of either your Injustice, or my Pain.
[Kneel^. But the sad Berenice before she dies,
Is sure to have Revenge if you have eyes.
Nor, Titus, need I go to find it far,
No further than that heart, I have it there:
[Points to his breast. Within your sel^ shall rise your dreadfull'st foe;
My past Integrities, my Torments now;
Which you, ungrateful perjured Man, have bred,
My blood which in your Palace I shall shed.
Sufficient terrors to your Soul shall give,
And '^is to them that my Revenge I Will leave.

[Exit furio^sly Paul. Thus, Sir, at least the Conquest you have won,
The Queen you see's contented to be gone.

Tit. Curse on thy Roman Rudeness, that can see
Such tears, unmoved, and mock such Misery!
Oh! I am lost, and it is in vain to strive,
If Berenice dies, I cannot live.
Fly and prevent that Fate to which she is gone.
Bid her but live, tell her the World's her own.

[ Exit Rut. Paul. Sir, if I might advise, you should not send,
Rather command her women to attend;
They better can her Melancholy cheer:
The worst is past, and now it is mean to fear.
I saw your melting Pity when she wept,
And my rough heart but very hardly escaped.
Yet look a little farther and you^^ find
That spite of all your fortune yet is kind.
What triumphs the whole World prepares, you will see,
And then hereafter think how great you will be.

Tit. Who for Barbarity would be adored!
I hate my self, Nero so much abhorred,
That bloody Tyrant, whom I b^ush to name;
Was never half so cruel as I am.
No, I Will pursue the Queen, she loves me still,
Will pardon me when at her feet I kneel:
Let Us go, and let proud Rome say what it will.

Paul. How Sir?

Tit. By Heaven I know not what I say:
Excess of Sorrow drives my mind astray.

Paul. O follow where your full Renown does lead,
Your last adieus Report abroad has spread.
Rome that did mourn, does now new triumphs frame,
The Temples fume with Offerings to your name:
The people wild in the applause you have won
With Laurel Wreaths to crown, your Statues run.

Tit. By that their Salvage natures they betray,
For so wild beasts roar o'r their murdered prey.
Who would have sense the sweets of power to prize!
Since most in danger when we highest rise:
For who by Greatness ever did happy grow?
None but the heavy Slave is truly so.
Who travels all his life in one dull road,
And drudging on in quiet, loves his load.
Seeking no farther than the needs of Life,
Knows what is his own, and so exempt from strife,
And cherishes his homely careful wife.
Lives by the Clod, and thinks of nothing higher;
Has all, because he cannot much desire.
Had I been born so low, I had been blessed
Of what I love, without control possessed.
Never had Honor or Ambition known,
Nor ever to be Great, had been undone.

[Shout within. Paul. The Tribunes, Sir, and Senate with their state,
In The name of all the Empire for you wait,
They Are followed too by an impatient throng,
Who seem to murmur, you delay so long.

Tit. Toil me no more, disperse that clamorous Rout:
Tell 'em they shall no more have cause to doubt;
The Queens departure they will to morrow see,
And me as wretched as they would have me be.
Take this Paulinus: bear it to the Queen,
[Writes on a Tablet. For should we meet, I must relapse again;
I h've bid her here eternally adieu,
Stay while she reads it, and her troubles view,
And bring me faithful word, as thou art true.
Hold! oh my Heart! yet go, (...) it must be done,
For what is necessity, we cannot shun.
Would I had never known what it is to live,
Or a new Being to my self could give.
Some monstrous and unheard of Shape now find,
As S^lvage, and as Barbarous as my mind.
Anti^chus!

Enter Antiochus, Attendants, Arsaces. Ant. My last Adieu to pay,
I come, and dare in Rome no longer stay.
My griefs, and my afflictions, grow so high;
If not by absence slackened, I must dye.

Tit. What reason have the happy to repine?
Now Berenice for ever will be thine.
With all her charms receive her to thy breast,
And be of all I ever loved, possessed.

Ant. It is beneath you, Sir, to mock my pain:
I ever kneel to Berenice again!
No, ^h^uld I stay to see you when you part,
Tho I am sure the sight would break my heart,
Yet ^he, as still my prayers have been denied,
Tho I but begged one blessing ere I died,
Even then ^ith scorn would throw me from her side.

Tit. Oh Heaven! she is entering, from her Charms lets fly,
I know my weakness; if I stay, I dye.
Meet, and prevent her --

[ Ex. Titus. Enter Berenice, etc. Ber. How h^ hasts away!
Ungrateful! Dearest Perjured Titus, stay.
[kneels. Afflictions catch him, great as those I bear.
My Lord, at last I have received my Doom:
It Is sealed; but ere I part from you and Rome,
I ask, and I your pardon would receive:
Can you the wrongs which I have done, forgive?

Ant. I never any Injuries did find;
No, Berenice has always been too kind.
With one soft word, how suddenly I Am lost,
And have no sense of my disgraces past!
But must I then for ever lose you so?
I am no Roman, nor was ere your foe.
No, rather here continue, and be Great,
Whilst I live ever hopeless at your feet.

Ber. Should I stay here and my wrongs tamely bear
From him that shuns, and flies me every where?
I have a nobler mind, and you shall see
I can disdain and scorn as much as he:
For tho it is true, I never can be yours;
Both Rome and him my heart this hour abjures.

Ant. To banish him your heart, whilst you prepare,
What will you do with all the Love that is there?
There Is no one Mortal can deserve it all,
And sure a little to my share might fall.

Ber. Oh of that killing Subject, talk no more,
I would have loved you, if I could, before.
Love for another struck me with his Dart,
And it is not in my power to force my heart.

Ant. When first my Passion was disdained for him,
You kept me yet alive with your esteem.
But now at last his breach of Faith you see,
And bear it nobly too: how can it be
TO your self so Just, and yet so hard to me?

Ber. What cruel storms, and fierce assaults you make,
To batter down a heart you cannot take!
Till you have broke it. Will you not give o'r?
No, rather let me go, and hear no more.

Antio. O stay, since of the Victory you are secure,
Pity the pains and anguish I endure;
[Kneels In wounds which you and none but you can cure.
Look back, whilst at your feet my self I cast,
And think the sigh that is coming is my last.
My heart it is ^ad eternal farewell takes:
Be but so kind to see me when it breaks.

Ber. Rise, rise my Lord. The Emperor's returned.
Conduct me hence, let me not more be scorned.

Enter Titus. Tit. How am I lost! resolve on what I will,
Spite of my self I wander this way still.
Why would you Berenice my presence shun?

Ber. No! I Will hear nothing, I Have resolved on flight,
And will be gone. Why come you in my sight?
Why come you thus t'exasperate my despair?
Are you yet not content? I know you are.

Tit. If ever yet my heart was dear to yours;
By all our plighted vows, those softest hours
In which for ever to be true I swore,
I beg that you^d afford me yet one more.

Ber. I till to morrow had your leave to stay;
But my resolves are to be gone to day.
And I depart.

Tit. No journey must you take.
Would you poor Titus in his griefs forsake?
No! Stay --

Ber. I stay! Ungrateful as you are.
For what? a Peoples rude affronts to bear.
That with the sound of my misfortune rend
The Clouds, and shouts to Heaven in Vollys send?
Does not their cruel joy yet reach your ears,
Whilst I alone Torment my self in tears?
By what offense or crime are they thus moved?
Alas! what have I done, but too much Loved?

Tit. Do You mind the voice of an outrageous throng?
I ever thought your constancy more strong.
Never believed your heart so weak could be,
Whose powerful charms had captivated me.

Ber. All that I see distraction does create,
These rich Apartments and this Pompous State.
These Places where I spent my happiest hours,
And plighted all my Vows, false Man, to yours.
All, as most vile Impostors I detest,
How strangely, Titus, might we have been blessed!

Tit. This art to torture souls where did you learn?
Or was it in your nature with you born?
Oh Berenice! how you destroy me!
Atendants, bring your Chair nearer.

Ber. No,
Return and to your famous Senate go;
That for your cruelties applaud you so.
Have you not honor to your full delight?
Have you not promised to forget me quite?
What more in expiation can you do?
Have you not ever sworn to hate me too?

Tit. Can you do any thing to make me hate?
Or can I ever Berenice forget?
This hard suspicion was unjustly urged,
Against a poor heart too much before surcharged*
Oh Madam! know me better, and recall
The wrong, since first I at your feet did fall.
Count all the single days and minutes past,
Where in my vows and my desires I pressed.
And at this time your greatest Conquest know,
For you were never so beloved as now.
Nor ever --

Ber. Still your Love you would have me own,
Yet you your self command me to be gone.
Is my despair so charming to your view?
D' you think the tears I shed are all too few?
Of such a heart, a vain return you make,
No never call those dear Idea's back.
But suffer me in this belief to rest;
That secretly, long since exiled your breast,
I only from a faithless wretch depart,
And one that never lays the loss to heart.
If you had Loved me, this had nere been sent,
Here you have commanded me to banishment.
[Opens the Tablets What wondrous Love you bear me this does show.
Read, read, ungrateful, read and let me go.

[Gives him the (...) Tit. You shall not go, I have not given consent,
Nor will I ever to your banishment.
Your cruel resolution I descry,
To be revenged of me you seek to dye.
And then of all I love, except the pain,
Naught but the sad remembrance will remain.
Antiochus! be thou a witness here
Ber. sinks down in a Chair. Of all my misery and my despair.

Antio. D^sp^ir's a Theme I only understand;
You, if you will, your wishes may command.
Such Beauty ready for possession see,
And leave that ugly hag Despair, to me.

Antio. Behold those eyes how dull and dark they grow!
Madam, when at your feet I fall thus low,
[Kneels. Vouchsafe my sad afflictions to believe,
Alas! '^is all the ease I Am like to have.
When first the dreadful minute I beheld;
That by my duty and the Laws compelled,
I found it forced that you must hence depart.
Though nothing e're can banish you my heart.
'Twas then m^ soul had first a sense of fears,
Foreseeing your reproaches and your tears.
I then expected, Madam, all the weight
Of woes that can on worst misfortunes light.
But whatsoever fears oppressed my heart,
I find I but foresaw the lesser part.
I thought my virtue not so apt to bow;
(...) am asham^d it is thus entangled now.

Ber. Let me alone and vex my soul no more,
You of your virtue talked enough before.
Urge it not still to agg^avate my shame.
When Crowned with conquest from the wars you came,
I know you brought me but to fill your state;
For els^ the triumph had not been ^omplete.

Tit. Since you have then resolved: It s^all be so.
And judge by this if you are beloved or no.
No longer Torments on my soul shall prey,
Since I to freedom see so brave a way;
A way by more than one great Roman shown,
Who, when their Misery's had pressed 'em down,
Propt from within, shook off with life, the weight,
Offers to stab himself And thus fell nobly grapling with their fate.

Ber. Oh stay! to wrong me more what way dy'e take?
Would Titus die for Berenices sake?
I see the blow you cruelly prepare
To wound that breast where I, you say, have share.
To hurt what is mine would be unjustly done*
No, rather strike this heart, that is all your own.

Tit. Best of thy sex! and dearest, now I see.
How poor is Empire when compared to thee.
Hence ye, perplexing Cares, that clog a brain,
Whilst struck with ecstasy* I here fall down.
[Kneels Thus at your feet a happy prostrate laid,
I Am much more blessed than if the world I swaid.

Ber. Now the blessed Berenice enough has seen:
[Kneels I thought your Love had quite extinguished been:
But 'twas my error, for you still are true.
Your heart is troubled, and your tears I view.
Even my worst sufferings much o'repaid I see,
Nor shall the unhappy world be cursed for me,
Nothing since first 'twas yours, my love would shake,
So absolute a Conquest did you make.
But now I Will bring it to the utmost test,
And with one fucal Act crown all the rest.

Tit. Hah! tell me Berenice what will you do?

Ber. Far from your sight and Rome for ever go:
I have resolved on it, and it shall be so.

Tit. Antiochus! I Am born to be undone;
When I the greatest conquest thought to have won:
Even in my noblest race I am outrun.
But thou were always generous, always kind;
Your enlarged Kingdom shall to hers be joined.
And now how much you are my faithful friend;
In being so to her, you will best expres.
Falling on his neck. Never forsake her in sad distress.
Where e're she goes, for ever with her be.
And sometimes in my absence sigh for me.

Antio. Arsaces! on thy bosom let me lie,
Whilst I but take one last dear look, and die.

Ber. No live: and by a generous strife outdo
Us both, and of your self be conqu'rour too.
Farewell.
Let us all three a rare example prove:
Of a most tender though unhappy love.
Thus, Sir, your Peace and Empire I restore.
Farewell and reign, I Will never see you more.
[ Ex. Ber.
Antio. Oh Heaven!

Tit. She Is gone and al^ I valued lost:
Now Friend, let Rome, of her great Emp'ror boast.
Since they themselves first taught me cruelty,
I Will try how much a Tyrant I can be.
Henceforth all thoughts of pity I Will disown,
And with my arms the Universe ore-run.
Robbed of my Love, through ruins purchase ^ame,
And mak^ the world's as wretched as I am.

[Exeunt Omnes. THE Cheats of Scapin.
Act First.
Scene First.
Enter Octavian Shift. Oct. THIS is unhappy News; I did not expect my Father in
two Months, and yet you say he is returned already

Sh. It Is but too true.

Oct. That he arrived this Morning?

Sh. This very Morning.

Oct. And that he is come with a resolution to Marry me?

Sh. Yes, Sir, To Marry you.

Oct. I am ruined and undone; prithee advise me.

Sh. Advise you?

Oct. Yes, advise me. Thou art as surly, as if thou really could do me no
good. Speak: Has Necessity taught thee no Wit? Have thou no Shift?

Sh. Lord, Sir, I am at present very busy in Contriving some Trick to save my
self; I am first prudent, and then good natured.


Oct. How will my Father rage and storm, when he understands what things have
happened in his absence? I dread his anger and reproaches.


Sh. Reproaches! Would I could be quit of him so easily; methinks I feel him
already on my Shoulders.

Oct. Dis-inheriting is the least I can expect.

Sh. You should have thought of this before, and not have fallen in Love with I
know not whom, one that you met by chance in the Dover-Coach; she is indeed a
good smug Lass, but God knows what she is besides; perhaps some --

Oct. Villain.

Sh. I have done, Sir, I have done.

Oct. I have no Friend that can appease my Father's anger, and now I shall be
betrayed to want and ^isery.


Sh. For my part, I know but one Remedy in our misfortunes.


Oct. Prithee what is it?


Sh. You know that Rogue and arch-Cheat Scapin.


Oct. Well* What of him?


Sh. There is not a more subtle Fellow breathing; so cunning, he can cheat one
newly Cheated; it is such a Wheadling Rogue, I Will undertake in two hours he
shall make your Father forgive you all, nay, allow you Money for your necessary
Debauches: I saw him in three days, make an old cautious Lawyer turn Chemist
and Projector.


Oct. He is the fittest person in the World for my Business; the Impudent
Varlet can do any thing with the peevish old Man. Prithee go look him out,
we'll set him a work immediately.


Sh. See where he comes -- Monsieur Scapin!


Enter Scapin. Scap. Worthy Sir!


Sh. I have been giving my Master a brief Account of thy most Noble Qualities:
I told him, thou were as Valiant as a ridden Cuckold, Sincere as Whores, Honest
as Pimps in want.


Scap. Alas Sir! I but Copy you: It Is you are brave; you scorn the Gibbets,
Halters and Prisons which threaten you, and valiantly proceed in Cheats and
Robberies.


Oct. Oh Scapin! I am utterly ruined without thy assistance.


Scap. Why? What Is the matter good Mr. Octavian?


Oct. My Father is this day arrived at Dover with old Mr. Gripe, with a
resolution to Marry me.


Scap. Very well.


Oct. Thou know I am already Married; How will my Father resent my
Disobedience? I am for ever lost, unless thou can find some means to
reconcile me to him.


Scap. Does your Father know of your Marriage?


Oct. I am afraid he is by this time acquainted with it.


Scap. No matter, no matter, all shall be well: I am publick-spirited; I love
to help distressed young Gentlemen, and thank Heav^n I have had good success
enough.


Oct. Besides, My present want must be considered, I am in rebellion without
any Money.


Scap. I have Tricks and Shifts too to get that: I can cheat upon occasion; but
Cheating is now grown an ill Trade; yet Heaven be thanked, there were never
more Cullies and Fools; but the great Rooks and Cheats allowed by public
Authority, ruin such little Undertraders as I am.


Oct. Well, Get thee straight about thy Business: Can thou make no use of my
Rogue here?


Scap. Yes, I shall want his assistance; the Knave has Cunning, and may be
useful.


Sh. Ay Sir; But like other wise Men, I am not over-Valiant: Pray leave me out
of this Business; my Fears will betray you; you shall execute, I Will sit at home
and advise.


Scap. I stand not in need of thy Courage, but thy Impudence, and thou have
enough of that: Come, come, thou shall along; What, Man, stand out for a
Beating? That Is the worst can happen.


Sh. Well, well.


Enter Clara. Oct. Here comes my dearest Clara.


Cla. Ah me Octavian! I hear sad News: They say, your Father is returned.


Oct. Alas! It Is true, and I am the most unfortunate person in the World; but
it is not my own misery that I consider, but yours: How can you bear those wants
to which we must be both reduced?


Clar. Love shall teach me, that can make all things easy to us, which is a
sign it is the chiefest good: But I have other Cares; Will you be ever
constant? Shall not your Father's Severity constrain you to be false?


Oct. Never, my dearest, never.


Clar. They that love much, may be allowed some fears.


Scap. Come, come; we have now no time to hear you speak fine tender things to
one another: Pray do you prepare to encounter with your Father.


Clar. I tremble at the thoughts of it.


Scap. You must appear resolute at first: Tell him you can live without
troubling him; threaten him to turn Soldier; or what will frighten him worse,
say, you will turn Poet. Come, I Will warrant you, we bring him to Composition.


Oct. What would I give 'twere over?


Scap. Let us practice a little what you are to do. Suppose me your Father,
very grave and very angry.


Oct. Well.


Scap. Do you look very carelessly, like a small Courtier upon his Country
Acquaintance; a little more surlily: -- Very well: -- Now I come full of my
Fatherly Authority. -- Octavian, Thou make me weep to see thee; but alas they
are not tears of joy, but tears of sorrow. Did ever so good a Father beget so
lewd a Son? Nay, but for that I think^ thy Mother Virtuous, I should pronounce
thou art not mine; Newgate-Bird, Rogue, Villain, what a Trick have thou played
me in my absence? Married? Yes: but to whom? Nay that thou ^knowest not. I'^
warrant you some Waiting Woman corrupted in a Civil Family, and redu^'d to one
of the Play Houses, removed from thence by some Keeping Coxcomb, or --


Cla. Hold Scapin, Hold --


Scap. No offense Lady, I speak but another words.

Thou abominable Rascal, thou shall not have a groat, not a groat. Besides, I
will break all thy bones ten times over; get thee out of my house -- Why Sir,
you reply not a word, but stand as bashfully, as a Girl that is examined by a
Bawdy Judge, about a Rape.


Oct. Look yonder comes my Father.


Scap. Stay Shift, and get you two gone, let me alone to manage the old fellow.


[Exit-Oct. and Clara. Enter Thrifty. Th. Was there ever such a rash action?


Scap. He has been informed of the Business, and is now so full of it, that he
vents it to himself.


Th. I would fain hear what they can say for themselves.


Scap. We are not unprovided.


[At a distance. Th. Will they be so Impudent to deny the thing?


Scap. We never int^nd it.


Th. Or will they endeavor to excuse it?


Scap. That perhaps we may do.


Th. But all shall be in vain.


Scap. We Will try that.


Th. I know how to lay that Rogue my Son fast.


Scap. That we must prevent.


Th. And sor that Tat^erdemal^^on (...), I Will thrash him to death, I will be
three Years a Cudgelling him.


Th. I wondered he had forgot me so long.


Th. Oh Oh! Yonder the Rascal is, that brave Governor, he tutored my Son
finely.


Scap. Sir, I am overjoyed at your safe return.


Th. Good mor^ow Scapin, indeed you have followed my Instructions very exactly,
my Son has behaved himself very prudently in my absence, has he not Rascal, has
he not?


Scap. I hope you are very well.


Th. Very well -- Thou say not a word Varlet, thou say not a word.


Scap. Had you a good Voyage Mr. Thrifty?


Th. Lord Sir! A very good Voyage, pray give a Man a little leave to vent his
Choler.


Scap. Would you be in Choler Sir?


Th. Ay, Sir, I would be in Choler.


Scap. Pray with whom?


Th. With that confounded Rogue there.


Scap. Upon what reason?


Th. Upon what reason? have thou not heard what has happened in my abscence.


Scap. I have heard a little Idle story.


Th. A little Idle story. Quoth a ^ why Man, my Son's undone, my Son's undone.


Scap. Come, come, things have not been well carried, but I would advise you to
make no more of it.


Th. I am not of your opinion, I Will make the whole Town ring of it.


Scap. Lord Sir, I have stormed about this business as much as you can do for
your Heart, but what are we both the better? I told him indeed, Mr. Octavian,
you do not do well, to wrong so good a Father: I preached him three or four
times asleep, but all would not do, ^till at last, when I had well examined the
Business I found you had not so much wrong done you as you Imagine.


Th. How not wrong done me to have my Son married without my consent to a
Beggar!


Scap. Alas he was ordained to it.


Th. That Is fine indeed, we shall steal, cheat, murder, and so be hanged, then
say we were ordained to it.


Scap. Truly I did not think you so subtle a Philosopher, I mean he was
fatally engaged in this affair.


Th. Why did he Engage himself?


Scap. Very true indeed, very true; but fie upon you now, would you have him as
wise as your self, young men will have their follies, witness my charge
Leander; who has gone and thrown away himself at a stranger rate then your Son.
I would fain know if you were not once young your self; yes I warrant you, and
had your frailties.


Th. Yes, but they never cost me any thing; a man may be as frail and as wicked
as he please, if it cost him nothing.


Scap. Alas he was so in Love with the young wench, that if he had not had her,
he must have certainly hanged himself;


Sh. Must! why he had already done it, But that I came very seasonably and cut
the rope.


Th. Did thou cut the rope, Dog? 'Ile Murder thee for that thou should
have let him hang.


Scap. Besides, her Kindred surprised him with her, and forced him to marry her.


Th. Then should he have presently gone, and protested against the Violence at
a Notaries.


Scap. O Lord Sir, he scorned that.


Th. Then might I easily have disanulled the Martiage.


Scap. Disanul the marriage.


Th. Yes.


Scap. You shall not break the marriage.


Th. Shall not I break it?


Scap. No.


Th. What shall not I claim the privilege of a Father, and have the
Satisfaction for the violence done to my Son?


Scap. It Is a thing he will never consent to.


Th. He will not consent to!


Scap. No. Would you have him confess he was hectored into any thing, that is
to declare himself a Coward: Oh fie Sir, one that has Honor of being your Son,
can never do such a thing.


Th. Pish, ta^k not to me of Honor, he shall do it or be dis-inherited.


Scap. Who shall dis-inherit him?


Th. That will I Sir.


Scap. You dis-inherit him! very good.


Th. How very good?


Scap. You shall not dis-inherit him.


Th. Shall not I dis-inherit him?


Scap. No.


Th. No!


Scap. No.


Th. Sir, you are very merry; I shall not disinherit my Son?


Scap. No I tell you.


Th. Pray who shall hinder me?


Scap. Alas Sir, your own self Sir; your own self.


Th. I my self?


Scap. Yes Sir, for you can never have the Heart to do it.


Th. You shall find I can Sir.


Scap. Come you deceive your self, Fatherly affection must show it self, it
must, it must; do not I know you were ever tender hearted.


Th. You Are mistaken Sir, You Are mistaken: -- Pish, why do I spend my time in
tittle tattle with this Idle fellow? -- Hang-dog go find out my rake-hell --
[to Shift. whilst I go to my Brother Gripe and Inform him of my misfortune.


Scap. In the mean time if I can do you any service. --


Th. Oh! I thank you Sir, I thank you. --


[Exit Thrift. Shift. I must confess thou art a brave Fellow, and our affairs
begin to be in a better posture -- but the money, the money -- we are
abominable poor, and my Master has lean Vigilant dunns that torment him more
than an old Mother does a poor Gallant, when she solicits a maintenance for her
discarded Daughter.


Scap. Your money shall be my next care -- let me see, I want a fellow to --
Can thou not Counterfeit a roaring Bully of Alsatia? -- Stalk -- look big --
very well. Follow me, I have ways to disguise thy voice and countenance.


Sh. Pray take a little care and lay your plot so that I may not act the Bully
all ways, I would not be beaten like a Bully.


Scap. We Will share the danger, we will share the danger.


Exeunt. ACT II.
SCENE I.
Enter Thrifty and Gripe. Gr. SIr, what you tell me concerning your Son, has
strangely frustrated our Designs.


Thr. Sir, trouble not your self about my Son, I have undertaken to remove all
Obstacles, which is the business I am so vigorously in pursuit of.


Gr. In troth, Sir, I Will tell you what I say to you, The Education of Children
after the getting of them, ought to be the nearest Concern of a Father: And had
you tutored your Son with that Care and Duty incumbent on you, he never could
fo slightly have forfeited his.


Thr. Sir, to return you a Sentence for your Sentence. Those that are so quick
to Censure and condemn the Conduct of others, ought first to take Care that all
be well at home.


Gr. Why Mr. Thrifty, have you heard any thing concerning my Son?


Thr. It may be I have, and it may be worse than of my own.


Gr. What is it I pray? My Son?


Thr. Even your own Scapin told it me, and you may hear it from him or some
body else: For my part, I am your Friend, and would not willingly be the
Messenger of ill news to one that I think so to me: Your Servant: I must hasten
to my Council to advise what is to be done in this Case. God-bu'y till I see you
again.


[Ex. Thrifty. Gr. Worse than his Son! For my part I cannot imagine how; For a
Son to marry impudently without the Consent of his Father, is as great an
Offense as can be imagined I take it: But yonder he comes.


Enter Leander. Leand. Oh my Dear Father, how Joyful am I to see you safely
returned. Welcome as the Blessing which I am now craving will be.


Gr. Not so fast Friend'a mine, soft and fair goes far Sir. You are my Son, as
I take it.


Leand. What do you mean Sir?


Gr. Stand still, and let me look ye in the Face.


Leand. How must I stand Sir?


Gr. Look upon me with both Eyes*


Leand. Well Sir I do.


Gr. What Is the meaning of this Report?


Leand. Report, Sir?


Gr. Yes Report Sir, I speak English as I take it, What is it that you have done
in my absence?


Leand. What is it Sir which you would have had me done?


Gr. I do not ask you what I would have had you done; but what you have done.


Leand. Who I Sir? Why I have done nothing at all, not I Sir.


Gr. Nothing at all! (Leand.) No Sir,


Gr. You have no Impudence to speak on.


Leand. Sir, I have the Confidence that becomes a Man, and my Innocence.


Gr. Very well, But Scapin, do you mark me young man, Scapin has told me some
tales of your Behavior?


Leand. Scapin!


Gr. Oh have I caught you? That name makes ye blush does it? It Is well you have
some Grace left.


Leand. Has he said any thing concerning me?


Gr. That shall be examined anon. In the mean while get you home do you hear. And
stay till my return; But look to it, if thou haft done any thing to dishonor
me, never think to come within my Doors, or see my Face more; but expect to be
as miserable as thy folly and poverty can make thee.

[Exit. Gr.
Leand. Very fine: I am in a hopeful Condition. This Rascal has betrayed my
marriage and undone me: Now there is no way left but to turn Outlaw, and live
by rapine: and to set my hand in; the first thing shall be to Cut the throat of
that perfidious Pick-thank Dog that has ruined me.


Enter Oct. and Scapin. Oct. Dear Scapin, how infinitely am I obliged to thee
for thy Care!


Leand, Yonder he comes: I Am overjoyed to see you good Mr. Dog!


Scap. Sir your most humble Servant, You honor me too far.


Leand. You act an ill fools part, But I shall teach you.


Scap. Sir.


Oct, Hold Leander.


Leand. No, Octavian, I Will make him confess the Treachery he has committed; yes
Varlet Dog, I know the trick you have played me: you thought perhaps no body
would have told me. But i will make you confess it, or I Will run my Sword in your
Guts.


Scap. Oh Sir, Sir, would you have the heart to do such a thing? have I done
you any Injury Sir?


Leand. Yes Rascal that you have, and I Will make you own it too, or I Will swing
it out of your already tan'd thick hide.


[Beats him] Scap. The Devil's in it, Lord Sir, what do you mean? Nay good Mr.
Leander, pray Mr. Leander; Squire Leander -- As I hope to be saved --


Oct, Prithee be quiet: for shame enough: --


[Interposeth] Scap. Well Sir, I confess indeed that --


Leand. What! speak Rogue.


Scap. About two Months ago you may remember, a Maid Servant dyed in the
house. --


Leand. What of all that?


Scap. Nay Sir, if I confess you must not be angry.


Leand. Well go on.


Scap. 'Twas said she dyed for love of me Sir; But let that pass.


Leand. Death, you trifling Buffoon;


Scap. About a week after her death, I dreft my self up like her Ghost, and
went into Madam Lucia your Mistresses Chamber, where she lay half in half out
of bed, with her woman by her, reading an ungodly Play-book,


Leand. And was it your Impuden^e did that?


Scap. They both believe it was a Ghost to this hour. But it was my self played
the Goblin to fright her from the Scurvy Custom of lying awake at those
unseasonable hours, hearing filthy Plays when she had never said her Prayers.


Leand. I shall remember you for all in time, and place; But come to the point,
and tell me what thou have said to my Father.


Scap. To you Father? I have not so much as seen him since his return, and if
you would ask him he will tell you so himself.


Leand. Yes he has told me himself, and told me all thou have said to him!


Scap. With your good leave Sir, then he ly'd, I beg your pardon I mean he was
mistaken.


[Enter Sly] Sly. Oh Sir, I bring you the most unhappy news.


Leand. What Is the matter?


Sly. Your Mistress Sir, is yonder arrested in an Action of 200 l. They say
it is a debt she left unpaid at London; in the have of her escape hither to
Dover, and if you do not raise money within this two hours to discharge her,
She Will be hurried to prison.


Leand. Within this two hours?


Sly. Yes Sir, within this two hours.


Leand. Ah my poor Scapin, I want thy assistance.


[ Scapin walks about Surlily] Scap. Ah my poor Scapin! Now I Am your poor
Scapin now you have need of me.


Leand. No more* I pardon thee all that thou have done, and worse if thou art
guilty of it.


Scap. No no, never pardon me, run your Sword in my Guts, you will do better to
Murder me.


Leand. For Heaven's sake; think no more upon that, but study now to assist me.


Oct. You must do something for him.


Scap. Yes to have my bones broken for my pains.


Leand. Would you leave me Scapin in this severe extremity!


Scap. To put such an affront upon me as you did;


Leand. I wronged thee I confess.


Scap. To use me like a Scoundrel, a Villain, a Rascal, to threaten to run your
Sword in my Guts.


Leand. I cry thy Mercy withal my Heart, and if thou will have me throw my
self at thy Feet, I Will do it.


Oct. Faith Scapin you must, you cannot but yield.


Scap. Well then; But do you mark me Sir, another time better words and gentler
blows.


Leand. Will you promise to mind my business?


Scap. As I see convenient, Care shall be taken,


Leand. But the time you know is short.


Scap. Pray Sir, don't be so troublesome: How much money is it you want?


Leand. Two hundred pounds. -- (Scap.) And you? -- (Oct.) As much.


Scap. No more to be said. It shall be done; For you the Contrivance is laid
already; and for your Father though he be covetous to the last degree, Yet
thanks be to Heaven he is but a shallow person, To Leander. his parts are not
extraordinary, do not take it ill Sir, for you have no resemblance of him, But
that you are very like him; Begone I see Octavians Father coming, I Will begin with
him.

[Exeunt Oct. and Leand. [ Enter Thrifty] Here he comes mumbling and chewing
the Cud to prove himself a clean Beast.


Thr. Oh audacious Boy, to commit so insolent a Crime, and plunge himself into
such a mischief!


Scap. Sir, your humble Servant.


Thr. How do you Scapin?


Scap. What, you are ruminating on your Sons rash Action.


Thr. Have I not reason to be troubled?


Scap. The life of man is full of troubles, that is the truth on it; But your
Philosopher is always prepared I remember an Excellent Proverb of the
Ancients, very fit for your Case.


Thr. What Is that?


Scap. Pray mind it, 'twill do ye a World of good.


Thr. What is it I ask you?


Scap. Why; When the Master of a Family shall be absent any considerable time
from his home or Mansion, he ought rationally, gravely, wisely, and
Philosophically, to revolve within his mind all the concurrent Circumstances,
that may during the Interval conspire to the Conjunction of those misfortunes,
and troublesome accidents, that may intervene upon the said absence, and the
interruption of his Oeconomical inspection, into the remissness, negligences,
frailties, and huge and perilous Errors, which his Substitutes, Servants, or
Trustees, may be capable of, or liable and obnoxious unto, which may arise from
the imperfection and corruptness of ingenerated Natures, or the taint and
contagion of corrupted Education, whereby the Fountainhead of Man's
Disposition becomes muddy, and all the Streams of his Manners and Conversation
run consequently defiled, and impure: These things premised, and
fore-considered, arm the said prudent Philosophical Pater Familias, to find his
House laid waste, his Wife murdered, his Daughters deflowred, his Sons hanged:
Cum multis aliis qua nunc perscribere longum est* and to th^nk Heaven it is no
worse too: Do You mark, Sir?


Thr. S'deat^! Is all this a Proverb?


Scap. Ay, and the best Proverb, and the wisest in the World: Good Sir, get it
by heart: It Will do ye the greatest good imaginable; and don't trouble your
self: I Will repeat it to you, till you have gotten it by heart.


Thr. No, I thank you, Sir, I Will have none on it.


Scap. Pray do; you will like it better next time; hear it once more, I say --
When the Master of a --


Thr. Hold, hold, I have better thoughts of my own; I Am going to my Lawyer;
I Will null the Marriage.


Scap. Going to Law! Are ye mad to venture your self among Lawyers? Do you not
see every day how the Spunges suck poor Clyents, and with a company of foolish,
non-sensical terms, and knavish tricks, undo the Nation: No, you shall take
another way.


Thr. You have reason, if there were any other way.


Scap. Come, I have found one. The truth is, I have a great compassion for your
grief; I cannot when I see tender Fathers afflicted for their Sons
miscarriages, but have bowels for 'em; I have much ado to refrain weeping for
you.


Thr. Truly my Case is sad, very sad.


Scap. So it is; tears will burst out; I have a great respect for your person.


[Counterfeits weeping. Thr. Thank you with all my heart; in troth we should
have a fellow-feeling.


Scap. Ay, so we should; I assure you there is not a person in the World whom I
respect more than the Noble Mr. Thrifty.


Thr. Thou art honest Scapin. Have done, have done.


Scap. Sir, Your most humble Servant.


Thr. But what is your way?


Scap. Why, In brief I have been with the Brother of her whom your wicked Son
has Married.


Thr. What is he?


Scap. A most outrageous roaring Fellow, with a down-hanging Look, contracted
Brow, with a swelled red Face enflamed with Brandy; one that frowns, puffs, and
looks big at all Mankind, roars out Oaths* and bellows out Curses enough in a
Day, to serve a Garrison a Week; bred up in blood and rapine, used to slaughter
from his youth upwards; one that makes no more conscience of killing a Man,
than cracking of a Lowse; he has killed sixteen, four for taking the Wall of
him; five for looking too big upon him; two he shot pissing against the Wall:
In short, he is the most dreadful of all the Race of Bullies.


Thr. Heaven! How do I tremble at the Description? But what is this to my
Business?


Scap. Why, He (as most Bullies are) is in want, and I have brought him, by
threatening him with all the Courses of Law, all the assistance of your Friends,
and your great Purse, (in which I ventured my life ten times, for so often he
drew and run at me) yet, I say, at last I have made him hearken to a
Composition, and to null the Marriage for a sum of Money.


Thr. Thanks, dear Scapin; but what sum?


Scap. Faith, He was damnably unreasonable at first, and gad I told him so very
roundly.


Thr. A Pox on him, what did he ask?


Scap. Ask? Hang him, why he asked 500 l.


Thr. Ouns and Heart, 500 l. Five hundred Devils take him, -- and fry and
frigassee the Dog; does he take me for a Madman?


Scap. Why, so I said; and after much argument I brought him to this: Dammee,
says he, I am going to the Army, and I must have Two good Horses for my self,
for fear one should die; and those will cost at least Threescore Guinea's.


Thr. Hang him Rogue! Why should he have two Horses? But I care not if I give
Threescore Guinea's to be rid of this Affair.


Scap. Then, says he, my Pistols, Saddle, Hose, Cloth, and all, will cost
Twenty more.


Thr. Why, That Is Fourscore.


Scap. Well reckoned; faith, this Arithmatick is a fine Art: Then I must have
One for my Boy, will cost Twenty more.


Thr. Oh the Devil! Confounded Dog! Let him go and be damned, I Will give him
nothing.


Scap. Sir.


Thr. Not a Sous, damned Rascal, let him turn Foot-Souldier and be hang^d.


Scap. He has a Man besides; Would you have him go a Foot?


Thr. Ay, and his Master too, I Will have nothing to do with him.


Scap. Well, You are resolved to spend twice as much at Doctors Commons, you
are, you will stand out for such a Sum as this; do.


Thr. Ha^! Oh damned unconscionable Rascal! well if i ^must be so. Let him have
the other twenty.


Scap. Twenty! why it comes to forty.


Thr. No I Will have nothing to do in it. Oh a Coveteous Rogue! I wonder he is
not ashamed to be so Covetous.


Scap. Why this is nothing to the Charge at Doctors Commons, and though her
Brother has no Money, she has an Uncle able to defend her.


Thr. Oh Eternal Rogue! well I must do it, the Devils in him I think!


Scap. Then says he, I must carry into France money to buy a Mule to carry --


Thr. Let him to the Devil with his Mule, I Will appeal to the Judges.


Scap. Nay good Sir, think a little.


Thr. No, I Will do nothing.


Scap. Sir, Sir, but one little Mule?


Thr. No not so much as an Ass!


Scap. Consider.


Thr. I will not consider, I Will go to Law.


Scap. I am sure if you go to Law you do not consider the Appeals, Degrees of
Jurisdiction, the intricate proceedings, the Knaveries, the Craving of so many
Ravenous Animals that will prey upon you, Villainous Harpies! Promoters,
Tipstaves, and the like; None of which but will puff away the clearest right in
the World for a Bribe; on the other side the Proctor shall side with your
Adversary, And sell your cause for ready Money; Your Advocate shall be gained
the same way, And shall not be found when your cause is to be heard: Law is a
torment of all torments.


Thr. That Is true: Why what does the damned Rogue -- reckon for his Mule?


Scap. Why for Horses, Furniture, Mule, and to pay some Scores that are due to
his Landlady, he demands and will have two hundred pounds.


Th. Come, come, let us go to Law.


Thr. walks up and down in a great heat. Scap. Do but reflect upon --


Th. I Will go to Law?


Scap. Do not plunge your self.


Thr. To Law I Will tell you?


Scap. Why there is for Procuration, Presentation, Council, Productions,
Proctors, Attendance, and scribbling vast Volumes of Interrogatories,
Depositions, and Articles, Consultations and Pleadings of Doctors, for the
Register, Substitute, Judgments, Signings -- Expedition Fees, besides the vast
Presents to them and their Wives. Hanged, the Fellow is out of Employment, give
him the money, give him it I say.


Thr. What, two hundred pounds!


Scap. Ay, ay, why you will gain 150 l. by it, I have summed it up; I say give it
him* I, faith do.


Thr. What 200 l.


Scap. Ay, besides you never think how they will rail at you in pleading, tell all
your Fornications, Bastardings, and Commutings in their Courts,


Thr. I defy 'em, let 'em tell of my whoring, it is the fashion.


Scap. Peace, Here Is the Brother.


Thr. Oh Heaven! what shall I do.


Enter Shift disguised like a Bully. Sh. Damme, where is this confounded Dog,
this Father of Octavian? Null the Marriage: By all the Honor of my Ancestors
I Will chine the Villain.


Thr. Oh, Oh!


[Hides himself behind Scapin] Scap. He cares not Sir, He Will not give the 200 l.


Sh. By Heaven, he shall be Worms-meat within these two hours.


Scap. Sir, he has Courage, he fears you not.


Th. You lie, I have not Courage, I do fear him mortally.


Sh. He! he! Ounds he! would all his Family were in him, I Would cut off Root and
Branch: Dishonor my Sister! This in his Guts: What Fellow's that? Hah!


Scap. Not he, Sir.


Sh. Nor none of his Friends?


Th. No, Sir: Hang him, I am his mortal Enemy.


Sh. Art thou the Enemy of that Rascal.


Th. Oh! ay, hang him -- Oh damned Bully!


(Aside. Sh. Give me thy hand, old Boy, the next Sun shall not see the impudent
Rascal alive.


Scap. He Will muster up all his Relations against you.


Th. Do not provoke him, Scapin.


Sh. Would they were all here: Ha! hah! hah! Here I had one through the Lungs;
there another into the Heart; Ha! there another into the Guts: Ah Rogues! there
I was with you. Hah -- hah!


He foyns every way with his Sword. Scap. Hold Sir, we are none of your Enemies.


Sh. No, but I will find the Villains out while my Blood is up; I will destroy
the whole Family. Ha, ha, -- hah!


( Ex. Shift. Th. Here Scapin, I have two hundred Guinea's about me, take them,
No more to be said, Let me never see his face again, take them I say, This is
the Devil.


Scap. Will you not give them him your self?


Th. No, no! I will never see him more. I shall not recover this these three
Months. See the business done, I trust in thee, Honest Scapin: I must repose
somewhere; I am mightily out of Order -- A plague on all Bullies I say.


[ Exit Thrifty. Scap. So there is one dispatched, I must now find out Gripe; He Is
here, how Heaven brings them into my Nets one after another!


Enter Gripe. Scap. Oh Heaven! Unlookt for misfortune, poor Mr. Gripe, what
will thou do


[walks about distractedly Grip. What Is that he says of me?


Scap. Is there no body can tell me News of Mr. Gripe?


Grip. Who Is there Scapin!


Scap. How I run up and down, to find him to ^^ purpose! Oh! Sir, is there no
way to hear of Mr. Gripe?


Grip. Art thou blind, I have been just under thy Nose this hour.


Scap. Sir, --


Grip. What Is the matter?


Scap. Oh! Sir your Son --


Grip. Hah, my Son --


Scap. Is fallen into the strangest misfortune in the World.


Grip. What is it --


Scap. I met him a while ago, disordered for something you had said to him,
wherein you very idly made use of my Name. And seeking to divert his
Melancholy, we went to walk upon the Pier, amongst other things he took
particular Notice of a New Caper in her full Trim, the Captain invited us
aboard, and gave us the handsome^t Collation I ever met with.


Grip. Well, and where is the disaster of all this?


Scap. While we were eating he put to Sea; and when we were at a good distance
from the Shore, He discovered himself to be an English Renegade that was
entertained in the Dutch Service; And sent me off in his Longboat to tell you,
That if you do not forthwith send him two hundred pounds, he will carry away your
Son Prisoner; Nay, for ought I know he may carry him a Slave to Algier.


Gr. How in the Devils name? 200 l!


Sca. Yes Sir, and more then that, he has allowed me but an hours time; you
must advise quickly what course to take to save an only Son.


Gr. What a Devil had he to do a Shipboard? -- Run quickly Scapin, and tell the
Villain I Will send my Lord Chief Justices Warrant after him.


Sca. Oh law! his Warrant in the open Sea, do you think Pirates are Fools?


Gr. In The Devils name what business had he a Shipboard?


Sca. There is an unlucky Fate that often hurries Men to mischief, Sir.


Gr. Scapin thou must now act the part of a faithful Servant.


Sca. As how, Sir?


Gr. Thou must go bid the Pyrate send me my Son and stay as a pledge in his
room, till I can raise the Money.


Sca. Alas Sir, think you the Captain has so little wit as to accept of such a
poor Rascally fellow as I am, instead of your Son?


Gr. What a Devil did he do a Shipboard?


Sca. Do You remember, Sir, that you have but two hours time.


Gr. Thou say he demands. --


Sca. 200 l.


Gr. 200 l. Has the fellow no Conscience?


Sca. O law! the Conscience of a Pyrate, why very few lawful Captains have any.


Gr. Has he no reason neither? Does he know what the Sum of 200 l. is.


Sca. Yes Sir, Tarpawlins are a sort of People that understand Money, though
they have no great acquaintance with Sense. But for Heavens sake dispatch.


Gr. Here take the key of my Compting House.


Sca. So.


Gr. And open it.


Scap. Very good.


Gr. In the left hand Window lies the Key of my Garret; go take all the Clo^ths
that are in the great Cheft, and sell 'em to the Brok^rs, to redeem my Son.


Scap. Sir, You Are mad; I shall not get Fifty Shillings for all that is there, and
you know how I am ^treightned for time.


Gr. But what ^ Devil did he do a Shipboard?


Scap. Let Shipboard alone, and consider, Sir, your Son. But Heaven is my
witness, I have done for him as much as was possible, and if he be not redeemed,
he may thank his Father's kindness.


Gr. Well, Sir, I ll go see if I can raise the Money. Was it not ninescore
Pounds you spoke of?


Scap. No, 200 l.


Gr. What, 200 l. Dutch, ha?


Scap. No, Sir, I mean English Money, 200 l. sterling.


Gr. In The Devil's Name, what business had he a Shipboard? Confounded
Shipboard.


Scap. This Shipboard sticks in his Stomach.


Gr. Hold Scapin, I remember I received the very Sum just now in Gold, but did
not think I should have parted with it so soon.

He presents Scapin his Purse, but will not let it go, and in his
transportments, pulls his Arm to and fro, whilst Scapin reaches at it.


Scap. Ay, Sir.


Gr. But tell the Captain, he is a Son of a Whore.


Scap. Yes, Sir.


Gr. A Dogbolt.


Scap. I shall, Sir.


Gr. A Thief, a Robber, and that he forces me to pay him 200 l. contrary to all
Law or equity.


Scap. Nay, let me alone with him.


Gr. That I will never forgive him, dead or alive.


Scap. Very good.


Gr. And that if ever I light on him, I Will murder him privately, and feed Dogs
with him.


Scap. Right, Sir.


[He puts up his Purse, and is going away. Gr. Now make have, and go redeem my
Son.


Scap. Ay, but do you hear, Sir? Where Is the Money?


Gr. Did I not give it thee?


Scap. Indeed, Sir, you made me believe you would, but you forgot, and put it
up in your Pocket again.


Gr. Ha -- my griefs and fears for my Son make me do I know not what.


Scap. Ay, Sir, I see it does indeed.


Gr. What a Devil did he do a Shipboard? -- Damned Pyrate, damned Renegade,
all the Devils in Hell pursue thee.


Scap. How easily a Miser swallows a Load, and how difficultly he disgorges a
Grain? But I Will not leave him so, he is like to pay in other Coin, for telling
Tales of me to his Son.


Enter Oct. and Leander. Scap. Well, Sir, I have succeeded in your Business,
there is 200 l. which I have squeezed out of your Father.


to Octavian. Oct. Triumphant Scapin.


Scap. But for you I can do nothing --


[ To Leander. Lea. Then may I go hang my self. Friends both adieu.


Scap. Do You hear, do you hear; the Devil has no such necessity for you yet, that
you need ride Post. With much ado I Have got your Business done too.


Lea. Is It possible?


Scap. But on condition that you permit me to revenge my self on your Father,
for the Trick he has served me.


Lea. With all my heart, at thy own discretion, good honest Scapin.


Scap. Hold your hand, there is 200 l.


Lea. My thanks are too many to pay now; Farewell dear Son of Mercury, and be
prosperous.


Scap. Gramercy Pupil: Hence we gather, Give Son the Money, hang up Father.


The End of the Second Act.
Act Third.
Scene First.
Enter Lucia and Clara. Lucia. WAS ever such a Trick played, for us to run away
from our Governesses, where our careful Fathers had placed us, to follow a
couple of young Gentlemen, only because they said they loved us, I think 'twas
a very noble Enterprise? I am afraid the good fortune we shall get by it, will
very hardly recompense the reputation we have lost by it.


Clar. Our greatest satisfaction is, that they are Men of fashion and credit,
and for my part I long ago resolved not to Marry any other, nor such a one
neither, till I had a perfect confirmation of his Love; and 'twas an assurance
of Octavian's that brought me hither.


Lucia. I must confess, I had no less a sense of the Faith and Honor of
Leander.


Clar. But seems it not wonderful, that the Circumstances of our Fortune should
be so near allied, and our selves so much Strangers. Besides, if I mistake not,
I see something in Leander, so much resembling a Brother of mine, of the same
Name, that did not the time since I saw him make me fearful, I should be often
apt to call him so.


Lucia. I have a Brother too, whose Name's Octavian, bred in Italy, and just as
my Father took his Voyage, returned home; not knowing where to find me, I
believe is the reason I have not seen him yet: But if I deceive not my self,
there is something in your Octavian, that extremely refreshes my memory of him.


Clar. I wish we might be so happy, as we are inclined to hope; but there is a
strange blind side in our Natures, which always makes us apt to believe what we
most earnestly desire.


Lucia. The worst at last, is but to be forsaken by our Fathers; and for my
part, I had rather lose an old Father than a young Lover, when I may with
reputation keep him, and secure my self against the Imposition of fatherly
Authority.


Clar. How insufferable it is to be sacrificed to the Arms of a nauseous
Blockhead, that has no other sense than to eat and drink when it is provided for
him, rise in the morning, and go to Bed at night, and with much ado be
persuaded to keep himself clean.


Lucia. A thing of mere Flesh and Blood, and that of the worst sort too, with a
squinting meager hang-Dog Countenance, that looks as if he always wanted
Physic for the Worms.


Clar. Yet such their silly Parents are generally most indulgent to, like Apes,
never so well pleased, as when they are fondling with their ugly Issue.


Lucia. Twenty to one, but to some such charming Creatures, our careful Fathers
had designed us.


Clar. Parents think they do their Daughters the greatest kindness in the
World, when they get them Fools for their Husbands, and yet are very apt to
take it ill, if they make the right use of them.


Lucia. I Would no more be bound to spend my days in Marriage to a Fool, because I
might rule him, than I would always ride an Ass, because the Creature was
gentle.


Clar. See, here is Scapin, as full of Designs and Affairs, as a Callow
Statesman at a Treaty of Peace.


Scap. Ladies!


Clar. Oh Monsieur Scapin! W^^t's the reason you have been such a Stranger of
late?


Scap. Why, faith Ladies, Business, Business, has taken up my time, and truly I
love an active life, love my Business extremely.


Lucia. Methinks tho, this should be a difficult place for a Man of your
Excellencies to find employment in?


Scap. Why, faith Madam, I^m never shy to my Friends: My Business is, in short,
like that of all other Men of Business, diligently contriving how to play the
Knave and Cheat, to get an honest Livelihood.


Clar. Certainly, Men of Wit and Parts need never be driven to indirect Courses?


Scap. Oh Madam! Wit and Honesty, like Oil and Vinegar, with much ado mingled
together, give a Relish to a good Fortune, and pass well enough for Sauce, but
are very thin Fare of themselves. No, give me your Knave, your thorow-pac't
Knave; hang his Wit, so he be but Rogue enough.


Lucia. You Are grown very much out of humor with Wit, Scapin* I hope, yours has
done you no prejudice of late?


Scap. No, Madam, Your Men of Wit are good for nothing, dull, lazy, restive
Snails; it is your undertaking, impudent, pushing Fool, that commands his
Fortune.


Clar. You are very plain and open in this Proceeding, whatever you are in
others.


Scap. Dame Fortune, like most others of the Female Sex, (I speak all this with
respect to your Ladyship) is generally most Indulgent to the nimble melted
Block-Heads, Men of Wit are not for her turn, even too thoughtful when they
should be Active; why who beleives any man of wit to have so much as Courage.
No Ladies, if you have any Friends that hope to raise themselves, advise them to
be as much fools as they can, and they will near want Patrons: And for honesty, if
your Ladyships think fit to retire a little further; you shall see me perform
upon a Gentleman that is coming this way.


Clara. Prithee Lucia, let us Retreat a little and take this opportunity of
some divertisement: which has been very scarce here hitherto.


Enter Shift with a Sack. Scap. Oh Shift!


Shift. Speak not too loud, my Masters coming.


Scap. I am glad on it, I shall teach him to betray the secrets of his Friend,
if any man puts a trick upon me without return, may I loose this Nose with the
Po^, without the pleasure of getting it:


Sh. I wonder at thy Valor, thou art continually venturing that body of thine:
to the Indignity of bruises and indecent Bastinadoes.


Scap. Difficulties in Adventures makes them pleasant when accomplished


Sh. But your Adventures how Comical soever in the beginning, are sure to be
Tragical in the end.


Scap. It Is no matter, I hate your pusillanimous Spirit; Revenge and Leachery
are never so pleasant as when you venture hard for them, begone: here comes my
Man.

Enter Gripe. Oh Sir, Sir, shift for your self, quickly Sir, quickly Sir, for
Heavens sake.


Gr. What Is the matter Man?


Scap. Heaven! is this a time to ask questions? will you be Murdered instantly?
I am afraid you will be killed within these two Minutes.


Gr. Mercy on me! killed for what?


Scap. They are every where looking out for you.


Gr. Who.? Who?


Scap. The Brother of her whom your Son has married, he is A Captain of a
Privatere, who has all sorts of Rogues, English, Scotch, Welsh, Irish, French,
under his command; and all lying in wait now, or searching for you to kill you,
because you would Null the Marriage; they run-up and down, crying where is the
Rogue Gripe, where is the Dog, where is the Slave Gripe; they watch for you so
narrowly that there is no getting home to your Hou^e.


Gr. Oh Scapin! what shall I do? what will become of me?


Scap. Nay Heaven knows, but if you come within their reach they will De -- wit
you, they will tear you in pieces: hark.


Gr. Oh Lord!


Scap. Hum it is none of them?


Gr. Can thou find no way for my Escape, dear Scapin?


Scap. I think I have found one.


Gr. Good Scapin, show thy self a man now.


Scap. I shall venture being most immoderately beaten.


Gr. Dear Scapin, do; I will Reward thee bounteously: I Will give thee this Suit
when I have worn it 8 or 9 Months longer.


Scap. Listen! who are these?


Gr. God forgive me, Lord have Mercy upon us.


Scap. No, there is no body; look, if you will save your life go into this Sack
presently.


Gr. Oh! whose there?


Scap. No body: get into the Sack and stir not, what ever happens, I Will carry
you as a Bundle of Goods through all your Enemies to the Majors house, or the
Castle?


Gr. An Admirable Invention, Oh! Lord quick.


Gets into the Sack. Scap. Yes, it is an Excellent Invention; if you knew all,
keep in your Head, Oh here is a Rogue coming to look for you.

Scapin counterfeits a Welshman. Do you hear, I pray you, where is Leander's
Fathers, look you.

In his own Voice. How should I know; what would you have with him -- [ (...)
close.

Have with him, look you! her has no creat pus'ness, but her would have
satisfactions and reparations, look you, for Credits and Honors, by St. Tavy
he shall not put the Injuries and Affronts upon my Captains, look you now, Sir,

In his own Voice. He Affront the Captain, he meddles with no Man.

(...) Sir, look you, and her will give you beatings and chastisements, for
your Contradictions when hur Wells ploods up, look you, and hur will Cudgel
your Packs and your Nottles for it, take you that pray you now.

His own Voice, Beat the Sack. Hold, hold, will you Murder me. I know not where
he is, not I.

Hur will teach saw^y Iacks how they profook Hur Welse ploods and hur Chollers:
and for the old Rogue hur will have his Guts and his plood ^ook you Sir, or hur
will never wear Leek upon St. Taffyes day more, look you.

His own Voice. Oh! He has mawl'd me, a damned Welsh Rogue.


Gr. You? The Blows fell upon my Shoulders: Oh! Oh!


Scap. 'Twas only the end of the Stick fell on you, the main substantial part
of the Cudgel lighted on me.


Gr. Why did you not stand further off?


Scap. Peace -- Here Is another Rogue.


In a Lancashire Dialect. Scap. Yaw Fellee, wi'th Sack theere, done yaw know
whear th'a^d Rascast Graip is?

Not I; but here is no Rascal.

Yaw Leen, yaw Dogue, yaw knawn weel eenuh whear he is, an yawden teel, and
that he is a foo Rascatt as any is in aw the Tawn; I's tell a that by'r Lady.

Not I, Sir, I know neither, Sir, not I.

By the Mess, an ay tack thee in hont, ay's raddle th'bones on thee, ay's
keeble thee to some tune.

Me, Sir? I don't understand ye.

Why, Th'awrt his Mon, thaw Hobble, I^ll snite the Nase o'thee.

Hold, hold, Sir, what would you have with him?

Why, I mun knock him dawne with my Kibbo, the first bawt to the grawnt, and
then I mun beat him aw to pap by the Mess, and after Ay mun cut off the Lugs
and Naes on en, and Ay wot, he will be a pratty swatley Fellee, bawt Lugs and
Naes.

Why, truly Sir, I know not where he is, but he went down that Lane.

This Lone, sayn ye? Ays find him by'r Lady, an he be above grawnt.

So, he is gone, a damned Lancashire Rascal.


Gr. Oh good Scapin! go on quickly. Hold, here is another.


[ Gr. pops in his Head. In an Irish Tone. Do thou hear Sack-man? I pridee
fare is de dam Dog Gripe?

His own Voice. Why, What Is that to you? What know I.

Fat's dat to me Joy? By my soul Joy, I will lay a great Blow upon thy Pate,
and de Devil take me, but I will make thee know fare he is indeed* or I Will beat
upon till thou do know, by my salvation indeed.

Scap. I Will not be beaten.

Now the Devil take me, I swear by him that made me, if thou do not tell fare
is Gripe, but I will beat thy Father's Child very much indeed.

What would you have me do? I cannot tell where he is. But what would you have
with him?

Fat would I have wid him? By my soul, if I do see him, I will make Murder
upon him, for my Captain's sake.

Murder him? He ll not be murdered.

If I do lay my Eyes upon him, gad I will put my Sword into his Bowels, de
Devil take me indeed. Fat have dow in dat Sack? Joy, by my salvation I will
look into it.

But you shall not. What have you to do with it?

By my soul Joy, I will put my Rapier into it.


Gr. Oh! Oh!


Scap. Fa^t it does grunt, by my salvation; de Devil take me, I will see it
indeed.

You shall not see my Sack; I will defend it with my life.

Den I will make beat upon thy Body; take that, Joy, and that, and that, upon
my soul, and so I do take my leave Joy. [Beats him in the Sack.

A Plague on him, he is gone; he had almost killed me.


Gr. Oh! I can hold no longer; the Blows all fell on my Shoulders.


Scap. You cannot tell me; they fell on mine: Oh my Shoulders!


Gr. Yours? Oh my Shoulders!


Scap. Peace, they are a coming.


In a ^oarse Sea-man's Voice. ^here is the Dog? I^ll lay him on fore and aft,
swinge him with a Cat o^nine tails, Keel-hale, and then hang him at the Main
Yard.

In broken French-English. If dear be no more Men in England, I will kille him,
I will put my Rapire in his Body, and I will give him two tree push'e in de
gutte,

Here Scapin Acts a Number of them together. We mun go this way -- of the right
hand, no to the left hand -- lie close -- search every where -- by my
salvation, I will kill the dam Dog -- and we do catch en, we'll tear 'en in
pieces, an I do here he went thick way -- no, straight forward. Hold, here is
his Man, where is your Master -- Dam me, where? in Hell? speak -- hold, not so
furiously -- and you don't tell us where he is, we'll murder thee --

Do what you will, Gentlemen, I know not.

Lay him on thick, thwack him soundly.

Hold, hold, do what you will, I Will nere betray my Master.

Knock'en down, beat'en zoundly, to'en, at'en, at'en, at. [As he is going to
strike, Gripe peeps out, and Scapin takes to his heels. Gr. Oh Dog, Traitor,
Villain! Is this your Plot? Would you have murdered me, Rogue? Unheard of
Impudence. [ Enter Thrifty. Oh Brother Thrifty! You come to see me laden with
disgrace; the Villain Scapin has, as I am sensible now, cheated me of 200 l.
this beating brings all into my memory.


[Aside. Th. The impudent Varlet has gulled me of the same Sum?


Gr. Nor was he content to take my Money, but has abused me at that barbarous
rate, that I am ashamed to tell it; but he shall pay for it severely.


Th. But this is not all, Brother, on Misfortune is the forerunner of another:
Just now I received Letters from London, that both our Daughters have run away
from their Governesses, with two wild debaucht young Fellows, that they fell in
Love with.


Enter Lucia. and Clara. Luc. Was ever so malicious Impudence seen -- Hah --
Surely, if I mistake not; that should be my Father.


Cla. And the other mine, who Scapin has used thus.


Luc. Bless us! Returned, and we not know of it?


Cla. What will they say to find us here?


Luc. My dearest Father, Welcome to England.


Th. My Daughter Luce?


Luc. The same, Sir.


Gr. My Clara here too?


Cla. Yes, Sir, and happy to see your safe Arrival.


Th. What strange destiny has directed this happiness to us?


Enter Octavian. Gr. Hey day!


Th. Oh Son! I have a Wife for you.


Oct. Good Father, All your Propositions are vain; I must needs be free, and
tell you, I am engaged.


Th. Look you now; is not this very fine? Now I have a mind to be merry, and be
friends with you, you will not let me now, will you? I tell you, Mr. Gripe's
Daughter here --


Oct. I Will never marry Mr. Gripe's daughter, Sir, as long as I Live; No,
yonder is she that I must Love, and can never Entertain the thoughts of any
other.


Cla. Yes Octavian, I have at last met with my Father, and all our fears and
troubles are at an end.


Thr. Law ye now, you would be wiser than the Father that begot you, would you?
did not I always say you should marry Mr. Gripes daughter? But you do not know
your Sister Luce?


Oct. Unlooked for blessing, why she is my friend Leander's Wife!


Thr. How Leander's Wife!


Gr. What my Son Leander?


Oct. Yes, Sir, your Son Leander.


Gr. Indeed! well Brother Thrifty, it is true, the Boy was always a good natured
Boy. Well now am I so overjoyed, that I could laugh till I shook my shoulders,
but that I dare not they are so sore. But look here he comes.


Enter Leander. Lean. Sir, I beg your pardon, I fi^d my marriage is discovered;
nor would I indeed, have longer concealed it, this is my Wife, and l must own
her.


Gr. Brother Thrifty did you ever see the like, did you ever see the like? Ha?


Thr. Own her quoth a! why kiss her, kiss her, Man, oddsboddikins, when I was a
young fellow and was first married, I did nothing else for three months. O my
conscience I got my Boy


Octi. there, the first night before the Curtains were quite drawn!


Gr. Well, it is his Fathers nowne Child; Just so Brother was it with me upon my
Wedding day, I could not look upon my dear without blushing, but when we were a
Bed, Lord ha mercy upon us -- but I le say no more.


Lean. Is then my Father Reconciled to me.


Gr. Reconciled to thee, why I love thee at my heart man, at my heart, why it is
my Brother Thrifty's daughter, Mrs. L^ce, whom I always designed for thy Wife,
and that is thy Sister Clara married to Mr. Octa. there.


Lean. Octavian are we then Brothers? there is nothing that I could have rather
wished after the Completing of my happiness with my charming Lucia.


Thr. Come Sir, hang up your complements in the Hall at home, they are old and
out of fashion: Shift go to the Inn and bespeak a Supper may cost more Money
than I have ready to pay for it, for I am resolved to run in debt to night.


Sh. I shall obey your commands Sir.


Thr. Then do you hear, send out and muster up all the Fiddlers, Blind or not
Blind, Drunk or Sober) in the Town; let not so (much as the Roaster of Tunes,
with his cracked Cymbal in a Case, escape ye.


Gr. Well what would I give now for the fellow that sings the Song at my Lord
Mayors Feast, I my self would make an Epithalamium by way of Sonnet, and he
should set a Tune to it, 'twas the pretty'st he had last time.


Enter Sly. Sly. Oh Gentlemen here is the strangest accident fallen out.


Thr. What Is the matter.


Sly. Poor Scapin.


Gr. Ha! Rogue let him be hanged, I Will hang him my self.


Sly. Oh Sir, that trouble you may spare, for passing by a place where they
were building, a great stone fell upon his head and broke his Scull so, you may
see his Brains.


Thr. Where is he?


Sly. Yonder he comes.


Enter Scapin between two, his Head wrapped up in Linen as if he had been
wounded Scap. Oh me! Oh me! Gentlemen you see me, you see me in a sad
Condition, cut off like a Flower in the prime of my years: But yet I could not
dye without the pardon of those that I have wronged, yes Gentlemen I beseech
you to forgive me all the injuries that I have done; but more especially, I beg
of you Mr. Thrifty, and my good Master Mr. Gripe.


Thr. For my part, I pardon thee freely, go, and dye in peace.


Scap. But it is you Sir, I have most offended, by the inhumane Bastinadoes
which --


Gr. Prithee speak no more of it, I forgive thee too.


Scap. 'Twas a most wicked Insolence in me, that I should with Vile Crab-tree
Cudgel --


Gr. Pish, no more, I say I am Satisfied.


Scap. And now so near my death it is an unspeakable grief that I should dare to
lift my hand against --


Gr. Hol thy Peace, or dye quickly, I tell thee I have forgot All --


Scap. Alas! how good a man you are! But Sir, do you pardon me freely and from
the bottom of your Heart, those mercyless drub^ that --


Gr. Prithee speak no more of it. I forgive thee freely, here is my hand upon it.


[Pulls off his Cap. Scap. Oh! Sir, how much your Goodness Revives me!


Gr. Hows that! Friend take Notice I pardon thee, but it is upon Condition that
you are sure to dye!


Scap. Oh me! I begin to faint again.


Thr. Come, fie Brother, never let Revenge employ your thoughts now, forgive
him, forgive him without any Condition.


Gr. A dewce on it Brother, as I hope to be saved he beat me basely and
scurvily, never stir he did; But since you will have it so, I do forgive him.


Thr. Now then let us to supper, and in our mirth drown and forget all troubles.


Scap. Ay, and let them carry me to the Lower End of the Table.

Where in my Chair of State, I Will sit at ease,
And eat and drink, that I may dye in Peace.

A Dance. The End.
Epilogue.
Spoken by Mrs. Mary Lee, when she was out of Humor. HOv little do you guess
what I Am to say?
I Am not to ask you how like Farce or Play;
For you must know, I Have other business now:
It is to tell ye, Sparks, how we like you.
How happy were we when in humble guise,
You came with honest Hearts and harmless Eyes:
Sat without Noise and Tumult in the Pit:
Oh what a precious Jewel then was Wit!
Tho now it is grown so common, let me dye,
Gentlemen scorn to keep it company.
Indulgent Nature has too bounteous been,
Your too much Plenty is become your Sin.
Time was ye were as meek as now you are proud,
Did not in cursed Cabals of Critics crowd,
Nor thought it witty to be very loud;
But came to see the Follies you would shun:
Tho now so fondly Antic here you are grown.
Y^invert the Stages purpose, and its Rules:
Make (...) Spe^tators, whilst you play the Fools.
Equally witty as some valiant are;
The sad defects of both are exposed here.
For here you will Censure, who disdain to write,
As some make Quarrels here, that scorn to fight.
The rugged Soldier that from War returns,
And still wi^th' heat of former Action burns.
Let him but hither come to see a Play,
Proceeds an Errant Courtier in a day^
Shall steal from the Pit, and fly up to the Box,
There hold impertinent chat with Taw^ry Maux:
Till e're aware the Blust^rer falls in love;
And Hero grows as harmless as a Dove.
With us the kind remembrance yet remains*
When we were entertained behind our Scenes.
Though now alas we must your absence mourn,
Whilst naught but Quality will serve your turn.
Damned Quality! that uses poaching Arts,
And (as it is said) comes masked to prey on hearts.
The proper use of Vizors once was made,
When only worn by such as owned the Trade:
Though now all mingle with 'em so together,
That you can hardly know the one from the other.
But it is no matter, on, pursue your Game,
Till we aried you return at last and ta^e;
Know then 'twill be our turn to be severe,
For when you have left your Stings behind you there:
You lazy Drones, ye shall not have harbor here.
FINIS.
The Courtiers Calling: Showing the Art of Living at Court, according to the
Maxims of Policy and Morality. By a Person of Honor. 12. Price 1 sh. 6 ^.

The Art of making Love, Or, Rules for the Conduct of Ladies and Gallants in
their Amors. 12. Price* 1 s.

Don Carlos Prince of Spain. A Tragedy, Act^d at the Dukes Theater. Written by
Tho. Otway, Price 1 s.

Published this Term.

The Portugal History: Or, A Relation of the Troubles that happened in the Court
of Portugal, in the Years 1667, and 1668. By S. P. Esquire.

All Sold by Richard Tonson at his Shop under Grays-Inn-Gate, next
Grays-Inn-Lane.


