Ots's Lamentation AND A VISION that appeared to him since his Trial: Over
heard by one of his Keepers in his Chamber: at the Kings bench,
A SONG
To the Tune of State and Ambition.
I.
A Due to my Title, of Savior of the Nation
My Forty Commissions and Spanish Black Bills,
My Twelve pounds a week and all hopes of Salvation,
Six Dishes a day which my Demons often fills:
Now Oats must be whipped through each County o'th Kingdom
In each Corporation in Pillory, must stand,
Outface the Contempt of all Christians, and when done,
Must turn home for Tyburn, to hang and be Damned.
II.
I no God nor Devil believed nor feared,
Until since my Trial one Night in the Goal,
A Legion of Fiends in my Chamber appeared
There over my Brazenfac'd Conscience did quale
They showed all my Actions, my Bums and my Postures
As we used to scamper on Flock-beds and Flours;
How I am the worst of all Sodomites Bastards,
I stuck to my Bums and kicked out all the Whores.
III.
Then Whitebread and Fenwick, brave Gavin and Harcourt,
Turner and Pickering, Coleman and Langorne
Ireland, Grove Staely; I deserve to hang for it,
And Stafford came bleeding and in the same form
Their heads in their hands, they quite round me removed
Blood sprung as from Fountains, where their heads had stood,
This Vision with horror my Conscience reproved
They left all my Chamber besmeared with Blood.
IV.
No Mercy from God, nor from Man I can hope, for
Abused both my Country, my God and my King,
The Destruction of all I most falsely have sworn for
The most Loyal Families to ruin I did bring,
Yet am so Case-hardned; I cannot repent it,
My soul is swelled bigger than it was before:
Black Treason or Murder, I still would attempt it,
Where I to be Damned* and hanged at the Door.
V.
Toney and Sidney were first that Employed me,
Sent me to St. Omers a Plot for to find;
They found me a Fool for their turn when they would tried me,
Zounds, I all the while left the Plot here behind,
Which Three parts of the Nation with Toney had signed,
Resolved to Rebel and our King to dethrone;
But his Stars by providence ours has out-shined,
And left me like a Rogue to be hanged all alone.
VI.
Twenty from St. Omers all proved me Perjured,
And Fifty from Staffordshire made it as plain;
Ireland died wrongfully to my souls hazard,
And all that I swore against dyed the same;
Besides, my own Evidence came in against me,
Called me Rogue, and spiller of Innocent Blood;
Yet still I Will deny all to save those Advanced me,
Whose party maintains me with Gold, Drink and Food.
VII.
Then he like a Hogg fell to snorting I left him,
Tied up with his Irons and his bloody black soul,
Content to be Damn^d as Old Ton^y had taught him,
For Perjured Murder, no Fiend e're so foul;
Yet he must be hanged for the honor of the Nation
That Innocent Blood may not threaten the Crown
Of the King or Queen Mary, the Worlds Admiration,
Whose Scepter shall flourish and never tumble down.
FINIS.
LONDON; Printed for James Dean, Bookseller in Cranborn-street, near
Newport-House in Leicester Fields, 1685.


