A COPY OF VERSES, HUMBLY PRESENTED To all his Worthy Masters and Mistrisses In
the Town of LAMBETH.
By THOMAS OULDMAN, Bell-Man,
PROLOGUE.
To all my worthy Masters, I present
These following Lines, hoping they will give Content:
I have but little Learning, Sirs, therefore,
On Losty Lines I don't pretend to soar;
But in a mean and Modest Civil Dress,
I labor here my Duty to express:
And if it please you, then I have my ends,
Hoping my Masters, you will be my Friends.
His Prayer for the CHVRCH.
LOrd let thy Church be here with Glory Crowned,
And all her Members in Obedience found
Unto thy Righteous Laws, so Good, so Just;
Wherein we may enjoy Eternal Rest:
Let Holy Angels Guard that Sacred place,
Wherein we may obtain the means of Grace.
On St. Andrew's Day.
ST. Andrew, blessed Apostle, which did Preach
His Lords dear Will, and Man the way did teach
To Everlasting Life, scorning to fear
The Threats of Death; this day did Witness bear
Of his firm Faith in Christ; for being tied
Unto a Racking Cross, he Preaching Died.
On Christmas Day.
THis blessed Day let every Nation Sing,
Glory and Praise to our Eternal King;
Who did from Heaven send his only Son
To save our Souls, who were by Sin undone:
Then let us all jointly with one accord,
Give Praise and Thanks unto the living Lord,
Whose loving kindness was to us so great,
My Tongue wants Eloquence it to relate.
On St. Stephen's Day.
ST. Stephen's Day is ushered in apace,
Who in his Lord and Masters eyes found Grace,
To be the first of Martyrs, and to Bleed,
The next to him, whose Blood the World has freed
From that sad Curse that did attend us all,
As Heirs to Adam, in his Wretched Fall.
On St. John's Day.
ST. John you know, beloved was most dear
By blessed Jesus, while he lived here;
The Scriptures say, that he above the rest,
Had liberty to lean upon Christ's Breast:
Oh! blessed was he that had so great a Friend,
Whose love for ever lasts, and has no end:
But certain it is he did submit to Death,
Though few can tell us where he lost his Breath.
On Innocents Day.
THis Day Blood-thirsty Herod in a Rage,
His Thirst with Infant Blood thought to assuage;
Aiming at his which for our Sins was shed,
Yet all in vain, for he to Egypt fled:
Though Rachel weeped for her Children sore,
Slain in the Streets, because there were no more.
On New Years Day.
ALL you that do the Bell-Man hear,
The First Day of this hopeful Year;
I do in love Admonish you,
To bid your Old Sins all adieu;
And walk as Gods just Laws requires,
In Holy Deeds and good Desires:
Which if to do you will do your best,
God will in Christ forgive the rest.


On Dark Nights.
AS Darksom Night unto thy thoughts present,
What it is to want the Days bright Element;
So let thy Soul descend through Contemplation,
Where utter Darkness keeps her Habitation;
Where endless, easeless, pains remediless,
Attend to torture Sins cursed Wilfulness.
O then remember whilst thou yet have time,
To call for Mercy for each forepast Crime;
And with good David, wash thy Bed with Tears,
That so Repentance may subdue Hells fears;
Then shall thy Soul, more purer then the Sun,
Joy as a Giant her best Race to run;
And in unspotted Robes her self address,
To meet her Lord, that Son of Righteousness:
To whom with God, the Father, and the Spirit,
Be all due Praise, where all true Joys inherit.
A Verse to my Loving Masters.
IT is the Duty of a Servant still
To strive his Masters pleasure to fulfill;
Therefore it shall my chief endeavor be
To please them all that are so kind to me:
I own that by their Bounty I do live,
Therefore to them I hearty thanks do give:
And hope that with them I shall never part,
Till conquering Death does pierce my tender heart.
To my Loving Mistrisses.
RIght worthy Dames, Virtuous in all their ways,
I cannot forbear, but must set forth their praise:
Raptures of Love does all their Lives attend,
When Crosses does their Husbands here offend:
They Will bear a part with them in Grief or Care,
So that I say, Good Women Blessings are;
To sweeten all the Sorrows of this life,
No Friend is like a kind and loving Wife:
Their Virtues I esteem, and value more,
Then all the Gold on the Rich Indian Shore.
To New-Married Men.
A Wake your Wives you Men that is newly Wed,
And let them know the joys of Marriage Bed;
Do not lie slugging like a Logg of Wood,
Be quick and active, else you will do no good:
O Man be careful of thy loving Wife,
And love her as thou love thy life;
And then I dare with boldness say,
That you will enjoy quietness every day:
For Virtuous Women are such pretty things,
Fit Company for Emperors and Kings.
Though with my Bell I this Discourse do raise,
I want a Tongue to set forth Women's Praise.
To Young Men.
YOung Men I here present you with a Verse,
Observe, I pray, what I herein rehearse;
Seek ye the Lord, and serve your Masters too,
And then a Blessing will attend on you;
When as that happy Day you live to see,
Of this great Ancient City to be free:
O then be Thrifty, strive to get and save,
And by this means you may good Matches have;
Like to your Seniors, soon to Riches rise,
Right Worthy Citizens, both Grave and Wise.
To the MAIDS.
YOu Youthful Damsels, Beautiful and fair,
I would not have you for a Love despair:
First learn to be a Huswife, get and save,
Fond thoughts of Love I fain would have you wave:
I pray observe the Bell-Man's Counsel here,
Be Chaste and Wise, and keep your Scutcheon clear:
And though at present you do lie alone,
In time you may have Husbands every one.
DOubtless some whom nothing will them please,
Will carping be, yea, and find fault with these;
But I am bound for to submit to such,
Hoping they will not run me down too much:
For if some will with Learned Men find fault,
They need not strange to see a Layman Halt;
But were I in the Latin Tongue well skilled,
My Paper should with Learned Theams be filled.
EPILOGVE.
KInd Masters and my Mistrisses, withal,
I pray accept my Gift here, though but small;
And when that you have well perused it over,
Remember then your Bell-man, which is Poor.
So I Conclude, praying that God would give
You Health and Wealth, and Peace, while that you Live;
And when you Dye, may you in Glory, be
Clothed with the Robes of Immortality.
LONDON, Printed in the year, 1689.


