Man wholly Mortal; OR, A TREATISE WHEREIN It Is proved, both Theologically and
Philosophically, That as whole Man sinned, so whole Man died; contrary to that
common distinction of Soul and Body: And that the present going of the Soul
into Heaven or Hell is a mere Fiction: And that at the Resurrection is the
beginning of our Immortality; and then actual Condemnation and Salvation, and
not before.

With Doubts and Objections answered and resolved, both by Scripture and
Reason, discovering the multitude of Blasphemies and Absurdities that arise
from the fancy of the Soul.

Also, diverse other Mysteries; as of Heaven, Hell, the extent of the
Resurrection, the New Creation, etc. opened, and presented to the Trial of
better Judgment.

By R. O.

The second Edition, by the Author corrected and enlarged.

That which befalls the Sons of Men, befalls Beasts; even one thing
befalls them all: as the one dies, so dies the other; yea, they have all
one breath: so that Man has no pre-eminence above a Beast: for all is vanity.

Eccl. 3.19. Printed at London, Anno 1675.

To the READER.
Judicious Reader,
THy serious perusal, but the scorn and devision of the multitude hereof, is
my expectation: Startle not thou, be patient, read, ponder, and Berean,
like-try whether these things be so or no: If any thing in it be worth thy
owning, take it, it is thine as well as mine, and I have my end, thy benefit: I
wish it well to all, but I fear it will be a Parable so most; however, I have
unbosom'd my duty; freely as I have received, I give it freely to the World; it
is my faith, as I believe, so have I spoken. I expect an Answer; if it it be
such as will not hold trial, it is likely I shall vindicate my self; but if by
force of Argument it shall convince, I shall be ready and free thankefully to
embrace it, and renounce my error, whether it be in part or in whole, though
in the maine I am nothing jealous; had I therein doubted, my weakeness had not
been thus visible to the World. Whereas in several places scattered through the
Book the use of the word Soul may seem to some, to imply that which I deny; let
such know, it is for Argument sake, not intending in the least any
self-distinct being by it. Thus desiring my endeavors may have a fair and
equal trial by Scripture and solid Reason, I commit thee to the blessing of God
in the perusal thereof, and rest

Thine in the love of the Truth, R. O.

Man's Mortality: OR, A Treatise proving MAN (as he is a Rational creature) a
Compound wholly mortal.
CHAP. I. Considerations from Natural Reason, disproving the common opinions of
the soul, and proving man wholly mortal.
IF we will rationally argue concerning the Soul, it is necessary to define
what that is, to which this immortality is ascribed: But since it is defined by
some one way, by some another way, I shall produce some Opinions about it; and
then bring the most rational to trial, omitting the more frivolous: viz.

The Stiocks held it, a certain blast hot and fiery; or the vital spirit of
the blood: The Creatins, Blood: Gallen, a certain exhalation of the purest
blood: Zeno, Cleanthes, Antipater, and Possiodonius, a hot complexion, or
corporeal quality diffused through the whole body: Democritus, Firc; and his
opinion was, the round atoms being incorporated by air and fire, do make up
the Soul: Pythagoras opinionated it a Number moving of it self: Plato, a
substance to be conceived in the mind, that received motion from itself,
according to Number and Harmony: Aristotle, the first continual motion of a
body natural, having in it those instrumental parts, wherein was possibility of
life: Dinarchus, an Harmony of the four elements: Nemesius, divides it into
Fantasy, Judgment, Memory; Aristotle in his Physics, into vegetative,
sensitive, motive, appetetive, intellective: And Ambrose Parey, p. 895. says,
the soul is the inward Entelechia, or the primative cause of all motions and
functions both natural and animal, and the true Form of a man: It sees,
hears, smells, touches, tastes, imagines, judges, etc. And more exactly
page 83. Lib. 3. Cap. 1. he says the soul is commonly distinguished into
three Faculties: Animal, Vital, Natural: The Animal, into Princial, Sensitive,
motive: The Principal, into Imaginative, (seated in the upper part of the
brain;) Reasonable (the middle part of the brain;) Memorative, (Cerebellum, or
after-braine. The Sensitive, into Seeing, (the eyes;) Hearing, (the ears;)
Smelling, (the nose;) Tasting, (the tongue, pallet;) Touching, (the body.) The
Motive, into Progressive (legs) Apprehensive, (hands.)

The Vital, into Dilative, or parts for Respiration, (weazon, lungs:)
Concoctive, or parts for vital motion, (heart and arteries) understood by the
Pulsificke Faculty.

The Natural, into Nutrative, Active, Generative: which three are performed by
the help of the Attractive, (the gullet;) Retentive, (lower passage, or the
stomach;) Concoctive, (body of the ventricle;) Assimulative, (three small guts;
Expulsive, (three great guts.)

Augustine and Athanasius say it is a substance created, a spirit intelligent,
invisible, immortal, incorporeal, like the angels.

And there be several Opinions of it is Body: Lucippus and Hipparchus say, it
has a fiery Body: Critias and Anaxemines, Woolnor and others, an aeriall
body: Hesiod, an earthly: Epicurius, fiery and airie: Zenophon, watery and
earthly: Drone, a middle betwixt the spirit and the body: Didimus and Origin, a
third substance.

Diverse other conceptions and fancies there be, to uphold this ridiculous
invention of the Soul, traducted from the Heathens, who by the Book of Nature
understood an immortality after Death; but through their ignorance how, or
which way, this invention (reported to be Plato's) was occasioned, and begot a
general belief: and so they, and after them the Christians, have thus strained
their wi^s to such miserable shifts, to define what it is; but neither conclude
any certainty, or give satisfaction therein. Yet since it is generally
concluded to be in man, and of man; but what, where, or how, no man knows;
though such several opinions of it be, if but examined: I Will pitch upon those
which afford most conceptory definition: that is, that of Aristotle, Nemesius,
or Ambrose Parey, which make the Soul to be all the internal and external.
Faculties of man jointly considered, or Man Anatomized: and thereto Reply thus.

All the Faculties of Man ( severally or together) are all, and each of them
mortal* as well those that are peculiar to man, as those that are common to
Beasts: and if all those, with his corpulent matter completing Man, be proved
mortal; then the invention of the Soul upon that ground vanishes: which I
thus prove.

All elementary compositions or Temperatures are mortal, and transitory:

But man's Faculties from the least to the greatest are Temperatures:

Ergo, mortal.

The Minor is thus proved.

That which is subject to increase and diminish, is a Temperature.

But all man's Faculties, yea those of Reason, Consideration, Science, etc. all
that distinguish Man from a Beast, are augmented by Learning, Education, etc.
lessened by negligence, idleness, etc. and quite nullified by madness:

Ergo.

That those Faculties are Temperatures, I further prove, thus.

A Temperature is a Quality; and a Quality may be in the Subject, or absent
from it, without the destruction of the same subject.

But reason, understanding, etc. may be absent from the Body their Subject, and
yet the Body living: as, in madmen, and persons in the Falling Sickness; and
none will deny they are men at that same time:

Ergo.

Object. Qualities of the Body are subject to sense.

But understanding, etc. subject to none:

Ergo.

Answ. A hot and dry brain is quick-witted, which by moisture and coldness is
altered: and so we are disposed according to the present constitution of our
Bodies.

If this suffice not, I add, that an effect is by passion from the cause, as
motion cannot be without passion from that which moves: for take away the
cause, and the motion cease: toll causam, tollitur effectus: Therefore
quickness of wit cannot be without passion from heat and dryness: for
overpower that hot and dry brain with moisture and coldness, as may be with
Opium, and the hotness and dryness thereof cease, and dullness follows.

Further, even from my Opposites Assertions, I prove this Soul they so talk
on, to be elemental, as Woolnor and others, who ascribe unto it an Aeriall
Body: For whatsoever is Aeriall is elemental, else could it not be Aeriall:

Ergo, this Soul is elemental, and so finite.

If this immortal spirit have an Aeriall Body, I wonder what would become of
it, if a living man were closed up in a Vessel, which were so solid every
where, that the Air could not possibly evacuate, and there the man die; either
it must perish with the man, or else* remain there, through which there is no
passage for its Aeriall Body: So that he so martyred has an ilfavored Paradise
for his Soul.

And further, experience tells us; If the former Brain-pan be hurt, the Senses
are hindered, but the Cogitation remains sound.

If only the Middle-pan be harmed, the Cogitation is maimed; but the Seat of
Sense keeps all the five Senses whole: If any hurt befall both to the Former
and Middle-pan, both Sense and Cogitation decay

If the Hinder-pan be disordered only, the Memory alone, and neither Sense
nor Cogitation receive harm.

So that in verity, Man is but a Creature whose several parts and members are
endowed with proper natures or Faculties, each subservient to other, to make
him a living Rational Creature; whose degrees or excellences of natural
Faculties make him in his kind more excellent then the Beasts: So that though
Parey and others do so excellently set forth his several endowments, or
properties of his several members, it does not follow, that those Faculties
together are a Being of themselves immortal: For as the members cannot be
perfect members without them, so they cannot be faculties without their
members: and separation cannot be without destruction of both: As attraction or
heat is the property of fire, which cannot be, if fire cease; nor fire be, if
it cease: and as well may we say the heat of the fire continues, after the
fire is dead out, as those Faculties when their Body is dead: for spoil one,
spoil both; kill one, kill both; this is in that, and that is in this: The
Form is so in the Matter, and the Matter so in the Form, as thereby, and not
else, is an Existence, or Humane Entitie: And their Being is in this Union, and
their Union is in this Being: So that, take away Form, and Matter cease; take
away Matter, and Form cease: destruction vnius est interitum alterius. The
Form is the Form of the Matter, and the Matter the Matter of the Form; neither
of themselves, but each by other, and both together make one Being: therefore
if one Be by the other, and thereby Both together; then one cannot consist
without the other, but must Both perish together: For nothing can consist
without that, by which it is.

But suppose on the contrary, one could consist without the other, as they say
the Soul can without the Body; then one may be generated without the other,
Soul without Body, and so according to their preposterous precepts, it is not
unnatural for a Woman to bring forth a spirit, that has neither flesh, blood
nor bones, instead of a Child.

Or if one Be without the other, as Form without Matter; Mass concepted,
without the Faculty conceptive: then should all corpulent Substances be as
infinite as God, without beginning, and Be of themselves, and themselves Gods:
But I hope all grant both impossible: Therefore they must as well end together,
as begin together; and begin together as end together. Moreover, experience
further tells us, that they neither can Be, nor consist without other: For if
Nature be deprived more or less in her work of conception, of her due, (her
Forms or conceptions being by her power Formative or conceptive, or her Formed
Faculties by her Facultive Forms) her Effect is accordingly: If membrally
impedited, a membral impediment; if totally impedited, a total frustration of
Matter and Form, in Both: For he that is borne without any member, has neither
Form nor Faculty thereof at all; or with any membral imperfection, that part
has not its perfection either of Form or Faculty: so comes it that some are
borne Fools, and never can be wise: Therefore their original Being must be
together. And that their ultimate end is together, we see, that the Eye is no
Eye without the Sight; and Sight no Sight without the Eye: and so of all the
other Senses and Faculies e minore ad majus. Wherefore, membral perfection is
not so much in shape as in virtue; and virtual perfection not so much in Mass
as in due proportion, and both jointly make natural perfection, which is the
gift of God, or Natures general instinct: So, as one can by no means be without
the other, so one cannot subsist without the other: For could there be a
Facultive subsistence (as that of the Soul is made) without its body; then a
man might live when his head were cut off.

Further, this Facultive Gift, or Natures endowment, can no more be said to be
a subsistent living Spirit, without its Receptacle, then the Sunbeames without
the Sun, which are the gift or property of the Sun. But the Being of this
communication must be in the Subject, as levitie in the Fire, ponderositie in
the Earth: And though the natures of things, be immediate communications of
Gods Power to Nature, yet disjunctively those communications are no Entities,
without God be so many several Beings; for in that sense they are not
communications, but absolute Beings of themselves; for betwixt Faculty and
Subject is a Relation to communication, as betwixt Father and Son to
Fatherhood; neither without other, nor it without both: and to say
notwithstanding, as this fancy of the Soul imports, that there may be a
Facultive Subsistence without its Subject; then Natures several Faculties must
not be the several communications of One Being, but so many absolute irrelative
Beings of themselves: So that this Doctrine of the Soul implies, no God; if a
God, so many several Gods as Faculties: and if but ONE, then it chops that ONE
smaller then herbs to the pot: Therefore Faculty cease with its Subject, or
with the Subject God gathers to himself the power, and yet his power no more
by retraction, then less before by communication; and so but One Being, in whom
all things are, or one Ens Entium.

Moreover, those several Faculties cannot be united or comprehended in one
body, but by the several members of the same body; for we see, if the member
decay, the Faculty decays: Therefore their unite subsistence must be
terminated membrally in the body: And if it were possible they could subsist,
separated from their members; then in that separation their Being could not be
conjunct or unite, for want of that which tied them together, the several
members: And so, if any Being, so many several Beings as several Faculties: if
any Soul, so many several Souls: a Phantasticke Soul, a Rational Soul, a
Memorative Soul, a Seeing Soul, a Hearing Soul, a Smelling Soul, a Tasting
Soul, a Touching Soul; with diverse other Souls of all sorts and sizes.

And further, that those Faculties are thus in their Subjects, and are not
without them, (as accidens non est nisi in subjecto,) we see, that they
increase and grow with their Subjects, and perfect together: For a Child is
totally proportionated (as Adam when God formed him of the Earth) before the
vital Faculty be actual, (as Parey says) and the Rational requires a due
process of time after birth, before it be ripe to bring forth the fruit of
Rationality; and as its Subject grows and ripeneth, so it increases and
perfecteth: for it is impossible, that the thing which is not actual in it
self, should have a second thing actual in it; and Rationality in an Infant, is
no more in it then a Chicken in the egg, only in posse: therefore a Child
cannot possibly ratiocinate, before it be actually Rational; which cannot be
before Organical perfection: For Reason cannot Be, and not show it self; show
it self, and not Be, for its Being is its Rationality, and its Rationality its
Being: therefore as its Organs are potential* it is potential; and as its
Organs are weak and imperfect, it is weak and imperfect; and as they are
perfect, it is perfect: Therefore Faculties increase with their Subjects; and
if increase, they must decrease.

Anatomize Man, take a view of all his lineaments and Dimensions, of all his
members and faculties, and consider their state severally, and all are
transitory, even all that goes to the Subject Man is corruptible, and himself
but a Bundle of corruption, or curious Mass of vicussitudes. If all of Man that
goes to his Manhood be mortal, where then, or what is this immortal thing the
Soul they talk of? we have examined all his parts and Faculties, and find even
all mortal: It is not sure his prima materia, though ingenerable,
incorruptible, insensible, indefinite, etc, Nor his Forma prima, that principle
which first gives Essence to a natural Body; the first Active principle,
informing and figurating the First Matter, sui appetentem; for both are general
to the whole Creation, whose Efficient Cause is only immediately God himself,
by whose power all things that are made, shall be returned to that of which
they were made, their Materia prima, or created matter: So that, (as Solomon
says,) Man has no pre-eminence above a Beast, even one thing befalls them.

What Reason is there now, that Man's Faculties in a higher Degree, should be an
immortal Spirit, more then a Beasts in a lower Degree? but both elementary and
finite.

Further* if it be not unnatural that Seeing, Hearing, etc. should be producted
by an Elementary operation, as none deny in the propagation of Beasts: why is
not the Rational Faculty in Man as natural in Man, and may as well be
producted elementarily by Man, as the other by Beasts, and be as actually
mortal? If this suffice not, observe; Substantia non recipit majus aut minus, a
Giant is no more a man then a Dwarf; there may be a gradual distinction, and
yet no Essential difference; Degrees of Faculties in several persons, and yet
the Faculties the same, and of one nature, though not equally excellent: and
the Degree does not make a Faculty more a Faculty, or less a Faculty:
Therefore, if the said Faculties in an inferior Degree be elementary, so must
they in a superior: But in Brutes, whom none deny to be wholly mortal, and all
their Faculties elementary, have our most noble parts and faculties scattered
amongst them, though in an inferior degree, as Ambr. Parey said, ( Lib. 2.
chap. 1.) If we will diligently seach into their nature, we shall observe the
impressions of many virtues: as of Magnanimity, Prudence, Fortitude, Clemency,
Docilitie, Love, Carefulness, Providence; yea, Knowledge, Understanding,
Memory, etc. is common to all Brutes, the Affections and Passions of the Mind,
all his Qualities good and bad, and every Faculty he has is to be found more
or less amongst them: And Parey further says: They are of quick Sense,
observant of the Rights of Friendship and Chastity, they submit themselves to
the discipline of man, they have taught man many things, etc.

The Hare is eminent for Memory, the Dog for Apprehension and Fidelity, the
Serpent for Wisdom, the Fox for Subtlety, the Dove for Chastity and
Innocence, the Elephant for Docilitie, Modesty, and Gratitude: Pliny says,
he comes near the understanding of a man, that they worship the Moon and
Stars; Plutarch, that they worship the Sun rising: the Ape is eminent for
Imitation and Understanding, the Turtle for Love, the Crocodile for Deceit, the
Lamb for Patience, the Waspe for Anger, etc. and for his Five Senses, he is by
them exce'd. Aper auditu nos vincit, Aranea tactu,
Vul^ur odoratu, Lynx visu, Simia gustu.


Thus Man in sensu diviso is to be found amongst the other Creatures, and in
him alone those several Faculties are eminent sensu conjuncto, and so only
capable of God: Therefore those Faculties being elementary in an inferior
Degree, in an inferior Creature; why may they not be* elementary in a
superior, Degree in a superior Creature?

Now from all, this follows, that if in man be an immortal Spirit, then
diverse other Creatures have the like, though not in the same Degree; for if
Degree therein should make or mar the thing it self, then some would have no
more Soul then Beasts, and some less* as, Madmen and Fools no more; and
Infants less. If it be the Rational Faculty, then all men are born without
Souls, and some before they had Souls, as Infants; and some after their Soul is
gone, as Madmen that live and perish in their Madness; and some would be born,
live, and die without Souls, as Fools; and some would have Souls but by fits
and jumps, as Drunkards, persons with the Falling Sickness, etc. nay all of us
spend a great part of our days without our Souls; for while we are in sound
sleep, our Rationality cease pro tempore: Thus this immortal Spirit goes and
comes as occasion serves.

That which is finite and mortal, cease from the time of the grave, till the
time of the resurrection; But whole man is finite and mortal.

Ergo.

Minor proved.

That which is The Argument lies in fallen nature, for the dispute is not of
creatures which kept their first station, but of man that is fallen from it.
elemental, is finite and mortal: But whole man is elemental.

Ergo.

Minor proved.

All that is created, is elemental. But whole man is created:

Ergo.

Major proved.

That which is material, is elemental. But all that is created is material: for
that which is not material, is nothing.

Major proved two ways.

First,

If that which is matter, be not compounded of the four elements, then that
which is no matter must be compounded of them, else no composition at all; and
besides the four elements, there is nothing else to compound with, or to make
this or that matter or thing of.

But no matter is incapable of composition; for of nothing comes nothing:

Therefore, that which is matter, is compounded of the four elements.

Secondly,

If matter created be not Elementary, then the Heavens and the Earth, with the
things therein contained, which are infallibly Matter Created, are void of the
elemental properties, to wit, heaviness, lightness, thickness, thinness; heat,
coldness; moisture, dryness.

But experience teaches, that the Heaven and the earth, with the things
therein contained, are not void of those properties, but are essentially
consistent thereof.

Ergo, Matter created must needs be elementary.

And so whole man being matter created, is elemental, finite, and mortal: and
so cease from the time of the grave, till the time of the Resurrection.

Another Argument disproving any actual immortality to be in fallen Man.

If there be an immortal Soul (as is imagined) in man, then it must be neither
hot nor dry, nor cold nor moist; neither thick nor thin, nor heavy nor light*
for all such compositions in fallen nature, are mortal and finite, (as before
proved,) for they are elemental.

But every thing in nature must be one or some of those, or all those together:
for in nature nothing can be, but it must be hot or dry, cold or moist, thick
or thin, heavy or light; for of those radical Qualities the whole creation
consists: that is not a creature that is not composed thereof. If there can
be any thing in Nature void of those qualities, let it be named, where it is,
how it can be, what and whereof it is, and that shall be called the immortal
Soul; but such a thing to be in nature, is past Imagination, yea, absolutely
impossible.

Therefore, no immortality in fallen man: as he is wholly elemental, so is he
wholly dissoluble: Every element returns to its Center; his earthly part unto
the earth, his moisture or watery part unto the water; his warmth or fiery part,
to the seat of fire, his airy part unto the air: and thus the composition Man
returns to his simples, and so cease from his Being; and is become as
before that composition, or elemental conception: Imagine how it was before he
was formed, conceived, or born; and even so is it with him when he is dead: for
as before his conception, he was in his elements; even so after his death he
returns to the same, and has no more being, nor otherwise, after death, then
before life: and so there is no more time to him after his death to the
Resurrection, or recomposition of his elements, then there was to him from the
creation to his birth, which is none at all.

Another Argument.

That which is not partly immortal as well as mortal, does cease from life or
Being from the time of the grave till the Resurrection.

But man is not partly immortal as well as mortal.

Ergo.

Minor proved.

That which is partly immortal, partly mortal, has two life's or Beings.

But man has not two beings or life's.

Therefore, man is not partly immortal, partly mortal.

Major and Minor proved, and first the Major.

If that which is partly mortal, partly immortal, have not two life's or Beings,
then that being must be all a mortal being [and then whole man dies] or else
all an immortal being, [and then whole man lives for ever] or else his flesh is
no more part of him, then a tree is part of an house; and so when the Heads-man
chopped off the Bishop of Caterburies head, he cut off no part of the man:

Therefore, man must either be all mortal, or all immortal; or that which is
partly mortal, partly immortal, must have two beings or life's.

Minor proved, to wit, that man has not two life's or beings.

If there be two distinct life's or beings in man, then one creature is two
creatures; for the distinction of Beings, is the distinction of creatures.

But for one creature to be two creatures, is impossible.

Ergo, there cannot be two beings in man.

That the distinction of beings is the distinction of creatures, I prove thus.

If the distinction of beings be not the distinction of creatures, then a man
is a Bull, a Bear, a Lion, a Dragon, etc. yea, all things is one thing, and
one thing is all things.

But man is not a Bull, a Bear, a Lion, etc. Therefore, the distinction of
Beings is the distinction of Creatures.

The consequence proved.

If my being did not distinguish me from an owl and a woodcock, and thy being
the same; then an owl and a woodcock were both writer and reader.

But an owl and a woodcock is neither writer nor reader:

Therefore the distinction of beings must needs be the distinction of creatures.

And so it is impossible for one man to have two Beings, except one man be two
men. Therefore, if he have not two beings, he has either none, or but one; and
if but one, that must be all mortal, or all immortal: For contraryes cannot
possibly be in one object. Now if he be all mortal, then he must all die; if
all immortal, then he must all live for ever; but our dying natures witness
against that: therefore this must be the sum of all, That whole man is mortal.

Therefore well says Tertullian, in his Book de Anima, that the Soul and Body
of man are both one; which, says Saint Jerome, in his Epistle to Marcellina
and Anapsychia, was the opinion of the greatest part of the Western Churches.
And Saint Austine in his four Books of the original of Souls, leaves the
question undecided; neither dares he rashly determine any thing. And his second
Book of Retractions, Chap. 56. does witness that he continued in that opinion
to his death.

As testifies Moulin in his Anatom. page 67.

Chap. II. Considerations from the Creation, Fall, and Resurrection of man,
disproving the Opinion of the Soul, imagining the better part of man immortal;
and proving him, as a reasonable creature, wholly mortal.
HAving had some consideration concerning the state of the Question in hand,
from the Dictates of Nature and Reason; let us repair to the unerring rule of
the Scriptures, to see how this mortality is either proved or disproved thereby.

And first, we may consider that the Scripture says, that when God had molded,
formed, and completely proportionated Adam of the dust of the ground, he
breathed in his face the breath of life, and man became a living Soul, Genesis
2.7. Here, first, we are to consider that we are not to speak of Man, as the
title or word man may be ascribed to the humane shape or carcass, as in this
place it seems it is, by way of distinction from other forms; but of such an
humane shape or carcass as is a living soul: and so always when we speak or
treat of man in this point of difference, we are not to mean his carcass in
humane form or shape only, but as he is a rational living soul in that form,
and so called man: for the text ascribes the title of Man to him, both before
and after the breathing in his face the breath of life; and man became a living
Soul: therefore that living Soul was Man. That which was formed or made of the
earth, became a living soul, or creature, by the breathing [or communicating]
the breath of life [a communicative rational, Faculty, or property of life in
his kind.] That liveless Lump became a living soul; and not such a living
soul, another creature, a distinct being of it self, was infused into that
formed matter, that had its Being before that Infusion, and can be when the
body cease, as is vulgarly supposed. That which was breathed before it was
breathed, was not a living soul; but that which was breathed upon, became the
living soul; no living soul was ascribed to man, before that: so that man was
formed, and man became a living soul, as Paul says, 1 Cor. 15.45. The first
man Adam was made a living Soul, which was his natural body, as verse. 44. of
whom was the woman, both innocent, free from sin, and so from Death and
mortality: For the wages of Sin is Death, Romans 6.23. therefore before sin
there could be no death; but as by one man sin entered into the world, even so
death by sin, Romans 5.12. and by the offense of one man, Judgment came upon all
men unto death, verse. 18. and 1 Cor. 15.21. by man came death: therefore man
was created free from the power of death, so to continue; but in the day he did
eat the forbidden fruit, he became mortal: and as he was made a living soul, 1
Cor. 15.45. so by transgression a dying soul, Genesis 2.17 that is, in dying to
die; or by becoming mortal, be dissolved, or return to what he was, the dust,
Genesis 3.19. namely, his Elements. Thus Man was gloriously immortal, yet no
longer a Creature incorruptible, then during innocent: For ( Genesis 2.17.) God
said, Of the tree of the knowledge of good and evil thou shall not eat of it,
for in the day thou eatest thereof, thou shall surely dye; or, dying thou shall
die: that is, thy immortality shall be changed for mortality: Immortal Adam
shall be made mortal; not apart of thee, but Thou shall surely dye, even whole
man, without the least exception of any, the worst or noblest part of him,
unless God had a mental reservation: but even the same Thou that live, Thou
shall surely die: that must die wherein was life: then surely if he had an
immortal Soul, which is the life of the body, that must be made mortal. The
result of all which, is this:

That what of Adam was immortal through Innocence, was to be mortalized by
Transgression.

But whole Adam (quatenus Animal rationale) was in Innocence immortal.

Ergo, all, and every part, even whole Man, was liable to Death by Sin: And so
consequently, if Adam had then such an indefinable thing in him, and of him,
without which he was not Man, (as is vulgarly supposed, and zealously
meintained by the Church of Rome, England, etc.) as an Angelical Spirit, that
neither could, nor can be subject to mortality: Then he had that he had not;
which made him be what he was not: he sinned with that, with which he could
not; which made him fall when he did not: for if Adam sinned, and that not, it
was no part of him; so that Adam was a living Soul, when he was not. And if
Adam sinned with that which he had not, he sinned with that with which he could
not; which made him fall when he did not: which Bopeepe in impossible: For if
Adam was mortalized, and That not, It was no part of him; this they must
confess or else the otheer follows.

Now whereas many from the expression of God's breathing into man the breath of
life, and he became a living soul, conceive an Angelical Entitie; a
supernatural, spiritual, infinite Existence to be couched in the flesh, or men's
corpulency; whose being does not depend on it, but is proper and peculiar to it
self: let such know, that so weak is the ground from whence it is concepted,
that by the same reason the like may be said of fish, birds, and beasts; for
the breath of life, and a living soul, is ascribed to them, as well as to man,
Genesis 7.21. to which read the margent in R. Jatran, compared with verse. 28. and
verse. 30. And to every beast of the earth, and to every Foul of the Air, and
to every thing that creeps upon the earth; wherein there is a living soul:
see the margent.

This being thus cleared and proved from Adams Creation and Innocence; let us
proceed to his Fall, Restitution, and Resurrection; who eating of the forbidden
fruit, God fulfilled his threatened Curse upon him, saying, ( Genesis 3.19.) In the
sweat of thy face shall thou eat bread, till thou return unto the Ground; for
out of it wast thou taken: for Dust thou art, and unto Dust thou shall return.
Here he is plainly disrobed of all his immortality; he must to Dust, without
the least mention of any being thereafter, either of part or whole, till the
Resurrection: for then, and not before, Man's immortality is in Actual Being,
whose beatitude and infelicity comes through Faith and infidelity. So that
Death reduces this productio Entis ex Non-ente ad Non-entem, returns Man to
what he was before he was; that is, not to Be: Psalm. 115.47. the Dead praise
not the Lord, neither they that go down into silence: And Psalm. 116.4. His
breath goes forth, he returns to the Earth, in that very Day his thoughts
perish. (see more, page 5, 6, 7, 8.) But Christ the second man Adam, who is
made a quicking Spirit, 1 Cor. 15.45. at the Resurrection restores this
non-ented Entitie to an everlasting Being, 1 Cor. 5.42. It is sown in
corruption, it is raised in incorruption.

Thus Mortality is derivated to all Adams posterity: The first man (quatenus
homo) is of the Earth earthly: as is the earthly, such are they that are
earthly: (1 Cor. 15.47, 48.) But the Earth of which Man is, is corruptable, and
shall be burnt up with fire, 2 Pet. 3.10. Therefore whole Man is corruptable:
for as in Adam all dye, (1 Cor. 15.22.) even so in Christ shall all be made
alive; what fell in Adam, shall be raised by Christ; what was mortalized by the
earthly Man, shall be immortalized by the Heavenly man: wherefore All, not a
part of Man was mortalized by Adam; or else only the fallen part must be
redeemed; and not the whole man: for no more of man then fell, was redeemed;
and if the body only fell, and his formal part (his soul) continued immortal,
then that part of man (his body only) was purchased, not his constitutive or
better part, his Soul: So that the bodies only of the Reprobate, according to
this fancy, shall be damned; for nothing of Adam, but what fell of Adam, can be
made liable to condemnation; and what of him stood, shall stand, as well as the
Angels that never fell: But in Christ we are complete, Col. 2.10. Therefore in
Adam totally fallen.

Further: If Adams fall was not a complete change of his whole manhood, from
immortality to absolute mortality of the whole; then in the day that he did
eat (the forbidden Fruit,) he did not surely die; for He implies his Manhood,
(and my very Opposites confess the Soul the very Essence and Being of
Manhood:) and [ in the day] and [ surely dye] imply Execution as well as
Transgression to be then; for both have equally relation to the Day: In the Day
that thou eatest thereof thou shall surely dye: so as well may we say, he did
not eat, as did not die That Day.

And if nothing dyed, that is, became mortal, but his Body; then that dyed, and
his Soul lived, that is, must be as it was at first, before God breathed life
into it, that is, a dead corpse, and indeed was never other, if the Soul were a
distinct Being of self, and all life in it self* and the Body but an Instrument
to it, whereby it performs all motion and action (as Nemesius on Man's Nature,
p. 266. with others, maintain:) And thus it must needs follow, that this death
threatened was a mere Scar-crow, even nothing at all; for He, that is, his
constitutive part (his Soul) continued immortal, and unchanged, and used his
body instrumentally, as it did before the Transgression. And if it be answered;
It became sinful and subject to sin, and so of final Condemnation in Hell at
the length: I Reply; That before he sinned, he was subject to sin, or else he
could not have sinned, for quicquid est in actu, prius fuit in potentia; and if
the wages of sin be death, then he must be of necessity subject to death the
effect, as well as sin the cause, at the same time: And so consequently, the
Souls possibilty of sinning being producted into Actual sin, the Soul must have
its wages, Actual mortality. Further, if the Souls Death be only that of Hell;
so then principal or efficient cause deepest in the Transgression was less
punished, then the instrument, the Body being but the Souls instrument whereby
it acts and moves: as if a Magistrate should hang the Hatchet, and spare the
Man that beat a man's brains out with it: and so the Soul suffer the last death,
and escape the first: which is as preposterous, as, if this Death should be
received before this Life. Moreover: Condemnation in Hell is not properly, but
remotely the reward of Adams Fall; For properly Condemnation is the wages of
Infidelity, or unbelief in Christ, as Salvation is of Belief: So that none
can be condemned into Hell, but such as are actually guilty of refusing Christ;
because immortality or the Resurrection cannot be by Propagation or Succession,
as mortality from Adam to his Issue; and so the Child, though temporally, yet
shall it not eternally be punished for his Fathers sin, but his Condemnation
shall be of himself.

If the Soul (as they say) be the very life, or have all life in it self, and
the body but its instrument; then the body now has no more life in it, then
when it is reduced to the earth; but is as dead as a dore-naile: And so at the
Resurrection cannot be raised from death; for that which never had life, cannot
be raised from death; and the union of it to the Soul at the Resurrection they
Fabulate on, is but an addition of corpulency or gross matter to the Soul;
which in truth is no Resurrection at all from the dead, no more then the
restoration of flesh lost by Famine, sickness, etc. For Resurrection from the
death, is not the addition of gross matter to life; but the Restoration of life
from death: So that the restitution of lost flesh now to the soul, is in
quality as much a Resurrection from the dead, as the addition of the whole body
to the soul at the Last day; which is to say with the Sadduces, there is no
Resurrection from the dead. But the Soularies, I know, are loath to be branded
for Sadduces; which how they will avoid, I cannot see: for if the soul live
separated from the body, the body cannot be raised from the dead, except the
body had a life of its own, differing from that of the soul; and so a man must
have two lives (as they say a Cat has nine:) the one mortal, the other
immortal; and at the Resurrection have two immortalities. If the soul be of a
distinct being from the body, and sinned as the body, and thereby incurred the
condemnation of Hell; then must the soul have a particular redemption from
thence, as the body from the grave; or else it must perish there for ever: And
if Christ redeemed us from thence, then he must suffer the same eternal
Torments; that is, the worm of conscience, despair, everlasting chains of
darkness, etc. But those he never suffered, as witnesses Doctor Ames to
Bellarmine.

Ergo.

If you urge, that in his agony and sweating of blood, he suffered equally with
the Torments, and therefore might be said to suffer eternal toments, though he
was never personally in hell; then may we as well say, that by his agony, etc.
he suffered pain equivalent to death, and therefore might be said to have
suffered the death of the grave, though personally he had never been in the
grave: for there is a greater equivalency betwixt those sufferings and the
grave, then betwixt his sweating of blood and the torments of the damned
Spirits in hell.

CHAP. III. Scriptures to prove this Mortality.
JOb 3.12, 13, 16. Why did the knees prevent me? or why the breasts that I
should suck? for now I should have lien still, and been quiet; I should have
s^ept; then had I been at rest: Or as a hidden untimely birth (mark) I had not
been, as an Infant that never saw light.

Job 4.19, 21. How much less on them that dwell in Houses of clay, whose
Foundation is in the Dust, which are crushed before the moth. Does not their
excellency which is in them go away? they die even without Wisdom.

Job 14.1, 2. Man that is borne of a woman is of few days, and full of trouble;
he comes up like a flower, and is cut down: he flees also as a shadow, and
continues not: (and verse. 7, 8, 9, 10, 11, 12.) For there is hope of a Tree,
if it be cut down, that it will sprout again, and that the tender branch
thereof will not cease: though the root thereof wax old in the ground, and the
stock thereof die in the earth, yet through the sent of water it will bud, and
bring forth branches like a plant: But Man dies and wastes away; yea, Man
gives up the ghost, and where is He? As the waters fail from the Sea, and the
flood decays, and dries up, so Man lies down, and rises not, till the
Heavens be no more, they shall not awake out of their sleep.

Psalm. 103.15, 16. As for man, his days are as grass, as a flower of the
field, so he florisheth, for the wind passes over it, and it is gone, and the
place thereof shall know it no more.

From these places compared, we may see, that man (not his flesh only, for
that makes not man; but flesh and Spirit sensu conjuncto make Man) is not as a
Tree, when He is cut down, whose Spirit lives, and sprouteth forth, and
continues: but as the flower of the field, (not the stalk, but the bare
flower,) which totally fades and perishes: Therefore Man is wholly mortal: he
shall die, and the Son of Man shall be made as grass, Isa. 51.12.

Ezekiel 13.19. To slay the souls that should not die, and to save the souls
that should not live.

Psalm. 7.1, 2. Save me, etc. Lest he tear my soul like a Lion, renting it in
pieces, etc.

Psalm. 89.48. Who can deliver his soul from the hand of the grave?

Psalm. 19.10. Lev. 21.1, 11, and 19.28. Numb. 5.2. and 19.11, 13. Hag. 2.13. in
all which places, the words dead body in the Original is soul. See Jun. Annot.
Lev. 21.1.

2 Cor. 5.1, 2, 3, 4. there out Being after death is called, a building of an
house not made with hands, eternal in the heavens: with this the Apostle
desires to be clothed; and what it is, he defines, viz. mortality swallowed up
of life: whence it is most evident, that all his hope of future life was
grounded upon the Resurrection; and that his hope was altogether grounded
thereon, he confirms, 1 Cor. 15, arguing, if Christ be not risen, the dead
should not rise: and (verse. 18.) They which are fallen asleep in Christ are
perished: and (verse. 14.) Then is our faith also in vain; whose end (1 Pet.
1.9.) is the Salvation of our Souls. How should then all be in vain, if our
souls as soon as breath is out of the body enter into glory and salvation? For
by that, though there were no Resurrection of the flesh, we should receive the
end of our Faith, the Salvation of our Souls. Nay further, he makes all our
hope to be in this life, if there be no Resurrection; for verse. 19. having
shown the evils that follow the denial of the Resurrection, faith; If in this
life only we have hope in Christ, we are of all men most miserable: verse. 32.
Saint Paul said, If after the manner of men I have fought with beasts at
Ephesus, what advantageth it me, if the dead rise not? whence plainly appears,
that the denial of the Resurrection confines all our hopes and advantages
within this life; and so all our sufferings, persecutions, prayers, faith, etc.
were to no purpose: which could not be, by this Soulary fancy of present reward
of beatitude after this life.

1 King. 2.2. David says to Solomon, I go the way of all the earth: that is,
as the earth must see corruption, so must he; and if his Soul were part of him,
yea, himself, so must it; else should he not go the way of all the earth.

And the expression in Joshua 2.13. Deliver our lives from death, imports
absolute mortality: for if Death be not dissolution of life, or its
deprivation, how can it be said to suffer death? not by a bodily separation,
for that is but as the laying down of a burden, wherewith it was clogged and
tired, whereby it is made more lively ten thousand times, (as, my Opposites
confess) and so, can no more be said to be dead, then a Porter when he is
disburthened of his Load.

Job 34.15. All flesh shall perish together, and man shall turn again unto dust.

That which is born of the flesh, is flesh, John 3.6 and, flesh and blood
cannot inherit the Kingdom of God, 1 Cor. 15.50.

But this Spirit, the soul so Idolized, (if such a thing be) is borne of the
flesh; for in the womb a Child is a living soul, and is so borne of the mother
that is flesh.

Therefore this soul is fleshly, and cannot enter into the Kingdom of glory,
till corruption have put on incorruption; which cannot be, but by death: Thou
fool, that which thou sowest is not quickened except it die, 1 Cor. 15.36.

Eccl. 3.12. That which befalls the Sons of Men, befalls Beasts; even one
thing befalls them: as one dies, so dies the other: they have all one
breath, so that they have no pre-eminence above a Beast: for all is vanity.

Wherefore if their Breath be all one, then God breathed no other Breath, (that
is, life or soul,) into Man, then he gave to Beasts: So that if Man be Fallen,
and the Beasts be cursed for his sake, Man must be equally mortal with them.

1 Timothy 4.8. I have fought a good fight, I have funished my course, I have kept
the faith: henceforth there is laid up for me a Crown of Righteousness, which
the Lord the righteous Judge shall give me at THAT DAY; and not to me only,
but to all them that love his appeareing. Here from the finishing of his course
a Crown being laid up, (which is even the same which Peter, Epist. 1 cap. 1.9.
makes the end of our faith, the Salvation of our souls) to be given at THAT
DAY, concludes an intermission to him and us till then.

1 Timothy 6.14, 16. Keep this Commandment until the appeareing of our Lord Jesus
Christ, who only has immortality, dwelling in light which no man can approach
unto; whom no man has seen, nor can see.

Whence appears, that none ever entered into Heaven since the Creation. And
it is in vain for my Opposites to say it is meant of the corpulent matter
only; for they make the Soul the very manhood: and none that enter therein,
enter by halfes and peecemeal: and this is confirmed by Joh. 3.13. And no man
has ascended into Heaven, but he that came down from Heaven, even the Son of
man, which is in Heaven.

Psalm. 6.5. For in death there is no remembrance of thee; in the grave who
shall give thee thanks?

Psalm. 89.11, 12. Shall thy loving kindness be declared in the grave? or thy
faithfulness in destruction? shall thy wonders be known in the dark? and thy
righteousness in the Land of forgetfulness?

Isa. 38.18, 19. For the grave cannot praise thee, death cannot celebrate thee:
they that go down into the pit cannot hope for thy truth. The living, the
living, he shall praise thee, as I do this day: the Father to the Children
shall make known thy truth.

Hence it is plain, that during this Death Man is void of actual Being: for had
he then an incorruptible or present actual Being in glory, he should be more
capable of the praise and remembrance of the Lord, then he was before he dyed.

Job 3. from the 11. to 20. Why dyed I not from the womb? etc. for now should I
have lien still, and been quiet, I should have slept, and then I should have
been at rest; as a hidden untimely birth, I had not been; as Infants that never
saw light: there the Prisoners rest together, they hear not the voice of the
Oppressor.

Hence follows, that during this Death there is no more present Being to man,
then to an hidden abortive Embryo in this life; and no more capability, then
light to unborn Infants; nor more oppression or torment, then where there is
none to oppress: which is to say, He absolutely IS NOT: Answerable to that of
Jacob, Me have ye bereaved of my children: Joseph is not, and Sime^n is not,
Genesis 42.36. to this add Psalm. 146.2. Job 7.21. For now shall I sleep in the
dust, and thou shall seek me in the Morning, but I shall not be. 2 Pet. 1.25.
Isa. 26.14. Psalm. 39.13. O spare me, that I may recover strength, before I go
hence and be no more.

Job 4.17, 19, 2O, 21. Whose foundation is in the dust, they perish for ever:
that is, cease to Be, till the resurrection.

Luke 20.37, 38. Now that the dead are raised, etc. relating to Exodus 3.6. I am
the God of Abraham, etc. From whence Christ proves the resurrection: But if
Abraham, Isaac, etc. had then lived in their souls, it had been no Argument to
prove the Resurrection; for he had been the God of living souls, Abraham, Isaac
and Jacob, though there had been no resurrection. Besides, he says all live
unto him: and this saying is ascribed unto the dead: therefore, as well may we
argue from thence, that they lived in their bodies, as say, they were dead in
body, but alive in soul unto God: for it is impossible to be potentially and
actually living at the same time.

Joh. 12.24. Except a corn of wheat fall into the ground, and die, it abides
alone: but if it die, it brings forth much fruit: compared to 1 Cor. 15. Thou
fool, that which thou sowest is not quickened, except it die. Therefore the
soul not dying (as the Soularies fabulate) nor falling into the ground, must
abide alone, and cannot bring forth fruit at the Resurrection, but must abide a
bare soul without a body: and the body having no life in it, falling into the
ground, cannot die, (for both vegetative, sensitive, and rational life is
ascribed to the soul) but must likewise abide alone, and cannot be quickened;
which is a flat denial of the Resurrection: yet though fundamentally the
Soularies thus deny the Resurrection, yet verbally they say there is a
resurrection; which must needs be a strange one, and as ridiculous as strange,
stated after their Imagination: For the soul not falling into the ground, nor
dying, must needs abide alone: therefore if the body be raised after their
conception, man would be divided into two immortalities, and both alone; one
might be in the North, the other in the South; the soul in one place, and the
body in another; yea, the soul in Hell, and the body in Heaven: for the body by
their grounds is as innocent from sin, as the knife wherewith a man is stabed
is free from murder; and the soul as guilty of all sin, as the murderer is of
the murder: and the Scripture condemns the guilty, and saves the innocent;
adjudgeth one for heaven, and the other for hell. O monstrous Resurrection! I
hope the Soulary Champions, the Priests of the Church of England, may be
ashamed longer to assert the soul to have all life in it, and the body to be
but the souls instrument whereby it acts and moves; and henceforth cease to
delude and stop the mouths of the people with a bare verbal Resurrection; that
the end of their faith may be suitable to Christ Jesus the foundation, on which
it is to be built, both real and infallible.

John 11.43, 44. And Jesus cried with a lovd voice, Lazarus, come forth: and he
that was dead [four days, verse. 39.] came forth bound hand and foot with
grave-clothes, etc.

If Lazarus soul were in heaven them four days, he received damage and not
vantage by that Resurrection: but it is idle to think that he which purchased
heaven by his blood, should fetch any out after they were in: and once there,
it is impossible to come from thence; for should they, it were point blank
against the nature of his death; who could not work against himself, no more
then God can lie.

1 Pet. 1.5, 7, 9, 13. compared; as, Who are kept by the power of God through
faith unto Salvation, ready to be revealed in the Last time; that the trial of
your faith, etc. might be found unto Praise, and honor, and glory, at the
appearing of Jesus Christ: receiving the end of your faith, the salvation of
your souls: and hope to the end, for the grace that is brought to you at the
Revelation of Jesus Christ: whence it is plain, that the end of our faith, the
salvation of our souls, is referred to the day of judgment: And Luke 21.28.
then is our Redemption; and Romans 8.23. our Adoption, to wit, the Redemption of
our body; one with that, which Peter calls the salvation of our souls: and Act.
23.6. and 24.21. and. 26.6, 7. Paul makes the end of all his hopes and, faith
to be only in the Resurrection: and 1 Cor. 15.18. says, If the dead rise not,
believers, of all men, are most miserable; which could not be, if they had
souls which went presently into glory, and the wicked had souls went into
Torment, though there were no Resurrection: yea, the day of Judgment
throughout the whole World, is made both the day of Salvation to the Righteous,
Romans 2.16. 1 These. 1.5, 7. 1 Pet. 1.5, 9, 13. 2 Pet. 3.7. Joh. 5.29. Mat.
25.34. Then shall he say, Come ye blessed; therefore not before then: And the
day of Condemnation to the wicked, Romans 25, 9. 2 These. 1.6, 8* 9. Job 21.30.
Pro. 16.4. Acts 3.19, 1 Pet. 1.10 Luke 21.28. Joh. 5.29. Mat. 25.41. Then shall
he say, Depart, etc. therefore not before then, Mat. 7.23.

John 3.5. Except a man be born of water and the Spirit, he cannot enter into
the kingdom of heaven: compared to Romans 6.3, 4, 5. Know ye not, that so many
of us as were baptized into Jesus Christ, were baptized into his death?
Therefore we are buried with him by baptism into death; that like as Christ was
raised from the dead by the Glory of the Father, even so we also should walk in
newness of life, etc. and to these, add 1 Cor. 15.29. Else what shall they do
that are baptized for the dead, if the dead rise not at all? Why are they
baptized for the dead? These places jointly holding forth the external
Ordinance of Baptism, or sign of the new Covenant, which carries the full
representation of the whole work of Redemption, or perfect figuration of the
new Covenant; do manifestly set forth this Mortality: for the death, burial,
and resurrection of Jesus Christ cannot in the external ordinance of bap^isme
be represented, as those places ^old forth it does; but by baptizing, that is,
dipping or submerging the whole man into the water, the evidence that whole man
shall die, and whole man be raised again, by the total death and total
Resurrection of Jesus Christ.

1 Cor. 11.26, For as often as ye eat this bread, and drink this Cup, ye do
show the Lords death till he come: The bread and wine signifying his Body and
blood, as a sign of his death, show plainly that his death was total; which
could not be, if his life shrunk into his soul, and still lived. But from hence
is plain, that not only body, but life it self was offered and dyed: for Lev.
17.24. The life of all flesh is the blood thereof: compare Genesis 2.4, 5. But
flesh with the life thereof, which is the blood thereof, shall you not eat, and
surely your blood of your lives will I require, at the hand of every beast will
I require, and at the hand of man, etc. will I require the life of man: whosoever
sheddeth man's blood, by man shall his blood be shed. To these, add 2 Samuel
1.16.8.27, 28. and 16.8. Mat. 23.30, 35. with various suchlike places; all
which plainly show the life of all flesh, as well of man as of beast, is in the
blood; else Christ's death, by the representation of his blood, could not be set
forth, nor could any by the effusion thereof die: but his Soul, blood, or life,
was poured out unto death: therefore his death was not in part, but of the
whole man.

Psalm. 89.48. What man is he that lives and shall not see death? shall he
deliver his soul from the hand of the grave?

Acts 1.13. He seeing this before, spoke of the Resurrection of Christ, that
his soul was not left in hell, neither did his flesh see corruption.

Eccl. 4.1, 2, 3. does show, that the living do suffer oppression, but to the
dead is none: and chap. 9.4, 5. they know not any thing; For a living dog is
better then a dead Lion: Therefore Psalm. 146.2. David says, I will sing
praises unto my God while I have any Being; implying, that in death there is no
humane being.

James 4.14. Our life is even a vapor that appears for a little time, and
then vanishes away.

Rev. 16.3. Every living soul in the sea died, chap, 20.4, 5. dead souls lived
again.

CHAP. IV. Objections extorted from Scripture Answered.
OBject. 1. Therefore we are always confident, knowing that whilst we are at
home in the body, we are absent from the Lord: we are confident, I say, and
willing rather, to be absent from the body, and to be present with the Lord, 2
Cor. 5.6, 8.

Whence is inferred a present enjoyment of Glory immediately after death.

I Answer, that both the foregoing and subsequent matter deny such an
Interpretation, or consequence: for before, wishing to be clothed with our
House from Heaven, on which is this expression of being present with the Lord,
he expounds, that his meaning is thereby, that mortality might be swallowed up
of life; or as he says, 1 Cor. 15.53. that this corruptable (man) might put on
incorruption, and this mortal put on immortalty: And the following matter of
the said words, being laid down as the reason or ground why he so spoke, prove,
that by his [ presence with the Lord] he meant nothing else, but his state
after the Resurrection: for says he, We must all appear before the
iudgment-seat of Christ, that every one, etc, verse. 1.

Object. 2. For I am in a strait betwixt two, having a desire to depart, and to
be with Christ, which is far better: nevertheless, to abide in the flesh is
much needful for you, Phil. 1.23, 14.

I answer, This is of the same nature, therefore must have the same
Interpretation: for Paul did not preach one thing to the Philippians, and the
contrary to the Corinthians. Besides, such manner of expressions are not
contradictory to this mortality: for though there be long time to the Living
till the Resurrection, there is none to the Dead: for from Adams death to his
Resurrection at the end of the World, will be to him, as the twinkling of an
eye to the Living: yea, the twinkling of an eye to the living, is more time,
then a thousand, yea ten thousand years is to the dead: For Being only
commensurates with Time, or length of days: not to Be, cannot possibly be
capable thereof: So that the Livings tedious anniversary expectation of the
Resurrection, and end of their faith, is not a twinkling to the grave: the
livings Future is the deads Present: Therefore, it is well figurated in
Scripture by sleep, as, slept with his Fathers, 1 Kings 11.43. fallen asleep
in Christ, Acts 7.60. and 13.36. 1 These. 4.13. and Psalm. 76.6. it is a Dead
sleep.
1 Cor. 15.18. etc. not that it is so long a time to the dead, but that in
nature there is nothing so represents death, or non-being, as sleep: So that
this may take away all carnal security: for who would not watch and pray
overnight, that knows he must dye in the morning; live well, and be wary to
day, that must rise and answer to morrow; believe to day, that would not be
damned but saved to morrow? This administers comfort to the righteous, but
terror to the wicked. Therefore Christ speakeing of his coming to Judgment,
says, I come quickly, and my reward is with me; to let all men know, that in
death there is no delay, their reward is present, he will not stay an instant:
And further to confirm it, says again, Surely I come quickly, Amen: even so
come Lord Jesus.

Object. 3. Thou fool, this night shall thy soul be required of thee. Luke.
12.20.

Answ. The life of the whole person, and not such as is fancied of the soul,
except it had a mouth to eat, drink, etc. as verse. 9.

Object. 4. And it came to pass as her soul was in departing, Genesis 35.18. Ergo,
there is such a thing as the Soul, which continues it is Being after death.

Answ. No such matter; for the sense of words is, as she was dying, or life a
departing, for the following words say she dyed; which could not be, if her
soul (her constitutive part) lived still, no more then a man can be said to
lose his hand, when he loses a finger.

Object. 5. And he stretched himself upon the Child three times, and cried unto
the Lord, and said, O Lord my God, pray thee, let this Child's soul come into
him again: And the Lord heard his voice, and the soul of the Child came into
him again, and he revived. 1 King. 17.21, 22. And Job 14.22. It is said, his
flesh upon him shall have pain, and his soul within him shall mourn.

Ergo, there is such a thing as the soul.

Answ. If it be meant life or breath, whose Being is consistent and terminated
in a corpulent union: For, by that of the Child, is meant his breath or life,
the thing that his corpulent matter wanted; as verse. the 17. implies, which
says, his sickness was so sore, that there was no breath left in him:
Therefore, that which was gone, was prayed for, his breath or life, as his
Answer further proves, which was, and it revived.

And by Soul in that of Job is meant, his conscience; whose seat is in the
reasonable and memorative Faculties. Therefore, the use of the word Soul in
those places, does not prove such a thing in man as is supposed: For in
Scripture it is variously used upon various occasions. It is put for the
Stomach. Pro. 27.7. for the eyes* Jer. 13.17. for the heart, 1 Samuel 18. for
God, Pro. 9.16. Heb. 10.38. Jer. 14.17. for the dead body, Psalm. 16.10. for the
whole man, Lev. 7.19. and 4.1. Acts 7.14. Number. 15.39. Romans 13.1. Genesis 12.5. and
46. Acts 2.41. 1 Pet. 3.20. for breath, Act. 20.10. for life, Isa. 53.17.

Therefore, from those places those parts may as well be proved so many Souls,
or Spirits of immortality, as from those where it is put for breath or life,
it is Being be proved, or such an immortal existence to be in the body.

But to this Objection might be added Christ's raising of Lazarus and others
from the dead: and it would make a very good plea for Purgatory, Because from
hell there is no returning, and from heaven none could be thankful to be called
again: and it cannot be supposed that Christ would work miracles for any, for
which they should not have cause to be thankful to him: and therefore these
persons raised from the dead, if they shall be supposed to have immortal Souls,
their return must needs be from some one of the Popes supposed Lymbocs or other.

Object. 6. For which cause we faint not; for though our outward man perish,
yet the inward is renewed day by day.

Ergo, there is soul and body in man.

Answ. It is not said, though our flesh perish, yet our souls are renewed; then
'twere something to little purpose: but it is said, our outward man, which
compared with what is meant by inward man, must needs be whole man; for by
inward man is meant faith or work of grace, (2 Cor. 5.17.) which is no part of
natural man: so that without it or it is renewing we are men perfect, as well as
with it.

Object. 7. Who knows the spirit of man, that goes upward; and the spirit of
a beast that goes downward to the earth? Wherefore man has a soul that goes
presently to Heaven, but the beasts to the earth.

Answ. It cannot bear the sense; for immediately before, he says, their breath
is all one, there is no difference: as the one dies, so dies the other, and
goes to one place, the dust: Therefore, if the beasts be reversed into the
elements, so must man's. The meaning I take to be thus, that such a wonderful
thing is the breath of a man, that breaths upward, and the breath of a beast
that breaths downward, (for spirit signifies breath;) according to that of
Ovid: Pronaque cum spectent animalia caetera terram,
Os Homini sublime dedit, coelumque videre
Jussit, and erectos ad sidera tollere vultus.
that it is Faculty how it is, is past finding out: for Art in all her
imitations could never touch that secret with her pensill.

Object. 8. Fear not them which kill the body, but are not able to kill the
soul; but rather fear him, who is able to destroy both soul and body in Hell.

Answ. This carries the face indeed of the souls immortality: but if the
interpretation must be confined to that sense, it overthrowes the current of
the whole Scripture: Wherefore, my opinion of it is, that by [not able to kill
the soul] is meant, (as Luke has it, chap. 12.4.) have no more that they can
do: that is, though they have power over this life, or the natural Body, that
is sown in corruption; they have none over the Spiritual, that is raised in
incorruption: which spiritual Bodies of men raised from the dead, are by Saint
John in Rev. 20 4, 5. termed Souls: I saw the Souls (says he) of those that
were beheaded for Christ, and they lived and reigned with him a thousand years:
But the rest of the dead lived not again, until the thousand years were ended:
the Souls then that lived and reigned with him, are none other then the persons
that were first raised by him from the dead at his coming, over whom none has
power but God alone, who therefore is most chiefly to be feared. This does not
set forth any immortality before the Resurrection, but shows, that only that
is in Gods hand, and he only able to touch it, that is, cast it into Hell.
That this must be so expounded, I further prove, from the non-entitie of Hell;
for there can be no casting into Hell, before Hell be; No Hell till the
Resurrection.
which though it be ordained of old, Isa. 30.33. it is but in posse, not in
esse till the Resurrection: for satisfaction, it is convenient to declare what
we mean by Hell: for Hell is diversely used in Scripture: It is put for the
grave, Psalm. 16.10. and 55.15. Isa. 14.15. for the Whale in which Jonah was,
Jon. 2.2. for Satan's Kingdom leading to Hell, Mat. 16.18. for Satan, or his
malignant Spirits, Jam. 3.6. for the place of the damned, Mat. 5.29. and 10.28.
Luke 12.5. and 16.23. 2 Pet. 2.4. and this last [the place of the damned] is
that which we mean by Hell: and it is likewise variously called: as, outer
darkness, Mat. 22.13. and 23.33. wrath to come, 1 These. 1.10. and 5.9. Chains
of darkness, 2 Pet. 2.4. Jude 6. eternal fire, Jude 23. second death* Rev.
20.6. bottomless pit, Rev. 9.2. place of torment, Rev. 14.10. and 20.10. Lake
of fire, Rev. 29.20. and 21.8. everlasting punishment, Mat. 25.41, 46 blackness
of darkness for ever, Jude 13. Those several expressions are generally taken to
set forth the end of the Reprobate, or the execution of Gods wrath upon them:
Therefore if none of the forementioned places that Hell is put for, save that
of the place of the damned, be taken for Hell, then most of those several
expressions suite with it, yea, declare it: but the expressions in general
grant no immediate execution after this death, but imply the contrary: as we
may see, if we examine them.

First, in Mat. 22.13. when it is called outer darkness, and 23. verse. 33.
damnation of Hell, compared with cap. 25.41. where it is said, Then shall he
say unto them on the left hand, Depart from me ye cursed into everlasting fire
prepared for the Devil and his Angels: to this add 2 Cor. 5.10. For we must
all appear before the Judgment Seat of Christ, that every one may receive the
things done in the flesh, whether good or evil: and to these add 1 These. 1.10.
and 5.9. where it is called, wrath to come: which thus compared, show plainly,
it is to come: else execution must go before Judgment; which in a
Commonwealth would be ridiculous injustice, as first to hang men, and then
judge them. At the day of Judgment we all must receive our reward according to
our deeds good or bad, THEN shall he say unto them on his left hand, etc. and
not before THEN: for it cannot be twice received: therefore, it is fitly called
wrath to come, and the very Devils confirm this themselves, Mat. 8.25. art
thou come to torment us before the time? which proves plainly, that the time
of their torment was not come: and if the Devil cannot be believed, God further
cleares it, 2 Pet. 2.4. For if he spared not the Angels that sinned, but cast
them down to Hell, and delivered them into Chains of darkeness, to be
reserved unto Judgment. And Jude 6. The Angels which kept not their first
estate, but left their own habitation, he has reserved in everlasting Chains,
unto the Judgment of the great day: In both which places it is said, they are
reserved unto Judgment: and Jude verse. 7. to the Reprobate is reserved the
blackness of darkeness for ever: and to this add Rev. 20.10, 11, 12, 13, 14,
15. which clearly show, that at the day of Judgment both Devils and Reprobate
together shall be cast into the Lake of fire: Therefore, if reserved for both
till then, I Will be bold to say, it shall not be till, nor before then.

Moreover, Rev. 19.20. it is said, the beast and the false Prophet, and them
that worshipped his Image, were cast alive into the lake of fire and brimstone:
and chap. 20.10. And the Devil that deceived them, was cast into the Lake: and
this, verse. 6. and 14. is called the second death: therefore, this casting into
the Lake must be after the Fall of Antichrist; and after he has done
deceiving, and not before: for if he be there now, he has done deceiving: for
once there, it is impossible he should deceive: but that he has not, there is
more witnesses, then stars in the Sky, or sand in the Sea; our innumerable
sins, whose just reward is the second death.

If it be Questioned, where then the Devils are?

Observe, they are but Creatures, and such as are fallen from their Heavenly
mansions, therefore, within the Sublunarie compass; so that as the Earth is the
proper place for ponderous and gross bodies; and the Devils being more subtle
and aiereal, may be referred to the air; and not without ground from
Scripture: for Ephesians. 2.2. the Devil is called the Prince of the power of the
air: so that their casting into Hell, must be the air: and Hell may as well
be put for the air in those places, as in other for the grave, etc. their
prison, or place of custody, as the grave to the dead. And Rev. 12.9. it is
said, he was cast into the earth, and his Angels, etc.

This premised, Hell and Damnation not yet; well might Ignorance strain it
self into such uncertain conceits about the place of it is Being, and it not as
yet: Some have feigned it in Mount Aetna, some in the Element of Fire, which is
betwixt the upper Region of the Air and the Globe of the Moon; some to be in
the Caves of the Earth, and Conduits of the Sea; some only in the Sea, as
Archer in his Personal reign of Christ mentions, because the Devils were cast
into the Swine, which ran violently down a steep place into the Sea, Mar. 5.3.
surely, they might as well say, they have Milstones about their necks, because
it is also said, Better a millstone were tied about his neck, and he cast into
the bottom of the sea: for the one follows no more then the other: Some say,
it is in the Earth, equally so far distant from the surface, as Heaven is above
it: as Phillips, etc. and this he labors to confirm with Scripture: as Pro.
15.4. The way of life is above to the wise, that he may depart from Hell
beneath: and Phil. 2.10. That in the name of Jesus every knee should bow, of
things in Heaven, and things in Earth, and things under the Earth: i. e. in
Hell, says he. And Luke 16. The rich man saw Abraham afar off, and Lazarus in
his bosom: And Ezekiel. 31.18. Yet shall thou be brought down with the trees of
Eden unto the nether parts of the Earth.

But those and such like places which literally seem to import Hell, conclude
the thing no more, then other literal expressions prove God to have corpulent
eyes, ears, hands, etc. but are expressions after the manner of men, to show
the gradation of condition betwixt the wicked and the righteous, the one the
extremest debasement, the other the extremest exaltation; which could not be
better figurated to sense, then by Heaven and Earth.

And in particular thus: The first, as Prove. 15.24. is literal or figurative,
which interpretation can neither be canonical nor rational; for thereby wise
men must not tread upon the ground, but must walk upon the Air, or upon the
water, as Christ and Peter upon the Sea, (Mat. 14.25, 29.) and there only the
way of life: for it says, their way is above. For the second; as, Phil. 2.10.
that is both prophetical and figurative, to show how in process of time all
Degrees shall subject to Christ: Angels, Men, Beasts, Devils, and Death, whose
Degrees are thus literally expressed to sense, by Heaven, Earth, under the
Earth; or Angels that are highest in dignity, and so caelestial; Men and
sublunars the middle, and so terrestrial; Devils and Death the lowest, and so
subterrestrial.

The third, as Luke 16. is parabolical: (of which more anon) and it seems by
this, if Hell be so deep in the Earth, the Damned have wonderful good eyes, to
see through the earths gross body, and the Heavens 12. Spheres into the Coelum
Empyreum, to spy Lazarus in Abraham's bosom; or else Heaven must be there too,
even in the center of the Earth: this is the consequence of such parabolical
Arguments. And the 4. or last, as Ezekiel. 31.18. is akin to those: for, it is but
to show, how that Pharaoh in the hight of his pride and fury was brought to
confusion, which in the 15. verse. is expressed by, In the day when he went down
into the grave; and verse. 14. unto death, to the nether parts of the earth, to
the pit; and verse. 17. into Hell: all which show but the sudden death and utter
confusion of Pharaoh and his Army: and at the utmost, Hell here can be but put
for death, or the grave; and not for any such place of torment.

Object. 9. Such a one caught up into the third Heavens: how that he was caught
up into Paradise, 2 Cor. 12.2, 4. there Paradise is put for the third Heaven:
And to this compare Christ's Answer to the thief upon the Cross: This day thou
shall be with me in Paradise: Therefore, Paradise is the third Heaven, the
place for the souls of the righteous, whither the Thiefes soul went that day.

Answ. Christ was not there that day himself; for he was three days and three
nights in the grave after his death: during which time, all the soul he had,
was there detayned by death, as is evident by Psalm. 16.10. compared with Acts
2.31. for if it were not so, then Christ's humane nature tasted of death (not
wholly) but partially only, and thereby wrought not a whole, but a partial
redemption to humane nature; because the soul, the most considerable part
thereof, dyed not, being immortal (as is fancied:) which if true, Then
believers will not be complete in or by Christ, as Saint Paul affirms them to
be, Col. 2.10. having immortality only to their bodies by Christ, but not to
their souls, these being immortal before. And then Christ by the Gospel brought
life and immortality to light, only for the bodies of men, and not for their
souls, 2 Timothy 1.10. and then believers at the Resurrection will have two
several and distinct lives and immortalities; the one of their souls, by
nature; and the other of their bodies, by Christ: which is absurd to imagine.

Besides, if the Thiefe's souls was that day with Christ's Soul in Paradise, a
place of glory and exaltation; Then humane nature had reward and exaltation
before Christ's Resurrection, or his conquest over death, even whilst the
Salvation of all mankind was in suspense, yea, and before its justification;
for Christ dying for our sins, rose again for our justification, Romans 4.25. And
further, if Christ's soul was that day in Paradise, then the Apostles Creed may
be questioned as untrue, which together with Scripture affirms, that Christ
that day was both dead and buried; neither of which can be true, if his soul
(the principalest part of his humanity) remained alive, and ascended that day
into Paradise. Besides, if that fancy had been true, then it ought, and without
doubt should have been put as an Article of the Creed, to have been believed by
all Christians; and had been as necessary a point to have been known and
believed by them, as any other Article there put concerning Christ.

Object. 10. But the meaning of the words may be, that the thiefes Soul was
that day in Paradise with the Godhead, and not with Christ's Soul.

Answ. If so, then this will follow, namely, that the theifs humane nature was
exalted before Christ's humane nature; which will contradict St. Paul, Col.
1.18. where he says, that Christ was the first born from the dead, that in all
things he might have the pre-eminence: and Christ's own reward and exaltation
went not before, but followed after (as an effect of) his sufferings and
conquest over death, as many Scriptures do witness: For when he had by himself
purged our sins, he sat down on the right hand of the Majesty on high, Heb.
1.3. we see Jesus was made a little lower then the Angels, for the suffering of
death, Crowned with glory and Honor, Heb. 2.9. Christ being found in the
fashion of a man, humbled himself, and became obedient unto death, even the
death of the Cross: wherefore God also has highly exalted him, and given Him a
name above every name, etc. Psalm. 2.8, 9. And no man in his wits can be so
senseless, as not to understand his Resurrection to intervene his suffering, and
this his exaltation.

Besides, since the Godhead is everywhere, how could the Thief be absent from
it anywhere?

Wherefore by no means may it be granted that the thief was in Paradise that
day, or can be there before his restoration or Resurrection; unless he were or
can be there with his broken legs: for Christ said not Thy Soul, but Thou, i.
e. Thou Theife, or Thou man shall be with me: And he that can make a Thief of
him in the sense for which he suffered, or a man either, without his body, is a
better workman then I know any.

And if the soul (as they say) have all life in it self, and it not subject to
death, and be the humanity and constitution of Man; and the corpulent matter,
the bulk of the body, be but an instrument whereby the soul acts and moves,
and all the action and motion of the body be merely instrumental; then neither
Christ nor the Malefactor died that day, nor can any man (as man) die: for
thereby his Manhood, that which makes him man, his Soul, is made immortal,
unsubject to death: But the Scripture speaking of the resurrection of Christ, (
Acts 2.31.) says, His soul was not left in Hell, neither his flesh did see
corruption: and Acts 8.33. For his life is taken from the earth: and Isa. 53.8.
He was cut off out of the Land of the living. All which could not be, by the
fabulous conceit of the soul: for the first place (as Act. 2.31.) does show,
that not only his flesh, but life and being was subject or conquered by death:
and the second, it was taken from the earth, shows it returned thither, else
could it not be raised from thence: the third, he was cut off out of the land
of the living, shows no life remained in the soul; for if his soul retained his
life, and entered Paradise, which the Soularies make to be the Land it self of
the living; he never dyed: But his soul (even all the soul he had) was made an
offering for sin, yea, he poured it out unto death, Isa. 53.10, 12. Therefore,
this opinion of the soul cannot stand in competition with the sufferings of
Christ, but flatly denies his death: So that from the expression of This day
shall thou be with me in Paradise, a present Soulary entrance into glory
cannot be wrested under or without the denial of his death.

Object. 11. It is said, Heb. 9.24. That Christ entered into heaven it self;
what is that, but the third heaven or Paradise, into which Saint Paul was caught
up, before mentioned, and whereinto the Thiefes soul entered the day of his
death?

Answ. This place of the Hebrews has reference to Christ's ascension after his
Resurrection, and to his entrance into the highest heaven, and Tabernacle of
God, not made with hands, whereof the Holy of holies, into which the
High Priest entered once a year, was a figure, made with hands, according to
the pattern of this heavenly house or Tabernacle which was showed to Moses in
the Mount; as by comparing Heb. 6.20. Heb. 8.1, 5. Heb. 9.1, 23, 24. and Act.
7.44. with Exo. 25.9, 40. may be seen: and is the same wherein Christ tells his
Disciples are many mansions, and that he will go and prepare a place there for
them, and that he will come again, and receive them to himself, John 14.1, 2,
3. And in the interim, he there appears in the presence of God for them; as
Heb. 9.24.

Object. 12. In 1 Pet. 1.3, 4. Peter says that it is an Inheritance
incorruptible, and undefiled, and that fades not away, reserved in heaven for
the Saints: and S. Paul, 2 Cor. 5. says, it is eternal in the heavens:
wherefore it being for the Saints enjoyment, the souls of the Saints presently
after death, must ascend to enjoy it; else can they not enjoy it at all: we
nowhere read that their bodies shall at any time ascend thither.

Answ. Saint Paul there says, It is eternal in the heavens, but says not that
it is eternally there: for Saint Peter in the 13 verse. of the same chap. says,
that it is to be brought thence to the Saints, at the Revelation of Jesus
Christ, (and not that the Saints shall be taken up to it:) and this will not be
so brought down to them for their enjoyment, till after the Resurrection, and
when the new Heavens, and the new Earth, are created; as is evident in Rev.
21.1, 2, 3. and When mortality is swallowed up of life, then, and not till
then, shall the Saints be clothed with this their house from Heaven, as Paul in
the same place, verse. 2, 4. declares.

Object. 13. By faith, Enoch was translated, Heb. 11.5. And Elijah went to
heaven in a whirlewind, 2 King. 2.11, 12.

Answ. This no way contributes any thing to the fancy of the soul in a
Paradise, but rather altogether confounds the conceit: for Elijah left his
mantle, not his body behind him, when he ascended; and Enoch was also wholly
taken up.

And therefore, Christ in the speech of the Theifs being with him in Paradise,
did not intend that present day, but at the time of his coming into his
Kingdom, he should be there with him (according to the theifes petition:)
which Kingdom was not then shortly to be expected, but is yet to come; nor
will it be, until after Christ's coming again in the clouds, with power and
great Glory, as is evident, Luke 19.11, 12, 15. Luke 21.27, 31.

Besides, if Christ himself was that day in Paradise, a place of glory, he was
there unglorified, or else being there glorified, he afterward became
unglorified again: for so he told Mary he was after his Resurrection, Joh.
20.17. neither of which can reasonably be imagined. And it is palpable, that
many errors are grounded upon mis-translations of the Scripture; and this
place, though the genuine signification of the words thereof be rendered, yet
may it be reputed within the nature of mis-translation: for we have manifestly
cleared, that the sense of [ this day thou shall be with me in Paradise]
cannot, as it is vulgarly taken, stand with the foundation of Religion, or with
solid reason: Therefore there must be some fault in the English Text; which if
narrowly examined may appear: for if the words in the Original be thus
rendered, (...) that is, And Jesus said unto him, Verily I say unto thee to
day, Thou shall be with me in Paradise; which differs from the common copies
only in the transposition of a comma, incident to transcribing and printing,
and then the objection from hence vanishes; i. e. To day I tell thee; not,
This day thou shall be with me in Paradise: And well might he use that
expression, [ I tell thee this day] as a trial of the sincerity of his faith;
for if he could believe in him that day, or present time of his sufferings, he
should be with him in paradise; or when he should appear in his Kingdom, he
should appear with him in glory: or thus, [ I tell thee to day, Thou shall be
with me in Paradise] is as if he should say, I tell thee this day, which is the
day of my suffering and of thy conversion, that as sure as this is the Day, so
sure thou shall be saved, or be with me at my coming into my Kingdom: where
the attestation of [ This Day,] is as an assurance, pledge, or witness of
Christ's mercy toward him, and as a trial of his faith therein. The like
expression Paul uses, Acts 20.26. Wherefore I take you to record this day,
that I am pure from the blood of all men.

Obj. 14. Then shall the dust return to the earth as it was, and the spirit
shall return to God who gave it. Eccl. 7.12.

Answ. By spirit cannot be meant such a thing as the soul, except all souls go
to God, and none to the Devil: for it is indifferently spoken of all: but by
spirit is meant life, which has various expressions in Scripture: it is the
will of God, that dust shall be made man, and live, and it is done, and he
lives; and his will that it shall die, and it dies, or returns to what it
was: he withdraws his communicated power, and man cease. [ The Spirit shall
return] the communication, power, or faculty of life shall cease: [ to God that
gave it] to him that communicated, or gave it, in whom we live, move, and have
our being: no otherwise man's spirit (or life) returns to God that gave it: he
takes away the breath, and the creatures dye, and return to their dust, Psalm.
104.29. for the life of man is even a vapor that appears for a little time,
and then vanishes away. Jam. 4.14.

Object. 15. And they stoned Steven, calling upon God, and saying Lord Jesus
receive my spirit. Act. ^7.59.

Answ. This is a commendation of his life or being into the hands of God, in
whom with Christ our lives are hid, Col. 3.3. as a full assurance of hope and
faith in the Resurrection, that when Christ who is our life, should appear, we
also might appear with him in glory: For God is not the God of the dead, but of
the living: for all live unto him, Luke 20.38. And thus, and no otherwise, was
his spirit commended, or returned to him that gave it, whose spirit goes
forth, and we are renewed, Psalm. 104.30. answerable to that of the two
witnesses, in whom the spirit of life from God, after they had lien dead three
days and an half, entered into them, and they stood upon their feet.

Object. 16. God breathed into his nostrils the breath of life, Genesis 2.7. Ergo,
man has an immortal soul.

Answ. Then so is the soul of a Beast; for Solomon says, their breath is all
one, Eccl. 3.19. and David reckoning up the creatures, and man amongst them,
says indifferently of them all, God hides his face, and they are troubled; he
takes away their breath, they die, and retrun to their dust, Psalm. 104.29. and
this is further amplyfied in Genesis 1.33. to every thing in the Earth wherein
there is a living soul, etc. and cap. 7.21, 22. all flesh dyed, in whose
nostrils was the breath of life: and Number. 31.28. all which make no difference
betwixt them, but as the one dies, so dies the other, and man has no
pre-eminence above a beast: For what man is he that lives, and shall not see
death, or deliver his soul from the hand of the grave? Selah. Psalm. 89.48.

Object. 17. And it came to pass the Beggar dyed, and was carried by Angels
into Abraham's bosom, etc. Luke 16. from the 22. to the end.

Answ. There was never such a man as Dives or Lazarus, or ever such a thing
happened, no more then Jothams Trees did walk and talk, Judge. 9.8. but it was
a Parable, to prove, that nothing is more effectual for conversion, then the
ordinary preaching of the Word by the true Ministers or Ambassadors of God;
such as Moses, and true Prophets of old; and as Christ, his Apostles, and
Prophets, and true ministers since. Further, the consequence concerning the
soul is but drawn from the literal sense, in which sense I shall deny it
canonical Scripture; for it makes in that sense more for bodies then the souls
present being in Heaven or Hell, v. 23, 24. and makes Abraham the Father of
the Damned, verse. 24, 25, 27, 30. and verse. 22. Dives dyed and was buried; and
yet verse. 23. he lift up his eyes being in torment, and sees Abraham, etc. and
verse. 25. he cried for Lazarus to dip the tip of his finger to cool his
tongue; which in the literal sense thus applicated, must needs be
contradictory, unless his eyes, tongue, and Lazarus finger was not buried, or
their souls had corporeal corpulent members; which to conceit is ridiculous:
Therefore, from this place the Resurrection of the body before the day of
Judgment (even as soon as a man is buried) may better be proved, then such a
present Soulary entrance into Heaven or Hell.

Object. 18. By which also he went, and preached to them in prison.

Answ. [By which] that is, by that whereby he was quickened, or raised from the
dead, his divine Spirit, as the foregoing words (whereon the sense of those
depend) does evidence, verse. 18. Christ once suffered, etc. dead in flesh, but
quickened by the spirit, (verse. 19.) by which also he went, etc. So that he
went and preached by that, whereby he was quickened or raised: Therefore, the
preaching here meant, was not by that which was raised, but by that which did
raise; which was ministerially, as the following words further evidence,
showing to whom he preached, even those which were disobedient in the days of
Noah, on whom the long-suffering of God waited while the Arc was a preparing:
those were the spirits here meant, the wicked of those days, which are now in
prison, that is, dead, or imprisoned in the Elements. Here the grave or death
is called a prison, as indeed it is, for therein all that dye are reserved in
the chains of death (the Elements) not to be delivered till Judgment, Rev.
20.13. according to Job 3.18. there the prisoners rest together.

Object. 19. Joh. 11.26. Whosoever lives and believes on me, shall never die.

Answ. [Whosoever liveth] does not in this place import the state of this life;
for should it, believers should not die this death: but relates to the state
or life at the Resurrection; as the foregoing words, on which the sense of
these depend, evidence, viz. I am the Resurrection, and the life: he that
believes in me, though he were dead, yet shall he live, (to which these words
are annexed) And whosoever lives, and believes in me, etc. which is to say,
Every believer, though dead, shall live, or be raised again; and living or
raised again, shall never dye any more; that is, shall escape the second death,
Joh. 5.24.

Secondly, This life may be reckoned from the action of belief: for God calls
things that are not, as if they were, Romans 4.17. yea all, even the dead, live
unto him, Luke 20.38. And so the believer never dies in Gods account. Romans
14.7, 8, 9. None of us lives to himself, and none of us dies to himself: for
whether we live, we live unto the Lord; and whether we die, we die unto the
Lord: whether we live, therefore, or die, we are the Lords: for this end Christ
both dyed, and rose, and revived, that he might be Lord both of the dead and
the living.

Object. 20. Therefore glorify God in your body, and in your spirits, 1 Cor.
6.20.

Answ. Before, he called the body the Temple of the holy Ghost, verse. 29. and
verse. 15. the members of Christ; which needs must be the whole man, and not his
bare carcass: for in death who can praise the Lord? in it can be no habitation
for the holy Ghost, and therein were they to glorify God: to make Christ the
head of such members, were to make God, the God of the dead and not of the
living: therefore, by body and spirit, is meant whole man, aiming at a thorough
and perfect sanctification, as well in that which respects thought, [ the
spirit] as in that which respects action, [ the body:] inwardly to gloryfie
God, as well as outwardly to flee fornication, etc.

Object. 16. I saw under the Altar the souls of them that were slain for the
word of God, etc. and they cried with a loud voice, etc. Rev. 6.10, 11.

Answ. They were such souls as lay under the Altar slain, or sacrificed, or as
verse. 11. has it, were killed; these therefore being dead souls, or martyred
Saints, their cry must be as the cry of the blood of Abel: And the like
vision of dead Saints confirms it, as, cap. 20. verse. 4, 5. And I saw the souls
of them that were beheaded for the witness of Jesus, and they lived, and
reigned with Christ a thousand years: but the rest of the dead lived not again
till, etc. whence it is plain, that he beheld the Resurrection, or restoration
of life unto dead souls, even of them that were beheaded, but the rest lay
dead, or lived not again till, etc.

Thus much of illegitimate Objections from Scripture: Now to the probation
hereof from Procreation or Generation, and as near as I can to resolve all
occurrent Objections thereon, that shall confront.

CHAP. V. Of procreation, how from thence this Mortality is proved.
IT is supposed (as I conceive) by none, that what naturally proceeds from
Man simply by the course of nature, can be immortal, but must first taste of
mortality: And therefore there are two sorts of Opinions to maintain this
Heathenish Invention about the soul, whereon it is immortality is grounded,
which I shall chiefly encounter: the one, that it is created, and infused at
the conception, and so only Gods work. The other, that it is concepted by the
woman through the concurrence of the seed of both sexes, but not simply by the
course of nature, but by the supernatural and extraordinary assistance or
efficacy of God in conception more then in other creatures: and so partly
man's, and partly Gods work. But that I may utterly demolish the structure of
this Invention, I shall turn up the foundation of each kind in it is place: But
first I shall speak a word or two in general of Procreation it self.

That whole man is generated by man, Observe: That as the whole Tree is
potentially in the seed, and actually in time springs from it; or as many
grains of wheat are in one grain virtually, and perfectly actual in time: so
in the seed of mankind, is whole man potentially, and wholly actual in time; or
all Adams succession, which in time are propagated, were wholly in him, life
and limbs, or as it is more common, soul and body. So that whatsoever in time
is actual by procreation, it was at first potentially wholly in it is original.

Further, Generatum sequitur naturam generantis (he begat a son in his own
image, Genesis 5.3.) is not not only philosophically, but Theologically true,
Mat. 7.16. Job 4.14 Therefore mortal Adam must beget mortal children in his own
likeness, soul and body, except the soul was no part of his likeness: For that
which is immortal cannot generatively proceed from that which is mortal, as
Christ says, that which is born of the flesh is (as it self is, corruptable
mutable) flesh, John 3.6. so then by this mortal flesh cannot be generated an
immortal spirit, or soul that can subsist by it self dissolved from the flesh;
for if it should, in that act it should go beyond it self, which is impossible;
and thereby more should be done by man and woman in generation, then God did or
could do in the creation; for he neither did, or could create any thing
greater, purer, or more excellent of nature then himself, and such as could
subsist without him. But if this doctrine be true, (as Woolner in his Original
of the soul averreth) fleshly man by a fleshly generation, or mixture of the
seed of both Sexes does beget or conceive something greater, purer, and more
excellent then himself; an immortal substance, an Angelical entitie, the Soul,
that can subsist without the flesh by which it is: which is as fire without
light, earth without heaviness, grosseness, etc. should be, by which they are:
and further, the Effect to be prior dignitate, precedent to the Cause, as if a
man because a creature, should be before his Creator. But if it be Replied,
that the soul is generated by the soul, as the body by the body; I answer, then
there must be He-souls and She-souls: for without Sexes is no generation.

But now to the first sort, who say it is by infusion, or as the saying is,
Creando infunditur, and infundendo creatur.

To which I Answer, that in conception there is corruption or marring,
according the proverb, Corruption unius est generatio alterius: so that if it be
by conceiving or creating infused, and by infusion concepted or created, that
is as much to say, it is made in the marring, and marred in the making; or,
infused in the marring, and marred in the infusion: whence follows, that it is
neither conceived, created, nor infused; neither made, nor marred: but must be,
if it be, no man knows what, or how; whether an Angel, a Beast, or a Monster,
any thing, or nothing: Riddle me, riddle me what is this? a Soul! a Soul!
creando infunditur, and infundendo creatur!

Secondly, if the soul be a creature infused, then Christ did not take the
whole manhood from the seed of the woman, but worse then a bare brutish body,
a dead carcass: But Christ was made of the seed of the woman according to the
flesh, Ram. 1.3. Acts 2.30. and was as we are, sin excepted, Heb. 14.15. and
this our Image he received wholly from the woman: Therefore receiving his whole
humanity from her, the soul can be no infused creature.

Thirdly, That which brake the Serpents head was Christ's humanity: But the seed
of the woman brake the Serpents head.

Ergo.

Fourthly, If we consist of soul and body, and are not men without both, and
receive not our souls from him, but are daily created: Then Adam is the father
of no man, 2. Christ cannot be the Son of man, and so no Savior, because
thereby his manhood, constitutive part, even that which should make him man,
could not be by the seed of the woman. 3. So a man is as much a father of fleas
and lice, which receive their matter from him, as of his children. 4. Whereas
God blessed man, and bid him, as the rest of the creatures in their kind, fill
the Earth in his kind with men: then he commanded him to do more then he had
given him power for: and so to content nature, and supply her imbecility to
obey, is forced to a daily creation. 5. Then God finished not the Creation in
six days, but rested before he had done creating.

Fifthly, If the soul be infused, it must be at the conception, or after the
conception: If at the conception, then every abortive conception has an
immortal spirit in it, and must rise again: If after, then there is growth
before there is life, which is impossible; for the soul is made the vegetive as
well as the motive, sensitive or rational part: and if this immortal spirit be
something else, then we are not conceived perfect men; and as we are conceived,
so are we born, trees, brutes, or I know not what, and afterward are made men,
if we be men at all: and so Infants that die in the womb, or in the birth, are
little better then trees, and worse then beasts.

Sixthly, If the soul be not generated with the body, but a creature infused
into a dead body, for they say, the soul is forma formans, that gives life and
motion to the body: Then it is lawful to be a Nigromancer; for Nigromancie is
nothing but putting a spirit into a dead body, and so it is but an imitation of
God, and God the only Nigromancer, and all the men in the word but
Nigromatnick Apparitions, whose spirits when they have done the work for which
they were put into the bodies, desert them, as other conjured Ghosts do.

Seventhy, It is granted that the body considered merely sensitive cannot sin,
and that the body is but an instrument, or as the pen in the hand of a Writer,
to the Soul, whereby it acts and moves: Therefore, if the Soul come immediately
from God, or there be an immediate work of his in it is production, then of
necessity, that immortal thing, and not our mortal flesh, is Author of all sin,
and it only prone to all sin, and not the flesh, no more then a conduit,
though a meet instrument to convey water, is the author, or fount of water, or
prone to spring: And so Gods immediate hand is the cause of all sin, that man
had better been without this soul; for it must needs be some damnable wicked
spirit, or some Devil that God puts in him; for such as the fruit is, such must
the tree be: but the fruit is damnably wicked: Therefore, the Soul must be some
damnable wicked thing: No marvel then if Reprobates must needs sin and be
damned, since God infuses such a malignant Soul, that counsels them with Jobs
wife to curse God, and die, yea such a one as wholly works out their
condemnation: This is as if a man should break his horses legs, and then knock
out his brains for halting. If it be said the soul comes pure from God, and it
is the body that corrupts it; I answer, that this to excuse God one way,
makes him like the tyrant Mezentius, that bound living men to dead bodies, till
the putrefaction and corruption of the stinking corpse had killed them. Besides,
the mind may sin without the Action of the body, but not the body without the
mind, for a man may covet in his mind, and not act with his body, and yet sin;
but if he do with his body, and not consent with his mind, he sins not: as
for example, a man may accidentally and ignorantly kill a man by a blow, which
was never intended or aimed at him, and yet he not guilty of murder: but if he
intend it in his mind, though he never do it, he is guilty: Therefore the body
may be made sinful by the soul, but not the soul by the body.

Now to the other kind, who say, that this supernatural work by nature, is
effected by Gods special supernatural assistance, operating or applicated to
this natural aptitude, in whose mutual concurrence this immortal substance is
concepted, and in conception united to the flesh, the whole in the whole, and
the whole in every part.

To which I Answer, that there is no more special supernatural efficiency from
God in man's procreation then in other creatures, but that special gift or
natural instinct to every kind of creature given in the Creation to produce
it is kind, whether vegetative, sensitive, or rational, Genesis 1.25. 1 Cor.
15.38. for the gift or blessing is all one and the same, and alike unto all
according to their kinds, as appears, Genesis 1.22. God blessed the Fowls and
Fish, saying, Be fruitful and multiply, and fill the waters in the Seas, and
let the Fowls multiply in the Earth: And verse. 28. the self-same he speaks of
man and woman, And God blessed them, and said unto them, be fruitful, and
replenish the earth; and by this blessing, or Natures general instinct equally
unto all, men and all other creatures continue their multiplications and
procreations: So that the Fowls, Fish, etc. have as great and special
assistance as man in their conceptions and procreations, equally mediate and
natural: Therefore, if by man's conception an Angelical immortal Soul is
producted, so likewise is there the like in other creatures. The result of all
which is this, that as Fish, Birds, and Beasts each in their kind procreate
their kind without any transcendency of nature: So man in his kind begets
man, corruptable man begets nothing but what is corruptable, not half mortal,
half immortal; half Angel, half man, but complete man totally mortal: for
through mortal organs immortality cannot be conveyed, or therein possibly
reside.

If it be scrupled, that this destroys the hope of our faith; I Answer, It
does but remove it from a false principle to a true, from a deceitful fancy to
an infallible object, the Resurrection: For though I ascribe nothing actually
to nature, but corruption, yet potentially I ascribe incorruption: as to the
kernel of an Apple a Tree may not actually, yet potentially be ascribed: So I
grant, that nature produces the Seed, to which when she has done her
elementary work, even all that she can do, and in all things transient
finished her course, even from that corrupted seed Christ supernaturally
raises an incorruptable body, 1 Cor. 15.36. Thou fool, that which thou sowest
is not quickened except it die: it is sown in corruption, it is raised in
incorruption; it is sown a natural body, it is raised a spiritual body:
Therefore nothing of man can be immortal, but what first has seen corruption.
So that, if that which is made the better and most excellent part of Man,
without which he is NO MAN (as is held) titled the Soul, shall not see
corruption, it shall not participate of the immortality purchased by Christ,
but must needs perish, except there be Ens extra Deum, as that strange invented
Entitie must needs be: And so consequently, NO MAN shall be saved: And as
before it incurred this Absurdity, that the Souls of the Damned shall not
perish, but stand as well as the Stative Angels: So by this, the Souls both of
the righteous and wicked shall for ever cease, and never be immortalized at the
Resurrection: And thence the denial both of Resurrection, Condemnation, and
Salvation, Heaven, and Hell, God and Christ, is inavoydable: After rusheth in
the Epicurean Blasphemy, Let us eat, and drink, for to morrow we die: And so,
so many bellyes, so many Gods, and no other.

It is Objected, That the rareness of conception argues a supernatural
immediate assistance essential, without which the soul cannot be.

Answ. That comes by a natural defect, and not by withholding of Gods
immediate hand, else he should have a special and immediate hand in Adultery:
And so Whoremongers and Adulterers set God a work to create Souls for their
Bastards, which is to make God a slave to their lusts.

Further, it is Objected, That God has from eternity decreed concerning man
above all creatures, both who should come into the world, and at what time:
Therefore, accordingly he must have a work in man's conception above other
creatures.

Answ. No such thing follows: for time and number may be appointed, and yet
the due course of nature proceed, as well without as with an immediate
assistance, toward man in his kind, as in Beasts in their kind.

Moreover, Woolner in his Treatise on the Soul, page 115. says, That the more
spiritual parts, and chiefly the Soul is (but partly mediately, partly
immediately) conceived at the first instant, or union of the seed of both
Sexes: For by it (page 127. he says,) the corporeal parts are prepared and
perfected: Therefore, it must of necessity be at the first instant, or else no
conception: And page 129. That all Souls, as well of Beasts, as of men, are
essentially as perfect at the first instant of conception as ever afterward.
And page 97. he says, The Soul can live without the body, and cannot be
corrupted by it.

Answ. That then it follows, If a woman miscarry, immediately after that very
instant, that the Soul of that Effluction or unshapen deformed piece of
congealed blood being immortal, must needs continue its immortality; and that
Effluction as well as perfect bodies, shall be raised again: for if degrees of
corporal perfection hinder, then those that are born imperfect, as without
legs, arms, or hands, or any other member, as diverse are, they shall never
be raised again, and so out of the compass of Christ's death: and though it
should be granted, that Christ's death is denied an Embryo, yet that souls
immortality cannot be nullified; for immortality once begun, must never have an
end: and he says, it cannot suffer with the flesh: therefore, if not with the
whole mass of man's corpulency grown to it is full perfection, much less with an
Embryo, that is ten times less imperfect and invalid: for he says, it is as
perfect at the first instant as ever afterward: therefore, it must be saved or
damned (if there be any for others) but no man knows how or which way, except
it can be proved, Christ dyed for bare souls, souls without bodies; which will
puzzle the cunningest soul that ever was made in the marring, and marred in the
making.

Further it is objected, Creatures propagated out of kind, as by buggery; as,
Apes, Satyrs, etc. are supposed, are not endowed with reasonable souls: Ergo,
souls are created immediately, or however of necessity, Gods superficient power
is joined to the propagation thereof:

Answ. As I will not altogether confidently affirm they have rational souls, so
will I not altogether deny it: For in man it is some organical deficiency more
or less, that is the cause, that some men are less rational then others; for
some have abundance of wisdom, and some are mere fools: and in children,
whose Organs are not come to perfection, there is not so much as there is in an
Ape: This premised, why in some measure, as far as by those improper Organs can
be expressed, may they not be rational, though not in the same degree as is
capable of God, as well as Infants who are as incapable pro tempore as Apes?
But perchance, it will be replied, that then Christ dyed for Apes, as well as
for Infants. I answer, Christ dyed not for the rational part separated from the
material, nor the material from the rational, if there should be such
Buggery-births, or if by that unnatural course they should meet in one, (which
is impossible, for the blessing of procreating any thing in its kind, is to
the kind) for that neither, but for the natural production by the conjunction
of both Sexes legitimate from Adam, and not such unnatural by-blowes: As for
births out of kind, they come within the compass of the Curse, and cannot any
ways claim privilege in the Restoration, but must expect with Thorns,
Briers, and all manner of Vermin, and Filth which breeds on corruption, to
be done away, when mortality is swallowed up of life. For all other Creatures
as well as man shall be raised and delivered from Death at the Resurrection: my
Reasons and grounds for it be these. First, that otherwise, the curse in Adam
would extend further then the blessing in Christ, contrary to the Scriptures:
For as in Adam all dye, even so in Christ shall all be made alive, 1 Cor.
15.22. For the wages of sin is death, but the gift of God is eternal life
through Jesus Christ our Lord, Romans 6.23. Therefore, Death coming upon all the
Creatures by the sin of Adam, no death being before sin, life shall come upon
all by Christ. Secondly, the Beasts were not given man to eat in the Innocence,
but to all flesh wherein was the Living Soul.
breath of life was given the green herb for meat: Therefore, the death of the
Beasts, etc. was part of the Curse, and so to be done away by Christ. Thirdly,
If the other Creatures do not rise again, then Christ shall not conquer death,
but when it is said, O Death where is thy sting, O grave where is thy victory?
it will be answered, In Beasts, because they are still captivated under its
bondage: But as by one man death entered into the world, Romans 5.12. and by man
came Death, by man shall come resurrection from Death; and the last Enemy that
shall be destroyed is Death, and Death shall be swallowed up in victory, 1 Cor.
15.21, 54. Therefore Death shall not retain them, but they must be delivered
out of its Jaws. Fourthly, these ensuing Scriptures do clearly prove it: Col.
1.15, to the 23. All things were created by him and for him, whether they be
things in Earth, or things in Heaven: and be not removed away from the hope of
the Gospel, which ye have heard, and which was preached to every Creature
under Heaven: And Mar. 16.15. Go ye into all the World, and preach the Gospel
to every Creature: that is, Glad Tidings, life and Resurrection from the
bondage of corruption to every Creature by Christ: therefore, is he said to be
the Firstborn of every Creature, the First that is born, or raised from the
Dead: so that those whereof he is the First, must follow, that is, every
creature, else could he not be the Firstborn from the Dead of them all. And
Rev. 21.5. after the dissolution of all things, he says, Behold, I make all
things New: And Psalm. 104. David reckoning up Men, Cattle, etc. says, Thou
take away their breath, and they die; thou sendest forth thy spirit, and
renewest the face of the Earth: and Psalm. 102. speaking of the Heavens, says,
as a vesture shall thou change them, and they shall be changed: and Isaiah
says, in the New Earth the Wolf and the Lamb shall feed together, and the
Lion shall eat straw like a Bullock: and Paul says, Romans 8.19, 20, 21. The
earnest expectation of the Creature waits for the manifectation of the sons
of God: For the Creature was made subject to vanity, not willingly, but by
reason of him who has subjected the same in hope: because the Creature it self
also shall be delivered from the bondage of corruption, into the glorious
liberty of the children of God: for we know that the whole Creation groaneth,
and traveleth in pain till now. Therefore the Gospel or Glad Tidings is unto
all; all are under hope, and all things, men, beasts, etc. shall be made new,
or restored at the Resurrection; and so Death shall be swallowed up in victory,
and mortality of life: or Death having given up her dead, shall be cast into
the Lake, Rev. 20.13, 15. Thus much by the by: Now to our matter in hand.

But be it granted, that those births are not endowed with reasonable souls,
yet does it not follow, that God creates immediately the soul, or immediately
assisteth nature in it is production more then the body: for this is an instance
out of kind^, therefore cannot expect the blessing of the kind, but be as it
self is, unnatural and cursed: for to the kind is required Sexes of the kind,
and thereto God has given the blessing to beget its kind, as well for man to
beget perfect man, as for the beasts to beget perfect beasts; so that
whatsoever is born of man naturally, is man, though one be ennobled with more
excellencys then another. A born Fool would have been a better instance; for if
to them rational Souls were denied, it might be thought, Nature naturally
begets mere irrational, brutish inhumane bodies, and rationality, or
humanity, is a mere supernatural work. To prevent such a cavil, I answer, that
by the Soularies grounds there can be no born fools: Infants new born, yea an
Embryo should be as actually rational as men of ripeness of years; for they
say, the soul is rationality it self, and that rationality is no more of the
body, then ink is of the pen; and the soul is absolutely perfect at the first
instant, yea it is forma formans: therefore, naturam expellas, furca licet usque
recurres, it is made action, which cannot but appear, for all action is
apparent: and they say it is an immortal spirit, therefore cannot cease* and if
not cease, it must show it self: Now why are not Infants then as rational as
others? nay, let me ask one Question, If this endless soul be forma formans,
the maker of our bodies, why have we not endless bodies? for omne tale generat
tale, every like brings forth its like; so then, if one be immortal, the other
must be immortal; if one mortal, the other mortal. Secondly, I answer, that
though some are fools from their birth, yet it does not follow, that Gods
immediate hand is required to man's procreation, but rather the contrary: for
imperfections in a thing argue the mediate generation thereof; because no
imperfection of any kind can come immediately from the hand of God:
imperfections are accidental, or from the curse: therefore not of creation, but
of procreation.

Now seeing all this while we have had to do with this immortal Soul, we cannot
find, or the Soularies tell what it is: such likewise is its residence; for if
we ask where it is? they slap us i'th'mouth with a Riddle; tota in toto, and
tota in qualibet part, the whole in the whole, and the whole in every part:
that is, the whole immortal Soul in the whole body, and the whole Soul wholly
in every part of the body. To which I answer, that this extends immortality or
impossibility of death to the body; for if immortality be in every part, then
no part of man, from the crown of the head to the soal of the foot can be
excepted; so we are all Soul all over, and every part a whole Soul immortal: So
that it must either be held to be ubiquitarie, which is an Attribute peculiar
to God; or else multiplicable by a corpulent division: and so, were a man
minced into Atoms, cut into innumerable bits, there would be so many
innumerable whole Souls, else could it not be wholly in every part.

Monstrum horrendum, ingens; cui quot sunt corpore crines,
Tot vigiles Animae subter, mirabile dictu!
And thus the Riddle is unfolded.

CHAP. VI. Testimonies of Scripture to prove that whole man is generated, and
propagated by Nature.
THat this is true secundum actum naturae, observe the sense of these ensuing
Scriptures: viz.

Genesis 1.17, 18. comparted with the 22 verse. where man and beast have an equal
blessing and charge to propagate their like.

Eccl. 3.19. there is no distinction betwixt them, etc.

Genesis 17.7. I will be thy God, and the God of thy seed after thee: here, by
seed must be meant persons and not bare carcasses: else he had been the God of
dead clots, and not of living souls.

Genesis 46.26. All the souls that came with Jacob into Egypt, which came out of
his loins, etc.

Job 31.15. Did not he that made me in the womb make him? and did not one
fashion us in the womb? Ergo, if his soul were immediately created, so was his
body; for he, that is, his Entity, person, even all that went to make him man,
was formed and shapen in the womb, both Epithites for procreation and not for
creation.

Job 10.10, 11.22. Have thou not poured me out as milk, and curdled me like
cheese? thou have clothed me with skin and flesh, and have fenced me with bones
and sinews, thou have granted me life and favor, and thy visitation has
preserved my spirit. Here Job sets forth exactly the manner of man's
procreation, from the act of generation even to his breathing: First, poured
out as milk, that is, the seminary evacuation of both Sexes in conjunction:
then curdled me like cheese; that is, the changing of that to a grosser matter,
congealed blood: then clothed me with flesh and skin; that is, the incarnation
of that condensed blood: then fenced me with bones and sinews, that is, that
carnated matter was formed into humane shape, and grew into members: then
grantedst me life: that is, began to breath: whence observe, that in ascribing
the whole work to God, he does ascribe it to one kind only, and not partly
mediate, partly immediate; for he ascribes even the evacuation of seed in
carnal copulation, and the conception of flesh and bones in as high a measure,
(yea, to take away all cavil, rather a greater,) as he does his life: poured,
clothed, and fenced, imply a more absolute act then granting, which is but a
sufferance, permission, or assenting: therefore, his conception was merely and
wholly natural: according to that of David, Psa. 51.5. Behold, I was shapen in
iniquity, and in sin did my mother conceive me. And to this add that of Zach.
12.1. The Lord forms the spirit of man within him. Whence it is clear, that
whole man flesh and spirit is a second act* formed in the womb; otherwise
flesh as well as spirit must be created, which all deny.

Children are the blessing of the breast and womb, Genesis 49.5. That came out of
the Loins, Exodus 1.5. Heb. 7.5. the fruit of the body, Deuteronomy. 18.4. came out of
the bowels, 2 Samuel 10.11. see Genesis 16.11. and 38.25. Mat. 1.18.

Genesis 5.3. Adam begat a son in his own likeness.

Psalm. 139.15, 16. My Substance was not hid from thee, when I was made in a
secret place, and curiously wrought in the lowest parts of the Earth: thine
eyes did see my mass, yet being imperfect; and in thy book all my members were
written, which in continuance were fashioned, when as yet was none of them:
whence is evident, that his whole Person was an act of nature in his mothers
womb or secret place: what of him was in the Book of Gods providence, he
declares, was made (not created) in a secret place, to wit, his substance or
mass, all that went to the subject man; and I hope the Soularies will not blot
his Soul out of the Book of Gods providence, or say it was no part of him.

Luke 1.31. Thou shall conceive in thy womb and bring forth a son: whence
observe, that what she was to bring forth, she was to conceive, to wit, a son;
and none will deny, Christ was born complete man, in all things as we are, sin
excepted: And if any scruple arise from Romans 1.3. He was made of the seed of
David according to the flesh; I Answer, That it is a distinction from other
men, in respect of that anointing he received from the Father above his
brethren and fellows.

Genesis 4.1. She conceived and bare Cain: see the like, cap. 38.3, 4, 5. Judge.
13.3, 5, 7. And Job 3.3. There is a man-child conceived. And Genesis 17.6. And
Kings shall come out of thee. verse. 17. twelve Princes, shall he beget. And
Judge. 8.30. Gideon had 70 Sons out of his body begotten: And Number. 5. Then she
shall be free, and shall conceive seed, and Heb. 11.11. compared with Genesis
17.8. and such like, plainly show man's procreation wholly natural.

Joh. 3.6. That which is born of the flesh, is flesh; and that which is born of
the spirit, is spirit: Here is the natural birth by nature, and the spiritual
birth by grace declared each in his kind, the one a mere natural, the other a
supernatural work: It is therefore inavoydablely true, otherwise the Soul
cannot be saved; for what is not born again cannot be saved, as the immediate
words testify, except a man be born again, he cannot enter into the Kingdom of
God: So then, the Soul as well as the body is born, that is, proceeds from the
flesh, except we be born without it: Wherefore, they are no more twain, but
one flesh.

I might declare, how Purgatory, Limbo Patrum, Infantum, Prayers unto dead
Saints, to the Virgin Mary, and a World of suchlike fancies are grounded upon
the Invention of the Soul; but that I shall leave it to the conception of the
ingenious.

Thus having found Man's Foundation to be wholly in the Dust, from thence taken,
and thither to return: Let this then be the use of all: That man has not
wherewith at all to boast, no more then of the dirt under his feet, but is
provoked wholly out of himself, to cast himself wholly on Jesus Christ, with
whom in God our lives are hid, that when he who is our life shall appear, we
might also with him appear in glory, to whom be the honor of our immortality
for ever, and for ever. Amen.

THere are many places of Scripture omitted, in this Treatise, which import man
to be wholly mortal; whereof I will here commend these few, to the serious
consideration of all such as desire to find out truth.

The Prophet Isaiah Prophesying of Christ, in chap. 53. verse. 10. says, Yet
the Lord would break him, and make him Subject to infirmities: When he shall
make his soul an offering for sin, verse. the 11. he shall see of the travel of
his soul, and be satisfied: verse. 12. Therefore will I give him a portion with
the great, and he shall divide the spoil with the strong, because he has
poured out his soul unto death, etc.

By Saint Matthew it is also recorded, chap. 26. verse. 38. Then said Jesus to
them, My soul is very heavy unto the death: Tarry ye here and watch with me;
speaking to Peter and the two sons of Zebedeus, ver. 37.

Rev. 16.3. (where it is Recorded) And the second Angel poured out his Vial
upon the sea, and it became as the blood of a dead man, and every living soul
died in the sea. Psalm. 66.9. He holds our soul in life.

[Here note,] That Soul and Life are distinct; the Soul of all are held in Life
by Christ, else would they die.

Psalm. 22.29. For all that go down into the dust shall bow before him, and none
can keep alive his own soul.

Ezekiel. 18.4. The soul that sins, it shall die.

Verse. 20. The same soul that sins shall die.

Job 33.18. He keeps back his soul from the pit, and his life from perishing
by the sword.

20. So that his life abhors bread, and his soul dainty meat.

22. His soul draws near unto the grave, and his life to the destroyers.

28. He will deliver his soul from going into the pit, and his life shall see
the light.

30. To bring back his soul from the pit, to be enlightened with the light of
the living.

The diligent Reader is desired to correct the mis-quotations escaped in this
little book, as follows.
Page 33. line 13. add Genesis 1. p. 34. l. 23. read 1 Cor. 15. p. 46. l. 21. r.
Eccl. 3.19, 20. p. 47. l. 6. r. 2 Timothy p. 48. l. 14. r. Psalm. 88. p. 49. l. 5.
add 4. p. 56. l. 10. r. Lev. 17.14. l. 11. r. Genesis 9. p. 57. l. 7. r. Acts
2.31. p. 59. l. 15. r. Phil. 1.23, 24. p. 63. l. 6. r. Jer. 53.12. p. 68. l. 2.
r. Rev. 19. p. 69. l. 16. r. Mat. 8.29. p. 72. l. 22. r. Prove. 15.24. p. 93. l.
1. r. Object. 21. p. 98. l. 17. r. Heb. 4.15. p. 118. l. 24. r. 11, 12.

The Postscript.
IN some ancient Chronicles of England, we read of King Druis, so addicted to
learning, that a Sect of Philosophers succeeded him, named, Druides; and that
this King, the better to encourage his Subjects without dread of death to fight
his battles, taught them that their Souls were immortal, not subject to death.
Hence as some think, came the opinion, that the Souls of men are immortal: but
others conceive it to have another rise, namely, The general Doctrine of the
Philosophers, being, That Virtue was to be rewarded, and Vice punished; and
these usually seeing Men to die without either punishment or reward, and being
ignorant of any Resurrection, taught thence, that men's Souls (after death)
remained alive, to receive the same: yet this was contrary to the judgment of
many of the Ancients, who nevertheless deemed men to be wholly mortal, as is
clearly proved by Pliny, in the 55 chap. of the 7th Book of his Natural
History; where treating of Ghosts, or Spirits of Men departed, he says thus:
viz. After men are buried, great diversity there is in opinion what is become
of their Souls and Ghosts, wandering some this way, and others that; but this
is generally held, that in what estate they were before men were born, in the
same they remain when they are dead: for neither Body nor Soul has any more
sense after our dying day, then they had before the day of their nativity: but
such is the folly and vanity of men, that it extends still even to the future
time; yea, and in the very time of death flattereth it self, with fond
imaginations, and dreaming of I know not what life after this: for some
attribute immortality to the Soul; others devise a certain transfiguration
thereof: and there be again, who suppose that the Ghosts sequestered from the
Body have sense; whereupon they do them honor and worship, making a God of him
that is not so much as a man: as if the manner of men's breathing differed from
that in other living Creatures; or as if there were not to be found many other
things in the world, that live much longer then men; and yet no man judges in
them the like immortality. But show me what is the substance and body, as it
were of the Soul by it self? what kind of matter is it apart from the body?
where lies her cogitation that she has? how is her seeing, how is her hearing
performed? what touches she? nay, what does she at all? how is she employed?
or if there be in her none of all this, what goodness can there be without the
same? but I would know, where she setleth, and has her abiding place after her
departure from the body? And what an infinite multitude of Souls like shadows,
would there be in so many ages as well past as to come? Now surely those be
fantastical foolish and childish toys; devised by men that would fain live
always, and never make an end.

Qualis in novissimo vitae die quisque moritur, Talis in novissimo mundi die
judicabitur.

The Contens.
CHAP. I. Considerations from natural reason disproving the common opinions of
the Soul, and proving Man wholly mortal. p. 1. CHAP. II. Considerations from
the creation, fall and resurrection, disproving the opinion of the Soul,
imagining the better part of Man immortal; and proving him, as a reasonable
creature, wholly mortal. p. 28. CHAP. III. Scriptures to prove this mortality.
p. 41. CHAP. IV. 21 Objections extorted from Scripture answered. p. 58. CHAP.
V. Of procreation, how from thence this mortality is proved. p. 94. CHAP. VI.
Testimonies of Scripture to prove that whole man is generated and propagated by
nature. p. 117.
FINIS.

