THE ORPHAN: OR, THE Unhappy-Marriage: A TRAGEDY, As it is Acted At His ROYAL
HIGHNESS THE DUKE's Theater.

Written by THO. OTWAY.

Qui Pelago credit magno, se foenore tollit;
Qui Pugnas and Castra petit, praecingitur Auro;
Vilis Adulator picto jacet Ebrius Ostro;
Et qui sollicitat Nuptas, ad praemia peccat:
Sola pruinosis horret Facundia pannis,
Atque inopi lingua desertas invocat Arts.
Petron. Arb. Sat. LONDON, Printed for R. Bentley, and M. Magnes, in
Russel Street in Covent Garden, 1680.

TO HER Royal Highness THE DUCHESS.
Madam,
AFTER having a great while wished to write something that might be worthy to
lay at your Highnesses Feet, and finding it impossible: Since the World has
been so kind to me to Judge of this Poem to my advantage, as the most
pardonable fault which I have made in its kind; I had sinned against my self,
if I had not chosen this Opportunity to implore (what my Ambition is most fond
of) your Favor and Protection.

For though Fortune would not so far bless my endeavors, as to encourage them
with your Royal Highnesses presence, when this came into the World: Yet, I
cannot but declare it was my design and hopes it might have been your
Divertisement in that happy season, when you returned again to cheer all those
eyes that had before wept for your Departure, and enliven all hearts that had
droopt for your Absence: When Wit ought to have paid it is Choicest Tributes
in, and Joy have known no Limits, then I hoped my little Mite would not have
been rejected; though my ill Fortune was too hard for me, and I lost a greater
Honor, by your Royal Highnesses Absence, than all the Applauses of the World
besides can make me Reparation for.

Nevertheless, I thought my self not quite unhappy, so long as I had hopes this
way yet to recompense my disappointment past: When I considered also that
Poetry might claim right to a little share in your Favor: For Tasso, and
Ariosto, some of the best, have made their Names Eternal, by transmitting to
after-Ages the Glory of your Ancestors: And under the spreading of that shade,
where two of the best have planted their Laurels, how Honored should I be, who
am the worst, if but a branch might grow for me.

I dare not think of offering at any thing in this Address, that might look
like a Panegyric, for fear lest when I have done my best, the World should
Condemn me, for saying too little, and you your self check me, for meddling with
a Task unfit for my Talent.

For the description of Virtues, and Perfections so rare as yours are, ought to
be done by as deliberate, as skillful a Hand; the Features must be drawn very
fine, to be like, hasty dawbing would but spoil the Picture, and make it so
unnatural, as must want false lights to set it off: And your Virtue can receive
no more Luster from Praises, than your Beauty can be improved by Art; which as
it Charms the bravest Prince that ever amazed the World with his Virtue: So let
but all other Hearts enquire into themselves, and then Judge how it ought to be
praised.

Your Love too, as none but that great Hero who has it could deserve it, and
therefore, by a particular Lot from Heaven, was destined to so extraordinary a
blessing, so matchless for itself, and so wondrous for it is Constancy, shall be
remembered to your Immortal Honor, when all other Transactions of the Age you
live in shall be forgotten.

But I forget that I am to ask Pardon for the fault I have been all this while
Committing: wherefore I beg your Highness to forgive me this presumption, and
that you will be pleased to think well of one who cannot help resolving with
all the Actions of Life, to endeavor to deserve it: Nay more, I would beg, and
hope it may be granted, that I may through yours never want an Advocate in his
Favor, whose Heart, and Mind, you have so entire a share in; it is my only
Portion and my Fortune; I cannot but be happy, so long as I have but hopes I
may enjoy it, and I must be Miserable, should it ever be my ill Fate to lose it.

This, with Eternal wishes for your Royal Highnesses Content, Happiness, and
Prosperity, in all Humility is presented by

Your most obedient and devoted Servant, THO. OTWAY.

The Persons Represented in the Tragedy.
MEN.
ACasto, A Nobleman retired from Court, and living privately in the Country. By
Mr. Gillow. Castalio, His Son. By Mr. Betterton. Polydore, His Son. By Mr. Io.
Williams. Chamount, A young Soldier of Fortune. By Mr. Smith. Ernesto, Servant
in the Family. By Mr. Norris. Paulino, Servant in the Family. By Mr. Wiltshire.
Cordelio, Polydore's Page. By the little Girl. Chaplain. By Mr. Percival.
WOMEN.
Monimia, The Orphan, left under the Guardian-ship of old Acasto. By Mrs.
Barry. Serina, Acasto's Daughter. By Mrs. Boteler. Florella, Monimia's Woman.
By Mrs. Osborn.
SCENE, BOHEMIA.

Prologue.
TO you, great Judges in this Writing Age,
The sons of Wit, and Patrons of the Stage,
With all those humble thoughts, which still have swayed
His Pride, much doubting, trembling and afraid
Of what is to his want of merit due,
And awed by every Excellence in you,
The Author sends to beg you would be kind,
And spare those many faults you needs must find.
You to whom Wit a Common Foe is grown,
The thing ye scorn, and publicly disown;
Though now perhaps you are here for other ends,
He swears to me, you ought to be his Friends:
For he never called ye yet insipid Tools;
Nor wrote one line to tell you ye were Fools:
But says of Wit ye have so large a store,
So very much, you never will have more.
He never with Libel treated yet the Town,
The names of Honest men bedawb'd and shown,
Nay, never once lampoon'd the harmless life
Of Suburb Virgin, or of City Wife:
Satyr's the effect of Poetries disease;
Which, sick of a lewd Age, she vents for Ease,
But now her only strife should be to please.
Since of ill Fate the baneful Cloud's withdrawn;
And happiness again begins to dawn,
Since back with Joy and Triumph he is come,
That always drove Fears hence, he're brought 'em home.
Often has he plough'd the boisterous Ocean over,
Yet never more welcome to the longing shore,
Not when he brought home Victories before.
For then fresh Laurels flourisht on his Brow,
And he comes Crowned with Olive-branches now.
Receive him! Oh receive him as his Friends;
Embrace the blessings which be Recommends;
Such quiet as your Foes shall never destroy;
Then shake off Fears, and clap your hands for Joy.
THE ORPHAN.
ACT I. SCENE I.
Enter Paulino and Ernesto. Paul. It Is strange, Ernesto, this severity
Should still reign powerful in Acasto's mind,
To hate the Court where he
Was bred and lived,
All Honors heaped on him that Power could give.

Ernest. It Is true, He came thither a private Gentleman,
But young and brave, and of a Family
Ancient and Noble as the Empire holds.
The Honors he has gained are justly his;
He purchased them in War; thrice has he led
An Army against the Rebels, and as often
Returned with Victory; the world has not
A truer Soldier, or a better Subject.

Paul. It was his Virtue that first made me serve him;
He is the best of Masters as of Friends.
I know he has lately been invited thither;
Yet still he keeps his stubborn purpose, cries,
He Is old, and willingly would be at rest;
I doubt there is deep resentment in his mind,
For the late slight his Honor suffered there.

Ernest. Has he not* reason! When for what he had born
Long, hard, and faithful Toil, he might have claimed
Places in Honor, and employment high;
A huffing shining flat'ring cringing Coward,
A Canker-worm of Peace was raised above him.

Paul. Yet still he holds Just value for the King,
Nor ever Names him but with highest reverence.
It Is Noble that --

Ern. Oh! I have heard him wanton in his praise,
Speak things of him might Charm the Ears of envy.

Paul. Oh may he live till Natures self grow old,
And from her Womb no more can bless the Earth!
For when he dies, farewell all Honor, Bounty,
All generous encouragement of Arts,
For Charity her self becomes a Widow.

Ern. No, he has two Sons that were ordained to be
As well his Virtues, as his Fortunes Heirs.

Paul. They Are both of Nature mild, and full of sweetness.
They came Twins from the Womb, and still they live,
As if they would go Twins too the Grave:
Neither has any thing he calls his own,
But of each others joys as griefs partaking;
So very honestly, so well they love,
As they were only for each other born.

Ern. Never was Parent in an Offspring happier,
He has a Daughter too, whose blooming Age
Promises Goodness equal to her Beauty.

Paul. And as there is a Friendship 'twixt the Brethren,
So has her Infant Nature chosen too
A faithful partner of her thoughts and wishes,
And kind Companion of her harmless pleasures.

Ern. You mean the Beauteous Orphan, fair Monimia.

Paul. The same, the Daughter of the brave Chamont.
He was our Lords Companion in the Wars,
Where such a wondrous friendship grew between 'em,
As only Death could end: Chamont's Estate
Was ruined in our late and Civil discords;
Therefore unable to advance her Fortune,
He left this Daughter to our Masters care;
To such a care as she soarce lost a Father.

Ern. Her Brother to the Emperors Wars went early,
To seek a Fortune or a noble Fate;
Whence he with honor is expected back,
And mighty marks of that great Princes Favor.

Paul. Our Master never would permit his Sons
To launch for Fortune in the uncertain World,
But warnes to avoid both Courts, and Camps,
Where Dilatory Fortune plays the Jilt
With the brave noble honest gallant man,
To throw her self away on Fools and Knaves.

Ern. They both have forward generous active Spirits,
It Is daily their Petition to their Father,
To send them forth where Glory's to be gotten;
They cry they are weary of their lazy home,
Restless to do some thing that Fame may talk of.
To day they chased the Boar, and near this time
Should be returned.

Paul. Oh that is a Royal sport!
We yet may see the old man in a morning
Lusty as health come ruddy to the Field,
And there pursue the Chase as if he meant
To overtake Time and bring back Youth again.

Ex. Ern. and Paul. Enter Castalio, Polidor, and Page. Cast. Polidor! our sport
Has been to day much better for the danger;
When on the brink the foaming Boar I met,
And in his side thought to have lodged my spear,
The desperate savage rusht within my Force,
And bore me headlong with him down the Rock.

Polid. But then --

Cast. Ay then my Brother, my Friend Polidor
Like Perseus mounted on his winged Steed
Came on, and down the dangerous precipice leapt,
To save Castalio. 'Twas a God-like Act.

Polid. But when I came, I found you Conqueror.
Oh my heart danced to see your danger past!
The heat and fury of the Chase was coold,
And I had nothing in my mind but Joy.

Cast. So, Polidor, methinks we might in War
Rush on together; Thou should be my guard,
And I Would be thine; what is it could hurt us then?
Now half the Youth of Europe are in Arms,
How fulsome must it be to stay behind,
And dye of rank diseases here at home?

Pol. No, let me purchase in my Youth Renown,
To make me lovd and valued when I Am old;
I would be busy in the World and learn,
Not like a course and useless dunghill Weed
Fixed to one spot and rot just as I grew.

Cast. Our Father
Has taken himself a surfeit of the World,
And cries it is not safe that we should taste it;
I own I have Duty very powerful in me;
And though I Would hazard all to raise my Name,
Yet he is so tender and so good a Father,
I could not do a thing to cross his will.

Pol. Castalio, I have doubts within my heart,
Which you, and only you, can satisfy:
Will you be free and candid to your Friend?

Cast. Have I a thought my Polidor should not know?
What can this mean?

Pol. Nay, I Will conjure you too
By all the strictest bonds of Faithful Friendship,
To show your heart as naked in this point,
As you would purge you of your sins to Heaven.

Cast. I will.

Pol. And should I chance to touch it nearly, bear it
With all the suff'rance of a tender Friend.

Cast. As calmly as the wounded Patient bears
The Artist's hand, that Ministers his Cure.

Pol. That Is kindly said. You know our Fathers ward*
The fair Monimia: is your heart at peace?
Is it so guarded that you could not love her?

Cast. Suppose I should.

Pol. Suppose you should not, Brother.

Cast. You Would say I must not.

Pol. That would sound too roughly
'Twixt Friends and Brothers as we two are*

Cast. Is love a Fault?

Pol. In one of us it may be;
What if I Love her?

Cast. Then I must inform you,
I loved her first, and cannot quit the Claim,
But will preserve the Birthright of my Passion.

Pol. You will!

Cast. I will.

Pol. No more, I Have done.

Cast. Why not?

Pol. I told you, I had done;
But you Castalio would dispute it.

Cast. No:
Not with my Polydor; though I must own
My Nature obstinate and void of suff, rance.
Love raigns a very Tyrant in my heart,
Attended on his Throne by all his Guards
Of furious wishes, fears, and nice suspicions.
I could not bear a Rival in my Friendship,
I am so much in love, and fond of thee.

Pol. Yet you would break this Friendship!

Cast. Not for Crowns.

Pol. But for a Toy you would, a Woman's Toy,
Unjust Castalio!

Cast. Prithee, where is my fault?

Pol. You love Monimia.

Cast. Yes.

Pol. And you would kill me,
If I Am your Rival.

Cast. No, sure wear such Friends,
So much one man, that our affections too
Must be united and the same as we are.

Pol. I dote upon Monimia.

Cast. Love her still;
Win, and enjoy her.

Pol. Both of us cannot.

Cast. No matter
Whose chance it proves, but let us not quarrel for it.

Pol. You would not wed Monimia, would you?

Cast. Wed her!
No! were she all desire could wish, as fair
As would the vainest of her Sex be thought,
With Wealth beyond what Woman pride could waste;
She should not cheat me of my Freedom Marry?
When I am old and weary of the World,
I may grow desperate
And take a Wife to mortify withal

Pol. It is an elder Brothers duty so
To propagate his family and name:
You would not have yours dye and buried with you?

Cast. Mere Vanity, and silly dotage all,
No, let me live at large, and when I dye.

Pol. Who shall possess the estate you leave?

Cast. My Friend,
If he survives me, or if not, my King,
Who may bestow't again on some brave man,
Whose Honesty and Services deserve one.

Pol. It Is kindly offered.

Cast. By yon Heaven I love
My Polydor beyond all wordly Joys,
And would not shock his quiet to be blessed
With greater happiness than man e're tasted.

Pol. And by that heaven eternally I swear,
To keep the kind Castalio in my heart.
Whose shall Monimia be?

Cast. No matter who is.

Pol. Were you not with her privately last night?

Cast. I was, and should have met her here again;
But the opportunity shall now be thine;
My self will bring thee to the Scene of Love;
But have a care by Friendship I conjure thee,
That no false Play be offered to thy Brother.
Urge all thy powers to make thy Passion prosper,
But wrong not mine.

Pol. Heaven blast me if I do.

Cast. If It prove thy Fortune, Polidor, to conquer,
(For thou have all the Arts of fine persuasion!)
Trust me, and let me know thy Loves success,
That I may ever after stifle mine.

Pol. Though she be dearer to my soul than Rest
To weary Pilgrims, or to Misers Gold,
To great men Power or wealthy Cities Pride,
Rather than wrong Castalio I Would forget her
For if ye powers have happiness in store,
When ye would shower down joys on Polydor,
In one great blessing all your bounty send,
That I may never lose so dear a Friend.

Ex. Cast. Pol. manet Page. Enter Monimia. Mon. So soon returned from hunting?
This fair Day
Seems as if sent t'invite the World abroad.
Past not Castalio and Polydor this way?

Page Madam, just now.

Mon. Sure some ill Fate's upon me.
Distrust and heaviness sits round my heart,
And Apprehension shocko my timorous Soul.
Why was I not lain in my peaceful Grave
With my poor Parents? and at Rest as they are?
Instead of that I am wandering into cares.
Castalio! oh Castalio! thou have caught
My foolish heart; and like a tender Child,
That trusts his play-thing to another hand,
I fear its harm, and fain would have it back.
Come near Cordelio, I must chide you, Sir.

Page Why, Madam, have I done you any wrong?

Mon. I never see you now; you have been kinder;
Sat by my Bed, and sung me pretty Songs:
Perhaps I Have been ungrateful, here is Money for you:
Will you oblige me? shall I see you oft'ner!

Page Madam, indeed I Would serve you with my Soul;
But in a morning when you call me to you,
As by your bed I stand and tell you stories,
I am ashamed to see your swelling Breasts,
It makes me blush, they are so very white.

Mon. Oh men for flattery and deceit renowned!
Thus when you are young, ye learn it all like him,
Till as your years increase, that strengthens too,
T'undo poor Maids and make our ruin easy.
Tell me, Cordelio, for thou have often heard
Their friendly Converse and their bosom secrets;
Sometimes at least, have they not talked of me?

Page Oh Madam! very wickedly they have talked:
But I Am afraid to name it, for they say
Boys must be whipped that tell their Masters secrets.

Mon. Fear not, Cordelio! it shall never be known;
For I Will preserve the secret as 'twere mine:
Polydor cannot be so kind as I.
I Will furnish thee for all thy harmless sports
With pretty Toys, and thou shall be my Page

Page And truly, Madam, I had rather be so.
Methinks you love me better than my Lord,
For he was never half so kind as you are!
What must I do?

Mon. Inform me how the have heard
Castalio and his Brother use my Name?

Page With all the tenderness of Love,
You were the Subject of their last discourse.
At first I thought it would have Fatal proved
But as the one grew hot the other coold,
And yielded to the frailty of his Friend;
At last, after much struggling 'twas resolved.

Mon. What, good Cordelio?

Page Not to quarrel for you.

Mon. I would not have 'em, by my dearest hopes,
I would not be the argument of strife.
But surely my Castalio will not forsake me,
And make a Mockery of my easy Love.
Went they together?

Page Yes, to seek you, Madam.
Castalio promised Polydor to bring him,
Where he alone might meet you,
And fairly try the Fortune of his wishes.

Mon. Am I then grown so cheap, just to be made
A common stake, a prize for love in jest.
Was not Castalio very loath to yield it,
Or was it Polydor's unruly Passion,
That heightened the debate?

Page The fault was Polydor's,
Castalio played with love and smiling showed
The pleasure, not the pangs of his desire.
He said no Woman's smiles should buy his Freedom;
And Marriage is a mortifying thing.

Mon. Then am I ruined, if Castalio's false,
Where is their Faith, or Honor to be found?
Ye Gods, that Guard the Innocent, and guide
The weak; protect, and take me to your care.
Oh! but I love him: There Is the Rock will wrack me!
Why was I made with all my Sexes softness,
Yet, want the Cunning to conceal its follies?
I Will see Castalio, tax him with his falsehoods,
Be a true Woman, rail, protest my wrongs,
Resolve to hate him, and yet love him still.
Enter Castalio and Polydor. He comes, the Conqueror comes! lie still, my
Heart,
And learn to bear thy injuries with scorn.

Cast. Madam, my Brother begs he may have leave
To tell you something that concerns you nearly;
I leave you as becomes me, and withdraw.

Mon. My Lord Castalio!

Cast. Madam!

Mon. Have you purposed
To abuse me palpably? What means this usage?
Why am I left with Polydor alone?

Cast. He best can tell you. Business of importance
Calls me away, I must attend my Father.

Mon. Will you then leave me thus?

Cast. But for a moment.

Mon. It has been otherwise; the time has been,
When business might have stayed, and I been heard.

Cast. I could for ever hear thee; but this time
Matters of such odd circumstances press me,
That I must go --

Mon. Then go; and if 't be possible, for ever,
Ex. Cast* Well, my Lord Polydor, I guess your business,
And read the ill-natured purpose in your eyes.

Pol. If to desire you more than Misers Wealth,
Or dying men an hour of added life,
If softest Wishes, and a heart more true,
Than ever suffered yet for love disdained,
Speak an ill Nature, you accuse me justly.

Mon. Talk not of Love, my Lord, I must not hear it.

Pol. Who can behold such Beauty, and be silent?
Desire first taught us words: Man, when created
At first alone, long wandered up and down,
Forlorn, and silent as his Vassal Beasts;
But when a Heaven-born Maid, like you, appeared,
Strange pleasures filled his eyes, and fired his heart,
Unloos'd his Tongue, and his first talk was Love.

Mon. The first created pair, indeed, were blessed;
They were the only Objects of each other;
Therefore he Courted her, and her alone;
But in this peopled World of Beauty; where
There Is roving Room, where you may Court, and ruin
A thousand more, why need you talk to me?

Pol. Oh! I could talk to thee for ever; Thus
Eternally admiring, fix and gaze
On those dear Eyes, for every glande they send
Darts through my Soul, and almost gives enjoyment.

Mon. How can you labor thus for my undoing?
I must confess, indeed, I owe you more,
Than ever I can hope to think to pay.
There always* was a Friendship 'twixt our Families;
And therefore when my tender Parents died,
Whose ruined Fortunes too expired with them,
Your Fathers pity and his Bounty took me
A poor and helpless Orphan to his care.

Pol. 'Twas Heaven ordained it so to make me happy.
Hence with this peevish Virtue, it is a cheat,
And those who caught it first, were Hypocrites;
Come, these soft tender Limbs were made for yielding.

Mon. Here on my kqees by heavens blessed powr'r I swear,
kneels. If you persist, I never henceforth will see you
But rather wander through the world a beggar,
And live on sordid scraps at proud men's doors;
For though to Fortune lost, I Will still inherit
My Mothers Virtues and my Fathers honors.

Pol. Intolerable Vanity! your Sex
Was never in the right; you are always false,
Or silly; even your dresses are not more
Fantastic than your appetites! you think
Of nothing twice! Opinion you have none.
To day you are nice, to morrow not so free,
Now Smile, then Frown; now sorrowful, then glad,
Now pleased, now not; and all you know not why;
Virtue you affect, Inconstancy's your practice,
And when your loose desires once get dominion,
No hungry Churl feeds courser at Feast,
Every rank Fool goes down --

Mon. Indeed, my Lord,
I own my Sexes follies, I have 'em all,
And to avoid it is faults must fly from you,
Therefore believe me, could you raise me high,
As most fantastic VVomans wish could reach,
And lay all Natures Riches at my feet,
I Would rather run a Salvage in the VVoods
Amongst brute Beasts, grow wrinckled and deformed,
As wildness and most rude neglect could make me,
So I might still enjoy my honor safe,
From the destroying wiles of faithless man.
Ex. Mon.
Pol. VVho'd be that sordid foolish thing called man,
To cringe thus, fawn, and flatter for a pleasure,
Which Beasts enjoy so very much above him:
The lusty Bull ranges through all the Field,
And from the Herd singling his Female out,
Enjoyes her, and abandons her at Will.
It shall be so, I Will yet possess my Love,
Wait on, and watch her loose unguarded hours,
Then when her roving thoughts have been abroad,
And brought in wanton wishes to her heart;
In The very minute when her Virtue nods,
I Will rush upon her in a storm of Love,
Bear down her guard of Honor all before me,
Surfeit on Joys till even desire grows sick:
Then by long Absence liberty regain
And quite forget the pleasure and the pain.

Ex. Pol. and Page. ACT II. SCENE I.
Enter Acasto, Castalio, Polydor, Attendants. Acast. TO Day has been a Day of
Glorious sport.
When you, Castalio, and your Brother left me,
Forth from the Thickets rusht another Boar,
So large, he seemed the Tyrant of the VVoods
With all his dreadful Bristles raised up high
They seemed a Grove of spears upon his Back;
Foaming he came at me, where I was posted,
Best to observe which way he would lead the Chase,
VVhetting his huge long Tusks, and gaping wide,
As if he already had me for his prey;
Till brandishing my well poys'd Javelin high,
With this cold Executing arm, I struck
The ugly brindled Monster to the heart.

Cast. The Actions of your life were always wondrous.

Acast. No flattery, Boy! an honest man cant't live by it,
It is a little sneaking Art, which Knaves
Use to Cajole and soften Fools withal
If thou half flattery in thy Nature, out with it,
Or send it to a Court, for there 'twill thrive.

Pol. Why there?

Acast. It Is next to money current there,
To be seen daily in as many forms,
As there are sorts of Vanities, and Men;
The superstitious Statesman has his sneer,
To smooth a poor man off with that cannot bribe him;
The grave dull fellow of small business sooths
The Humorist, and will needs admire his Wit:
Who without spleen could see a hot-brained Atheist
Thanking a surly Doctor for his Sermon,
Or a Grave Councellor meet a smooth young Lord,
Squeeze him by the hand, and praise his good Complexion.

Pol. Courts are the places where best manners flourish,
Where the deserving ought to rise, and Fools
Make show. Why should I vex and chafe my spleen,
To see a gaudy Coxcomb shine, when I
Have seen enough to sooth him in his follies,
And ride him to advantage as I please? --

Acast. Who merit ought indeed to risei'th world,
But no wise man that is honest should expect.
What man of sense would rack his generous mind,
To practice all the base Formalities
And forms of business, force a grave starch't face,
When he is a very Libertine in's heart?
Seem not to know this or that man in public,
When privately perhaps they meet together,
And lay the Scene of some brave Fellows Ruin.
Such things are done --

Cast Your Lordships wrongs have been
So great that you with Justice may complain;
But suffer, us whose younger minds never felt
Fortunes deceits, to Court her as she would fair.
Were she a Common Mistress, kind to all,
Her worth would cease, and half the world grow idle.

Acast. Go to, you are Fools, and know me not, I Have learnt
Long since to bear, revenge, or scorn my wrongs,
According to the value of the doer;
You both would fain be great, and to that end
Desire to do things worthy your Ambition;
Go to the Camp, preserments noblest Mart,
Where Honor ought to have the fairest play, you will find,
Corruption, envy, discontent, and Faction,
Almost in every Band: How many men
Have spent their blood in their dear Countries service,
Yet now pine under want, while selfish slaves,
That even would cut their throats, whom now they fawn on,
Like deadly Locusts eat the Honey up,
Which those industrious Bees so hardly toiled for?

Cast. These precepts suit not with my Active mind,
Methinks I would be busy.

Pol. So would I,
Not loyter out my life at home, and know
No farther than one prospect gives me leave.

Acast. Busy your minds then, study Arts and Men:
Learn how to value Merits though in Rags,
And scorn a proud ill-manner'd Knave in Office.

Enter Serina, Monimia, and Maid* Ser. My Lord, my Father!

Acast. Blessings on my Child,
My little Cherub, what have thou to ask me?

Ser. I bring you, Sir, most glad and welcome news,
The Young Chamont, whom you have so often wished for,
Is just arrived and entering.

Acast. By my Soul,
And all my honors, he is most clearly welcome,
Let me receive him like his Fathers Friend.
Enter Chamont. Welcome thou Relick of the best loved man,
VVelcome from all the Turmoiles, and the hazards
Of certain danger, and uncertain Fortune,
VVelcome as happy Tidings after Fears,

Cham. Words would but wrong the gratitude I owe you:
Should I begin to speak, my soul's so full,
That I should talk of nothing else all day.

Mon. My Brother!

Cha. Oh my Sister! let me hold thee
Long in my Arms, I Have not beheld thy Face
These many days, by night I Have often seen thee
In gentle Dreams, and satisfied my soul
With fancied Joy, till morning cares awaked me.
Another Sister, sure it must be so;
Though I remember well, I had but one:
But I feel something in my heart that prompts,
And tells me she has claim and interest there.

Acast. Young Soldier, you have not only studied War,
Courtship I see has been your practice too,
And may not prove unwelcome to my Daughter.

Cha. Is she you Daughter? then my heart told true!
And I Am at least her Brother by Adoption.
For you have made your self to me a Father,
And by that Patent I have leave to love her.

Ser. Monimia, thou have told me, men are false,
Will flatter, feign and make an Art of love.
Is Chamont so? No, sure he is more than man
Something that is near Divine and Truth dwells in him.

Acast. Thus happy, who would envy pompous power,
The luxury of Courts, or wealth of Cities?
Let there be joy through all the house this day!
In every Room let plenty flow at large,
It is the Brith-day of my Royal Master.
You have not visited the Court, Chamont,
Since your return?

Cha. I have no business there,
I have not slavish Temperance enough
To Attend a Favorites heels, and watch his smiles,
Bear an ill Office done me to my Face,
And thank the Lord that wronged me for his favor.

Acast. This you could do.
To his Sons.
Cast. I Would serve my Prince.

Acast. who'd serve him.

Castal. I would, my Lord.

Pol. And I both would.

Acast. Away,
He needs not any Servants such as you!
Serve him! he merits more than man can do!
He is so good, praise cannot speak his worth;
So merciful, sure he never slept in wrath;
So just, that were he but a private man,
He could not do a wrong. How would you serve him?

Cast. I Would serve him with Fortune here at home.
And serve him with my person in his wars.
Watch for him, fight for him, bleed for him.

Pol. Dye for him,
As every true bron loyal Subject ought.

Acast. Let me embrace ye both. Now by the souls
Of my brave Ancestoss, I Am truly happy,
For this be ever blessed my Marriage-day
Blessed be your mothers memory that bore you,
And doubly blessed be that auspicious hour,
That gave the birth. Yes, my aspiring Boys,
Ye shall have business when your master wants you,
You cannot serve a nobler. I have served him
In this old body yet the marks remain
Of many wounds. I Have with this Tongue proclaimed
His right even in the face of rank Rebellion,
And when a foul mouthed Traitor once profaned
His sacred name, with my good Sabir drawn
Even at the head of all his giddy rout
I rusht and Clove the Rebel to the Chine.

Enter Servant. Ser. My Lord, the expected Guests are just arrived.

Acast. Go you, and give 'em Welcome and Reception.

Cham. My Lord, I stand in need of your assistance
In something that concerns my Peace and Honor.

Acast. Spoke like the Son of that brave man I loved;
So freely frinedly we converst together.
What e're it be with confidence impart it,
Thou shall command my Fortune and my Sword.

Cham. I dare not doubt your Friendship nor your Justice!
Your Bounty shown to what I hold most dear,
My Orphan sister, must not be forgotten!

Acast. Prithee, no more of that, it grates my Nature.

Cha. When our dear Parents died, they died together,
One Fate surpised 'em, and one Grave received 'em:
My Father with his dying breath bequeathed
Her to my Love: my Mother as she lay
Languishing by him, called me to her side,
Took me in her fainting Arms, wept, and embraced me,
Then pressed me close, and as she observed my Tears,
Kissed 'em away, said she, Chamont my Son,
By this and all the Love I ever showed thee
Be careful of Monimia, watch her Youth,
Let not her wants betray her to dishonor.
Perhaps kind Heaven may raise some friend.
Then sighed. Kissed me again; so blessed us, and expired,
Pardon my grief.

Acast. It speaks an honest Nature.

Cham. The Friend Heaven raised was you, you took her up
An Infant to the desert world exposed,
And proved another Parent.

Acast. I Have not wronged her.

Cha. Far be it from my Fears.

Acast. Then why this Argument?

Cham. My Lord, my Nature's jealous, and you will bear it.

Acast. Go on.

Cha. Great Spirits bear misfortunes hardly,
Good Offices claim gratitude, and Pride,
Where Power is wanting, will usurp a little,
May make us (rather than be thought behind hand)
Pay over-price.

Acast. I cannot guess your dirft;
Distrust you me?

Cham. No, but I fear her weakness
May make her pay a debt at any rate:
And to deal freely with your Lordships goodness,
I Have heard a story lately much disturbs me.

Acast. Then first charge her; and if 'th' offense be found
Within my reach, though it should touch my Nature
In my own Offspring, by the dear remembrance
Of thy brave Father whom my heart's rejoye'd in,
I Would prosecute it with severest Vengeance.

Cham. I thank you from my Soul.

Mon. Alas, my Brother!
What have I done? and why do you abuse me?
My heart quakes in me; in your settled Face
And clouded Brow methinks I see my Fate:
You will not kill me!

Cha. Prithee, why do talk so?

Mon. Look kindly on me then, I cannot bear
Severity; it daunts, and does amaze me;
My heart so tender, should you charge me roughly,
I should but weep, and answer you with sobbing,
But use me gently like a loving Brother,
And search through all the Secrets of my Soul.

Cha. Fear nothing, I will show my self a Brother,
A tender loving and an honest Brother,
You Have not forgot our Father!

Mon. I shall never.

Cha. Then you will remember too, he was a man,
That lived up to the Standard of his Honor,
And prized that Jewel more than Mines of Wealth:
He Would not have done a shameful thing but once,
Though kept in darkness from the World, and hidden,
He could not have forgiven it to himself;
This was the only Portion that he left us;
And I more glory in it than if possessed
Of all that ever Fortune threw on Fools.
'Twas a large Trust, and must be managed nicely;
Now if by any chance, Monimia,
You have soyl'd this gem and taken from it is value,
How will y' account with me?

Mon. I challenge Envy,
Malice, and all the Practices of Hell,
To censure all the Actions of my past
Unhappy life, and taint me if they can!

Cha. I Will tell thee then; Three Nights ago, as I
Lay musing in my Bed, all darkness round me,
A sudden damp sturck to my heart, cold sweat
Dew'd all my Face, and trembling seized my Limbs,
My Bed shook under me, the Curtains started,
And to my tortured Fancy there appeared
The form of Thee thus Beauteous as thou art,
Thy garments flowing loose, and in each hand
A wanton Lover, which by turns caressed thee
With all the freedom of unbounded pleasure:
I snatched my Sword and in the very Moment
Darted it at the Fantome, strait it left me:
Then rose and called for lights, when, O Dire Omen!
If found my weapon had the arras pierced,
Just where that famous tale was interwoven,
How the unhappy Theban slew his Father.

Mon. And for this cause my Virtue is suspected!
Becasue in Dreams your Fancy has been ridden,
I must be tortured waking!

Cha. Have a care,
Labor not to be justified too fast,
Hear all, and then let Justice hold the scale;
What followed was the Riddle that confounds me;
Through a close Lane as I pursued my Journey,
And meditated on the last nights Vision,
I spied a wrinckled Hagg, with Age grown double,
Picking dry sticks, and mumbling to her self;
Her eyes with scalding Rhume were galled and red;
Cold Palsy shook her head, her hands seemed withered,
And on her crooked shoulders had she wrapped
The tattered Remnant of an old stripped hanging,
Which served to keep her carcass from the cold,
So there was nothing of a piece about her;
Her lower weeds were all over coursely patched
With different colored Rags, black, red, white, yellow;
And seemed to speak variety of wretchedness;
I asked her of my way, which she informed me;
Then craved my Charity, and bad me hasten
To save a Sister: at that word I started.

Mon. The Common cheat of Beggars every day!
They flock about our doors, pretend to Gifts
Of prophecy, and telling Fools their Fortunes*

Cer, Oh! but she told me such a Tale, Monimia,
As in it bore great circumstance of truth;
Castalio, and Polydor, my Sister.

Mon. Hah!

Cha. What altered! does your courage fail you!
Now by my Fathers Soul the Witch was honest;
Answer me, if thou have not lost to them
Thy Honor at a fordid Game.

Mon. I Will,
I must; so hardly my Misfortune loads me,
That both have offered me their Loves most true.

Cha. And it is as true too, they have both undone Thee.

Mon. Though they both with earnest Vows
Have pressed my heart, if e're in thought I yielded
To any but Castalio!

Cha. But Castalio!

Mon. Still will you cross the Line of my Discourse!
Yes, I confess that he has won my Soul
By generous Love and honorable Vows,
Which he this day appointed to complete,
And make himself by holy Marriage mine.

Cha. Art thou then spotless? have thou still preferv'd
Thy Virtue white without a blot untainted.

Mon. When I Am unchaste, may Heaven reject my Prayers!
Or more, to make me wretched, may you know it!

Cha. Oh then, Monimia, art thou dearer to me,
Than all the Comforts ever yet blessed man,
And let not Marriage bait thee to thy Ruin.
Trust not a man; we are by Nature false,
Dissembling, subtle, cruel, and unconstant:
When a Man talks of Love, with caution trust him;
But if he swears, he will certainly deceive thee;
I charge thee let no more Castalio sooth Thee.
Avoid it as thou would preserve the peace
Of a poor Brother, to whose soul thou art precious.

Mon. I will!

Cha. Appear as cold when next you meet, as Great Ones
When Merit begs, then shall thou see how soon
His heart will cool and all his pains grow easy.
Ex. Cha.
Mon. Yes, I will try him, torture him severely:
For, oh Castalio! thou too much have wronged me,
In leaving me to Polydor's ill usage.
He comes, and now for once, oh Love stand Neuter,
Whilst a hard part's performed! For I must tempt,
Wound his soft Nature, though my own Heart aches for it.
Ex.
Enter Castalio. Cast. Monimia, Monimia, she is gone:
And seemed to part with anger in her eyes;
I am a Fool, and she has found my Weakness;
She uses me already like a Slave
Fast bound in chains to be chastis'd at will.
'Twas not well done to trifle with my Brother:
I might have trusted him with all the secret,
Opened my silly heart and shown it bare,
But then he loves her too; but not like me,
I am a doting honest Slave, designed
For Bondage, Marriage bonds, which I Have sworn
To wear: It is the only thing I e're
Hid from his knowledge; and he will sure forgive
The first Transgression of a wretched Friend
Betrayed to Love and all its little follies.

Enter Polydore, and Page at the door. Pol. Here place your self, and watch my
Brother thoroughly:
If he should chance to meet Monimia, make
Just observation of each word and action;
Pass not one circumstance without remark:
Sir, It Is your office, do it and bring me word.
Ex. Pol
Enter Monimia. Cast. Monimia, My Angel, 'twas not kind
To leave me like a Turtle here alone,
To droop and mourn the absence of my Mate.
When thou art from me every place is desert,
And I, methinks, am Salvago and forlorn,
Thy Presence only it is can make me blessed,
Heal my unquiet mind, and tune my Soul.

Mon. Oh the bewitching Tongues of faithless men!
It Is thus the false. Haena makes her moan,
To draw the pitying Traveller to her Den;
Your sex are so, such false dissemblers all,
With sighs and plaints y'entice poor Women's hearts,
And all that pity you, are made your Prey.

Cast. What means my Love? oh how have I deserved
This language from the Sovereign of my Joys!
Stop, stop those Tears, Monimia, for they fall
Like baneful dew from a distempored sky,
I feel 'em chill me to the very heapt.

Mon. Oh you are false, Castalio, most forlorn,
Attempt no farther to delude my Faith,
My heart is fixed, and you shall shake'r no more.

Cast. Who told you so? What Hell-bred Villain durst
Profane the Sacred Business of my Love*

Mon. Your Brother knowing on what terms I Am here,
The unhappy Object of your Fathers Charity*
Licentiously discoursed to me of Love,
And durst affront me with his brutal Passion.

Cast. It Is I have been to blame, and only I,
False to my Brother and unjust to Thee.
For, oh! he loves Thee too, and this day owned it,
Taxt me with mine and claimed aright above me.

Mon. And was your Love so very tame to shrink,
Or rather than lose him abandon me.

Cast. I knowing him precipitate and rash,
To calm his heat and to conceal my Happiness,
Seemed to comply with his unruly will;
Talked as he talked, and granted all he ask't;
Lest he in Rage might have our Loves betrayed,
And I for ever had Monimia lost.

Mon. Could you then? did you? can you own it too?
'Twas poorly done, unworthy of your self,
And I can never think you meant me fair.

Cast. Is this Monimia? surely no! till now
I ever thought her Dove-like, soft, and kind,
Who trusts his Heart with Woman's surely lost:
You were made Fair on purpose to undo us,
Whilst greedily we snatch the alluring Bait,
And never distrust the poison that it hides.

Mon. When Love ill placed would find a means to break.

Cast. It never wants pretenses nor excuse.

Mon. Man therefore was a Lord-like Creature made,
Rough as the winds, and as inconstant too:
A lofty Aspect given him for command,
Easily softened, when he would betray:
Like conquering Tyrants, you our Breasts invade,
Where you are pleased to forage for a While,
But soon you find new conquests out, and leave
The ravaged Province ruinate and waste.
If so, Castalio, you have served my heart,
I find that Desolation's settled there,
And I shall never recover Peace again.

Cast. Who can hear this and bear an equal mind!
Since you will drive me from you, I must go;
But, oh Monimia, when the have banished me,
No creeping slave, though tractable and dull,
As artful Woman for her ends would choose,
Shall ever dote as I have done; for oh!
No Tongue my Pleasure nor my Pain can tell:
It Is Heaven to have Thee, and without Thee Hell.

Mon. Castalio! stay! we must not part. I find
My Rage ebbs out, and Love flows in apace;
These little Quarrels Love must needs forgive,
They rouse up drowsy thoughts, and wake the Soul.
Oh! charm me with the Music of thy Tongue,
I Am never so blessed, as when I hear thy Vows,
And listen to the Language of thy Heart.

Cast. Where am I! surely Paradise is round me!
Sweets planted by the hand of Heaven grow here,
And every sense is full of thy Perfection.
To hear thee speak might calm a mad-mans Frenzy,
Till by attention he forgot his sorrows;
But to behold thy Eyes, the amazing Beauties,
Might make him rage again with Love as I do.
To touch thee's Heaven, but to enjoy thee oh!
Thou Natures whole perfection in one piece!
Sure framing thee Heaven took unusual care,
As its own Beauty it designed thee Fair;
And formed thee by the best loved Angel there.
Ex.
ACT III. SCENE I.
Enter Polydor, and Page. Pol. WEre they so kind? Express it to me all
In words may make me think I saw it too.

Page At first I thought they had been mortal Foes;
Monimia raged, Castalio grew disturbed,
Each thought the other wronged, yet both so haughty,
They scorned submission; though Love all the while
The Rebel played, and scarce could be contained.

Pol. But what succeeded?

Page Oh 'twas wondrous pretty!
For of a sudden all the Storm was past,
A gentle calm of Love succeeded in;
Monimia sighed and blushed, Castalio swore*
As you, my Lord, I well remember did
To my young Sister in the Orenge-Grove,
When I was first preferred to be your Page.

Pol. Happy Castalio! Now by my Great Soul,
M' Ambitious Soul, that Languishes to glory,
I Will have her yet, by my best hopes I will.
She shall be mine in spite of all her Arts.
But for Castalio why was I refused?
Has he supplanted me by some foul play,
Traduced my Honor? Death! he durst not do it.
It must be so: we parted and he met her,
Half to compliance brought by me, surpised
Her sinking Virtue till she yielded quite,
So Poachers basely pick up tired Game,
Whilst the fair Hunter's cheated of his Prey.
Boy!

Page My Lord!

Pol. Go to your Chamber and prepare your Lute;
Find out some Song to please me, that discribes
Woman's Hypocrisies, their subtle wiles,
Betraying smiles, feigned tears, inconstancies,
Their painted outsides, and corrupted minds,
The sum of all their follies, and their falsehoods.

Enter Servant. Serve. Oh the unhappyest Tidings Tongue e're told!

Pol. The matter!

Serve. Oh! your Father, my good Master,
As with his Guests he sat in mirth raised high,
And chased the Goblins round the joyful Board,
A sudden trembling seized on all his Limbs:
His Eyes distorted grew; His Visage pale,
His Speech forsook him; Life it self seemed fled,
And all his Friends are waiting now about him.

Enter Acasto leaning on Two. Acast. Support me, give me Air, I Will yet recover.
'Twas but a slip decaying Nature made,
For she grows weary near her Journeys end.
Where are my Sons? come near, my Polidore,
Your Brother! where is Castalio?

Serve. My Lord,
Iv'e searched, as you commanded, all the house,
He or Monimia are not to be found.

Acast. Not to be found, then where are all my Friends? it is well,
I hope they will pardon an unhappy fault
M'unmannerly infirmity has made.
Death could not come in a more welcome hour,
For I Am prepared to meet him, and methinks
Would live and dye with all my Friends about me.

Enter Castalio. Castal. Angels preserve my dearest Father's Life,
Bless it with long and uninterrupted days!
Oh! may he live till time it self decay,
Till good men wish him dead, or I offend him!

Acast. Thank you, Castalio; give me both your hands,
And bear me up, I Would walk: so, now methinks
I appear as great as Hercules himself,
Supported by the Pillars he had raised.

Cast. My Lord, your Chaplain.

Acast. Let the good man enter.

Cast. Heaven guard your Lordship and restore your Health!

Acast. I have provided for thee, if I dye.
No fawning! it is a scandal to thy Office.
My Sons, as thus united ever live,
And for the Estate, you will find when I am dead
I have divided it betwixt you both
Equally parted, as you shared my love;
Only to sweet Monimia I Have bequeathed
Ten thousand Crowns, a little Portion for her,
To wed her honorably as she is born.
Be not less Friends because you're Brother; shun
The man that is singular, his mind's unsound,
His Spleen o're-weighs his Brains, but above all
Avoid the politic, the factious Fool,
The busy, buzzing, talking, hardn'd Knave;
The quaint, smooth Rogue, that sins against his Reason;
Calls saucy loud Suspicion, public Zeal,
And Mutiny the Dictates of his spirit.
Be very careful how ye make new Friends,
Men read not Morals now, 'twas a Custom,
But all are to their Fathers Vices born:
And in their Mothers Ignorance are bred.
Let Marriage be the last mad thing ye do,
For all the Sins and Follies of the past.
If you have Children, never give them knowledge,
'Twill spoil their Fortune, Fools are all the fashion.
If you have Religion, keep it to your selves,
Atheists will else make use of Toleration,
And laugh ye out on it, never show Religion
Except ye mean to pass for Knaves of Conscience,
And cheat believing Fools that think ye honest.

Serin. My Father!

Acasto. My heart's Darling!

Serina. Let my Knees
Fix to the Earth. Never let my Eyes have rest,
But wake and weep till Heaven restore my Father!

Acast. Rise to my Arms, and thy kind prayers are answered,
For you are a wondrous extract of all Goodness,
Born for my joy, and no pain's felt when near thee.
Chamont!

Cham. My Lord, may't prove not an unlucky Omen!
Many I see are waiting round about you:
And I am come to ask a Blessing too.

Acasto. May thou be happy!

Cham. Where?

Acast. In all thy wishes!

Cham. Confirm me so, and make this Fair One mine,
I am unpracticed in the Trade of Courtship;
And know not how to deal Love out with Art.
Onsets in Love seem best like those in War,
Fierce, resolute, and done with all the force.
So I would open my whole heart at once,
And pour out the abundance of my Soul.

Acast. What says Serina? can thou love a Soldier?
One born to Honor and to Honor bred;
One that has learnt to treat even Foes with kindness;
To wrong no good man's Fame nor praise himself.

Serin. Oh! name not Love, for that is allied to joy,
And joy must be a stranger to my heart,
When you're in danger. May Chamonts good Fortune
Render him lovely to some happier Maid!
Whilst I at Friendly distance see him blessed,
Praise the kind Gods and wonder at his Virtues.

Acast. Chamont, pursue her, conquer, and possess her,
And as my Son a third of all my Fortune
Shall be thy Lot.
But keep thy Eyes from wandering man of frailty,
Beware the dangerous Beauty of the wanton,
Shun their enticements; Ruin like a Vulture
Waits on their Conquests: Falsehood too's their business,
They put false Beauty off to all the World;
Use false endearments to the Fools that love 'em,
And when they marry to their silly Husbands,
They bring false Virtue, broken Fame, and Fortune.

Monim. Hear ye that, my Lord?

Polyd. Yes, my fair Monitor, old men always talk thus.

Acast. Chamont, you told me of some doubts that pressed you.
Are you yet satisfied that I am your Friend?

Cham. My Lord, I would not lose that satisfaction
For any blessing I could wish for.
As to my fears already I have lost 'em;
They never shall vex me more, nor trouble you.

Acast. I thank you: Daughter, you must do so too.
My Friends it is late, or we would yet be company
For my disorder seems all past and over,
And I methinks begin to feel new health.

Cast. Would you but rest, it might restore you quite.

Acast. Yes, I Will to Bed; old men must humor weakness.
Let me have Music then to lull and chase
This melancholy thought of Death away,
Goodnight! my Friends, Heaven guard ye all! good night!
To morrow early we'll salute the day,
Find out new pleasures, and redeem lost time.

Ex. all but Chamont and Chaplain. Cham. Hist, hist, Sir Gravity, a word with
you.

Chap. With me, Sir?

Cham. If you're at leisure, Sir, we'll wast an hour,
It Is yet too soon to sleep, and 'twill be charity
To lend your Conversation to a Stranger,

Chap. Sir, you are a Soldier?

Cham. Yes.

Chap. I love a Soldier,
And had been one my self, but my old Parents
Would make me what you see of me, yet I Am honest
For all I wear black.

Cham. And that is a wonder,
Have you had long dependence on this Family?

Chap. I have not thought it so, because my time's
Spent pleasantly, My Lord's not haughty nor imperious,
Nor I gravely whimsical, he has good nature,
And I have manners;
His Sons too are civil to me, because
I do not pretend to be wiser than they are;
I meddle with no man's business but my own;
I rise in a morning early, study moderately,
Eat and drink cheerfully, live soberly,
Take my innocent pleasures freely,
So I meet with respect, and am not the jest of the Family*

Cham. I Am glad you are so happy:
A pleasant fellow this, and may be useful.
Knew you my Father the old Chamont?

Chap. I did, and was most sorry when we lost him.

Cham. Why? did thou love him?

Chapter Every body loved him; besides he was my masters Friend*

Cham. I could Embrace thee for that very Notion.
If thou did love my Father I could think
Thou would not be an Enemy to me.

Chap. I can be no man's Foe.

Cham. Then prithee tell me;
Think thou the Lord Castalio loves my Sister?
Nay, never start. Come, come, I know thy Office
Opens thee all the Secrets of the Family.
Then if thou art honest, use this Freedom kindly.

Chap. Love your Sister?

Cham. Ay, Love her.

Chap. Sir, I never asked him.
And wonder you should ask it me.

Cham. Nay, but thou art an Hypocrite: is there not one,
Of all thy Tribe that is honest in your Schools?
The pride of your Superiors makes ye Slaves:
Ye all live loathsome sneaking servile lives;
Not free enough to practice generous Truth,
Though ye pretend to teach it to the World.

Chap. I would deserve a better thought from you.

Cham. If thou would have me not contemn thy Office
And Character, think all thy Brethren Knaves,
Thy Trade a Cheat, and thou its worst Professor;
Inform me; for I tell thee, Priest, I Will know.

Chap. Either he loves her, or he much has wronged her.

Cham. How wronged her? have a care: for this may lay
A Scene of mischief to undo us all.
But tell me, wronged her say'dst thou?

Chap. Ay, Sir, wronged her.

Cham. This is a secret worth a Mon archs Fortune:
What shall I give thee for it? thou dear Physician
Of sickly Souls, unfold this Riddle to me,
And comfort mine, --

Chap. I would hide nothing from you willingly.

Cha. Nay, then again you are honest. Would thou tell me?

Chap. Yes, If I durst.

Cham. Why, what affrights thee?

Chap. You do,
Who are not to be trusted with the Secret.

Cham, Why, I am no Fool.

Chap. So indeed you say.

Cham. Prithee, be serious then.

Chap. You see I am so,
And hardly shall be mad enough to Night,
To trust you with my Ruin.

Cham. Art thou then
So far concerned in it? What has been thy Office?
Curse on that formal steady Villains Face!
Just so do all Bawds look; Nay, Bawds they say
Can pray upon occasion, talk of Heaven,
Turn up their Gogling Eye Balls, rail at Vice,
Dissemble, lie, and preach like any Priest.
Art thou a Bawd?

Chap. Sir, I Am not often used thus.

Cham. Be just then.

Chap. So I will be to the trust
That Is laid upon me.

Cham. By the rev'renc'd Soul
Of that great honest man that gave me Being,
Tell me but what thou know concerns my Honor,
And if I e're reveal it to thy wrong,
May this good Sword never do me right in Battle!
May I never know that blessed peace of mind,
That dwells in good and pious men like thee!

Chap. I see your temper's moved, and I will trust you.

Cham. Will thou?

Chap. I will; but if it ever 'scape you --

Cham. It never shall.

Chap. Swear then.

Cham. I do, by all
That Is dear to me, by the Honor of my Name,
And that Power I serve, it never shall.

Chap. Then this good day, when all the house was busy,
When mirth and kind rejoicing filled each Room,
As I was walking in the Grove I met them.

Cham. What met them in the Grove together? tell me.
How? walking, standing, sitting, lying? hah!

Chap. I by their own appointment met them there,
Received their Marriage vows and joined their hands.

Cham. How! married!

Chap. Yes, Sir.

Cham. Then my Soul's at peace:
But why would you delay so long to give it?

Chap. Not knowing what reception it may find
With old Acasto, may be I was too Cautious
To trust the secret from me.

Cham. What Is the cause
I cannot guess, though it is my Sisters Honor,
I do not like this Marriage
Hudl'd in the dark and done at too much Venture:
The business looks with an unlucky Face.
Keep still the secret; for it never shall 'scape me,
Not even to them, the new matched Pair. Farewell.
Believe my Truth and know me for thy Friend.

Exeunt. Enter Castalio, and Monimia. Cast. Young Chamont, and the Chaplain!
sure it is they!
No matter what is contrived or who consulted,
Since my Monimia's mine; though this sad Look
Seems no good boading Omen to our Bliss;
Else, prithee, tell me why that Look cast down?
Why that sad sigh as if thy heart were breaking?

Mon. Castalio, I am thinking what we have done.
The Heavenly Powers were sure displeased to day!
For at the Ceremony as we stood,
And as your Hand was kindly joined with mine,
As the good Priest pronounced the Sacred Words,
Passion grew bigg and I could not forbear,
Tears drowned my eyes, and trembling seized my Soul.
What should that mean?

Cast. Oh thou art tender all!
Gentle and kind, as sympathizing Nature!
When a sad story has been told, I Have seen
Thy little breasts with soft Compassion swelled,
Shove up and down, and heave like dying Birds;
But now let fear be banished, think no more
Of danger, for there is safety in my Arms;
Let them receive thee: Heaven, grow Jealous now.
Sure she is too good for any Mortal Creature!
I could grow wild, and praise thee even to madness.
But wherefore do I dally with my Bliss?
The Night's far spent and day draws on apace;
To bed my Love and wake till I come thither.

Pol. So hot my Brother?

Polydore at the Door. Mon. 'Twill be impossible:
You know your Fathers Chamber's next to mine,
And the least noise will certainly alarm him.

Cast. Impossible? Impossible? alas!
Is It possible to live one hour without thee?
Let me behold those Eyes; they will tell me truth*
Have thou no longing? Art thou still the same
Cold Joy Virgin? No; the art altered quite.
Haste, haste to Bed, and let loose all thy wishes.

Mon. It Is but one Night, my Lord, I pray be ruled.

Cast. Try if thou have Power to stop a flowing Tide,
Or in a Tempest make the Seas be Calm;
And when that is done I Will Conquer my desires.
No more, my Blessing. What shall be the sign?
When shall I come? Fot to my Joys I Will steal
As if I never had paid my Freedom for them.

Mon. Just three soft strokes upon the Chamber door.
And at that Signal you shall gain Admittance:
But speak not the least word; for if you should,
It Is surely heard and all will be betrayed.

Cast. Oh! doubt it not Monimia, our Joys
Shall be as silent as the Extatick bliss
Of Souls, that by Intelligence converse:
Immortal pleasures shall our senses drown;
Thought shall be lost, and every Power dissolved:
Away, my Love; first take this kiss. Now haste*
I long for that to come, yet grudge each minute past.
Ex. Mon. My Brother wandering too so late this way!

Pol, Castalio!

Cast. My Polydore, how do thou?
How does Our Father? is he well recovered?

Pol. I left him happily reposed to Reft;
He Is still as gay as if his life were young.
But how does fair Monimia?

Cast. Doubtless well.
A Cruel Beauty with her conquests pleased
Is always joyful and her mind in health.

Pol. Is she the same Monimia still she was?
May we not hope she is made of mortal Mould?

Cast. She Is not Woman else:
Though I Am grown weary of this tedious hoping;
VV'ave in a barren desert strayed too long.

Pol. Yet may relief be unexpected found,
And Loves sweet Manna cover all the field,
Met ye to day?

Cast. No, She has still avoided me,
Her Brother too is jealous of her grown,
And has been hinting something to my Father.
I wish I Would never medl'd with the matter,
And would enjoin thee, Polidore --

Pol. To what?

Cast. To leave this Peevish Beauty to her self.

Pol. What quit my Love? as soon I Would quit my Post
In fight, and like a Coward run away.
No, by my Stars I Will chase her till she yields
To me, or meets her Rescue in Another.

Cast. Nay, she has Beauty that might shake the Leagues
Of mighty Kings, and set the World at odds;
But I have wondrous Reasons on my side,
That would persuade thee, were they known.

Pol. Then speak 'em.
What are they? Came ye to her Window here
To learn 'em now? Castalio, have a care;
Use honest dealing with your Friend and Brother.
Believe me, I Am not with my Love so blinded,
But can discern your purpose to abuse me.
Quit your pretenses to her.

Cast. Grant I do,
You love Capitulation, Polydore,
And but upon Conditions would oblige me.

Pol. You say, yo've Reasons. Why are they Concealed?

Cast. To Morrow I may tell you.
It is a matter of such Circumstance,
As I must well Consult e're I reveal:
But, prithee, cease to think I would abuse thee,
Till more be known.

Pol. When you, Castalio, cease
To meet Monimia unknown to me,
And then deny it slavishly, I Will cease
To think Castalio Faithless to his Friend.
Did I not see you part this very moment?

Cast. It seems yo've watch't me then?

Pol. I scorn the Office.

Cast. Prithee, avoid a thing thou may repent.

Pol. That is henceforward making Leagues with you.

Cast. Nay, if you are angry, Polydore, good Night.

Pol. Good Night, Castalio, if you are in such haste.
He little thinks I Have overheard the Appointment*
But to his Chamber's gone to wait a while,
Then come and take possession of my Love.
This is the utmost Point of all my Hope,
Or now she must or never can be mine.
Oh! for a means now how to Counterplot
And disappoint this happy Elder Brother.
In every thing we do, or undertake,
He soars above me, mount what height I can,
And keeps the start he got of me in Birth.
Cordelio!

Enter Page. Page My Lord!

Pol. Come hither, Boy.
Thou have a pretty forward Lying face,
And may in time Expect preferment, can thou
Pretend to sectesie, Cajole and Flatter
Thy Masters follies and assist his pleasures?

Page My Lord, I could do any thing for you,
And ever be a very Faithful Boy.
Command what e're's you Pleasure, I Will observe.
Be it to run, or watch; or to convey
A Letter to a Beauteous Ladys Bosom;
At least I am not dull, and soon should learn.

Pol. 'Iis pity then thou should not be employed:
Go to my Brother* he is in's Chamber now
Undressing and preparing for his rest,
Find out some means to keep him up a while,
Tell him a pretty story that may please
His Ear: Invent a Tale, no matter what.
If he should ask of me, tell him I Am gone
To bed, and sent you there to know his pleasure,
Whether he will hunt to morrow. Well said, Polydore;
Dissemble with thy Brother: That Is one Point;
But do not leave him till he is in his bed;
Or if he Chance to walk again this way,
Follow, and do not quit him, but seem fond*
To do him little offices of Service.
Perhaps at last it may offend him; then
Retire and wait till I come in. Away:
Succeed in this, and be employed again.

Page Doubt not, my Lord: he has been always kind
To me; would often set me on his knees;
Then give me Sweetmeats, call me pretty Boy,
And asked me what the Maids talked of at Nights.

Pol. Run quickly then, and prosperous be thy Wishes.
Ex. Page. Here I Am alone and fit for mischief; now,
To cheat this brother will it be honest, that
I heard the Sign she ordered him to give.
Oh for the Art of Proteus but to change
The happy Polydore to blessed Castalio!
She Is not so well acquainted with him yet,
But I may fit her Arms, as well as he.
Then when I Am happily possessed of more
Than sense can think, all loosened into Joy,
To hear my disappointed brother come,
And give the unregarded Signal; Oh!
What a malicious pleasure will that be!
Just three soft strokes against the Chamber door,
But speak not the least word, for if you should,
It is surely heard, and we are both betrayed.
How I adore a Mistress that contrives
With care to lay the business of her Joys!
One that has wit to charm the very Soul,
And give a double relish to delight!
Blessed Heaven, assist me but in this dear hour,
And my kind Stars be but propitious now;
Dispose of me hereafter as you please.
Monimia! Monimia!
Gives the Sign. (Maid at the Window.) Whoe's there?

Pol. It Is I.

Maid. My Lord Castalio?

Pol. The same.
How does my Love, my Dear Monimia.

Maid. Oh!
She wonders much at your unkind delay,
You Have staid so long that at each little Noise
The Wind but makes, she asks if you are coming.

Pol. Tell her I Am here, and let the door be opened.
Maid Descends. Now boast, Castalio, Triumph now and tell
Thy self strange stories of a promised Bliss.
The Door unbolts It opens, hah I what means my trembling flesh!
Limbs, do your Office and support me well.
Bear me to her, then fail me if you can.

Enter Castalio, and Page. Page Indeed, my Lord, 'twill be a lovely Morning,
Pray let us hunt.

Cast. Go you're an Idle Pratler,
I Will stay at home to morrow, if your Lord
Thinks fit, he may command my Hounds: go leave me,
I must go to bed.

Page I Will wait upon your Lordship,
If you think fit, and sing you to repose.

Cast. No, my kind Boy, the night is too far wasted,
My senses too are quite disrobed of thought,
And ready all with me to go to rest.
Good night: commend me to my Brother.

Page Oh!
You never heard the last new Song I learnt;
It is the finest, prettiest Song indeed,
Of my Lord and my Lady, you know who, that were caught
Together, you know where, My Lord, indeed it is.

Cast. You must be whipped Youngster, if you get such
Songs as those are. What means
This Boys impertinence to Night?

Page Why, what must I sing, pray, my dear Lord?

Cast. Psalms, Child, Psalms.

Page Oh dear me! Boys that go to School learn Psalms, but
Pages that are better bred Sing Lampoons.

Cast. Well, leave me, I Am weary.

Page Oh! but you promised me last time I told you what
Color my Lady Monimia's stockings were of and that
She garter'd them above knee, that you would give me a little
Horse to go a hunting upon, so you did. I Will tell you no more
Stories, except you keep your word with me.

Cast. Well, go you Trifler and to morrow ask me.

Page Indeed, my Lord, I cannot abide to leave you.

Cast. Why, were thou instructed to attend me?

Page No, no, indeed, indeed, my Lord, I was not;
But I know what I know.

Cast. What do thou know? Death! what can all this mean?

Page Oh! I know who loves somebody.

Cast. What Is that to me, Boy?

Page Nay, I know who loves you too.

Cast. That is a wonder, prithee tell it me.

Page It Is -- it is -- I know who -- but will
You give me the Horse then?

Cast. I will, my Child.

Page It is my Lady Monimia, look you, but don't you
Tell her I told you, She Will give me no more play things then.
I heard her say so as she lay a bed, Man.

Cast. Talked she of me when in her bed, Cordelio?

Page Yes, and I sung her the Song you made too.
And she did so sigh, and so look with her Eyes;
And her breasts did so lift up and down; I could have found
In my Heart to have beat 'em, for they made me ashamed.

Cast. Hark, what is that Noise?
Take this, be gone, and leave me.
Ex. Page. You Knave, you little flatterer, get you gone.
Surely it was a Noise. Hist -- only Fancy.
For all is hushed, as Nature were retired,
And the perpetual Motion standing still:
So much she from her work appears to cease,
And every warring Element's at peace,
All the wild Herds are in their Coverts Coucht;
The Fishes to their Banks or Ouze repaired,
And to the murmurs of the Waters sleep;
The feeling Ayr's at rest and feels no noise,
Except of some soft Breaths among the Trees,
Rocking the hermeless birds that rest upon 'em.
It Is now that guided by my Love I go,
To take Possession of Monimia's Arms.
Sure Polydore's by this time gone to bed.
At Midnight thus the Us'rer steals untract,
To make a Visit to his hoarded Gold,
And Feast his Eyes upon the shining Mammon:
Knocks. She hears me not, sure she already sleeps.
Her wishes could not brook my so long Delay,
And her poor heart has beat it self to rest.
Knocks again. Monimia! my Angel -- hah -- not yet --
How long's the softest Moment of delay
To a Heart Impatient of it is pangs like mine,
In sight of ease and panting to the Goal.
Knocks again. Once more --

Maid Who Is there,
That Comes thus rudely to disturb our Rest?

Cast. It Is I.

Maid. Who are you, what is your Name?

Cast. Suppose
The Lord Castalio.

Maid. I know you not;
The Lord Castalio has no business here.

Cast. Hah! have a care, what can this mean!
Who e're thou art, I charge thee to Monimia fly;
Tell her I Am here and wait upon my doom.

Maid. Who e're you are, you may repent this outrage,
My Lady must not be disturbed Good Night!

Cast. She must, tell her she shall, go I Am in haste,
And bring her tidings from the state of Love,
They Are all in consultation met together,
How to reward my Truth, and Crown her Vows.

Maid. Sure the man's mad.

Cast. Or this will make me so,
Obey me, or by all the wrongs I suffer,
I Will scale the Window and come in by force,
Let the sad Consequence be what it will,
This Creatures trifling folly makes me mad.

Maid. My Ladies answer is, you may depart,
She says she knows you; You are Polydore
Sent by Castalio as you were to day,
TO affront and do her violence again.

Cast. I Will not believed.

Maid. You may, Sir.

Cast. Curses blast thee!

Maid. Well, it is a fine cool Evening, and I hope
May cure the raging Fever in your Blood.
Good night!

Casta. And farewell all that is just in Woman!
This is contrived, a studied Trick to abuse
My easy nature, and torment my mind;
Sure now sh'has bound me fast, and means to Lord it,
To rein me hard, and ride me at her will,
Till by degrees she shape me into Fool.
For all her future use's Death and Torment.
It Is impudence to think my Soul will bear it.
Oh I could grow even wild, and tear my hair:
It Is well, Monimia, that thy Empire's short;
Let but to morrow, but to morrow come,
And try if all thy Arts appease my wrong;
Till when be this detested place my Bed,
Lays down. Where I will ruminate on Woman's Ills,
Laugh at my self and curse the inconstant Sex.
Faithless Monimia! Oh Monimia!

Enter Ernesto. Ernesto. Either
My sense has been deluded, or this way
I heard the sound of sorrow, it is late night,
And none, whose mind's at peace, would wander now.

Cast. Who Is there?

Ern. A Friend.

Cast. If thou art so, retire,
And leave this place, for I would be alone.

Ern. Castalio! My Lord, why in this posture,
Stretched on the Ground? Your honest true old Servant,
Your poor Ernesto cannot see you thus;
Rise I beseech you.

Cast. If thou art Ernesto,
As by thy honesty thou seem to be,
Once leave me to my folly.

Ern. I cannot leave you,
And not the reason know of your disorders.
Remember how when young I m my Arms
Have often born you, pleased you in your pleasures,
And sought an early share in your Affection.
Do not discard me now, but let me serve you.

Cast. Thou can not serve me.

Ern. Why?

Cast. Because my thoughts
Are full of Woman, thou poor Wretch, art past'em.

Ern. I hate the Sex.

Cast. Then I Am thy Friend Ernesto.
Rises. I Would leave the world for him that hates a Woman.
Woman the Fountain of all Humane Frailty!
What mighty Ills have not been done by Woman?
Who was it betrayed the Capitol? A Woman.
Who lost Mark Anthony the World? A Woman.
Who was the cause of a long ten years War,
And laid as last Old-Troy in Ashes? Woman.
Destructive, damnable, deceitful, Woman.
Woman to Man first as a Blessing given,
When Innocence and Love were in their prime,
Happy a while in Paradise they lay,
But quickly Woman longed to go astray,
Some foolish new Adventure needs must prove,
And the first Devil she saw she changed her Love,
To his Tempations lewdly she inclined
Her Soul, and for an Apple damned Mankind.

ACT IV. SCENE I.
Acasto solus. Acast. Blessed be the morning that has brought me health,
A happy rest has softened pain away,
And I Will forget it, though my mind's not well.
A heavy melancholy cloggs my heart,
I droop and sigh I know not why! Dark-dreams,
Sick Fancies Children, have been over-busie,
And all the Night played Farces in my Brains;
Methought I heard the Midnight-Raven cry;
Waked with the imagined Noise, my Curtains seemed
To start, and at my Feet my Sons appeared
Like Ghosts, all pale and stiff: I strove to speak,
But could not; suddenly the Forms were lost,
And seemed to vanish in a bloody Cloud;
'Twas odd, and for the present shook my thoughts;
But was the effect of my distempered blood;
And when the Health's disturbed, the mind's unruly.
Enter Polydore. Good Morning, Polydore.

Pol. Heaven keep your Lordship.

Acast. Have you yet seen Castalio to day?

Pol. My Lord, it is early day, he is hardly risen.

Acast. Go, call him up, and meet me in the Chapel.
Ex. Pol. I cannot think all has gone well to night;
For as I waking lay (and sure my sense
Was then my own) methought I heard my Son
Castalio's Voice; but it seemed low and mournful,
Under my Window too I thought I heard it;
M' untoward fancy could not be deceived
In every thing; and I will search the truth out.
Enter Monimia, and her Maid. Already up Monimia! you Rose
Thus early surely to outshine the Day!
Or was there any thing that crossed your rest!
They were naughty thoughts that would not let you sleep.

Mon. What ever are my thoughts, my Lord, I Have learned
By your Example to correct their Ills,
And Morn, and Evening, give up the Account.

Acast. Your Pardon, Sweet one, I upbraid you not;
Or if I would, you are so good I could not;
Though I Am deceived, or you are more fair to Day;
For Beauty's heightened in your Cheeks, and all
Your Charms seem up, and ready in your Eyes.

Mon. The little share I have's so very mean,
That it may easily admit Addition;
Though you, my Lord, should most of all beware
To give it too much praise, and make me proud.

Acast. Proud of an Old man's praises! No Monimia!
But if my Prayers can work thee any good,
Thou shall not want the largest share of 'em:
Heard you no Noise to Night?

Mon. Noise! my good Lord!

Acast. Ay! about Midnight.

Mon. Indeed, my Lord, I do'nt remember any.

Acast. You must sure! went you early to rest?

Mon. About the wonted Hour: Why this enquiry?
Aside.
Acast. And went your Maid to bed too?

Mon. My Lord, I guess so;
I Have seldom known her disobey my Orders.

Acast. Sure Goblins then, Fairyes haunt the dwelling;
I Will have inquiry made through all the House,
But I Will find out the Cause of these Disorders.
Good Day to thee, Monimia -- I Will to Chapel.
Ex. Acasto.
Mon. I Will but dispatch some orders to my Woman,
And wait upon your Lordship there:
I fear the Priest has played us false; if so,
My poor Castalio loses all for me;
I wonder though, he made such haste to leave me!
Was It not unkind, Florella! surely 'twas!
He scarce afforded one kind parting Word,
But went away so cold: The kiss he gave me
Seemed the forced Complement of fated Love.
Would I had never married!

Maid. Why?

Mon. Methinks
The Scene's quite altered; I am not the same;
I Have bound up for my self a weight of Cares,
And how the burden will be born none knows.
A Husband may be Jealous, rigid, false;
And should Castalio e're prove so to me;
So tender is my Heart, so nice my Love,
'Twould ruin, and distract my rest for ever.

Maid. Madam, he is coming.

Mon. Where, Florella? where?
Is he returning? To my Chamber lead;
I Will meet him there: The Mysteries of our Love
Should be kept private, as Religious Rites,
From the unhallowed View of Common Eyes.

Ex. Mon. and Maid. Enter Castalio. Cast. Wished Morning's come! And now upon
the plains
And distant Mountains, where they feed their Flocks,
The happy Shepherds leave their Homely Huts,
And with their Pipes proclaim the newborn day.
The lusty Swain comes with his well-fill'd Scrip
Of Healthful Viands, which, when hunger calls,
With much content, and appetite he eats,
To follow in the Field's his daily Toil,
And dress the grateful Glebe, that yields him Fruits.
The Beasts that under the Warm Hedges slept,
And weathered out the cold bleak Night, are up,
And looking toward the Neighboring Pastures, raise
The Voice, and bid their fellow Bruites good morrow:
The Cheerful Birds too, on the tops of Trees,
Assemble all in Quoires, and with their Notes
Salute and welcome up the rising Sun.
There Is no Condition sure so cursed as mine;
I Am married: 'Sdeath! I am sped. How like a Dog
Looked Hercules, thus to a Distaff chained?
Monimia! oh Monimia!

Enter Monimia; and Maid. Mon. I come,
I fly to my adored Castalio's Arms,
My wishes Lord. May every Morn begin
Like this: And with our Days our Loves renew.
Now I may hope you are satisfied --
Looking languishingly on him.
Cast. I am
Well satisfied, that thou art -- Oh --

Mon. What? speak:
Art thou not well, Castalio? Come lean
Upon my Breasts, and tell me where is thy pain.

Cast. It Is here! it is in my Head; it is in my Heart,
It Is every where; It rages like a madness;
And, I most wonder how my reason holds;
Nay, wonder not, Monimia; the Slave
You thought you had secured within my Breast,
Is grown a Rebel, and has broke his Chain,
And now he walks there like a Lord at large.

Mon. Am I not then your Wife, your Loved Monimia?
I once was so, or I Have most strangely dreamt.
What ails my Love?

Cast. What e're thy Dreams have been,
Thy waking thoughts never meant Castalio well.
No more, Monimia, of your Sexes Arts,
They are useless all: I Am not that pliant Tool,
That necessary Utensil you would make me,
I know my Charter better -- I am Man,
Obstinate Man; and will not be enslay'd.

Mon. You shall not fear't: Indeed my Nature's easy;
I Will ever live your most obedient Wife,
Nor ever any privilege pretend
Beyond your will; for that shall be my Law;
Indeed I will not.

Cast. Nay, you shall not, Madam,
By yon bright Heaven, you shall not; all the day
I Will play the Tyrant, and at Night forsake thee;
Till by afflictions and continued Cares,
I Have worn thee to a homely household Drudge;
Nay, if I Have any too, thou shall be made
Subservient to all my looser pleasures,
For thou have wronged Castalio.

Mon. No more:
Oh kill me here, or tell me my offense,
I Will never quit you else; but on these Knees,
Thus follow you all day, till they are worn bare,
And hang upon you like a drowning Creature.
Castalio. --

Cast. Away, Last night, last night.

Mon. It was our wedding Night.

Cast. No more, forget it.

Mon. Why? do you then repent?

Cast. I do.

Mon. Oh Heaven!
And, will you leave me thus? help, help, Florella.
He draggs her to the Door and breaks from her* Help me to hold this yet loved
cruel Man.
Oh my heart breaks -- I Am dying, Oh -- stand off,
I Will not indulge this woman's weakness; still
Chaft, and Fomented, let my Heart swell on,
Till with its injuries it burst, and shake
With the Dire blow, this Prison to the Earth.

Maid. What sad mistake has been the cause of this?

Mon. Castalio: Oh! how often has he swore,
Nature should change, the Sun and Stars grow dark,
E're he would falsify his Vows to me.
Make haste, Confusion, then: Sun, lose thy light,
And Stars drop dead with Sorrow to the Earth;
For my Castalio's false --

Maid. Unhappy Day!

Mon. False as the VVind, the Water, or the VVeather.
Cruel as Tigers over their trembling prey.
I feel him in my breast, he tears my heart,
And at each sigh he drinks the gushing blood;
Must I be long in pain?

Enter Chamont. Cha. In tears Monimia!

Mon. Who e're thou art,
Leave me alone to my beloved Despair.

Cham. Lift up thy Eyes, and see who comes to cheer thee.
Tell me the story of thy Wrongs; and then
See if my soul has rest till thou have justice.

Mon. My Brother!

Cham. Yes, Monimia, if thou think
That I deserve the Name, I am Brother.

Mon. Oh Castalio!

Cham. Hah!
Name me that Name again! My Souls on fire,
Till I know all: There Is meaning in that name,
I know he is thy Husband: Therefore trust me,
With all the following truth --

Mon. Indeed, Chamont,
There Is nothing in it but the fault of Nature:
I Am often thus seized suddenly with grief,
I know not why.

Cham. You use me ill, Monimia;
And I might think with Justice most severely
Of this unfaithful dealing with your Brother.

Mon. Truly I am not to blame: Suppose I Am fond,
And grieve, for what as much may please another:
Should I upbraid the dearest Friend on Earth
For the first fault? you would not do so: would you?

Cham. Not, if I Would cause to think it was a Friend.

Mon. Why do you then call this unfaithful dealing?
I never concealed my soul from you before:
Bear with me now, and search my wounds no farther,
For every probing pains me to the heart.

Cham. It Is sign there is danger in it, and must be prevented.
Where Is your new Husband? Still that thought disturbs you.
What, only answer me with tears? Castalio!
Nay, now they stream.
Cruel unkind Castalio! is it not so?

Mon. I cannot speak, grief flows so fast upon me,
It choaks and will not let me tell the cause.
Oh!

Cham. My Monimia, to my Soul you are dear,
As honor to my name: Dear as the light
To eyes but just restored, and heald of blindness.
Why will thou not repose within my breast
The anguish that torments thee?

Mon. Oh! I dare not.

Cham. I have no friend but thee: we must confide
In one another: Two unhappy Orphans,
Alas, we are; and when I see thee grieve,
Methinks it is a part of me that suffers.

Mon. Oh should thou know the cause of my lamenting,
I am satisfied, Chamont, that thou would scorn me;
Thou would despise the abject lost Monimia,
No more would praise this Beauty: but
When in some Cell distracted, as I shall be,
Thou see me lie; these unregarded Locks,
Matted like Furies Tresses; my poor Limbs
Chained to the Ground, and 'stead of the delights
Which happy Lovers taste, my Keeper's stripes,
A Bed of Straw, and a course wooden dish
Of wretched sustenance. When thus thou see me,
Prithee have Charity and pity for me.
Let me enjoy this thought.

Cham. Why will thou rack
My Soul so long, Monimia? Ease me quickly;
Or thou will run me into madness first.

Mon. Could you be secret?

Cham. Secret as the Grave.

Mon. But when I Have told you, will you keep your fury
Within its bounds? will you not do some rash
And horrid mischief? for indeed, Chamont,
You would not think how hardly I Have been used
From a near Friend; from one that has my Soul
A Slave; and therefore treats it like a Tyrant.

Cham. I will be calm, but has Castalio wronged thee?
Has he already wasted all his Love?
What has he done? quickly; for I Am all trembling
With expectation of a horrid Tale.

Mon. Oh! could you think it!

Cham. What?

Mon. I fear he will kill me.

Cham. Hah!

Mon. Indeed I do, he is strangely cruel to me,
Which if it lasts, I Am sure must break my heart.

Cham. What has he done?

Mon. Most barbarously used me,
Nothing so kind as he, when in my Arms,
In thousand kisses, tender sighs and joys,
Not to be thought again, the night was wasted,
At dawn of day, he rose and left his Conquest,
But when we met, and I with open Arms
Ran to embrace the Lord of all my wishes,
Oh then! --

Cham. Go on!

Mon. He threw me from his Breast,
Like a detested sin.

Cham. How!

Mon. As I hung too
Upon his Knees, and begged to know the cause
He dragged me like a Slave upon the Earth,
And had no pity on my Cries.

Cham. How! did he
Dash thee disdainfully a way with scorn!

Mon. He did; And more I fear, will never be friends,
Though I still love him with unbated Passion.

Cham. What, throw thee from him!

Mon. Yes, indeed he did.

Cham. So may this Arm
Throw him to the Earth, like a dead Dog despised;
Lameness and Leprosy, Blindness and Lunacy,
Poverty, Shame, Pride, and the name of Villain
Light on me, if, Castalio, I forgive thee:

Mon. Nay, now Chamont. art thou unkind as he is?
Did thou not promise me thou would be calm?
Keep my disgrace concealed? why should thou kill him?
By all my Love this Arm should do him Vengeance.
Alas, I love him still; and though I never
Clasp him again within these longing Arms,
Yet bless him, bless him (Gods) where e're he goes.

Enter Acasto. Acast. Sure some ill Fate is toward me; in my house
I only meet with oddness and disorder;
Each Vassal has a wild distracted face;
And looks as full of business as a block-head
In times of danger: Just this very moment
I met Castalio too --

Cham. Then you met a Villain.

Acast. Hah!

Cham. Yes, a Villain.

Acast. Have a care, young Soldier,
How you are too busy with Acasto's Fame?
I have a Sword my Arms good old Acquaintance.
Villain, to thee --

Cham. Curse on thy scandalous Age
Which hinders me to rush upon thy Throat,
And tear the Root up of that Cursed Bramble!

Acast. Ungrateful Ruffian! sure my good old Friend
Was never thy Father; nothing of him's in thee:
What have I done in my unhappy Age,
To be thus used? I scorn to upbraid thee, Boy,
But I could put thee in remembrance --

Cham. Do.

Acast. I scorn it --

Cham. No, I Will calmly hear the story,
For I would fain know all, to see which Scale
Weighs most -- Hah, is not that good old Acasto?
What have I done? can you forgive this folly?

Acast. Why do thou ask it?

Cham. 'Twas the rude overflowing
Of too much passion; pray, my Lord, forgive me.
kneels.
Acast. Mock me not, Youth, I can revenge a wrong.

Cham. I know it well, but for this thought of mine
Pity a mad man's frenzy and forget it.

Acast. I will, but henceforth, prithee, be more kind.
Raises him. Whence came the Cause?

Cham. Indeed I Have been to blame,
But I Will learn better; for you have been my Father:
You Have been her Father too --
Takes Mon. by the hand.
Acast. Forbear the Prologue --
And let me know the substance of thy Tale.

Cham. You took her up a little tender Flower,
Just sprouted on a Bank, which the next Frost
Had nipt; and with a careful loving hand
Transplanted her into your own fair Garden,
Where the Sun always shines; there long she flourished,
Grew Sweet to sense, and Lovely to the eye,
Till at the last a Cruel Spoiler came,
Cropped this fair Rose, and rifled all its Sweetness;
Then cast it like a loathsome Weed away.

Acast. You talk to me in Parables, Chamont,
You may have known that I Am no wordy man,
Fine Speeches are the Instruments of Knaves
Or Fools, that use'em, when they want good sense;
But honesty
Needs no Disguise nor Ornament: Be plain.

Cham. Your Son --

Acast. Iv'e two, and both I hope have honor.

Cham. I hope so too -- but --

Acast. Speak.

Cham. I must inform you,
Once more Castalio --

Acast. Still Castalio!

Cham. Yes,
Your Son Castalio has wronged Monimia.

Acast. Hah! wronged her?

Cham. Married her.

Acast. I Am sorry for it.

Cham. Why sorry?
By yon blessed Heaven there is not a Lord
But might be proud to take her to his heart.

Acast. I Will not deny't.

Cham. You dare not, by the Gods,
You dare not; all your Family combined
In one damned False-hood to outdo Castalio,
Dare not deny't.

Acast. How has Castalio wronged her?

Cham. Ask that of him: I say my Sister's wronged;
Monimia my sister born as high
And noble as Castalio -- Do her Justice,
Or by the Gods I Will lay a Scene of Blood,
Shall make this Dwelling horrible to Nature.
I Will do it: hark you, my Lord, your Son Castalio
Take him to your Closet, and there teach him manners.

Acast. You shall have Justice.

Cham. Nay -- I will have Justice.
VVho'll sleep in safety that has done me wrong?
My Lord, I Will not disturb you to repeat
The Cause of this; I beg you (to preserve
Your Houses Honor) ask it of Castalio.

Acast. I will.

Cham. Till then farewell --

Ex. Cham. Acast. Farewell; proud Boy.
Monimia!

Mon. My Lord.

Acast. You are my Daughter.

Mon. I am, my Lord, if you will vouchsafe to own me.

Acast. When you will complain to me, I Will prove a Father.

Ex. Acasto. Mon. Now, I Am undone for ever: Who on Earth
Is there so wretched as Monimia?
First by Castalio cruelly forsaken;
I Have lost Acasto: his parting frowns
May well instruct me, rage is in his heart;
I shall be next abandoned to my Fortune,
Thrust out a naked Wanderer to the World,
And branded for the mischievons Monimia;
What will become of me? My cruel Brother
Is framing mischiefs too, for ought I know,
That may produce bloodshed, and horrid Murder:
I would not be the Cause of one man's Death,
To reign the Empress of the Earth; nay, more,
I Would rather lose for ever my Castalio,
My dear unkind Castalio.

Enter Polydore. Pol. Monimia, weeping!
So morning Dews on new blown Roses Lodge,
By the Suns amorous heat to be exhaled.
I come my Love, to kiss, all sorrow from thee.
What mean these sighs? and why thus beats thy Heart?

Mon. Let me alone to sorrow: It Is a cause
None e're shall know; but it shall with me dye.

Pol. Happy, Monimia, he, to whom these sighs,
These tears, and all these languishings are paid!
I am no stranger to your dearest secret;
I know your heart was never meant for me,
That Jewel's for an Elder Brother's price.

Mon. My Lord.

Pol. Nay, wonder not, last Night I heard
His Oaths, your Vows; and to my torment saw
Your wild Embraces: heard the appointment made:
I did, Monimia, and I cursed the sound.
Will thou be sworn, my Love? will thou be never
Unkind again?

Mon. Banish such fruitless hopes!
Have you sworn constancy to my undoing?
Will you be never my Friend again?

Pol. What means my Love?

Mon. Away; what meant my Lord
Last Night?

Pol. Is that a question now to be demanded?
I hope, Monimia, was not much displeased.

Mon. Was it well done to treat me like a Prostitute,
T'assault my Lodging at the dead of night,
And threaten me if I denied admittance? --
You said you were Castalio. --

Pol. By those eyes,
It was the same, I spent my time much better,
I tell thee, ill natured Fair One, I was posted
To more advantage on a pleasant hill
Of springing Joy, and everlasting sweetness.

Mon. Hah -- have a care. --

Pol. Where is the danger near me?

Mon. I fear you are on a Rock will wreck your Quiet,
And drown your soul in wretchedness for ever;
A thousand horrid thoughts crow'd on my memory.
Will you be kind and answer me one question?

Pol. I Would trust thee with my life on those soft Breasts;
Breath out the Choicest secrets of my heart;
Till I had nothing in it left but Love.

Mon. Nay, I Will Conjure you by the Gods, and Angels,
By the honor of your name, that is most concerned,
To tell me, Polydore, and tell me truly,
Where did you rest last Night?

Pol. Within thy arms
I triumphed: Rest had been my Foe.

Mon. It Is done --
She faints.
Pol. She faints: no help, who waits? a curse
Upon my Vanity that could not keep
The secret of my happiness in silence.
Confusion! we shall be surpised anon,
And consequently all must be betrayed,
Monimia! she breaths -- Monimia. --

Mon. Well, --
Let mischiefs multiply! Let every hour
Of my loathed life yield me increase of horror!
Oh let the Sun to these unhappy eyes
Never shine again, but be eclipsed for ever!
May every thing I look on seem a prodigy,
To fill my Soul with terrors; till I quite
Forget I ever had Humanity,
And grow a Curser of the works of Nature!

Pol. What means all this?

Mon. Oh, Polydore, it all
The friendship e're you vowed to good Castalio
Be not a falsehood, if you every loved
Your Brother, you have undone your self and me.

Pol. Which way? can Ruin reach the man that is Rich,
As I am in possession of thy Sweetness?

Mon. Oh I Am his Wife:

Pol. What says Monimia! hah!
Speak that again.

Mon. I am Castalio's Wife.

Pol. His married wedded Wife?

Mon. Yester-dayes Sun
Saw it performed.

Pol. And then have I enjoyed
My Brothers Wife.

Mon. As surely as we both,
Must taste of misery that guilt is thine.

Pol. Must we be miserable then?

Mon. Oh!

Pol. Oh! thou may yet be happy.

Mon. Could thou be
Happy with such a weight upon thy Soul?

Pol. It may be yet a secret: I Will go try
To reconcile and bring Castalio to thee,
Whilst from the World I take my self away,
And Waste my life in Penance for my Sin.

Mon. Then thou would more undo me: heap a load
Of added Sins upon my wretched head:
Would thou again have me betray thy Brother,
And bring pollution to his Arms? cursed thought!
Oh when shall I be mad indeed!

Pol. Nay, then,
Let us embrace, and from this very Moment
Vow an Eternal misery together.

Mon. And will thou be a very faithful wretch?
Never grow fond of cheerful peace again?
Wilt with me study to be unhappy,
And find out ways how to increase affliction?

Pol. We'll institute new Arts unknown before,
To vary plagues and make 'em look like new ones:
First if the Fruit of our detested Joy,
A Child be born, it shall be murdered. --

Mon. No.
Sure, that may live.

Pol. Why?

Mon. To become a thing
More wretched than its Parents, to be branded
With all our Infamy, and Curse its Birth.

Pol. That Is well contrived! then thus let us go together
Full of our guilt, distracted where to roam,
Like the first Wretched Pair expelled their Paradise.
Let Us find some place where Adders nest in VVinter,
Loathsome and Venomous; Where poisons hang
Like Gums against the VValls; where Witches meet
By night and feed upon some pampered Imp,
Fat with the Blood of Babes: There we'll inhabit*
And live up to the height of desperation,
Desire shall languish like a withering Flower,
And no distinction of the Sex be thought of,
Horrors shall fright me from those pleasing harms,
And I Will no more be caught with Beauties Charms,
But when I Am dying take me in thy Arms.

ACT V. SCENE I.
Castalio lying on the ground. SONG.
COme, all ye Youths, whose Hearts e're bled
By cruel Beauties Pride,
Bring each a Garland on his head
Let none his Sorrows hide,
But hand in hand around me move
Singing the saddest Tales of Love;
And see, when your Complaints ye join,
If all your Wrongs can equal mine.
2
The happyest Mortal once was I,
My heart no Sorrows knew.
Pity the Pain with which I dye,
But ask not whence it grew.
Yet if a tempting Fair you find
That Is very lovely, very kind,
Though bright as Heaven whose stamp she bears,
Think of my Fate, and Shun her Snares.
Castal. See where the Deer trot after one another,
Male, Female, Father, Daughter, Mother, Son,
Brother and Sister mingled all together;
No discontent they know, but in delightful
VVildness and freedom, pleasant Springs, fresh Herbage,
Calm Harbors, lusty health and innocence
Enjoy their portion; If they see a man
How will they turn together all and gaze
Upon the Monster --
Once in a Season too they taste of Love:
Only the Beast of Reason is its Slave,
And in that Folly drudges all the year.

Enter Acasto. Acast. Castalio! Castalio!

Cast. Who's there
So wretched but to name Castalio?

Acast. I hope my message may
succeed.

Cast. My Father,
It Is Joy to see you, though where sorrow's Nourisht.

Acast. I Am come, in Beauties Cause, you will guess the rest.

Cast. A woman! if you love my peace of mind,
Name not a woman to me; but to think
Of woman were enough to taint my Brains,
Till they foment to madness! Oh! my Father.

Acast. What Ails my Boy?

Cast. A woman is the thing
I would forget, and blot from my Remembrance.

Acast. Forget Monimia!

Cast. She to choose: Monimia
The very sound's ungrateful to my sense.

Acast. This might seem strange, but you I Have found will
Hide your heart from me, you dare not trust to your Father.

Cast. No more Monimia.

Acast. Is she not your Wife?

Cast. So much the worse, who loves to hear of Wife?
When you would give all worldly Plagues a name
Worse than they have already, call 'em Wife:
But a new married wife's seeming mischief,
Full of her self: Why, what a deal of horror
Has that poor wretch to come, that wedded yesterday?

Acast. Castalio, you must go along with me.
And see Monimia.

Cast. Sure my Lord but mocks me,
Go see Monimia! Pray, my Lord, excuse me;
And leave the Conduct of this part of Life,
To my own Choice.

Acast. I say, no more dispute.
Complaints are made to me, that you have wronged her.

Cast. Who has complained?

Acast. Her Brother to my face proclaimed her wronged,
And in such terms they have warmed me.

Cast. What terms? her Brother! Heaven!
Where learnt she that?
What does she send her Hero with defiance?
He durst not sure affront you?

Acast. No, not much,
But --

Cast. Speak, what said he?

Acast. That thou were a Villain:
Methinks I would not have thee thought a Villain.

Cast. Shame on the ill-manner'd Brute:
Your age secured him, he durst not else have said so.

Acast. By my Sword,
I would not see thee wronged, and bear it vilely,
Though I have past my word she shall have Justice.

Cast. Justice! to give her Justice would undo her:
Think you this Solitude I now had chosen,
Left joys just opening to my sense, sought here
A place to curse my Fate in, measured out
My Grave at length, wish to have grown one piece
With this cold Clay, and all without a Cause?

Enter Chamont. Cham. Where is the Hero famous and renowned
For wronging Innocence, and breaking Vows;
Whose mighty spirit, and whose stubborn heart,
No woman can appease, nor man provoke?

Acast. I guess, Chamont, you come to seek Castalio.

Cham. I come to seek the Husband of Monimia.

Cast. The Slave is here.

Cham. I thought e're now to 'ave found you
Attoning for the Ills you have done Chamont:
For you have wronged the dearest part of him;
Monimia, young Lord, weeps in this heart;
And all the Tears the Injuries have drawn
From her poor Eyes, are drops of Blood from hence.

Cast. Then you are Chamont?

Cham. Yes, and I hope no Stranger
To great Castalio.

Cast. I Have heard of such a Man
That has been very busy with my Honor:
I own I Am much indebted to you, Sir,
And here return the Villain back again
You sent me by my Father.

Cham. Thus I Will thank you.
Draws.
Acast. By this good Sword, who first presumes to violence
Makes me his Foe --
Draws and interposes. Young Man, it once was thought
To Castalio. I was sit Guardian of my Houses Honor,
And you might trust your share with me -- For you
To Charm. Young Soldier, I must tell you, you have wronged me:
I promised you to do Monimia right,
And thought my word a Pledge I would not forfeit:
But you I find would fright us to Performance.

Cast. Sir, in my younger years with Care you taught me,
That brave Revenge was due to injured Honor;
Oppose not then the Justice of my Sword,
Lest you should make me jealous of your love.

Cham. Into thy Father's arms thou fly'st for safety,
Because thou know the place is sanctified
With the Remembrance of an ancient Friendship.

Cast. I am a Villain if I will not seek thee
'Till I may be revenged for all the wrongs
Done me by that ungrateful Fair thou plead'st for.

Cham. She wrong thee! by the Fury in my heart,
Thy Father's Honor's not above Monimia's;
Nor was thy Mother's Truth and Virtue fairer.

Acast. Boy, don't disturb the Ashes of the dead
With thy capricious Follies: The remembrance
Of the loved Creature that once filled these Arms --

Cham. Has not been wronged.

Cast. It shall not.

Cham. No, nor shall
Monimia, though a helpless Orphan, destitute
Of Friends and Fortune, though the unhappy Sister
Of poor Chamont, whose Sword is all his Portion,
Be oppressed by thee, thou proud imperious Traitor.

Cast. Hah! let me free.

Cham. Come both.

Enter Serina. Serin. Alas! alas!
The cause of these disorders my Chamont?
Who is it has wronged thee?

Casta. Now where art thou fled
For shelter?

Cham. Come from thine, and see what safeguard
Shall then betray my fears.

Serin. Cruel Castalio,
Sheath up thy angry Sword, and don't affright me:
Chamont let once Serina calm thy breast:
If any of thy friends have done thee injuries,
I Will be revenged, and love thee better for it.

Casta. Sir, if you would have me think you did not take
This opportunity to show your Vanity,
Let Us meet some other time, when by our selves
We fairly may dispute our wrongs together.

Cham. Till then I am Castalio's Friend.

Cast. Serina,
Farewell, I wish much happiness attend you.

Serin. Chamont's the dearest thing I have on Earth;
Give me Chamont, and let the world forsake me.

Cham. Witness the Gods, how happy I am in thee!
No beauteous Blossom of the fragrant Spring,
Though the fair Child of Nature newly born,
Can be so lovely. Angry, unkind Castalio,
Suppose I should a while lay by my passions,
And be a beggar in Monimia's Cause,
Might I be heard?

Cast. Sir, 'twas my last request
You would, though you I find will not be satisfied:
So in a word, Monimia is my scorn;
She basely sent you here to try my fears;
That was your business.
No artful Prostitute, in Falsehoods practiced,
To make advantage of her Coxcombs Follies,
Could have done more -- Disquiet vex her for it.

Cham. Farewell.

Cast. Farewell. -- My Father, you seem troubled.

Acast. Would I had been absent when this boistrous brane
Came to disturb thee thus: I Am grieved I hindered
Thy just resentment -- But Monimia --

Cast. Damn her.

Acast. Don't curse her.

Cast. Did I?

Acast. Yes.

Cast. I Am sorry for it.

Acast. Methinks, as if I guess the fault's but small,
It might be pardoned.

Cast. No.

Acast. What has she done?

Cast. That she is my Wife, may Heaven and you forgive me.

Acast. Be reconciled then.

Cast. No.

Acast. Go see her.

Cast. No.

Acast. I Will send and bring her hither.

Cast. No.

Acast. For my sake,
Castalio, and the quiet of my age.

Cast. Why will you urge a thing my Nature starts at?

Acast. Prithee forgive her.

Cast. Lightnings first shall blast me.
I tell you were she prostrate at my Feet,
Full of her Sexes best dissembled sorrows,
And all that wondrous Beauty of her own,
My heart might break, but it should never soften.

Enter Florella. Flor. My Lord, where are you? Oh Castalio!

Acast. Hark.

Cast. What Is that?

Flor. Oh show me quickly where is Castalio.

Cast. Why, what is the business?

Flor. Oh the poor Monimia!

Cast. Hah!

Acast. What Is the matter?

Flor. Hurried by despair
She flies with fury over all the house,
Through every Room of each apartment crying,
Where Is my Castalio? give me my Castalio:
Except she sees you, sure ^hee'l grow distracted.

Cast. Hah! will she? does she name Castalio?
And with such tenderness? Conduct me quickly
To the poor lovely mourner. Oh my Father.

Acast. Then will thou go? blessings attend thy purpose.

Cast. I cannot hear Monimia's Soul's in sadness,
And be a man, my heart will not forget her,
But do not tell the world you saw this of me.

Acast. Delay not then but haste and cheer thy Love.

Cast. Oh I will throw m'impatient Arms about her,
In her soft bosom sigh my Soul to peace,
Till through the panting breast she finds the way,
To mould my heart, and make it what she will.
Monimia! Oh!

Ex. Acast. Cast. Enter Monimia. Mon. Stand off and give me Room,
I will not rest till I have found Castalio.
My wishes Lord comely as rising day,
Amidst ten thousand eminently known.
Flowers spring wherehe e're treads, his Eyes
Fountains of brightness cheering all about him!
When will they shine on me? -- Oh stay my Soul!
I cannot dye in peace till I have seen him.

Castalio Reenters. Cast. Who talks of dying with a Voice so sweet,
That life's in love with it?

Mon. Hark! it is he that answers:
So in a Camp though at the dead of night,
If but the Trumpets cheerful noise is heard,
All at the signal leap from downey rest,
And every heart awakes as mine does now.
Where art thou?

Cast. Here, my Love.

Mon. No nearer, lest I vanish.

Cast. Have I been in a Dream then all this while!
And art thou but the shadow of Monimia!
Why do thou fly me thus?

Mon. Oh! were it possible that we could drown
In dark Oblivion but a few past hours,
We might be happy.

Cast. Is It then so hard, Monimia, to forgive
A fault, where humble Love, like mine, implores thee?
For I must love thee, though it prove my ruin.
Which way shall I Court thee?
What shall I do to be enough thy Slave,
And satisfy the lovely pride that is in thee?
I Will kneel to thee, and weep a flood before thee;
Yet prithee, Tyrant, break not quite my heart;
But when my task of Penitence is done,
Heal it again and Comfort me with Love.

Mon. If I am dumb, Castalio, and want words,
To pay thee back this mighty tenderness;
It is because I look on thee with horror,
And cannot see the man I so have wronged.

Cast. Thou have not wronged me.

Mon. Ah! alas, thou talk
Just as thy poor Heart thinks; have not I wronged thee?

Cast. No.

Mon. Still thou wander'st in the dark, Castalio;
But wilt e're long stumble on horrid danger.

Cast. What means my Love!

Mon. Could thou but forgive me?

Cast. What?

Mon. For my fault last night; Alas, thou can not.

Cast. I can, and do.

Mon. Thus Crawling on the Earth
Would I that Pardon meet; the only thing,
Can make me view the Face of Heaven with hope.

Cast. Then let us draw near.

Mon. Ah me!

Cast. So in the Fields,
When the destroyer has been out for prey,
The scattered Lovers of the Feathered kind,
Seeking when danger's past to meet again,
Make moan, and call, by such degrees approach;
'Till joying thus they bill, and spread their wing*
Murmuring Love, and Joy, their fears are over.

Mon. Yet have a care be not too fond of peace,
Lest in Pursuance of the goodly quarry,
Thou meet a disappointment that distracts thee.

Cast. My better Angel, then do thou inform me,
What danger threatens me, and where it lies:
Why did thou (prithee smile and tell me why)
When I stood waiting underneath the Window,
Quaking with fierce and violent desires;
The dropping dews fell cold upon my head,
Darkness enclosed, and the Winds whistl'd round me;
Which with my mournful sighs made such sad Music,
As might have moved the hardest heart: Why were thou
Deaf to my Cries and senseless of my pains?

Mon. Did I not beg thee to forbear inquiry?
Read'st thou not something in my face that speaks
Wonderful change and horror from within me?

Cast. Then there is something yet which I Have not known;
What do thou mean by horror, and forbearance
Of more inquiry; tell me, I beg thee, tell me;
And do not betray me to a second madness.

Mon. Must I?

Cast. If laboring in the pangs of death
Thou would do any thing to give me ease,
Unfold this riddle e're my thoughts grow wild,
And let in fears of ugly form upon me.

Mon. My heart will not let me speak it, but remember,
Monimia, poor Monimia tells you this,
We never must meet again --

Cast. What means my destiny?
For all my good or evil Fate dwells in thee:
Never meet again!

Mon. No, never.

Cast. Where Is the power
On Earth, that dares not look like thee, and say so,
Thou art my hearts inheritance, I served
A long and painful, faithful slavery for thee,
And who shall rob me of the dear bought blessing.

Mon. Time will clear all, but now let this content you:
Heaven has decreed, and therefore I Have resolved,
(With Torment I must tell it thee, Castalio,)
Ever to be a stranger to thy Love,
In some far distant Country waste my life,
And from this day to see thy Face no more.

Cast. Where am I? sure I wander midst Enchantment,
And never more shall find the way to rest;
But, oh Monimia, art the indeed resolv*d,
To punish me with everlasting absence;
Why turn'st thou from me? I Am alone already;
Methinks I stand upon a naked beach,
Sighing to winds, and to the Seas complaining,
Whilst afar off the Vessel sails away,
Where all the Treasure of my Soul's embarked;
VVilt thou not turn -- Oh could those eyes but speak
I should know all, for Love is pregnant in 'em;
They swell, they press their beams upon me still;
VVilt thou not speak? if we must part for ever,
Give me but one kind word to think upon,
And please my self withal whilst my heart's breaking.

Ex. Mon. Mon. A poor Castalio!

Cast. Pity, by the Gods,
She pity's me; then thou will go Eternally?
What means all this? why all this stir to plague
A single wretch? If but your word can shake
This world to Atoms, why so much ado
With me? think me but dead and lay me so.

Enter Polydore. Pol. To live, and live a Torment to my self,
What Dog would bear't that knew but his Condition?
We have little knowledge, and that makes us Cowards.
Because it cannot tell us what is to come.

Cast. Who's there?

Pol. Why, what art thou?

Cast. My Brother Polydore!

Polyd. My Name is Polydore.

Cast. Can thou inform me?

Polyd. Of what?

Cast. Of my Monimia?

Polyd. No. Good-day.

Cast. In haste?
Methinks my Polydore appears in sadness.

Polyd. Indeed and so to me does my Castalio.

Cast. Do I?

Polyd. Thou do.

Cast. Alas! I Have wondrous reason;
I Am strangely altered, Brother, since I saw thee.

Polyd. Why?

Cast. Oh, to tell thee would but put thy heart
To pain, let me embrace thee but a little,
And weep upon thy Neck; I would repose
Within thy friendly bosom all my Follies,
For thou will pardon 'em, because they are mine.

Polyd. Be not too credulous, consider first,
Friends may be false. Is there no Friendship false?

Cast. Why do thou ask me that? does this appear
Like a false Friendship, when with open Arms
And streaming Eyes I run upon thy Breast?
Oh it is in thee alone I must have comfort.

Polyd. I fear, Castalio, I have none to give thee.

Cast. Do thou not love me then?

Polyd. Oh, more than life:
I never had a thought of my Castalio
Might wrong the Friendship we had vowed together.
Have thou dealt so by me?

Cast. I hope I have.

Polyd. Then tell me why this mourning, this disorder?

Cast. Oh, Polydore, I know not how to tell thee;
Shame rises in my Face, and interrupts
The Story of my Tongue.

Polyd. I grieve my Friend
Knows any thing which he is ashamed to tell me;
Or did thou e're conceal thy thoughts from Polydore?

Cast. Oh, much too often.
But let me here conjure thee,
By all the kind affection of a Brother,
(For I am ashamed to call my self thy Friend)
Forgive me.

Pol. Well, go on.

Cast. Our Destiny contrived
To plague us both with one unhappy Love!
Thou like a Friend, a constant generous Friend,
In its first pangs did trust me with thy passion,
Whilst I still smoothed my pain with smiles before thee,
And made a Contract I never meant to keep.

Pol. How!

Cast. Still new ways I studied to abuse thee,
And kept thee as a stranger to my Passion,
Till yesterday I wedded with Monimia.

Pol. Ah, Castalio, was that well done?

Cast. No, to conceal't from thee was much a fault.

Pol. A fault! when thou have heard
The Tale I Will tell, what will thou call it then?

Cast. How my heart throbs!

Pol. First, for thy Friendship, Traitor,
I cancel't thus; after this day, I Will never
Hold trust, or converse, with the false Castalio:
This, witness Heaven.

Cast. What will my Fate do with me?
I Have lost all happiness, and know not why:
What means this, Brother?

Pol. Perjured, Treacherous Wretch,
Farewell.

Cast. I Will be thy Slave, and thou shall use me
just as thou will, do but forgive me.

Pol. Never.

Cast. Oh! think a little what thy heart is doing;
How from our Infancy we hand in hand
Have trod the Path of Life, in Love together;
One Bed has held us, and the same desires,
The same A versions still employed our thoughts;
When-e're had I a Friend, that was not Pollydore's,
Or Polydore a Foe, that was not mine?
Even in the Womb we embraced, and will thou now,
For the first Fault, abandon, and forsake me,
Leave me amidst Afflictions to my self,
Plunged in the gulf of grief and none to help me?

Pol. Go to Monimia, in her Arms thou wilt find
Repose; She has the Art of healing sorrows.

Cast. What Arts?

Pol. Blind Wretch, thou Husband! there is a question;
Go to her fulsom bed, and wallow there,
Till some hot Ruffian, full of lust, and wine,
Come storm thee out, and show thee what is thy Bargain.

Cast. Hold there, I charge thee.

Pol. Is she not a --

Cast. Whore?

Pol. Ay, Whore, I think that word needs no explaining.

Cast. Alas, I can forgive, even this to thee;
But let me tell thee, Polydore, I Am grieved,
To find thee guilty of such low Revenge,
To wrong that Virtue which thou could not ruin.

Pol. It seems I lie then.

Cast. Should the bravest man
That e're wore Conquering Sword, but dare to whisper,
What thou proclaim'st, he were the worst of Liars:
My Friend may be mistaken.

Pol. Damn the Evasion,
Thou mean the worst, and he is a base born Villain
That said I ly'd.

Cast. Do, draw thy Sword, and thrust it through my heart;
There Is no Joy in life; if thou art lost.
A base born Villain.

Pol. Yes, thou never came
From old Acasto's Loins, the Midwife put
A cheat upon my Mother, and instead
Of a true Brother, in the Cradle by me
Placed some course Peasants Cub, and thou art he.

Cast. Thou art my Brother still.

Pol. Thou lie.

Cast. Nay, then:
Yet I am Calm.
He draws.
Pol. A Coward's always so.

Cast. Ah -- ah -- that stings home: Coward?

Pol. Ay, base born Coward, Villain.

Cast. This to thy heart then, though my Mothore bore thee.

Fight, Polydore drops his Sword, and runs on Castal. Pol. Now my Castalio is
again my Friend.

Cast. What have I done! My Sword is in thy Breast.

Pol. So I would have it be, thou best of men,
Thou kindest Brother, and thou truest Friend.

Cast. Ye Gods, we are taught, that all your works are Justice,
You Are painted merciful, and Friends to innocence;
If so, then why these plagues upon my head?

Pol. Blame not the Heavens, here lies thy Fate Castalio;
They Are not the Gods,'it is Polydore has wronged thee;
I Have stained thy Bed, thy spotless Marriage -- Joys
Have been polluted by thy Brothers Lust.

Cast. By thee!

Pol. By me last night the horrid deed
Was done; when all things slept, but Rage, and Incest.

Cast. Now, where is Monimia? Oh!

Enter Monimia. Mon. I Am here, who calls me?
Methought I heard a Voice
Sweet as the Shepherds Pipe upon the Mountains,
When all his little Flock's at feed before him:
But what means this? here is Blood.

Cast. Ay, Brothers Blood;
Art thou prepared for Everlasting pains?

Pol. Oh let me charge thee by the Eternal justice,
Hurt not her tender life!

Cast. Not kill her? Rack me,
Ye Powers above, with all your choicest Torments,
Horror of mind and pains yet uninvented,
If I not practice cruelty upon her,
And treat revenge some way, yet never known.

Mon. That task my self have finished, I shall dye
Before we part: I Have drunka healing draught
For all my Cares, and never more shall wrong thee.

Pol. Oh she is innocent.

Cast. Tell me that Story,
And thou will make a wretch of me indeed.

Pol. Had thou, Castalio, used me like a Friend,
This never had happened, had thou let me know
Thy Marriage, we had all now met in Joy;
But ignorant of that,
Hearing the appointment made, enraged to think
Thou had outdone me in successful Love,
I in the dark went and supplied thy place,
Whilst all the Night, midst our Triumphant Joys,
The trembling, tender, kind, deceived Monimia,
Embraced, Carest, and called me her Castalio.

Cast. And all this is the work of my own Fortune,
None but my self coulde're have been so cursed,
My Fatal Love, alas! has ruined thee,
Thou fairest, goodliest Frame the God's e're made,
Or ever humane eyes, and hearts adored,
I Have murdered too my Brother,
Why would thou study ways to damn me further
And force the sin of Parricide upon me?

Pol. 'Twas my own Fault, and thou art innocent,
Forgive the barbarous trespass of my Tongue,
'Twas a hard violence; I could have died
With Love of thee, even when I used thee worst;
Nay, at each word that my Distraction uttered,
My heart recoyl'd, and 'twas half death to speak 'em.

Mon. Now, my Castalio, the most dear of men,
Will thou receive pollution to thy Bosom,
And close the eyes of one that has betrayed thee?

Cast. Oh I Am the unhappy wretch, whose cursed Fate
Has weighed thee down into destruction with him,
Why then thus kind to me?

Mon. When I Am laid low in the Grave, and quite forgotten,
May thou be happy in a fairer Bride;
But none can ever love thee like Monimia.
When I am dead, as presently I shall be;
(For the grim Tyrant grasps my heart already)
Speak well of me, and if thou find ill tongues
Too busy with my fame* do'nt hear me wronged,
'Twill be a noble Justice to the memory
Of a poor wretch, once honored with thy Love.
How my head swims! It Is very dark: Good night.
Dies.
Cast. If I survive thee, what a thought was that?
Thank Heaven I go prepared against that Curse.

Enter Chamont disarmed, and seized by Acasto, and Servants. Cham. Gape, Hell,
and swallow me to quick Damnation,
If I forgive your House, If I not live
An Everlasting plague to thee, Acasto,
And all thy Race. Y' have over power'd me now;
But hear me, Heaven! Ah, here is the Scene of Death,
My Sister, my Monimia! Breathless! Now,
Ye Powers above, if you have Justice, strike,
Strike Bolts through me, and through the cursed Castalio.

Acast. My Ploydore.

Pol. Who calls?

Acast. How came thou wounded?

Cast. Stand off thou hot-brained boistrous noisy Ruffian,
And leave me to my sorrows.

Cham. By the love
I bore her living, I will never forsake,
But here remain till my heart bursts with sobbing.

Cast. Vanish, I charge thee, or --
Draws a Dagger.
Cham. Thou can not kill me,
That would be kindness, and against thy Nature.

Acast. What means Castalio? Sure thou will not pull
More sorrows on thy Aged Fathers head.
Tell me, I beg you, tell me the sad cause
Of all this ruin.

Pol. That must be my Task*
But it is too long for one in pains to tell;
You Will in my Closet find the story written,
Of all our woes. Castalio's innocent,
Andso's Monimia, only I Am to blame:
Inquire no farther.

Cast. Thou unkind, Chamont,
Unjustly have pursued me with thy hate,
And sought the life of him that never wronged thee,
Now if thou will embrace a noble vengeance,
Come join with me and curse.

Cham. What?

Cast. First thy self,
As I do, and the hour that gave thee birth:
Confusion and disorder seize the World,
To spoil all trust and converse amongst men*
'Twixt Families engender endless fewds,
In Countries needless fears, in Cities factions,
In States Rebellion, and in Churches Schism:
Till all things move against the course of Nature;
Till Form's dissolved, the Chain of Causes broken,
And the Originals of Being lost.

Acast. Have Patience.

Cast. Patience! preach it to the Winds,
To roaring Seas, or raging Fires; the Knaves
That teach it laugh at ye, when ye believe'em.
Strip me of all the common needs of life,
Scald me with Leprosy, let Friends forsake me,
I Will bear it all; but cursed to the degree
That I am now, it is this must give me patience:
Thus I find rest, and shall complain no more.
Stabs himself
Pol. Castalio! Oh!

Cast. (...) me.
Chamont, to thee my birthright I bequeath:
Comfort my Mourning Father, heal his griefs;
Acasto faints into the Arms of a Servant. For I perceive they fall with weight
upon him.
And for Monimia's sake, whom thou will find
I never wronged, be kind to poor Serina.
Now all I beg, is, lay me in one Grave,
Thus with my Love. Farewell, I now am -- nothing.
Dies.
Cham. Take care of good Acasto, whilst I go
To search the means by which the Fates have plagued us.
It Is thus that Heaven it is Empire does maintain,
It may Afflict, but man must not Complain.

Epilogue.
You Have seen one Orphan ruined here, and I
May be the next, if old Acasto dye:
Should it prove so, I Would fain amongst you find,
Who it is would to the fatherless be kind.
To whose protection might I safely go?
Is there amongst you no good Nature? No.
What should I do? should I the Godly seek,
And go a Conventicling twice a Week?
Quit the lewd Stage, and its profane pollution,
Affect each Form and Saint-like Institution,
So draw the Brethren all to Contribution?
Or shall I (is I guess the Poet may
Within these three days) fairly run away?
No, to some City Lodgings I Will retire,
Seem very grave, and privacy desire:
Till I am thought some Heiress rich in Lands,
Fled to escape a cruel Guardian's hands;
Which may produce a Story worth the telling,
Of the next Sparks that go a Fortune-stealing.
FINIS.

