Ratiocinium Vernaculum: OR, A REPLY TO Ataxiae Obstaculum. Being A pretended
ANSWER To certain QUERIES, Dispersed in some parts of Gloucester-shire.

Give unto Caesar, the things that are Caesar's, and unto God, the things that
are Gods,

Mark 12. 17. For so is the will of God, that with well doing, ye may put to
silence the Ignorance of Foolish men,

1 Pet. 2. 15. LONDON, Printed for A. B. MDCLXXVIII.

THE PREFACE
IT is now near Seven years since the Ensuing Queries, (grounded, most of them,
on Holy Writ, or on the Writings of Learned and Judicious men of the Church of
England) were one Morning Cursorily written: Upon the sight of certain Queries
that had been delivered to, and answered by a neighbor Minister; and to him
only privately sent, without the least Design or Intention, of their ever being
made public; but to Convince him, (with such others of his Judgment, to whom
he should think good to communicate them) of the unreasonableness, especially
on Protestant Principles, of exercising. Force and Compulsion in Religion, with
the danger of Persecuting any on the account thereof. But no answer by him was
ever returned unto their Author, who so little concerned himself in them; that
they were as much out of his thoughts, as if they had never been written by
him: When about Michaelmas 1676. he was surprised with the news of a weak and
unadvised Parson's having taken them up into the Pulpit with him, and there
made them the Subject of his Mornings Exercise, to the Amazement of some, and
Derision of other of his Parishoners; who had never before heard of them, and
then understood not his Descant on them. But the noise hereof, soon made them,
which for some years had been buried in silence, now the Discourse of the
Country; and they were not only oppugn'd from the Press, the Pulpit, and the
Pens of diverse Adversaries, but their Author Prosecuted at the Assizes as
Criminal; though 'twill, perhaps, be difficult, showing as they were written,
and disposed of by him, what Law of God or Man, he therein Transgressed; or
what Civil or Religious Interest was thereby injured; since upon the severest
Examination and Scrutiny, they will be found to have no worse aim or design,
than to manifest how Irrational it was, and how Ineffectual it must needs be,
to all good purposes (as well as inconsistent with the Precepts of the Gospel,
and Principles of Christianity) to Force Religion; and how dangerous to
Persecute any on the account thereof: And herein he is satisfied to have the
Concurrent opinion of the most Learned and Judicious Divines of all Parties;
though the Practices of too many of them, have not been answerable thereunto;
who, indeed, say and do not: Nay may be said, some of them to make themselves
Transgressors, Gal. 2. 18.
in building again the things which they destroyed. And though 'twould not be
difficult to Compose a Volume, in but Transcribing what they have Written to
this purpose: I shall here content my self with a single Citation; yet it being
from one, who having had the Approbation and Applause of the Famousest
University of Christendom, as well as of the Generality of Learned and
Judicious Men of the Reformation, may pass for more then a single Testimony;
and this is the Eminently Learned and Acute Mr. Chillingworth, who in his
Treatise, Entitled, the Religion of Protestants, a safe way to Salvation; thus
speaks: I have learnt, Chap. 5. 96. p. 265. Imp. 3.
says he, from the Ancient Fathers of the Church; that nothing is more against
Religion, then to Force Religion: And of St. Paul, The Weapons of the Christian
Warfare are not Carnal: And great Reason, for humane Violence may make men
Counterfeit, but cannot make them Believe; and is therefore fit for nothing,
but to breed From without, and Atheism within. Besides, says he, if this
means of bringing men to embrace any Religion were generally used, (as if it
may be justly used in any place, by those that have Power, and think they have
Ttuth: Certainly they cannot with Reason deny, but that it may be used in every
place, by those that have Power as well as they, and think they have Truth as
well as they,) what could follow but the maintenance, perhaps of Truth; but
perhaps, only of the Profession of it in one place, and the Oppression of it in
an hundred? What will follow from it, but the preservation, peradventure of
Unity; but peradventure only of Uniformity in particular States and Churches,
but the Immortalizing the greater and more lamentable Divisions of Christendom
and the World? And therefore what can follow from it, but perhaps, in the
Judgment of Carnal Policy, the Temporal benefit and Tranquillity of Temporal
States and Kingdoms; but the Infinite Prejudice, if not the Desolation of the
Kingdom of Christ? And therefore it well becomes them who have their Portions
in this life, who serve no higher State, then this of England or Spain, or
France; nor this neither, any further than they serve themselves by it: Who
think of no other Happiness, but the Preservation of their own Fortunes, and
Tranquillity in this world; who think of no other means to preserve Estates but
Humane Power, and Machivellian Policy; and believe no other Creed but this,
Regi aut Civitati imperium habenti nihil injustum quod utile. Such men as
these, it may well become to maintain by worldly Power and Violence, their
State-Instrument, Religion: For if all be vain and false, (as in their Judgment
it is) the present whatsoever, is better then any, because it is already
Settled; an alteration of it, may draw with it change of States; and the change
of State the Subversion of their Fortune. But they that are indeed Servants and
Lovers of Christ, of Truth, of the Church* and of Mankind; ought with all
courage to oppose themselves against it, as a Common enemy of all these. They
that know there is a King of Kings, and Lord of Lords, by whose will and
pleasure King^ and Kingdoms stand and fall; they know that to no King or State,
any thing can be profitable, which is unjust; and that nothing can be more
evidently unjust, then to force weak men, by the Profession of a Religion which
they believe not; to loose their own Eternal Happiness, out of a vain and
needless fear, least they may possibly disturb their Temporal quietness: There
being no danger to any State from any man's Opinion, unless it be such an
Opinion of which Disobedience to Authority, or Impiety is taught or Licensed;
which sort, I confess, may justly be punished as well as other Faults; or,
unless this Sanguinary Doctrine be joined with it; that it is lawful for him by
humane violence to enforce others to it.

This was the Judgment of this Learned and Judicious Divine of the Church of
England, concerning Force in Religion; and of those Doubtless, who Licensed and
Approved of this his Learned and Judicious Treatise; in which they unanimously
declare, to find nothing contrary to the Doctrine and Discipline of the Church
of England: So that it is not the Church of England, that approves or allows of
Force in Religion, or that Carnal weapons are to be used in the Christian
warfare; but such of her Degenerate and Base Sons only, as forsake the Law of
their Mother. For, as he has well observed Humane Violence may make men
Counterfeit, but cannot make them Believe; and is therefore fit for nothing,
but to breed Form without, and ^thism within; which should make it to be
abhorred and detested by all sincere and good Christians. And surely the Church
of England, who decryes, and so highly condemns blind Obedience in the Duties
of Religion, can never Approve or Allow of Forceing any therein against their
Light and Judgments: which is, certainly, the worst of blind Obediences: For,
since Whatever is not of Faith, is sin; Whatever a man does against his Faith,
or Conscience, must needs be much more so.

And as the Church of England, neither Approves, nor Allows of Secular Force
and Compulsion in Religion; and much less that any should be therein required
to do ought against their Light or Judgments, which were to sin against their
Consciences: So she as little Allows or Approves of Persecuting, or any ways
Molesting or Troubling any for the real performance of any truly Christian
Exercise of Religien. Nor, I dare presume to say, does any Law of England Allow
or Countenance, much less Command, or Require any such thing; though too many
have Misconstru'd and Misapplied the late Act for Preventing and Supressing
Seditious Conventicles, to the Disturbing and Punishing, I may say Ruining of
many Peaceable and Pious people, for Meeting only, really and truly to Worship
and serve God: For the Act does not say, if any person or persons above such a
number, shall meet to Worship God truly and sincerely, in other manner than
according to the Liturgy, etc. They shall incur the Penalty mentioned: But
where any Person, etc. shall be present at any Meeting, under Color or
Pretense of any Exercise of Religion, in other manner than according to the
Liturgy and Practice of the Church of England, etc. It shall and may be Lawful,
etc. The Act certainly, does not prohibit or punish any real and truly
Christian Exercise of Religion; for if it did, it were, Ipso Facto, null and
void, as being against the Law of God. But if it be objected, it appears not
whether their Worship be Sincere or Pretended only; and the Law prohibites such
a number to meet, under any color or pretense of any Exercise of Religion, in
other manner then according to the Liturgy and Practice of the Church of
England; and punishes those that transgress the same: It Is answered, that all
Pretenses ought in Charity to be believed, where no Over-act discovers the
Hypocrisy or falsehood of the mind: But since there is so little Charity
amongst men; let it be shown wherein the Exercises of Religion, which some have
been pleased to punish by virtue, or color rather, of that Law; were in other
manner than, according to the Liturgy and Practice of the Church of England. If
it be said they ought to be performed in the very words of the Liturgy; it is
more than the Act says: And the Practice of the Church of England, has ever
allowed men to pray, even in Public, in other words than are prescribed in the
Liturgy. Our Blessed Savior teaching his Disciples to pray, said unto them;
After this manner, Mat. 6. 9.
therefore pray ye; Our Father which art in Heaven, Acts 1 14. 4. 24, etc.
etc. And yet we do not find in Scripture, Romans 1. 9. 10. 1.
(where their Prayers are often Recorded) that they ever prayed by that Form,
Ephesians 1. 16, etc.
but in other words, 1 Thessalonians. 1, 2, 3, 10.
agreeing for matter, and yet they were accepted. Phil. 4.
There are none therefore, I hope, will say, they disobeyed their Lord and
Master, by praying in other manner than he taught and commanded them, because
they prayed not by that Form: No more do they transgress the Law against
praying in other manner than according to the Liturgy and Practice of the
Church of England, who pray not by the words of the Liturgy while they pray in
other words agreeing with it for matter. What pretense then, can any have to
Charge the Author of these Queries with Libelling the Church and State; since
they reflect on neither, nor Cinsure, or by any undue surmises, condemn ought
that they approve or allow of? Nay, is it not unreasonable to account that a
Crime in any one, which is the duty of every one, viz. To endeavor, by all
lawful ways and means, that all that would, might lead peaceable and quiet
lives in all godliness and honesty; which they can never do, who are forced to
Profess, what they believe not; and in the duties of Religion, to practice what
they approve not, which is to live in a perpetual lie. The question here is
not, whether what is required of any, be in it self sinful or unlawful; but
whether they who judge it so, be it through Ignorance, or otherwise, can
without sinning, conform to it? There is no doubt and question, but that many
may, and do, live Godly, Holily and Righteously, in the Exercise of that
Religion, which to others, would be Damnable; for to him who esteems a thing
unclean, to him it is so; though in it self, it may be pure: So he that
doubts is damned if he eat; while others persuaded of the lawfulness thereof
may safely use their Liberty. Pleading therefore against Force in Religion; we
neither condemn nor censure this or that Religion, which teaches not that
Sanguinary Doctrine; but would that every one should be fully persuaded in his
own mind, the Religion he Embraces and Professes, is what God wills and
requires of him; since whatever is not of Faith is sin, and Faithin all things
respects the Commands and Authority of God.

It were, indeed, heartily to be wished, that all were of a mind, as to the due
performance of this great and indispensable duty, the Worship of God: But this
is rather to be wished, then hoped for, while there are men truly fearing God;
Isa. 29. 13. Safe way to Salv. p. 187.
and those whose fear of him, is taught by the Precept of men. There are,
(says our Lerrned and Judicious Mr. Chillingworth,) But two ways that may be
conceived probable to reduce Christians to unity of Communion: The one, by
taking away diversity of Opinions touching matters of Religion; the other, by
showing that the diversity of Opinions which is among the several Sects of
Christians, ought to be no hindrance to their unity in Communion.

Now the former of these, says he, is not to be hoped for without a Miracle;
unless it could be made evident to all men, that God has appointed some
visible Judge of Controversies, to whose Judgment all men are to submit
themselves. What then remains, but that the other way must be taken; and
Christians must be taught to set a higher value upon these high points of Faith
and Obedience wherein they agree, than upon those matters of less moment
wherein they differ; and understand that agreement in those ought to be more
effectual to join them in one Communion; I mean, says he, In a common
profession of those Articles of Faith, wherein all Consent: A joint Worship of
God after such a way, as all esteem lawful: And a Mutual performance of all
those works of Charity, which Christians owe one to another. But whilst every
one has a Confession, a Form of Worship, a Church and its Authority, which
must be imposed on all others, we may look and with for Peace, Moderation and
Unity, but are never like to meet with them on these Terms.

Those whom Experience will not convince of the vanity, of endeavoring to
bring Christians to Unity of Communion, by Secular Force or Compulsion; and of
the great Miseries, Persecutions and Sufferings, such Methods have in all Ages
brought upon the Churches and People of God; with the little, or no, advantage
that at any time has thereby accrued to Religion; will never be Convinced
thereof by the clearest Evidences, or Demonstrations, of Reason. And though it
cannot be denied, but that there have been, and still are, many good and holy
men, who contend earnestly for Secular Force and Compulsion in Religion; yet it
must withal be said, it is a preposterous and blind zeal in them, to endeavor
to promote the Truth of Gospel, contrary to the Laws of the Gospel. But for the
generality of its Advocats, nothing is more evident, then that it is not for
the Interest of Religion; but for some Carnal Interest or Secular advantage,
they receive by it.

It Is strange that any not wholly ignorant of the State of Christendom, or most
Christian States; not to speak of the Civil Powers, in other parts of the
World; should think that the Exercise of Secular Force or Compulsion in
Religion, can be for the Interest of the Truth, when the Generality of them are
Ignorant of it, if not enemies to it. But we are told, where the Truth is once
owned and professed, every Error and Heresy that rises up against it, ought to
be Suppressed and Extirpated by the Civil Sword. Will these men then tell us,
what Sect or Society, not of Christians only, but of Jews, Turks or Heathens,
believe not themselves alone possessed of the Truth? So that this Method of
preserving and propagating Religion, prevailing (as it does too much through
the Power and Influence of the God of this World, whose Kingdom of darkness
could not otherwise long stand against the light and power of Truth.) What, I
say, does or can follow upon it; but perhaps the Profession of Truth in one
place, and the Oppression of it in an hundred. Do not they who deny unto such
as Dissent from the Religion Established here, the Exercise of their Religion;
upon the same ground, deny it also to all the Reformed Churches, in all Popish
Countries of Europe? To talk of Truth and Error here is Ridiculous: For, as we
were but now told, If Force in Religion may be justly used in any place by
those that have Power, and think they have Truth; it cannot with reason be
denied, but that it may be used in every place, by those who have Power as well
as they, and think they have Truth too, as well as they. But were the same mind
in us, tha^ was in our Lord and Master Christ Jesus; the same frame of Spirit,
that was in his Blessed Apostles; we would do to others, as we would be done
unto; and not mete unto any, what we would not should be meted unto us again.
But whilst some men make their Judgments or Opinions, the Rule or Standard of
Truth and Error; forcing others to embrace, or renounce that as such, which
they shall so call or judge; whatever it appears to them by the Rule, whereby
they are commanded to try and prove it; what Truth or Peace can from thence be
expected, or hoped for? Well therefore might the Judicious Mr. Chillingworth,
cry out, Let those leave claiming Infallibility, that have no Title to it; and
let those that in their Words disclaim it, disclaim it likewise in their (...)
them, under pretense of Religion; nor yet a Liberty for any to Preach or Teach
Doctrines Destructive or Prejudicial to the Peace and Quiet of Civil Societies;
but a Liberty of Worship only, under the Magistrates inspection: And that such
a Liberty is the Natural and Common Right of all Nations and Persons, has been
so fully proved by many Eminent and Learned men, even of the Church of England;
and particularly by the Reverend and Learned Dr. Jeremy Tailor, (late Bishop of
Down and Conough) in his Discourse of the Liberty of Prophesying, it would be
but, Actum agere, to say more. And it argues great Ignorance or Impudence in
those who persist Declaiming against Liberty of Religion, without offering at
the least answer to what has been said for it, by this and other Learned and
Judicious Divines of the Church of England, as well as by most of the Ancient
and Orthodox Fathers of the Church.

As for that other Objection against Liberty of Religion, that it will cause
Disturbance in the State: It is not only against Reason, but the Experience of
all Ages and Places; no Instance being to be given that ever Liberty of
Religion gave Disturbance to any Civil State: But the contrary, the denying
Christians their just Liberty therein, has been the unhappy occasion of the
greatest Troubles, Miseries, and Desolations, that have befallen most of the
States and Commonwealths of Christendom.

But to conclude this Point; The Liberty pleaded for, is no more, in Substance,
then what by His Majesty's late Declaration of Indulgence to Dissenters, was
Allowed and Approved of by him, a much better and Competenter Judge of what is
for the Nations Peace and Interest, then they who object this: Nor was the
Parliaments Exception to the Indulgence granted, but the manner of granting it;
which they judged might be of ill and dangerous Consequence: It is therefore to
be hoped, they will, in due time take it into Consideration, and make such
provision for the preventing and punishing Seditious Conventicles, as wicked
and ungodly men may not take occasion from, to Molest and Disturb the
Assemblies of Peaceable and Pious People, for the performance only of the
Worship and Service of God, in such a way as none can, (with reason,) say to be
against the Rule and Order of the Gospel; much less to be guilty of any Moral
Evil or Impiety; That the Word of the Lord may have a free Course, and his Name
be Glorified in the midst of us.

The Answer to the Answerers Preface.
IT will, I doubt not, be equally difficult for this Answerer to show, what
Truth he has Vindicated, as what Truth these Queries oppose. How far any have
been satisfied with his performances, is best known unto themselves: But how
little he has Complied with the Gentleman's desire, in returning a Candid and
Christian Resolution to them, is left to the Judgment of every Judicious and
Intelligent Reader.

Had he not himself told us, he had Reviewed what he had written; the gross
oversights he has been guilty of, might have been imputed to his too hasty
Pen; which he now gives us to understand, are the effects of something else.

Had he convinced us of any mistakes or Aberrations, we might have been guilty
of; we should have thanked him for the Discovery: But, as yet, we cannot own
the least Obligation to him on that account.

The Queries, he acknowledges here, afford variety of matter for the Exercise
of any Learned Pen, (they had not else, been worthy his Consideration) and yet
in his Title Page, they were to be avoided, as Foolish and Unlearned Questions.
But more of this anon.

His Reader, I am persuaded, is no less to seek for those old Truths,
Vindicated with old Arguments, which he promises him: Than for those new
Notions and Discoveries, he bids him not to expect from him.

It were, indeed, as he says, somewhat strange, that Dissenters should use the
same methods to unsettle and pervert people, in the unerrable esteem they ought
to have of the Church and their Superiors; which the Popish Emissaries do with
those Persons they intend to Proselyte to their Abominable Religion: But it is
not at all strange he should tell us so, without giving us one Instance thereof.

It Is observable, he says, The very first Stratagem the Devil used to ruin
Mankind, was to propose a Query to our first Parents: But had he been as well
acquainted with our Blessed Savior, and his Actions; as he appears to have
been Conversant with the Devil, and his doings: He might likewise have
observed, it was by a Query also, that he Confounded and silenced, his
malilitious and ensnaring Adversaries; who wanted his skill or cunning, Mat.
21. 25. See Ans. to the 21. and 27. Quer.
to answer from the Question, or to tell him; There were very great mistakes,
or it had many things questionable in it. And it was by Queries also, Mat. 23.
that he Convinced the Scribes and Pharisees; (those blind guides,) of their
Errors. And when ever this Answerer, instead of his Circumlocutions, shall
vouchsafe a Categorical answer to these Queries; they may possibly convince him
also, of (what perhaps, he would not be convinced of, (...) the 24. Qu.
least he should see no fruit of the Travel of his Soul) the unreasonableness
of using Secular Force and Compulsion in Religion; without the least danger of
shaking either his Faith, Hope, or Peace; unless resolved to act against his
Conscience; which, if not seared, might indeed, give him disquiet.

If Queries and scruples in matters of Religion, were (as he affirms) certain
signs, either of a weak and Childish, or of a Cavilling and Froward Judgment;
we had never, certainly, been commanded, to work out our Salvation with fear
and trembling. Phil. 2. 12*
Nor had the Beraeans been comemnded for searching the Scriptures, after the
Preaching even of Paul himself, whether those things were so. Acts 17.
But we cannot deny, he may have reason to say, some men are Novices in
knowledge, ever learning, but never able to come to the knowledge of the Truth:
And for such as hold it in unrighteousness, it must one day be accounted for.

But with what forehead, can this Answerer here charge us with studying to be
Skeptical; and with divulging these Queries, to deceive the Hearts of the
simple, and overthrow the Faith of weak Christians? Or with what Conscience can
he say, They are propounded with Superciliousness, Insolence, and Violence,
etc. When in the Judgment of all unbyassed Persons; they could not well have
been propounded, with greater Candor, Sobriety and Meekness: But what will not
a kown and Infamous, and Impudent Libeller dare to say, even against
Conscience; and the clearest Evidences of Sense and Reason?

Though we are given to understand, That which was chiefly designed in the
Answer; as he calls it, to these Queries: Was first, to remove those false
pretenses of Conscience men make in matters of Religion; and then to endeavor
the defense of the Magistrates power therein: We are yet as far to seek wherein
he has removed the one; as what cause has by these Queries been given him, to
endeavor the defense of the other.

Nothing is more certain, than that it would greatly contribute to the
Happiness of this Nation: To break off our sins by Righteousness; and, laying
aside all petty Differences and Animosities, to unite our selves against the
common enemy of Protestanism; But this is not to be expected from those, who
while they declaim against Popery; uphold and support it in their Principles
and Practices.

It Is very strange, he tells us, the Jesuited Priests should have the luck for
so many years to escape the lash of all the Penal Laws, and not one of them be
made an example of Justice. But it is yet more strange, an Impudent Libeller
should be Licensed to reflect thus upon the Government.

The Papists, he says, of late years, are very zealous for Liberty of
Consciscience; And who, that has a Conscience, is not so? But this, let me
assure him, is no Popish Tenent; nor are they the more to be trusted for it,
than he for his declaiming against Popery.

The Vigorous Execution of one Law, would, he says, do more good than a
Million of Proclamations: But their Force is Rescinded; their Course
Obstructed; and their Penalties Pardoned: And by whom all this? It Is not
therefore these Queries, but this Answerer, that Reflects on the Government,
Libells the State, and speaks evil of things he understands not: As, God
willing, shall be further Evidenced in what follows.

ERRATA.
PAge 1. l. 5. r. Answerer, p. 2 l. 19. r. Answerer, l. 23. r. word, p. 3. l.
17. r. man, p. 5. l. 29. r. Immortalities, p. 6. l. 19. r. unto Satan, p. 7. l.
16. r. intended by, p. 10. l. 17. r. Gongregations, p. 13. l. 5. for or r. a,
l. 10. dele to, l. 19. for in r. is, l. 23. r. unitate, l. 26. r. unitatis, l.
26, and 27. r. Scripta, p. 21. r. It will I, p. 24. l. 25. r. Seneca, p. 25. l.
10. r. Mysteries, p. 26. l. 9. r. In Nations, l. ult. dele a, a. p. 27. l. 10.
dele it, p. 29. l. 13. for theer r. his, l. 19. r. acknowledged, p. 31. l. 21.
r. work, p. 34. l. 5. r. unto, l. 27 r. hear, p. 35. l. 11. r. Imperatoriae, p.
53. l. 14. r. the Saints. p. 62. l. 25. r. Ames* p. 72. l. 1. r. teneatis; p.
85. l. 18. r. be forced in, p. 87. l. 26. r. by an, l. ult. for our, r. one, p.
88. l. 2. r. proceed. p. 89. l. 16. r. blinder, p. 90. l. 12. r. impro, p 91.
l. 6. r. on the, p. 97. l. 1. r. has, p. 100. l. 2^. r. first Ref. l. 25. r.
it, l. 27. r. for as, p. 105. 1. for Just. r. Jurisdiction, p. 108. l. 6. dele
at, l. 28. r. on each other, p. 109 l. 6. r. alike, a Leiutenant, l. 6, 7. r.
Vicar General, l. 9. r. yet she is, p. 112. l. 7. r. are of, p. 114. l. 30. r.
eudued, p. 116. l. 27. r. hers, p. 11^. l. 9r. and Superstition, p. 118. l. 6.
r. says, p. 125. l. r. Churches obedience, p. 127. l. 9. r. in no wise. p.
132. l. 31. for Kings r. kinds, p. 133. l. 7. r. aid, p 135. l. 10. r.
Nursing, p. 136. l. 18. r. And so, p. 138. l* 3 r. Mahumatism, l. 15. r. of
others, l. 16. r. i.e. such* p 140. 25, 26. r. gaudentem, p. 142. l. 10. r.
neatly, p. 144. l. 17. r. their duty, p. 151. l. 6. r. Authors, l. 14. r.
Murder, p. 153. after l. 26. r. with a design and purpose to ensnare the
Consciences of Inferiors; much less shall we take upon us to determine, what
humane Laws thwart, etc. p. 15^. l. 10, 11. r. Instructions, l. 14. r. the
Kings, p. 156. l. 21. r. these, p. 161. l. 21. r. endear his, l. 26. r. passed
a, p. 166. l. 9, 10. r. Superstitions.

Query I.
Whether has Christ Instituted a Gospel Church?

Reply to the Answer to this Query.
CAvils at expressions, tending only to an unprofitable strife of words, ought
no less to be avoided, then foolish and unlearned Questions; This Answer
therefore, who so early, as in his Title Page, cautioned his Reader against the
one, should not himself have so soon obtruded on him the other (...) What
Prerogative preceding Ages had above the present, to Coin Phrases in Divinity,
we should be glad to be informed; Or if no expression may be therein used, we
meet not with in the New Testament; we may no longer use Sacrament, nor
Trinity, which are not to be there found: And yet a Church constituted and
Gover^'d according to the Rule of the Gospel; may as properly be termed a
Gospel Church: as a Church Constituted and Governed according to the Laws of a
Nation, be termed a National Church; an expression frequently used by this
Answerer, though he meet not with it in the New Testament; Nor, possibly in
Antiquity, at least to express a Christian Church. But having given us the
Queries meaning in his own words; he acknowledges that Christ has Instituted
such a Church,

Query II.
What is an Instituted Church of the Gospel? and by what means do Persons
become a Church of Christ?

Reply to the Answer to this Query.
AS in all Disputations, it is necessary the Terms be agreed upon; so here, what
is meant by Church, which in Scripture has diverse acceptations; Ephesians. 1. 22. 5.
23. 27.
for by Church there, is sometimes understood the Elect only, or mystical Body
of Christ; by some called the Holy Catholic Church. Acts 8. 3.
Sometimes again the universality of the Professors of Christianity, Phil. 3. 6.
commonly called the Church Catholic visible. And sometimes by Church, is
meant only a particular Church, or Society of Christians united for the
performance of the worship of God in the same individual Ordinances, according
to the Order by Christ prescribed. Such was the Church at Corinth; 1 Cor. 12.
the Church at Jerusalem; the Church at Antioch; Acts 15. 4. 14. 27.
the Seven Churches in Asia; and diverse others mentioned in the New Testament;
Rev. 2.
and is the Church here inquired after: To which this Answer, in saying, The
Church, or the Christian Church, is God's Family, or Household, etc. answers
not, the Question not being concerning the Church in the 1st. or 2d.
acceptance of the word. But had he said, An Instituted Church of the Gospel;
or as he expresses it, A Church Constituted and Governed according to the Rules
of the Gospel, is a Society of men joining together in the Profession of the
Christian Faith, having right Pastors or Officers, invested with Power to Guide
and Govern them in the ways of God; and to dispense unto them the Ordinances of
the Gospel, (which none but a Church in the third acceptance of the word
has,) it might have past for an answer to the Query, though not so full and
clear a one, as might have been given.

But whereas he says, He hopes, there may be as well such a National Church in
England, as there was for above fifteen hundred years in Palestine among the
Jews. If by such a National Church, he means only, a Church having National
Church Officers over it, (as had the Church of the Jews) no man sure doubts it;
But if by such a National Church, he means a National Church of Divine
Institution; we see not whereon he grounds his hopes, since it has not pleased
God to Institute, or appoint any such National Church under the Gospel: Nor
does the Church of England pretend to any such original, as is evident by the
Statute of the 25th of Edward the 3d. Statute of Provisors of Benifices.
Where it is declared to be founded in Prelacy, by the Kings and Nobles of
England; without the least pretense to a Divine Institution, as had the
National Church of the Jews.

There is no doubt but that Christ, as he says, would have his Church
Catholic, as well as Holy; yet not always so Illustrious or visible, as to be
seen and owned by the world. And though whole Nations were to embrace the
Christian Faith, and upon that account to Constitute the Christian Church, or
Catholic Church visible; yet that does not Constitute them National Churches,
such as was the Church of the Jews; nor can they be so called, upon the same
account that a particular Church is called a Church. And when Christ threatened
the Jews to take the Kingdom of God from them, and give it unto a Nation that
should bring forth the Fruits of it; he meant, no doubt, as he says, more by a
Nation, then one particular Church; for he meant a Nation (or People) that
might have many particular Churches, or Congregations of Christians in it, but
did not thereby Constitute, or intend a National Church in his notion. Neither
yet did he confine the Christian Church to a Nation; and consequently not
within smaller bounds then the Jewish was, when empal'd within the Land of
Canaan. But how will this Answerer prove it to have been as he says, far from
the mind of our Redeemer to crumble his Church, (as he words it) into such
minute and little Principles of being, (as Congregational Churches,) when the
Scriptures give so great evidence to the contrary, there being indeed no other
Instituted Church, under the Gospel, then what is Congregational. And when our
Blessed Savior Instituted those, he commanded certainly, the Demolishing an
Established National Church, even the National Church of the Jews; the only
National Church in the world of Gods Institution.

The second part of this Query, does evidently enough intend a particular
Church, as before expressed, which it is not impossible but five or six Persons
may Constitute, notwithstanding his peremptory denial thereof; Christ himself
having told us; Where two or three are gathered together in his name, he is in
the midst of them; which is the ground or principle of all Instituted Churches:
and we read of the Church in the House of Aquila and Priscilla; 1 Cor. 16. 19.
which cannot reasonably be supposed to consist of any great number.

By what means Persons become a Church of Christ; And how particular Persons
become Members of the Church of Christ; are two different Questions; and even
this, which is his own, he answers not distinctly; for by his first way, They
become Members only of the Catholic Church visible; By his second, They become
Members also of the Holy Catholic Church, the mystical Body of Christ: so that
without distinguishing what is here and there meant by Church; we are not like
to be much edified by this Answerer.

That a visible Profession of Christianity, Entitles men to the Privileges of
the Church, in the second acceptance of the word, may be true; which yet, with
his good leave, their Debaucheries and Immoralitys may again deprive them of,
notwithstanding the Church at Corinths delay in casting out the incestuous
person. But it is not every vice or error in a Member of a particular Church,
that Unchurches them. St. Paul therefore might very well own the Church at
Corinth for a Church; notwithstanding the Debaucheries and Immoralities that
were in some of its Members. But the tolerating them, was certainly a Crime,
which the Parable of the Tares and Wheat will never justify: for though they
were to grow together till Harvest, it was not in the Church, but in the world;
for so our Savior declares the field to be. Matt; 13. 38.
Nor will the parable of the Net, and good and bad Fishes contained therein,
give any more countenance to this fond Assertion; that Debaucheries and
Immoralities are, or may be tolerated in a Christian Church: or that Debaucht
and Immoral persons, are not to be debarred the Privileges thereof; If that
be, as it seems to be, this Answerers meaning; the Apostle commanding that the
Incestuous person be delivered unto Satan: i. e. cast out of the Church, the
Kingdom of God, into the world, the Kingdom of the Devil.

Query III.
Whether the Parochial Churches within these Nations, and the worship therein
used, be according to Christ's Institution, or the Rule and Order of the Gospel?

Reply to the Answer to this Query.
THis Query, relating to the former, has respect unto the means whereby
Christians become a Church of Christ; and aimed at their Information or
satisfaction, who doubted whether Co-habitation, or men's living together within
such or such a Precinct, having a Priest or Curate so and so set over them, be
the formal cause of an Instituted Church of the Gospel: And whether such
Societies, meeting to worship God, by certain set or prescribed Forms of
Prayer, and Administration of the Sacraments, be according to Christ's
Institution, or the Rule and Order of the Gospel: which this Answerer not
thinking good to speak to, requiring only the contrary to be shown, leaves his
Reader therein as much unsatisfied, and to seek, as before, while he troubles
himself with enumerating such particulars, as are not here questioned, nor were
ever intr^ded by the Query, which respected more the manner, then matter of
worship, and formal cause only of an Instituted Church of the Gospel.

Query IV.
Whether it be not the duty of every Christian, to withdraw from every Brother
that walks disorderly; and not after the Traditions received from the Apostles?

Reply to the Answer to this Query.
WE have an affirmative answer here, which could not well be denied us; 2 These.
3: 6.
since it is but what the Apostle commands. But then he tells us from an
excellent Expositor, what disorderly walking is; by which it seems, we are only
to withdraw from such as withdraw their Obedience from the Church; and like
disbanded Soldiers run away from their Colors, (where, by the way, disbanded
Soldiers are improperly said to run away,) forsake the Service of their
Superiors, and Commands of their Bishops, etc. and with such, he tells us, we
are not to have any familiar or friendly conversation: But this withdrawing,
says he, concerns only private Persons; and yet private Persons are not totally
to withdraw themselves from such disorderly walkers, till so and so; nay, even
then we are not interdicted all Society with such a Person: So that we are
little edified by this Answerer, or his excellent Expositor, as to our duty of
withdrawing; which they do not convince us, ought to be only from the civil
conversation, of such as withdraw their obedience from the Church; or as
forsake the service of their Superiors; and commands of their Bishops; and not
also from the Religious Fellowship and Communion of such Bishops and Brethren,
as in the Worship and Service of God, walk not according to the Rule and Order
of the Gospel.

Query V.
Whether it be not the duty of every Christian to choose the Communion of the
purest Church? And whether in the choice thereof, is he bound to follow his own
Judgment, after the best information he is able to attain unto, or other men's
Judgments against his own?

Reply to the Answer to this Query.
LIttle of what has been here said, is to the matter in Question; though in a
peevish and froward manner, he tells us, If there be a purer Church they may
betake themselves to it: Whereby he seems to acknowledge, That it is every man's
duty to choose the Communion of the purest Church: Nor does he say, that in the
choice thereof, a man is bound to follow another Judgment against his own;
and if he be not, why are any molested for but doing their duty? and though
possibly they may be mistaken in their choice; yet while they are so by
misfortune, and not their fault; God will pardon it, and men ought not to
punish it; at least, while therein, they hurt none but themselves. Yea, but
says this Answerer, They introduce confusion in all the Parishes of this
Kingdom; Deuteronomy. 19. 14.
in setting up one Altar against another, and removing ancient Landmarks,
expressly against a Divine Prohibition; which is not says he, to embrace the
Communion of the purest Church, but to cast a man's self out of the Catholic
Church.

But does this Learned and Judicious Answerer really believe, That they who
Separate from a Parochial, or National Church, do thereby cast themselves out
of the Catholic Church? Does he believe, the French Protestants cast
themselves out of the Catholic Church, when they Separated from their
Parochial Churches, or from the National Church of France? Or that the
Parliament went expressly against a Divine Prohibition, in removing an Ancieut
Landmark, when they gave new Bounds to St. Martins Parish, by taking
Covent Garden out of it? And what do they, who in this Nation, worship God in
Assemblies, Separate from the Parochial Congregations, more then all the
Reformed Churches, in all Popish Conntries in Europe, both do, and have done,
ever since they had a Being; and yet, I hope, they set not Altar against Altar:
or if they do, let him show the evil of it.

His objection against Dissenters being let alone, or snffer'd to go on in
their way; in that it will, as he says, administer occasion to the Enemies of
our Religion, to come and take away both our Place, our Church and Nation; is
but the old objection the Chief Priests and Phraisees heretofore made against
tolerating our Blessed Savior himself; Joh. 11. 48.
If say they, We let him thus alone, all men will believe on him; and the
Romans shall come and take, away both our Place and Nation: and I heartily
wish, it may not befall us, as it did them; That while they let him not a lone,
the Romans did come, and took away both their Place and Nation.

But what means he, in saying, A Naional Church is the ground of Unity and
Communion amongst the Professors of Christianity? which is a Notion, I am sure,
he never met with in the New Testament, nor in Antiquity; nor yet, I dare say,
in any judicious or intelligent Author: Nor is it easy to conceive what he
intends by it, or in what sense a National Church can be said to be the ground
of Unity and Communion amongst the Professors of Christianity; who are
dispersed over all Nations; if by it, he means only amongst the Professors of
Christianity in a Nation; it is very impertinent; for a Diocesan Church, or a
Parochial Church, is as much the ground of Unity and Communion, amongst the
Professors of Christianity in a Diocese, or in a Parish; as a National Church
amongst the Professors of Christianity in a Nation.

But it is impossible, says this Answerer, to obtain this Communion, unless the
members of the Church own this principle, viz. That the visible Unity of the
Curch is necessary for the great ends of Christianity, etc.

But what Church, and what Unity, is here intended? If a National Church?
Wherein consists its Unity? It cannot consist in a joint Assembly for the
celebration of the Ordinances of the Gospel; or any one of them, as was the
Case of the Church of the Jews which met at set times, in one place for the
performance of that worship which was then required. If it shall be said, its
visible Unity consists in a subordination of Officers in this Church, centring
in one: It will be said likewise, and with as good reason, That if such an
Unity of a National Church be necessary, for the great ends of Christianity,
the preserving and promoting of Peace and Unity; the same Unity of the
Catholic Church visible, is no less necessary for the same ends, and so much
more desirable, as the Unity of the whole, with the Peace and Piety thereof, is
more to be desired, then the Unity, Peace and Piety of a part: and where then
shall we end, but in a Pope? This is so obvious to every understanding, that
none who plead for the one, can with any color or shadow of reason reject the
other: And if this Profession, as this Answerer says, Obliges all persons to
acquiess in those determinations, by which the Church is visibly upheld and
maintained; It does so no less in respect of the Catholic Church visible, then
of a National Church: and why then does he not acquiess in the determinations,
of the Council of Ariminum, against the Diety of our Blessed Savior; of the
Council of Constance, in taking the Cup from the People; of the Council of
Nice, in Decreeing Image Worship; of the Council of Lateran, in determining
Transubstantiation; with others exercising the like Authority; an acquiescensie
therein, being that whereby, in his Judgment, the Church is visibly upheld and
maintained: for he cannot, with any color of reason pretend, greater
submission or obedience to be due to the determinations of a National Church in
its representative or National Council; then to the determinations of the
Catholic Church visible, in its representative, a general Council. Nor,
possibly, will he abide by his own principle, of acquiessing in the
determinations of a National Church; if he call to mind, or but to inform
himself, what a National Church; and even this National Church has determined,
within the memory of some not long since living. I mean in Queen Mary's Reign;
or if he should be such a through pa^'t Conformist, all of his Coat will not I
am very confident be so. But thus far I agree with him, That to acquiess in the
determinations of any Society, or of the Governors thereof, i^ a ground of
Unity and Peace in that Society; but not always of Truth and Piety, without
which, there is little or no advantage in Unity; For, nihil bonum est in
^unitate, nisi unitas sit in bono: Unity in error, being but Conspiracy against
Truth: or, as Hierome said, speaking of the Council of Ariminum, Nomine
unitatis and fidei, infidelitas Scripta est. But I do fully agree with him, The
Society is yet un-named, which did not always justify its own Acts; and oblige
those under its Authority, to confirm to its Laws, and Constitutions; But this
is not to our Question, which is not concerning the Authority of the Governors
or Rulers of a Society; or the obedience due unto them, from the Members, or
Subjects of that Society; But whether Christians have not a Right and Liberty
to choose their Communion; or whether it be not their duty to join themselves
unto such Congregations, in the participation of the Ordinances of the Gospel,
as they judge to walk according to the rule of the Gospel; and wherein they may
be best edified in the knowledge of Jesus Christ; and of their Salvation in and
by him; which this Answerer does not deny; neither can it reasonably be denied:
For, I presume, none will say, It is every man's duty to be of the Communion of
that Church, where providence has cast his Nativity, or confined his abode;
Because there born, or abiding: Nor yet, that it is any man's duty to continue
in that Church, wherein he has been educated, if after serious and sober
enquiry and Examination, any thing therein enjoined or required to be professed
or done, be judged unlawful or unwarrantable by a man's own Conscience. But that
every one, who is actually a Member of any Church or Christian Society; ought,
while he so continues, to conform to its Laws and Constitutions; none sure will
deny: Nor can any hinder or forbid Churches of whatever denomination, to
determine the Bounds of their own Communion; and that by such Constitutions and
Rights, as they in their wisdoms, shall judge necessary to preserve Order and
Unity; and advance the edification of those under their charge and Government.
This, as he very well says, is essential to the Church, as it is a Society; and
there can be no Society without Government; and no Government if every one be
allowed the Privilege to question and disobey its Laws and constitutions;
nothing being more rational, then that they who are entrusted with the reins of
Government, should be invested with a Power to decide and determine all
Differences and Controversies arising in that Government; and whoever will not
acquiess therein, ought to be banished the Society: But the Paralogisme is very
gross and foul, to argue, That because they who submit not to the Laws and
Constitutions of a Society, ought to be banished that Society; therefore they
who submit not to the Laws and constitutions of the Church, ought to be banished
the Commonwealth. It Is sufficient to the ends of Government, they be banished
that Society only, whose Laws and Constitutions they submit not unto; and so
this Answerer says well, Non opus est habere civem qui parere nescit; neither
Church nor Commonwealth have need of those persons who know not how to obey.
But till there be a due distinction made between the Church and State; between
civil and religious Societies: and that liberty in Religion allowed unto all
men which the Law of Nature, and positive Law of God, allows and requires the
exercise of; we can never hope to see Religion flourish, nor Peace and Quiet in
Christendom.

Query VI.
Whether is there any visible living Judge in Doubts and Controversies of
Religion, to whose determinations any man is bound to yield his assent and
obedience, against the Dictates of his own Conscience, guided (according to the
best of his light and knowledge) by the rule of Gods word?

Reply to the Answer to this Query.
A Clear and positive Answer to this Query, would go far toward the ending our
greatest differences and Disputes in Religion: For either, there is, or there
is not such a Judge as is here inquired after: if such an one there be; let him
be produced, and his determinations in all Controversial points, be made known,
that they may be submitted to: or if there be no such Judge, why are any
molested and troubled for going according to their own Judgments and
Consciences, when it is their duty so to do?

what is said of a Churches being a Society, and that every Society may agree
upon the means by which all differences arising in it, may be determined, that
may probably violatate the Peace and Unity thereof; is not to the present
Question, which is only concerning such a Judge in Doubts and Controversies of
Religion; to whose determinations, every one is bound to yield his Assent and
obedience against his own Judgment. We have already acknowledged, That they
who submit not to the Laws and Constitutions of a Church, ought to be cast out
of that Church; which is a sufficient means, and the only means of preserving
the Peace and Unity thereof: And if the Church of England assumes no other
Power or Privilege; there is no ground of quarrel or exceptions against her
for that: But whereas, he says, She does not like the Papists, own any Judge of
Controversies in Religion; If he means Infallible Judge, like the Papists; none
says She does: Or if his meaning be, That She owns no such Judge of
Controversies, as to oblige any to acquiess in her Determinations, against
their own Judgments, as it seems to be, by his saying, She requires none of
her Members to yield obedience to her Determinations, against the Dictates of
their Consciences: why does he, molest and trouble any for not yielding such
obedience. And if all she demands, as he says, be but, That obedience be given
to those Laws which are undoubtedly Divine; An acquiescence yielded to some
disputable points, etc. (which are not against a man's Conscience) and a
conformity to some indifferent Rites, etc. (which all judge to be indifferent)
no rational man can sure except against any of this: nor deny the Governors of
the Church of England to be as much Umpires, and Judges in these matters, as
the Pastors and Elders in any of the Separated Congregations.

It is, as he very well says, A vain thing for men to plead, that they make
Conscience their guide, unless they take Scripture for their rule. Nor can any
plead Conscience for disobeying Lawful Authority in things innocent and
indifferent, where they judge the things commanded to be so; but what some may
count indifferent, others may judge sinful. The Scripture commanding obedience,
and to be Subject for Conscience Sake; does sufficiently manifest that none
ought to obey, or comply, in any thing against Conscience, since none against
Conscience can be Subject for Conscience Sake.

It cannot be denied, but that horrid Impieties and Immoralities have been
acted under pretense of Conscience; though they can never be justified upon the
account of Conscience: and where any plead Conscience against all sense of
duty, it is but just with God to leave them to a reprobate state of mind: but
some men's abandoning, or abusing Conscience, will never justify others
dispising and deriding of it.

Whether Dissenters endeavor after the best Information they are able to
attain unto, and in other things do their duties, is no part of this Query. But
if they do not, they are too blame, and will have the more to answer for
another day; and cannot with that satisfaction bear their present sufferings,
which otherwise they might do. As for the grounds of their Separation, Whether
sufficient to justify it, or excuse them of Schism; will be more seasonably
argued, when this Answerer, or his Adherents, shall tell us of such a Judge as
in the Query is inquired after, to determine who is in the right, and who in
the wrong; who keeps to, and who swerves from the rule of the Gospel.

Query VII.
Whether to inflict Corporal punishments upon any as transgressors in those
matters, which no man or Society of men whatever, have Authority to pronounce a
Judicial difinitive Sentence in, so as to make it any man's duty to yield his
Assent or obedience thereunto; Be not to Execute before Judgment? And whether
to do so, be not against all Rules and Forms of Justice both Divine and humane,
and such a violation of the Law and light of Nature, as no sober or judicious
Heathen was ever yet guilty of?

Reply to the Answer to this Query.
HAd not this officious person taken on him the answering Questions, before he
understood them, he might have spared his pains in all he has here said;
having only beaten the Air, and fought with his own Shadow. It Is not therefore
the Gentleman's being meanly read, as he says, but the Clergy-mans not
understanding what he reads, that obtrudes upon the World the errors and
absurdities we here meet with; the Query not being so impertinent, as his
ignorance apprehends it; nothing being more evidently unjust, then that any
should suffer as transgressors in those matters, wherein in none are authorized
to pass a judicial definitive Sentence, whether they have therein transgressed
or not; in which case, to punish, is to Execute before Judgment; and that, we
say, is such a violation of the Law and light of Nature, as no sober or
judicious Heathen was ever yet guilty of, Have we not then to do with an
Ingenious and Pleasant person, who having spent above twenty pages to no
purpose, being wholly from the Question, has at last the face or folly rather,
to tell us, He hopes, now it appears to be no violation of the Law or light of
Nature, to inflict punishments in matters of Religion: when every Child that
could but read English would have told him; That not to inflict punishments in
matters of Religion, but to Execute before Judgment, was the violation of the
Law and light of Nature mentioned in the Querie: And though this might serve
for a sufficient Reply, to so pertinent and judicious an Answer; yet least he
should conceit himself, to have said something material, though not to the
present Question, we will examine all he here says, as we have done his
preceding answers, though little or nothing to the Questions before him, as
every intelligent and discerning Reader sees.

None sure ever denied judicious Heathens to have been guilty of inflicting
Coporal punishments upon Christians; yet did none of them ever do it, before
they judged Christianity it self Criminal; and so did not Execute before
Judgment, though it were an erroneous and an unrighteous Judgment. And if, as
he says, it were heretofore the Devils policy to serve himself of those who
were most Eminent for intellectual and moral accomplishments in persecuting
Christ's Disciples, to beget in undiscerning minds the greater prejudice against
them; he seems now to have lost much of his ancient subtilty, rarely employing
in that base work, but the most vicious and flagitious livers.

It will, I doubt not, puzzle this Answerer to prove what he affirms, viz. That
they who are serious and reserved, and stictest in their lives and
Conversations, are the greatest opposers of Gods Truths, and the Churches
Peace; the contrary being evident, and the very assertion, a contradiction of
it self.

Liberty of Conscience, and the Magistates Power in Religion, have of late,
indeed been the Subject of many men's thoughts and discourses. But none, sure,
do affirm that the Magistrate is not to use all due and proper means to bring
men to the knowledge of God, and of the service he requries of them: But that
secular force is a means conducive thereunto; many, indeed, do deny: the
liberty of Conscience therefore pleaded for, by those who are concerned for the
Honor of Religion, and Power of Godliness; is not, as he says, That men may
serve, or not serve God, at their pleasure, But that all men may be allowed the
liberty of serving God, as by the rule of his word, they judge he would be
served, while under pretense thereof, they become not guilty of any ral evil or
impiety: And that none be forced to conform to such ways and modes of worship,
as they judge sinful, or may not be fully persuaded of the lawfulness of; since
whatever is not of Faith, is Sin. But as the best of things, are not exempt
from the worst of abuses, so it is not impossible, but as some plead for Liberty
of Conscience, that they may render unto God an acceptable service; others
again may plead for liberty also, to be excused, the preformance of those
duties God requires of them: To distinguish therefore between these, ought to
be the Magistrates great care and concern. But for this Answerer to say,
Because' its the Magistrates duty to let men alone in the duty they ow to God
their Creator and Redeemer, (i.e. in the preformance of those religious duties
God requires of them, and none can deny to be truly such;) therefore God may be
either served or Blasphemed, owned or disowned, by them; is such a conclusion,
as none I think but himself, would have made: for no sober man, sure, ever
doubted it the Magistrates duty to see, as much as in him lies, that God be
owned, and duly served, by all under him: and all moral evils and impieties,
restrained and punished. Nor can any pretense of Conscience excuse, much less
justify, as he says, Blasphemy; or exempt any guilty thereof, or of the like
moral evils, from the Magistrates revenging Power, which were, indeed, for him
to bear the Sword in vain.

And now our Answerer, craves his Reader's patience, by speaking, as he says,
something largely to this Query; when he should have craved his pardon rather
for mistaking the Question, and entertaining him with so impertinent and
tedious a Combat with his own shadow: But so bewitching is the pleasure of
Conquest, that sensible of his advantage on his man of Straw, he never thinks
he has sufficiently beaten him. To begin therefore, He craves leave to tell the
Gentleman, the Clergyman is none of the wisest, to think that Doomsday's
Judgment is the Judgment here spoken of. But to do him right on all
occasions, he is very much in the right, in saying, It Is no anticipation of
Gods Judgment at Doomsday, to inflict Corporal or pecuniary Penalties upon
those that offend against the known and plain rules of duty in matters of
Religion; and therefore he need not have asked to have it shown, why it should
be so, more in Religion, then in civil concerns. A Magistrate, says he, for
pronouncing a Sentence of Condemnation upon a Felon or a Murderer, may be said
to Execute before Judgment, as well as a Justice of Peace for granting a
Warrant to leavy 12d. upon an Atheist or Papist, for not repairing upon the
Lords day to his Parish Church: And why then will this Gentleman (this ignorant
Gentleman) say, that the Execution of such a mild, or perhaps a severer Law, is
a violation of the very Law and light of Nature? It is indeed a Question fit to
be asked, and had been a folly never to have been answered, had he said any such
thing. But with this learned and judicious Answerers good leave, the Gentleman
will take leave to say, That should a Magistrate pronounce Sentence of
Condemnation, and Execute a Felon, or a Murderer, before he were Convict and
Judged a Felon, or a Murderer; it would be such a violation of the Law and
light of Nature, as no sober or Judicious Heathen was ever yet guilty of. The
like may be said of levying 12d. upon any for not coming to Church, before he
be Convict of not coming, and his not coming, Judged a Crime.

That all Nations, whether Jewish, Heathen or Christian, have as he says,
assumed to themselves the power of protecting the Honor of those Dieties they
have made the object of their worship, and punished those offenders that have
either neglected their duty, or affronted the Majesty of those Gods which they
have pretended to serve; is so evident and notorious, and agreeable to the Law
and light of Nature, that it is time lost to prove it; our Answerer therefore,
might have spared his pains in this particular, and not have given himself the
trouble of proving, what none sure ever denied or doubted.

But he tells us of Grotius his observation out of Sneca, viz. That those who
violate Religion, have various kinds of punishments inflicted on them, but
there is no Nation but inflicts some. No certainly, it being so far from a
violation of the Law and light of Nature, that nothing is more consonant
thereunto. And who, I pray, are greater violators of Religion, then they who
subvert, or alter its Divine or Original Institutions? When Numa Pompilius, as
he observes, Instituted a Pontifex Maximus, or Chief Priest, and committed to
him all the sacred writings and mysteries, gave him order with what Sacrifices,
and upon what days, and in what places the Rites of Religion were to be
perforwed; had it not been a violation of his Religion, to have used other
Sacrifices, upon other days, in other places, and with other Rites then he
appointed? And if among Heathens, as he farther observes, both public and
private Mysteries were all determined by the Chief Priest, that it might be
known where the Common People might repair to worship their Gods, lest there
should be any disorder or confusion in Religion, either by neglecting the
sacred Rites of their Country, or introducing any that were Foreign and
Strange: Shall not we allow the Lord Jesus our High Priest to determine the
sacred mysteries of his Religion, with all Rites and Ceremonies thereof, that
under pretense of Order and Decency, there may not be introduced, that disorder
and confusion in the Christian Religion, we see at this day, through the
neglect of those sacred Rites of his Institution, and the introducing such as
are Foreign and strange into his worship. Let not, therefore, those that abhor
Idols, commit Sacrildge: And if Heathen Romans, as he observes, were so
careful, that none but the Roman Dieties might be worshipped; and that after no
other manner but that of their own Institution; How much more careful and
concerned ought Christians to be, that none but the Almighty, the Holy one of
Israel be worshipped, and that after no other manner, then that of his own
Institution and appointment.

And since, as this Answerer observes, That wise people were so jealous and
careful, least any Innovation should be made in their Religion; and least its
Uniformity and Integrity should be dissolved by the Customs and mixtures of
other Countries; How much more ought Christ's Disciples to be jealous and
careful that no innoventions be made, or humane Inventions added to Christ's
Institutions, either as to matter, or to man's, (beyond the orderly observance
of such circumstances as necessarily attend such Ordinances, as Christ himself
has Instituted) least the uniformity and integrity of his worship, should be
dissolved by the Customs and mixtures of other Countries; in the establishing
of different ways and modes of worship, according to the variety of men's
Inventions and Fancies. And since, not only Grotius from St. Anstin, observes,
That the Romans were successful in their Arms, because they had a hearty
respect and veneration for Religion: But the Apostle tell us, 1 Timothy 4. 8.
That Godliness has the promise of this life, as well as of that which is to
come; surely it can be against no rule or form of Justice, or Prudence, nor any
violation of the Law or light of Nature; for Christian Princes to be as zealous
for a true Religion, as the Heathens were for a false one. But, as the wise man
says, He that Answers a matter before he hear it; so he that Answers a
Question before he understands it, It shall be ^ folly and shame unto him.

And now we are told of the zeal and care, the holy Kings and Governors of the
Jewish Nation, had of Religion, which will never prove, That to execute before
Judgment, is no violation of the Law and light of Nature: Nor in the least
prejudice any Principle these Queries labor to support.

When he shall inform us, What David's ordering the turns and courses of the
Priests; and setting up Music in the Temple, it is to this Query, it may be
considered of; or if he would in^er from it, That civil Magistrates, without
particular Warrant or Commission from God, may order or appoint, in the worship
and service of God; what they please, or shall Judge condu^ive to the Honor
and Glory of God, or the ^ecent and Orderly performance of Divine worship, it is
a Question we are not at present ^oncern'd in; and shall therefore pass it by.

Asa did not any thing, 2 Chro. 14
which was by any ^enyed to be his duty; nor commanded ought in others, which
they did not acknowledge ^^kewise to be theirs; And, notwitstanding ^ur
Answerers asserting the contrary; The Covenant which Asa, 2 Chro. 15
and all Judah and Benjamin, and the Strangers with them, entered into, was
voluntary in all parties; for it is said, They did it with all their heart, and
with all their soul; and again v. 14. They swear unto the Lord with a loud
voice and with shouting, and with Trumpets, and with Cornets? And all Judah
rejoiced at the Oath, for they had sworn with all their hearts, and sought him
with their whole desire, and he was found of them: There cannot well be greater
evidence to prove any action to have been voluntary; For, God is not found of
those who seek him not in sincerity, and with a willing mind; who draw nigh
unto* him with their lips, while their hearts are far from him. Let none
therefore, too hastily credit this Answerer in ought he says; but like the
noble Bereans, search the Scriptures, whether it be so o^ no.

Jehoshaphat, we are told, used his Coercive Power in taking away the High
places and groves dedicated to Idolatry, and what did he therein* which all
Judah acknowledged not to be his duty? And who did ever deny it to be in the
Magistrates Power, to send Teachers to instruct^ the People in the Law of the
Lord? or Judged it a violation of the Law or light of Nature, so to do?

And what did Jehojada, in putting Athalia to death; and in making a Covenant
between him and between all the People, and between the King* that they should
be the Lords People: And i^ breaking down the Altars and Images in the House of
Baal, and slaying the Priests thereof before the Altar; which he had not good
Authority to do? and which all Judah approved not of?

The Reformations of Hezekiah and Josiah, were very eminent, but nothing done
by either of them; or by any of the good Kings of Judah, does in the least
oppugn ought in this, or in any of these Queries.

What did Hezekiah in opening the Doors of the Temple that had been long shut
up, in cleansing the City, and Kingdom from Idols; in restoring the Priests to
their Offices and dues; in reviving the Sacrifices, which had been long
neglected, and celebrating the Passover with great magnificence; more then
what every man's Conscience told him was right and necessary to be done.

And did Josiah, 2 Chro. 34.
(in making a Covenant before the Lord, to milk after the Lord, and to keep his
Commandments, and his Testimonies, and his Statutes, with all his heart, and
with all his soul, to perform the words of the Covenant which are written in
the Book of the Law of the Lord; and causing all that were present in Jerusalem
and Benjamin, to stand to it; yea, in making all that were present in Israel to
serve the Lord their God; Do ought which any acknowledged not to be both his
and their duty? and how made he them to do all this? was it by secular force
and Power; verse 30.
or by reading unto them all the words of the Book of the Covenant that was
found in the House of the Lord? was it not by convincing them it was their duty
so to do? for it reached no farther then to those who were present; And who
denies the like Power unto Christian Magistrates? Nor needs there any great
search in the Annals of time, and History of Ages, to know that Princes and
People never more prosper'd, then when Religion was countenanc't, Idolatry
punished and the great Causes and occasions of Schism (the requiring other Terms
and Conditions of Church Fellowship and Communion, then God requires) were
unknown or removed.

Nor is there ought in the Instances before mentioned, That needs any such
constructions or evasions as this Answerer speaks of to reconcile them to the
liberty in Religion pleaded for: For who did ever deny unto Magistrates Power
to command, and require their People to serve God, as God has expressed and
declared he will be served? or to remove such outward appearances and Monuments
of worship, as are evidently and apparently false and Idolatrous? which in both
instances, was but the Case of the beforementioned Kings of Judah: But that
which is excepted against, Is the prohibiting any to worship God, in such a way
as none can say to be against the mind and will of God, or displeasing unto
him: or the compelling any to worship God in such a way, as they Judge sinful;
or are not satisfied in the lawfulness of. And though the State of Religion
under the Gospel, be far differing from what it was under the Law; yet, surely,
Princes are not, as he says, in a worse condition by the coming of Christ, then
they were in the Jewish Commonwealth* where they had no power to command ought
in Religion, but what God willed or commanded; and so they may do still, by all
the ways and means appointed by God, and useful thereunto.

But what is it this Answerer has found in the 49 chap of Isaiah, to prove the
Magistrates Coercive Power in Religion? Gods affectionate answer to his peoples
complaint, promising never to forget them, will not do it; neither his promise
of delivering them from their Enemies, and adding to their numbers: nor yet,
that Kings should be nursing Fathers, and Queens nursing Mothers to his Church;
For Nurses do not use to force and coerce their Children; but nourish and
cherish them. But this place does indeed imply or promise, that there should be
Sovereign Princes, who should nourish and cherish the People of God; and take
care that no hurt or violence be offered unto them, or to his Church; which is
as much as the Metaphor will bear, since true Religion cannot be forced, or
upheld, by Secular power: It Is Antichristianism that is so supported and
maintained, Rev. 17. 12. 13.
by those who give their power and strength unto the Beast: And they carry the
Metaphor too far, who would have Princes, like Nurses to feed their Children;
Christ having appointed other Overseers of his flock for that works; whom the
Magistrate ought indeed to protect and defend, in the performance thereof; but
not to dictate, nor prescribe to them therein.

There may not be wanting expositors, who as he says, may conceive this
Prophecy to have been fulfilled, when Emperors and Kings became Christians,
and enacted Laws to secure the Faith of Christ from all Enemies, etc. though
they have no great Reason for it; it being but too well known, that Christian
Religion has suffered more then ever it gained by pretended Christian
Magistrates: For if Constantine protected the Truth; his Successor Constantius,
with diverse others after him, persecuted it: Yea, the generality of Christian
Magistrates for above a thousand years together, by the instigations of the
Bishop of Rome were its great opposers and oppressors: and though for several
years past, God has blessed this Nation, beyond most of the Nations of the
Earth, with Kings and Queens, who have protected and defended the Truths of the
Gospel, and the people of God, from the Tyranny and opprssieon of that great
Enemy to both; yet in respect of Christendom, there is little cause to say that
this Prophecy was fulfilled, when Kings and Emperors became Christians.

As there have been Laws enacted by Kings and States in behalf of the Truth; so
there have been infinitely more enacted against it: error too soon and
generally prevailing over the Christian world; which for a Protestant to
Question, were to deny his Faith. He cannot be thought a Friend to Truth, who
shall oppose any means conducive unto its promotion; But whoever shall
consider, how few of the Mighty and Noble of the Earth, to whom wordly Power
and Authority is committed, are called unto the knowledge thereof; must
acknowledge likewise, that where one Law bath been enacted in behalf of the
Truth, hundreds have been enacted to its prejudice: It is not therefore in
opposition to Truth, but for the Truths sake, that we plead for its standing
upon its own Bottom; and prevailing by its own strength and efficacy: For as
the Truths of the Gospel were at first planted, and propagated throughout the
world, by the Ministry of the Gospel, and influence of the Divine Spirit,
without the aid and assistance of the secular Power; so by the same means and
methods, they are best secured and preserved: nor is secular force and power a
means by God appointed, or in its nature conducive to the promoting of Truth,
since it is conviction and not force, must induce assent: And though some
Heretics may have seemed to retract their opinions, upon the severity of penal
Laws against them; there is little reason to believe that any of them thereby
became real converts; for, though force may make an Hypocrite, it can never
make a true Believer.

If we believe not the Donatists and Independants so nearly related as this
Answerer tells us, having but his say so, without other proof; and if we are
not Convinced, That Austins changing his mind, proves second thoughts to be
always best; it will not, we hope, be thought any violation of the Law or light
of Nature; it is not unknown how that Pious Father was molested by that petulant
Faction, no wonder therefore he should approve of what ever delivered him from
them. But would it not be very pleasant for Magistrates to change their Laws,
as often as Doctors change their minds; and that every new opinion should be the
ground of a new Statute: And yet I fully approve of what this Learned and Pious
Father That Kings (as is commanded them from Heaven) serve God in that Office,
when in their Kingdoms, they Command what is good; and Prohibit what is evil;
and that not only in things that belong unto humane Society, but also unto
Divine Religion: So they command but what is known and allowed to be good, and
in men's power to do: and Prohibit no more then what is by the light of Nature,
or some positive Law of God, apparently evil; And if there be more passages to
the same purpose, as this Answerer tells us, he may spare his pains in
transcribing them; for that they make as little to his purpose, as against
ours. And whereas he tells us, The same Arguments the Socinians and
Independants, urge against the Magistrates Coercive Power, were in St. Austin'
s days, made use of by the Donatists, and answered by that Father; The
substance of which was, That no man was to be compelled to the Faith; and that
Religion was not to be chosen, but out of freedom of will: Let him prove the
contrary, and I will own my self his Convert. And though nothing be more
evident to common Sense and Reason; so that it needs no Authority to
countenance or support it: yet since he pretends Authority against it, he may
her^ likewise, if he please, what others have said for it.

A man, Ire. Chap. 6. Sect. 6.
says our Learned Dr. Stillingfleet, Has not the power over his own
understanding, much less can other have it, And then cites, Picus Mirandulus,
saying, Nullus credit aliquid esse verum; quia vult credere id esse verum; non
est enim in potestate hominis facere aliquid apperere intellectui suo verum
quando voluerit: No man can believe any thing to be true, because he would
believe it true; for it is not in a man's power to make what he will appear true
to him.

And Lactantius says, Non opus vi and injuria, quia Religio cogi non potest;
There needs no force and injury (for so he esteems force in Religion to be) for
that Religion cannot be compelled. And says Ambrose) ea quae Divina, Lib. 5.
Cap. 23.
imperatoniae potestati non esse subjecta: Divine things are not subject to the
Emperors power, And again, writing to Valentinian the younger, he says, ut
putes te in ea quae Divina sunt, imperiale aliquod jus habere: Epist. 3^. ad
soro.
Do not think thy self to have any imperial right over Divine things. And else
where, That Christ sent his Disciples to sow the Faith; who were not to
compel, but to teach; not to exercise force and power, but to extol the
Doctrine of humility. So Tertullian, Lex nava uon se vindicat vltore gladio.
The Gospel does not support it self by the secular Power. And says Hilarie,
Deus cognitionem sui docuit potius, quam exegit; God has rather taught, then
extorted the knowledge of himself. And writing to the Emperor Constantius;
Lib. 2 ad Constable.
we beseech, faith he, not with words only, but with tears, that the Catholic
Church be no longer oppressed with grievous injuries; and sustain into-berable
persecution and contumelies, and that which is shameful, even of our Brethren:
Let your elemency therefore provide and appoint; that all Judges every where,
to whom Provinces are committed, who ought to take care and charge of
Commonwealth matters only, refrain meddling with Religion. The like may be
produced from most of the Fathers, who expressly exclude force and complusion
in Religion, being unanimous in this; That no man ought to be required to
profess, what he believes not; nor practice in Religion, what he approves not.
It is not, therefore sufficient for this Answerer to tell us, That many of the
Ancients own and have proved the Magistrates Coercive Power in the concerns of
Religion; without giving us farther evidence thereof; since the Nature and
being of Religion, is inconsistent with compulsion: Though it is not denied, but
that the Magistrate may require the performance of those Religious duties,
which none can deny to be such; which is as much as any of the good Kings of
Israel or Judah ever did; which none sure, ever thought to be any violation of
the Law or light of Nature. Nor does the Statute Primo Elizabethae, prove as he
says, that our Ancestors had other thoughts concerning this matter: because
they levied the penalty of 12d. upon such persons as had no lawful or
reasonable excuse for not coming to Church; since they who have not that, and
yet come not, may reasonably enough be punished. If Independants, who say a man
should not steal, do themselves steal, they are the more inexcusable: But it is
not impossible but this Answerer may be mistaken in matter of Fact: For, though
he would have it thought, the Quakers who were put to death in New England,
suffered for Religion; the contrary is well known; it being only for the
insufferable disturbances they gave to the public worship of God, wherever
they came; and that not till after other ways and means were used to have
reclaimed them, or prevented those disorders; they returning after Banishment
upon Banishment; and even at the place of Execution, were offered their lives,
if they would then but have promised to depart the Country, or to forbear
disturbing the public Assemblies for the worship of God, as is related in the
Printed Narrative of that matter: and though it cannot be denied, but some
milder course might have been taken with them; yet they suffered not for
Religion, but for disturbing the public Peace, in disturbing the public
Worship and Service of God.

As for his conclusive citation out of Calvin. That there are none plead
against the Magistrates Coercive Power and Sword of Justice, but those who out
of Consciousness of their own Heresies, Schisms, and Misdeeds, are in danger
and afraid of suffering by it; and therefore would wrest the Sword out of the
Magistrates hand, that they might persevere in their Heresies, Schisms,
Blasphemies, and offenses without punishment and remorse: If these are the
words of that Eminent Divine and Servant of Gods, I can upon my own sure and
certain knowledge say, He is therein greatly mistaken, in that there are who
plead against the Magistrates Coercive Power in Religion, on no other account
then the Interest of the Truth, and happiness of all Interests; that so neither
the Magistrate may incur the guilt of punishing the Innocent; nor the guiltless
suffer in the place of the nocent, through that darkness and ignorance, which
is upon the minds of the most of men, in the things of God, and the Truths of
Religion; of which whoever is not Convinced, by the too lamentable experience
of almost all Ages, Times, and Places, in which Truth has suffered in the
stead of error, and error been promoted instead of Truth; I shall not hope to
rectify their Judgments, by any thing I can here say. Did, indeed, any plead
for Blasphemers or Evildoers; or that impious or immoral persons of any kind,
might be exempt from the Magistrates Jurisdiction and Authority to punish,
there might be some color for what has been here said; But while the Plea is
only against the Magistrates interposing and exercising his Power and
Authority, in disputable points, in Controversies only of Truth and Error in
Religion, of which he is not a competent Judge, and which are not within his
Province to determine and punish; it is a most unreasonable and uncharitable
Censure, not improbably proceeding from this Eminent and good man (though
herein greatly mistaken) upon occasion of his too severe dealing with Servetus,
whom he caused to be burnt alive at Geneva.

Query VIII.
Whether it is not Incongruous and Heterogeniall, to punish Corporally, man
erring Spiritually?

Reply to the Answer to this Query.
THe Question is not here, Whether any Judge or Justice can take cognizance of
men's Thoughts or Consciences; nor when wickedness in the heart is manifested by
external action, whether liable to the Magistrates Power and Inspection; none,
I think, ever questioning either of them. But whether men erring Spiritually,
ought Corporally to be punished. Paul 's reckoning Heresies among the works of
the flesh; and telling the Gorinthians they were Carnal, from the Schisms and
disorders that were amongst them, does not prove it. But says this Answerer,
Certainly any sensual sin may be punished by the Civil Sword: What thinks he
then of Hatred, Wrath, Covetousness, Emulations, Envyings, and the like; which
are sensual Sins, or works of the flesh, yet not therefore to be punished by the
Civil Sword.

But why are they as he tells us, Who gather Churches, etc. more then
Spiritually Erroneous? How comes that which was the great Errand and Duty of
the Apostles, and their immediate Successors; now to become so great a Crime?
Is it that Men, or Children rather, are now born Christians? or being born in a
Christian Commonwealth (as it is usually, though improperly expressed) or in
such, or such a Parish, they do thereby become a Church of Christ? No one,
certainly, who understands what either a Christian, or a Church of Christ is,
can think so. And wherein do they, as he says, despise Government, and Trample
upon all Laws? Did he not but now tell us, The Church was a Society, and that
there can be no Society without Government; How then comes the gathering of
Churches to be a despising of Government, and trampling upon all Laws?
undoubtedly there is a Law, and a Divine Law to, for the gathering of Churches,
if the Gospel be the Law of God; as I hope, neither this Answerer, nor any who
own themselves Christians, doubt it to be.

There is little reason, sure to say as he does, The inticers to Idolatry,
mentioned in Deutromony, might as well have pleaded, it was only an error of
their minds, as any of our Dissenting Ministers; for that none, certainly, can
imagine that it could be a sin of Ignorance in them, to draw any from the true
God, to worship Idols; it being against the very light of Nature, in that, as
the Apostle tell us, That which may be known of God, Romans 1. 19.
was manifest in them. It may therefore, for any thing this Answerer has here
said, Be both Incongruous and Heterogenial, to punish Corporally, men erring
Spiritually.

Query IX.
Whether secular force and compulsion, in things of Divine and Supernatural
Revelation, be not the Arms of Antichrist, and not of the true Church?

Reply to the Answer to this Query.
THis Answerer might have done well to hae informed us, How secular force and
compulsion in Religion toward some, is, as he says, Antichristian, and not
toward other; the difference not being evident, at least to all capacities.

We are not here enquiring after, what is so much a violation of the Law of
Nations, as of the Law of Nature: and though our Answerer expresses his dislike
of the Spaniards dealings with the Indians; graciously acknowledging that
propriety is not forfeited by unbelief; Yet but now speaking of Dissenters
here, he said, Ans. to the 5th Q.
If they disapprove of the Decisions of their Superiors, the world is wide
enough, they may leave the Government, and betake themselves to the Communion
of purer Churches; which is but in other words to say, Be of the Religion of
your Country, or abanden your Properties, with the Land of your Nativity. But
should providence permit the Establishment of a Religion in this Nation he
approves not of, (if he be not resolved to approve of whatever shall be the
National Religion) would he not think himself hardly dealt with, to be required
to Conform, or to abandon his Native Country? He may do well therefore, to
meditate a little on that no less Divine, then Moral precept; Of doing to
others, as he would they should do to him.

The Cannon he mentions, is indeeed, very pertinent to our purpose: So likewise
is what he Cites from Tertullian and Lactantius: But then, without the least
color or shadow of Reason; (and perhaps only because Grotius says, Lib. 2. C.
20.
It is not just or lawful to make War upon any, because they will not embrace
the Christian Religion) He would have this to be understood only of Princes
raising Wars, against Pagan Nations to compel and force them to the Profession
of Christianity, and embracing of the Gospel. But it is very well and
judiciously observed of him, That these things nothing concern a Kingdom, in
which there is a visible and universal profession of the same Religion; in that
there is, indeed, no need of compelling or forcing any to profess, what all
already do profess. But yet, even in such a Kingdom, Magistrates, he says, may
use compulsive methods to secure their People from a total and manifest
Apostasy from the true Faith, etc. which we would freely allow him, if
compulsive methods could secure a People from Apostasy; and that through
ignorance or mistake of the Truth, Magistrates did not too often instead
thereof compel to error. But none sure will say, but that Magistrates may, and
ought, to repress such Seducers as threaten the extirpation of their own
Government: yea, and of the true Faith too; were it once determined, which
amongst the many that would be so accounted, were the true. What he says of the
Religious Princes of the Jewish Church, has been already spoken to.

Query X.
Whether any one can be compelled by secular force or compulsion, to perform
any one Religious duty acceptably; since God accepts not of any but what is
vol^ntary, and of Faith, which cannot be forced? And of what use then, is
secular Force and compulsion in Religion, but to make men sin or suffer?

Reply to the Answer to this Query.
THis Query, which this Answerer says, with others is forged in the Shops of
the Socinians and Anabaptists; is with the rest grounded on the Rule of Gods
word: with which he seems to be little acquainted, or with the due performance
of Religious Duties, in saying, That it might with as much strength of Reason,
be urged against the Magistrates using compulsive methods toward his Subjects
for the performance of the Duties of the 2d. Table, a^ those of the first,
There being some difference be^ween forcing men to moral actions and Divine
duties: since in things moral, the action, however circumstantiated, is in it
self positively good or evil: But in things of Divine Institution, the manner
only of the performance makes the action good or evil; and therefore it is
said, Isa. 66. 3.
He that Sacrifices an Ox, is as if he killed a Man; and he that kills a Lamb
as if he cut off a Dogs neck; where the manner of performing the Command, is
not observed as well as the matter. The like may be said of all such Gospel
Duties, the goodness whereof depends wholly upon the Institution; and therein
the manner as well as the matter, must be punctually observed; nay the manner
of performing these duties, determines the matter of them; for if they be
performed in their due manner, the action is good; if not, the action it self
is sinful. This Answerer therefore runs himself into this error, by not
distinguishing between things in their own Nature good or evil, and those
things whose goodness depends wholly upon Institution; and consequently on
their due performance. Authority, therefore, may oblige men to be Loyal and
Peaceable, Honest and Just, which are moral virtues; and punish them, if they
be Rebellious and Seditious, Injurious and Theives, which are moral evils. Yet,
cannot force any in the sight of God to an acceptable performance of the one,
nor abstinence from the other; because God accepts only of the Heart; or an
hearty obedience, which cannot be so forced.

It has been already acknowledged, in the case of the Kings of Israel and
Judah, That Magistrates may command their People to serve God, as God has
commanded; and they are convinced and satisfied, he will be served; but no
otherwise, since whatever, is not of Faith, is sin; which the Magistrate may
not compel to: yet may he prohibit the doing of any thing, which may either
dishonor or destroy Government.

Every King is, as he says, both the Minister of God, and the Ruler of his
People; and obliged to the duties he mentions, as has been already
acknowledged. Nor are as he says, our Governors so much to consider our
willingness to serve God, as our benefit, and their duty: But it is neither
their duty to force any to worship God, after any other way or manner, then
they are persuaded God will be worshiped; or that will be acceptable unto him;
since, as has been said, what is not Faith, is sin, which the Magistrate by
forcing to, becomes guilty of. Nor is it for their Peoples benefit to be forced
to any thing in Religion, beyond their Convictions; all such performances being
in themselves sinful. And for this Answerer to say, It will perhaps, be found
as great an Act of Justice and Charity, to force some to go to Church, as it is
to force some Boys to go to School; speaks him very unfit to be an Instructor
and Teacher of others, who is himself so unacquainted with the nature and
essence of Religion.

And whereas he says, The Magistrate will find the benefit by exercising his
Coercive Power, (in matters of Religion, for it is of that alone we are here
speaking) in securing the honor of his own Laws and Authority; the contrary is
most evident: for wherever his Authority interposeth it self where the
Authority of God is immediately concerned, (as it is in all the Actions and
duties of Religion) and shall by Religious and Pious Persons be Judged to
interfer therewith; it will certainly be contemned and disobeyed, as were the
Decrees of Nebuchadnezzar and Darius, Recorded in the third and sixth chapters
of Daniel; and as was the Authority of the Chief Priests and of the Rulers of
the Jews, Acts 4.
when they forbad Peter and John to speak or teach in the name of Jesus. Nor is
it likely to be more beneficial to the persons on whom such methods are used;
for being no means of Gods appointment unto any such ends, as well as in its
own nature thereunto improper, his blessing cannot be expected to go along with
it. And to say, It Is better for men to come within the possibility of being
persuaded to Religion, and reduced to sober apprehensions of it; then to
continue in their Schisms, and voluntary neglect of all Piety; is very wide
from this Question, which neither countenances Schism, nor discountenances
Piety; but would not that any should be forced to serve God, in any other way
or manner, then God will be served, or they Judge acceptable unto him; nor are
all to be charged with Schism, and a voluntary neglect of Piety, who frequent
not the Public worship wherever, they live: much less to be out of a
possibility of being persuaded to Religion, and void of all sober apprehensions
of it: which yet compulsion is so far from persuading or reducing any unto,
that its efficacy lies the other way; it breeds rather an aversion and
abhorrency toward it, and toward those that use it. But says our Answerer,
suppose the worst, (viz.) That compelling men to Church, do not produce any
inward change in their minds; yet certainly it is a means conducive to so
blessed an end: But who, I would know, tells him so? It Is no means, I am sure,
of Christ's appointment; nor did he himself ever use it; salvation indeed, he
offered, which who so refused at his Peril; those that had ears to hear, let
them hear, being the usual conclusion of his Sermons: He sent likewise his
Disciples to Preach the Kingdom of God, but not to force or compel any to hear
them: Deter. Q. Quest. 15.
But suppose, says the Pious and Learned Bishop Davenant, some should be so
obstinate they will not receive this Gospel, shall they then exercise no
temporal Power? none at all, says he, They are commanded to shake off the dust
from their feet as a Testimony against them; but they are not commanded to
compel them by any external force or violence. I would gladly know of this
Answerer, should providence permit the Re-establishment of Popery in this
Nation, whether the compelling him to Church, would be a means conducive to his
Conversion; if it will, can he doubt but they who would esteem it a blessed
work, should not be as zealous for it then, as he is now? Perhaps he may say
the case is not the same; for he is in the right, while all others, on either
hand of him, are in the wrong; which is not impossible, though very improbable;
yet whilst others think themselves as much in the right as he, the case will be
the same, and he may reasonably enough expect the same measure he metes, will
be measured to him again.

That Hypocrasie, the sin against which our Blessed Savior denounced so many
woes, should be preferred, as by him it is, for the honor of Religion; is what
I have not before met with: such Preachers therefore, may well plead for
compelling to their Churches; who are not otherwise likely to have many
hearers. Nor do I understand the Logic of all men's being advantaged by
forceable methods; because some may be externally reformed; while others again
are thereby apparently injured. And to what purpose does he here talk of men's
being restrained from acting their abominable Lusts; which we no less wish then
he; nor does this Query infer the contrary, though he would have it thought to
countenance impiety, and a scornful contempt of the Church, and Iustitutions of
Christ; when it aims only at the promoting of Piety, in a due observation of
Christ's Institutions; by which the Nations, as well as Gods honor, will be
best secured.

Ahabs humiliation which he instances in, was a voluntary action; he did it not
by constraint, but was thereunto moved by what the Prophet said unto him, and
makes not therefore against the drift of this Query. And who doubts that if a
stop were put to gross Schisms (I mean what are truly such, and not unduly so
called) and bare faced Atheism, with other villainies that abound amongst us,
but it would be acceptable unto God, and all good men: As likewise the
restr^ining of Seducers, from propagating their contagious errors, would this
Answerer but (vouchsafe a clear and positive Answer to the 6th Query, and) tell
us; who is Judge of Truth and Error, in disputable Points of Religion, and not
always leave it to the strongest to determine. And to talk of Lawless and
licencious Practices, being universally pleaded for; when the plea is only for
a liberty to serve God* in Faith without doubting, is a strain beyond the
ordinary bounds of Truth and Honesty.

But says our Answerer, If men are so perverse and incorrigible as not to be
reformed themselves, yet the punishments that are inflicted upon them, may
prevent the like sin in others: They may so, in such things as any are
convinced to be sins: But what any shall judge to be theirs and others
indispensable duties; the punishing of some for those things, will not deterr
others, who fear God, more then men, from doing the like, whatever they suffer
for it: But so something be said, and Authorities cited, it matters not how
applicable to the present Question.

Query XI.
Whether Christ's Rule of his Disciples under the Gospel be not by a Spiritual
Power? and whether to use the Temporal Sword in Religious matters, be not to
make the Weapons of the Gospel, not mighty through God, but mighty through the
Magistrates Power; to Arm the Church with Weapons, Christ never gave her; and
to make her a Military, rather then a spiritual Society.

Reply to the Answer to this Query.
THough what is mighty through the Magistrates Power, is, as he says, mighty
through God, as he is the original and Fountain of all Power; yet the Apostle
tells us, The weapons of their Warfare are not Carnal; 2 Co^ 10.
whereby he distinguishes between the Carnal Power of the Civil Magistrate, by
which the world is Governed, in all worldly Affairs and Concerns; and the
Spiritual Power wherewith Christ rules his Subjects under the Gospel: which
this Answerer seems altogether unacquainted with; having, possibly, never felt
the power and efficacy thereof in his own Soul; and to talk to such of a
Spiritual Power, is like talking to blind men of colors.

But the Magistrate, says he, is Gods Minister, and that to the benefit and
welfare of men's souls, as well as their worldly and outward Estates: But how,
or in what manner to the benefit and welfare of their Souls, he is not at
present disposed to tell us; But would have us to believe, the reason why
Christ never made use of the Civil Magistrates Power, to recommend, or obtrude,
as he phrases it, his Doctrine on the world; was because the secular Powers
were in the days of his flesh, in open Enmity and Hostility against him. But
does he think Christ could not as easily have converted Magistrates, as others;
had he so pleased? Matt. 28. 18.
or does he not know that To him was given all Power both in Heaven and on
Earth; and that had he thought it necessary or expedient for the Interest of
Religion, he could as well have commanded the Magistrates Power, as any other?
But he declined it, as we may reasonably enough suppose, to manifest to the
world, that the Gospel, or true Religion, was wholly founded upon Spiritual
Power, was complete therein, and needed not the aid and assistance of secular
Force: But the Argument against the Magistrates Power in matters of Religion,
is not so much from Christ's not using it, as from the nature of Religion, which
cannot be so forced, it being seated in those faculties, to which outward
violence can have no access: So that the unsuitableness of the means to the end
aimed at, as well as Christ's not serving himself of it for the propagation of
Christian Religion; with the sufficiency of that Spiritual Power, in the gifts
he gave unto his Ministers for the perfecting of the Saints, Ephesians. 4.
for the work of the Ministry, and for the edifying of his Body; Is that which
renders the Magistrates Authority in matters of Religion, not necessary, not to
say more. And whereas this Answerer says, That Christ was armed with such
miraculous power from Heaven, that he did not need any assistance from Empires
or States; Does he think his Arm shortened? or that he now stands in more need
of secular assistance, then heretofore? We argue not against the Churches
making use of the Authority of Kings, to protect herself against force and
violence* or the injuries or oppressions of any, but against Magistrates
imposing on her, or on any, in matters of faith and worship; and yet we say,
with this Answerer, That our Blessed Savior, in erecting his Church, never
intended to diminish the Power of Magistracy; neither has he, it being the
same now it ever was; Magistrates having the same Power now that ordinarily
they ever had: nor is there any thing in Christian Religion, but what is, not
only consistent, but highly advantageous to Civil States and Societies; in that
it reaches conscientious obedience to Authority, wheresoever, and in
whomsoever lodged; and faithful dealings between man and man.

Though the Church be as he says, 2 Cor. 10.
a Military, she is still a spiritual Society; the weapons of ^h^se warfare are
not carnal, but mighty through (the Spirit of) God, (not the Power of the
Magistrate) to the pulling down of strong bolds; and every high thing that
exalts it self against the knowledge of God, and bringing into captivity
every thought to the obedience of Christ. If this Answerer can tell us of any
other weapons belonging to her, we shall own our obligation to him, for the
discovery.

Query XII.
Whether to say the Spiritual Power Christ has given unto his Church, for the
right ordering and governing thereof, is not sufficient unto that end, without
the aid and assistance of the secular Power, be not to blaspheme.

Reply to the Answer to this Query.
WE were promised in the last Answer, to be shown in this, what were the
weapons of the Churches warfare; but instead thereof, are there told, the end
only of Christ's giving Power to his Church; which none, sure, ever doubted to
be for the edification, not destruction, of the souls of his People: yet we
still say, with the Apostle, the weapons of the Churches warfare, are not
carnal; That Christ gave gifts, and neither Swords nor Guns unto men, for the
perfecting of Saints, for the work of the Ministry, and for the edifying of his
Body; and that the Spiritual Power he gave unto his Church, for the right
ordering and Governing thereof, is sufficient unto that end. And wherein does
this permit men to renounce the common Christianity, etc. as this Answerer very
impertinently objecteth. And it is left to the Judgment of all rational men,
whether they who insist upon the sufficiency of the Spiritual Power, Christ
has given unto his Church, for the right ordering and governing thereof; and
the Scriptures being the sole rule of every man's Faith and Obedience, in all
Gospel duties and Administrations; or they who allow unto every national or
Provincial Church, a Power to Decree Articles of Faith, and compose Forms of
Divine worship, to be imposed by civil Magistrates upon Christians; are the
more likely to lead into the Paths of Heresy and Schism; and to destroy the
Unity of the Church, and consequently whether these or those, do gratify the
old Serpent in his malicious wiles and methods, and give leave to his
Instruments to accomplish their Hellish designs, in destroying Christianity,
and the Churches Government at one blow: I say again, let every rational and
unprejudiced person, considering the nature and essence of Christianity, and by
what ways and methods it has been corrupted and destroyed, judge.

Gods name is not, indeed, blasphemed as he says, when his Institutions are
made use of, to uphold his Truths, etc. But he has no where Instituted the
civil Sword, to force any to the Christian Faith; much less to uphold whatever
is taught, or pretended so to be.

And if his name be blasphemed, when men's minds are alienated from the
Christian Religion; They will be found guilty thereof, who use such means and
methods, for its propagation (as they pretend) as beget an aversion in many
toward it, and those that use them. And who is it that would make the
profession thereof Arbitrary? They who say, the Spiritual Power Christ has
given unto his Church for the right ordering and governing thereof, is
sufficient unto that end, cannot reasonably be said so to do. And wherefore
does he here talk of every be^ted Brain, and Sulpherous Malcontent, being
left to serve God, or serve him not; to believe in Christ, or openly to deny
and blaspheme him: When all we Pray, and Plead for, is but, 2 Thessalonians. 3
That the word of the Lord may have a free course; and that his name may be
glorified, in the free exercise of all Religious duties; without ever denying
it the Magistrates duty, to punish Blasphemy, and the like evils and impieties.
But 'twere worth knowing from this Learned and Judicious Answerer, how far any
are obliged to ad here to the Church in which they were Baptized, that we may
not have too hard thoughts of our first Reformers, for forsaking the Church, in
which they partook of that Sacrament.

It is, as he says, One thing to Convert Pagans and Infidels to Christianity,
and another thing to keep them within the bounds of their duty, who already
profess it: and yet are both effected by the same means; and the Magistrate can
no more compel unto the one, then to the other: But when men give up their
names to Christ, it is certainly as he says, the duty of Churchmen, to use all
lawful (and proper) means, to prevent their Apostasy from him. But who are the
incorrigible offenders he speaks of? Or what occasion does this Query
administer, To ask why the Magistrate may not be requested to save a soul from
death, etc. The Magistrate may certainly be requested to punish sin and
wickedness, it being the great end for which God committed the Power of the
Sword to him; But he can no more save a Soul from death, and Rescue him out of
the snare of the Devil; then he can give grace or faith, which are the gifts of
God alone; yet this hinders not, but that Magistrates and Ministers, ought to
use all due and lawful means, To reduce men to Christianity, and prevent their
Apostasy from it.

There is no more need now, then in the primitive Ages of the Church, that its
Acts and Censures, should be seconded by the Sword of the Secular Power: our
Blessed Savior who is faithful, having promised to be with his Disciples,
Teaching what he commanded them, Matt. 28.
to the worlds end. And that there is so little of Power and efficacy in in the
Acts and Censures of some who would be accounted his Disciples; is not that
Christ has withdrawn any of that ordinary Power he gave unto his Ministers,
for the perfecting of the Saints, and the edifying of his body; but their
failure in the condition annexed to his promise in not teaching what he
commanded; but setting up their own inventions and devices, in the place of his
Institutions; were the Censures of the Church as orderly and regularly
pronounced now as heretofore; they would have the same effects now as then,
upon the Souls and Consciences of believers; what effect they had upon their
Bodies, we are rather told, then Convinced of; for the Intestuous Corinthian's
being delivered unto Satan; was no more, then (as has been already said) his
being cast out of the Church, the Kingdom of God, into the World, the Kingdom
of the Devil: nor were the deaths of Ananias and Saphira, with the blindness of
Ellmas the Sorcerer, the effects of any Church Acts or Censures; but of that
extraordinary Power Christ conferred on his Apostles, to manifest his Power and
Authority to the unbelieving world, and to say, it was to supply the defect of
the Magistrates Coercive Power in the Church; as if the Churches Power were
defective, without the Magistrates Sword; is highly derogatory unto that
Spiritual Power and Authority, Christ has given unto the Ministers of his
Gospel, for the ordering and Governing of his Church, unto the worlds end It Is,
as one has well observed, much of Christ's glory to rule his Subjects under the
Gospel by a spiritual Power; it is that Power makes a man a Christian; it is that
Power in all Gospel Institutions, that keeps men in their due obedience unto
Christ; and it is that Power carries the sting of the punishment, when men are
cast out of the Church: It Is indeed, that Power does all under the Gospel, and
to bringin the Temporal Sword, is to make the weapons of the Gospel, not mighty
through God, but mighty through the Magistrates Power; and wholly to alter the
nature of the Gospel, and all its Institutions; It Is to A^m the Church with
weapons Christ never gave her; and to make her a Military, rather then a
Spiritual Society.

What he says, of Dissenters being p^nisht, for indangering the Peace of the
State, by disobeying the Laws of the Church; shall be spoken to, when he tells
us, what Laws, and what Church he here means: Nor can we till then say, How the
Interest of those Societies, are twisted and united: But do very well know it
to have been one of the greatest Artifices in the mystery of Iniqu^ty, so to
twist the civil, and some pretended Religious Interests; as to preswade the
world, The Oak cannot subsist without the Ivy: but as well Reason as
Experience, have evidenced the contrary; and that there are no greater Enemies
to the Authority, State and Dignity of civil Magistrates then some pretenders
to Religion.

Query XIII.
Whether the Carnal conjunction of the Temporal Power with the Spiritual, has
not made all Ecclesiastical Regiment odious, and unsavory; and served only to
enable the Clergy, under the pretense of the Power of the Gospel, to trample,
by the Power of the world, mankind under their feet?

Reply to the Answer to this Query.
THis Answerer might with as good reason have said, There is no more
Spirituality in the Ordinances of the Gospel, then there was in the Ordinances
under the Law; As that there is no more Carnality in the present Union of the
civil Power with the Ecclesiastical; then there was in the Jewish Church or
Commonwealth: For who, besides himself, is ignorant how God himself United
those, making that Church and State but one Commonwealth, over which himself
presided; whereby they became rather a Spiritual, then a Civil Society; a
Theocracy, or a People whom God Governed by Princes and Rulers extraordinarily
assisted and inspired by him; or guided and directed by Prophets occasionally
sent to declare his mind and will unto them. So that it was God himself that
made that Church and State one; He that was a Member of the State, thereby
becoming a Member of the Church likewise. But it is otherwise under the Gospel,
the Church and State being now distinct Societies; and a man may be a Member of
the one, without being so of the other: Nor are their concerns otherwise
intermixed, then in the Churches enjoying Peace and Protection from the
righteous Rule and Government of the State; and the State prosperity from the
Prayers and Blessings of the Church. Those therefore whom God then joined, he
has now severed; and for any other to bring them again together, is, as one
very well says, Presumptious Fornication.

The attempt of Core and his accomplices, he instances in, was undoubtedly a sin
in them, as the like would be in any now; which both Magistrates and Ministers
ought to use their several Interests and Authorities to prevent, and this Query
is far from giving the least countenance or encouragement unto.

Though the assistance given by Moses to Aaron, did not, as he says, incite him
to trample upon the people; yet they who have given their Power and Strength
unto the Beast, and his Adherents, have enabled them, under a pretext of the
Power of the Gospel, to trample, by the Power of the world, mankind under their
feet; to Depose Princes, Subvert States, and Butcher People; and indeed, to
make the rest of mankind but their Slaves and Vassals: A truth so well known
unto all, who are not wilfully b^ind or wholly ignorant in History, and the
transactions of former Ages, wherever the man of sin, and Son of Perdition had
Power; it wouldbe time lost to go about to prove it.

That Ministers are made, as he says, the formal cause of the hatred and
contempt of too many Persons; may be both their faults, for, though several
Treatises bave been lately written to show the grounds of the contempt of the
Clergy, it may be comprehended in two lines.

Pretending Piety, by some contemned,
But more by others, 'cause they but pretend.
I mean too many of them, which gives a disreputation to the whole, though
there are (God be thanked) many Reverend, Learned and Pious Persons of the
function deserving double Honor, both for their own, and their works sake:
and may the number of them be daily increased. But none have cause to be
comforted as he says, That the same fate has happened to others more
deserving; unless they tread in their steps, and suffer on the same account
with them: But it is, and may be just cause of satisfaction unto any to be
scorned and contemned by those, whose respect and esteem would be a reproach:
Woe be unto you, Luke 6. 26.
said our Blessed Savior; when all men shall speak well of yon, we acknowledge
therefore there are those, whose commendations wound, and whose favor is a
reflection; and from such, we neither expect, nor desire praise.

Query XIV.
Whether to force and compel men in the worship and service of God, to Act
against their Light and Judgments, be not a spiritual Rape upon their
Consciences?

Reply to the Answer to this Query.
IT may possibly, puzzle this Answerer to prove this Query Skeptical, as he
terms it, for but implying, that no man ought to be forced or compelled in the
Worship and Service of God, to do ought against his Light or Judgment; since
nothing is more certain, then that no man ought to do or practice any thing
therein, which is not of Faith; and why may not such a force then be termed a
Spiritual Rape upon the Concience? And how has this been Answered, as he says,
in the seventh Query, where he has neither proved, That any ought to be so
for^'t against their Judgments; nor yet that any actually were ever so forced
by any of the Kings of Judah he instances in: He may do well therefore, as he
promises, to consider it a little more, and better to, or 'twill be to little
purpose. But what means he in saying. It makes Conscience the ONLY rule of men's
Faith and Practices? For though Conscience (which is the Judgment a man makes
of himself and his actions, with reference to the future Judgment of God) be
the rule by which all men ought to walk; yet is it a rule that must be ruled;
and it is therefore every man's duty, carefully to endeavor his Conscience be
rightly informed; Ir^. chapter 6.
but to follow it is still his duty. The plea of an Erroneous Conscience, says
the Reverend and Learned Dr. Stilling fleet takes not off the obligation of
following the Dictates of it; for as he is bound to lay it down, supposing it
to be Erroneous, so he is bound not to go against it, whilst it is not laid
down. And says the like Learned and Reverend Dr. Ames, Conscientia quamvis
errans, semper ligat; ita ut ille peccet, qui agit contra Conscientiam, quoniam
agit contra voluntatem Dei, quamvis non materialiter and vere, tamen formaliter
and interpretive: For he who does not what he Judges, or believes, God commands
or requires of him, would not do it, though God did cammand or require it.

But says this Ingenious and candid Answerer, The main Argument with which the
Libertines of all Ages have sheltered themselves against the reach of wholesome
and good Laws, has been Conscience, and the Internal Liberty of that faculty;
which say they, is only and immediately Subject unto God: It is so; and yet it
neither does, nor ought to, shelter any guilty of sin and wickedness against
the reach as he pretends of wholesome and good Laws; for he who sins, ought to
suffer for it, whether it be with, or against his Conscience. But says he, A
Spirit may be as soon pierced with a Sword, as violence offered to the
Conscience; or the mind constrained to understand, to Fear, Love, Hate, etc.
which are Elicite Acts of the soul, and cannot be forced or violated, by all
the compulsive Powers in the world. Does he then conceive Conscience to be
concerned only in thinking? Or in the Acts of the mind? Conscience, certainly,
is concerned in all a man's actions; which none sure who knows what Conscience
is, ever yet doubted: He has therefore cause to say, as he does, All this
signifies very little in the present debate; not because as he says,, no
Authority ever offered violence to the Internal Acts of men's minds; but for
that Conscience is concerned in the External actions of a man's life. Conscience
is concerned in the performance, or nonperformance of every duty God commands;
and Conscience is violated, when any through dread and fear, are awed or
deterred from the performance of those duties they judge God requires of them;
or provoked or urged to do, what they are no less persuaded he dislikes, or
prohibits them. But how impertinently are we here told, When men's opinions are
recluded and locked within their own Breasts, the Magistrate never concerns
himself about them; for how should the Magistrate concern himself about that he
neither knows, nor can have any cognizance of? And how ignorantly, if not
deceitfully, does he here urge that saying of St. Paul, Romans 14.
Have thou Faith, have it to thy self; as if the Apostle thereby intended that
men should keep their Faith and Opinions to themselves; when he spoke to quite
another purpose: For, speaking of meats which some forbore as judging them
unlawful; he advises those who were otherwise persuaded, to forbear their
Christian Liberty, when it offended those were not yet convinced of the
lawfulness of eating thereof: that is, having attained a sure knowledge of the
lawfulness of those things, whereof others doubted, they might use their
liberty therein, when it gave no offense to their Brethren; so keeping their
Faith to themselves, and not using it to the offense or scandal of others, as
is evident to whoever reads and considers the context. But none sure, ever
affirmed, the Magistrate was to consult men's private Consciences, and not the
honor of God, the safety of his own person and Government, and his peoples
benefit and good. That it may be a greater sin for a man to act according to
the Dictates of his Conscience, then to act against them, as he says, is an
assertion I have not before met with: For whatever sin a man commits acting
according, to the Dictates of his Conscience, is at most but a sin of
Ignorance, which excuses a tanto, though not a toto, whereas he that acts
against the Dictates of his Conscience, is guilty of willful and presumptuous
sinning, which admits of no excuse; yea, is the highest aggravation of sin that
can be, and yet has he the confidence to say, This so notoriously false
assertion, is evident, not only from the experience of all Ages; but from the
Holy Scriptures: which says he, speak of a seared Conscience; of men whose
Consciences are defiled, of a Reprobate mind, etc. But there being men of
Reprobate minds, and of seared and defiled Consciences; does not prove, that it
may be a greater sin for a man to act according to the Dictates of Conscience,
then to act against them. Men of seared Consciences, may be said rather to make
no Conscience of what they do; then to act either with, or against their
Consciences: For a seared Conscience, is a dead or stupid Conscience; a
Conscience without sense or feeling: the like may be said of such as are of a
Reprobate mind; and whose Consciences are defiled; nor can there be any greater
defilement of Conscience then to act against it.

But what is our Blessed Saviors Prediction of the times coming, wherein some
should think they did God service in killing Christians. To this Query: Is it
that men of such preverted apprehensions, were to be compelled to worship God
otherwise then they are persuaded God will be worshipped, or how does he apply
it?

There are none sure who doubt, but that the Jewish Sanhedrim would gladly have
slain Peter and John, for Preaching Christ; as, no doubt, would others, who at
this day are no less grieved at the Preaching of the Gospel, slay their
Successors in the Ministry of the word, did not the good hand and providence of
God restrain them, But what is all this to the present Question. Or what is
Paul's pleading Conscience for persecuting Christ's Disciples, and making havoc
of the Church? These, indeed, prove that there have been, and will be, men of
Erroneous Consciences: and none sure, ever doubted or questioned, but that the
Magistrate may punish men acting according to their Consciences, if what they
so do be evil; pretense of Conscience no ways justifying an evil action before
men, how far soever an Erroneous Conscience may excuse it before God. But what
is all this to forcing any to act against their Consciences? And how
impertinently is it here asked, whether it had been to commit a Rape upon St.
Paul' s Conscience to have punished him for persecuting Christ's Disciples? As if
to punish an evil action voluntarily committed; and to force and compel any to
what is evil, were the same thing. Yet, he says, He knows very well, that it
will be here said, (though he knows not well what himself says) That a
Magistrate may punish for Murder and violating the Laws of the second Table:
but the answer to this, he says, is easy; if he should say, that just so our
Magistrates do when they Execute any of the penal Laws Statutes upon
Dissenters: this, indeed; is easier said, then understood; for what means he by
his, just so? What Laws of the 2d. Table are Dissenters, as such guilty of the
violation off? or what Law of God, or Nature, do they therein transgress? I
will not say, I know it will be here said, but suppose it may be said, they
disobey the commands of lawful Authority, and therefore ought to be punished:
ought then all commands of lawful Authority to be actually obeyed? I know not
what this Answerer may say; but am very confident none who understand
themselves will say so: But they may perhaps say, All the lawful commands of
lawful Authority, ought to be obeyed: They ought so, yet this exception lies
against the general Rule, That if the person whose obedience is required,
judges them unlawful, though in themselves they may be lawful, he may not
actively obey them. But he proceeds, and tells us, It is a very strange thing
for any to believe, that the Magistrate is invested with a Power to punish men
for words and actions tending to the damage of private persons, etc. But let
them speak never so many lies in the name of God; and Preach and Teach them in
Hypocrasie; let them blaspheme God, and Christ, and Religion; then Authority
has its hands tied up; no Coercive Power must be used against any such
Criminals; for all those Acts flow from Conscience: It were indeed, a very
strange thing if it should be so: But who tells him that no Coercieve Power
must be used against those Criminals whose actions flow from Conscience? or who
Questions the Magistrates Authority to punish such as blaspheme God, or Christ,
or Religion; or that they who speak lies in the name of God; and Preach and
Teach them in Hypocrasie, may not be punished for it; when proved against them?
But we still say, That to Execute before Conviction and Judgment, is against
all Rules and Forms of Justice, both Divine and Humane; and such a violation of
the Law and light of Nature, as no Sober or Judicious Heathen was ever yet
guilty off. But the whole of this discourse is grounded on this absurdity,
which the Query gives not the least countenance unto; (viz.) That none ought to
be punished for what they do according to their Consciences; which no man, sure,
in his senses ever affirmed; every man being to be proceeded against by the
Civil Magistrate^, according to the Nature and quality of his offense; be it
never so much according to his Conscience, if it be that which ought not to be.
But he tells us, every Christian is to act out of a Principle of Conscience in
the duties of the second Table, as well as in those of the first; which no man
sure, ever doubted off.

Nor did any rational man, ever say, That Conscience was a sufficient plea
against the Coercive Power of Kings. The Magistrate may certainly, Enact Penal
Laws against Murder, Felony, and the like moral evils; whatever he may do
against Infidelity, Schism, Heresy, or errors in Religion; and yet may not
force or compel any in the Worship and Service of God to act against their
Light and Consciences. The Question here is not, whether the Magistrate may use
his Coercive Power to punish for sin; but whether he may compel men to sin; as
most certainly they do, who compel them to worship God in any other way or
manner, then they are persuaded God will be worshiped, and requires of them.

Query XV.
Whether to require conformity in Practice, where there is difference in
Judgment, be not to command a man to act against light and Conscience, and
consequently to sin?

Reply to the Answer to this Query.
TO the Question he proposes, I answer; The Superior not only may, but ought
to take care to act according to the Dictates of his Conscience, as well as the
Inferior to practice according to his: which is yet no answer to this Query;
For as it is the Magistrates duty to cause, as much as in him lies, those under
his charge to serve God acceptably; so it is not his duty to command them to
serve God in such a way or manner as they judge sinful, or not according to
Gods Institution and appointment. He ought, indeed, to endeavor their
Conviction, by all due and just means, whom he Judges in any kind to err; but
not to force them to any thing, in the Worship and Service of God, against
their Judgments; since, as has been often inculcated, whatever is not of
faith, is sin. But if there be any, who, as he says, conceive it their duty to
serve God in such ways and methods, as are Diametrically contrary to Gods will;
and subversive to the Magistrates Government; let them be Impleaded, and
punished, after due Conviction and Judgment, but not before.

It Is not impossible but a Governor may think himself bound in Conscience to
command, what an Inferior may be persuaded he ought not to obey. The
Superiors Conscience being as certain a Rule in commanding, as the Inferiors
can be to him in disobeying; but, with our Answerers good leave, this is not,
as he says, the case between the King of England* and the present Dissenters
from the Church: His Majesty having sufficiently declared in his late gracious
Declaration of Indulgence, that it is not against his Conscience to give
liberty to Dissenters. But how flily would he insinuate here, That it is
against his Coronation Oath so to do; in that, he says, His Majesty swears,
That he will defend and preserve to the Clergy, all Canonical Privileges,
etc. And how this Oath can be performed unless the Clergy have now, the like
Privilege as heretofore, to Burn, Masacre, and Destroy, the faithful Servants
and Disciples of Jesus Christ, and true worshippers of God, under pretense of
their being Heretics and Schismatics, may possibly, as he says, be past his
Power to conceive and determine. For nothing less, it seems, will satisfy him,
Then all the Canonical Privileges and Free-Franchises granted to the Clergy,
by the glorious St. Edward, and other Kings: and what they were, may deserve
consideration. But, as he very well says, every Prince owes a strict account to
God of his Crown and Government; and the Dignity of his place obliges him to
promote the happiness of his people; which, certainly, he does not, who permits
a Generation of men under the pretext of the Power of the Gospel, to trample by
the Power of the world, mankind under their feet; even Princes themselves,
where they are able; which if seemly in their eyes, is not so, I hope, in
others.

Whether differnce in Judgment, will justify any man from Inconformity in
Practice? He advises his Reader to consider the strict account Christ called
the Angel of the Church in Thyatira to, Rev. 2. 20.
for suffering that woman Jezabel, to teach and seduce his Servants; and would
be resolved, whether the Bishop or Angel might not have excused his own
neglects, by pleading for Jezabel; That her Judgment differed from his; and to
make her practice things quite contrary to her Judgment; was that Christ never
did in the days of his flesh: It was an Invasion of the freedom of men's wills,
and the Liberty of their Consciences; It was a constraining of them to act
against their own Light, and consequently to sin.

Risum tenaatis Amici? can any forbear laughter at such ridiculous reasonings?
is not this Answerer able to distinguish, between commanding to sin; and
restraining from sin? Had the Angel of the Church in Thyatira been called to an
account for Jezabels nonconformity, such a Plea might have been pertinent; but
his Crime was not the making her practice things contrary to her Judgment;
which yet to have done might have been a Crime; but the suffering her to Teach
and Seduce without control; without contending for the Truth, and opposing it
to her Errors; which would not have been a constraining her to act against her
light, but the enlighting her; sound Doctrine diligently and duly taught, being
sufficient against Seducers. We had not else heard of many Truths of the Gospel
at this day; there being neither in the days of Jezabel, nor long after, any
Christian Magistrate in the World, to protect or defend them.

What the Reverend Mr. Perkings says of restraining error, is nothing to this
Query, which opposes only the compelling to sin; yet we would, as much as any
that error were restrained by such ways and means as Truth might not suffer in
the stead of it. And if this Reverend Person judged the Commonwealth in his
days, did well in making Laws to restrain those who depart from our Church; he
did not, I presume, think it did so some years before, when it made Laws to
restrain those who departed from the then Church; so preferring the Relation
before the Rule; making the right and Equity of the Law, to depend on his
Judgment or Opinion of Truth and Error in Religion. And if it were his
Judgment, as we are told, That People ought to be compelled to the Public
Assemblies (though unsatisfied of the lawfulness of the Service there used) it
was an Erroneous Judgment, and of very evil consequence; for by the same Rule
ought all to be so compelled by those who have Power on their side, and believe
they have Truth also: and what advantage (not to speak of the unreasonableness
and unjustifiablenes of the thing it self) can any Protestant think Truth and
true Religion will get thereby? It were therefore rather to be wished, that all
men would observe that no less Divine then Moral precept; Of doing unto others,
as they would be done unto.

The Query here is not concerning Governors requiring conformity to those
things, which the Judgments of Inferiors dislike or disapprove of, as unmeet
or inconvenient; but to those things (and in the worship of God only) as
Inferiors Judge sinful. The constraining therefore any against their Wills
and Interests, to do what they deny not to be honest and just, reaches not the
present Question.

Though nothing can, as he says, excuse Subjects from yielding obedience to
lawful Authority; but the unlawfulness of what that Authority does enjoin; yet
when any one is persuaded the thing commanded is unlawful, though in it self
lawful, He may not yield obedience to it; An innocent or invincibly erring
Conscience, Dullor. Dubit. l. 1. cap. 3. rule 6.
as the Reverend and Learned Bishop Tailor truly tells us, being to be obeyed
against the known commandment of our Superiors. But a man may lawfully engage
upon that action, which he Judges to be unmeet and inconvenient only, not
unlawful; though he have some inward averseness and reluctance in his mind
against it, and wishes that no such obligation were laid on him.

But our Answerer does very seasonably recollect himself, in telling us, it
will be here said, That the resolution of this case, does not come home to our
present Dissenters; for that they Judge, the commands of Authority about those
things which we call indifferent, to be not only inconvenient, but sinful; and
for that reason they deny Conformity in practice. But where this has been in
part answered, as he says, we have not yet observed: and wish it may be, (as he
promises) considered in the following Queries.

Query XVI.
Whether to punish any for not conforming to such Modes and Forms of Worship,
as in their Consciences they judge sinful, be not to punish them for not doing
what is acknowledged to be their duty not to do?

Reply to the Answer to this Query.
THat it is all men's duty, as he says, to Obey lawful Authority, either
actively or passively, none sure doubts; but what is that to this Query? To say
that active obedience is not required by Authority to all its commands, is to
say Authority commands things to be done, which it self judges sinful and
unlawful, which ought not to be supposed: So that active obedience is by
Authority required to all its commands, and nothing can excuse any from such
obedience; but the unlawfulness, or supposed unlawfulness, of what is so
commanded. But it is neither the duty of a Loyal Subject, nor humble Christian,
as he would have it, so to mistrust his own Judgment, as to neglect the
exercise thereof, in a due Examination of the lawfullness, or unlawfullness of
whatever is commanded him.

But, says this Answerer, To make some nearer approaches to the Query (which is
but need) it is not Conscience (if that thing be condemned as sinful) which is
not some way or other forbid by God in the Sacred Scriptures: It Is not indeed a
right Conscience; but where a man is persuaded that any thing is forbid by God
in Sacred Scriptures, though it may not be so, it is Conscience in him not to do
it, though it be an Erroneous Conscience; yet such an one, as till Convinced of
its. Error, he ought not to go against. And his saying, It may be Humor, or
Fancy, or Passion, or Diabolical suggestions, or Forestalements and prejudices
imbibed by ill education and instruction, etc. will never prevail with Prudent
and Pious men, to abandon Conscience, or in ought to act against it: nor yet to
renounce the exercise of their Judgments in yielding blind Obedience unto any;
which were, indeed, not to choose their Religion, or Act as men; but like Bruits
rather, bear whatever shall be imposed on them: So changing their Religion, as
often as chance or providence, shall change their Masters; which, indeed, is very
far from a Rational or manly choice.

Whether any can plead Conscience for not conforming to the Established worship
of the Church of England, is no part of this Query; which meddles not with
particulars: And yet if no more, as he says, can be said in the case, Then that
he doubts whether he ought to worship God after such a manner, or no; it may be
sufficient to hinder his Comformity, notwithstanding we are told, It ought not
to be of that weight, as to keep him from his lawful Superiors lawful
command. For he who doubts of the lawfulness of the worship, may doubt
likewise, whether his Superiors commanding him so to worship, be a lawful
command; or whether his Superior have Authority to command him so to worship;
for where Superiors have no right to command* there lies no obligation of
Conscience on Inferiors to obey; and then such a command can be no sufficient
ground to supersede his doubting; especially when he is persuaded he has a
plain Prohibition of Scripture against what he is commanded. Neither, as is
said, is it duty, or any part of Christian meekness, where the doubt is
concerning the Superiors Authority, for any therein to take his resolution,
from those claiming that Authority. And though it be the sin of Dogmatizing, to
affirm any thing unlawful for any to do, which some Law of God, still in
force, does not Prohibit; yet while the Question is, whether there be not a Law
of God, now in force, prohibiting the matters in doubt, and which is that which
occasions the doubt? it can be no such sin: So that it is not impossible, but
both that and the disobedience here talked of, may still commence Virtue,
notwithstanding all that has been here said to the contrary. And yet we deny
it not to be every man's duty, in doubtful matters, to seek satisfaction from
those whom God has appointed to instruct and teach them; but not to yield
blind obedience unto any; or obey them against the Dictates of their
Consciences. And whether this or that particular, commanded by Superiors in
the Worship and Service of God; be agreeable with, or contrary to, the Law of
God, Rat. account. p. 7.
none may judge for another; every man's Reason, (as the Reverend and Learned
Dr. Stillingfleet has truly told us) proceeding according to the rule of Gods
word, must therein be his own Judge.

Query XVII.
Whether it be not the duty of all Christians to walk together so far as they
have attained, and in other things wait the Revelation of the mind of God to
them that differ?

Reply to the Answer to this Query.
OUr Answerer acknowledges, what none can reasonably deny, That every Christian
is bound to frame and order the course of his life, according to the measures
of his knowledge: And he is so in an especial manner, in all the exercises of
Religion, in which none ought to be forced, beyond what God has been pleased
to reveal of his mind and will unto them: for where any are not convinced of
the lawfulness of an action to do it, to them (...) is sin, though the thing it
self, may not be unlawful. Nor is every one who is not of his Superiors
opinion, to be censured by this Answerer, as wilful, in retaining error; or
opiniotive in dispising those who have more knowledge then himself: It Is not
impossible but Superiors may err; and God approves not of blind obedience,
because he will not (as the Reverend and Learned Bishop Davenant tells us) hold
them excused, Det. Quaest. Quaest. 6.
who with a blind zeal follow their Leaders.

But who are they, this Answerer terms weak Christians, and Babes in knowledge?
If such as make Conscience of their ways and actions; and out of fear of
offending God, dare not Conform to what they are not convinced of the
lawfulness of; they are so far from being weak, they will one day appear to be
the wisest Christians. Let us not therefore judge one another, but judge this
rather, Romans 14. 13
That no man put a stumbling block, or an occasion to fall, in his Brothers
way. And though he tells us, Babes in knowledge are not fit to be entrusted
with their own Conduct and Protection, etc. there are those Babes to whom God
has revealed those things he has hid from the Wise and Prudent. What he says
of Childrens being cccker'd and upheld in their humors, is extremely
impertinent here; and nothing to this Query.

But he tells us, If men would live up to the plain Principles of their
Religion: or walk together so far as they have attained; They could not
possibly conceive it their duty totally to forsake their Parochial Churches;
and think it an arbitrary indifferent matter, whether they professed themselves
Christians or Infidels. What he means by totally to forsake their Parochial
Churches, I know it: there being those, who, though they cannot communicate
with every Parochial Church; nor yet with any Parochial Church, in every thing,
are yet ready and willing to communicate with them in all Christian Offices and
duties of Religion, separated from those circumstances or Adjuncts of worship
of Humane Institution, of whose lawfulness they are not satisfied; who do not
therefore totally forsake them; much less think it an Arbitrary indifferent
matter, whether they profess themselves Christians or Infidels; though they
believe, not all Profession of Christianity to consist in Communicating with
Parochial Churches. As for his Scorners and Infidels Chair, it might very well
have been spared here; neither this, nor any of these Queries, giving the least
countenance or encouragement unto such; or that any should go unpunisht for the
neglect or contempt of Christianity.

An Inferiors differing in Judgment from his Superior, ought to excite his
utmost ^are and diligence to search and find out the Truth; But will not
warrant his yielding blind obedience to any of his Dictates. 1 Cor 7. 23.
Be ye (...) not the Servants of men, is a Divine precept, which must take
place in the duties of Religion, or no where. Yet ought not any to Condemn a
whole Church, or withdraw from its Communion; but where there are so great
corruptions and defects in it, and those too so plain and evident from
Scripture, as may justify both his charge and separation; but of them the
party seperating must still Judge. It is the highest Usurpation, (says the
Reverend and Learned Dr. Stillingfleet) to rob men of the Liberty of their
Judgments; Ire. chapter 6. p. 118
That which we plead for against the Papists, is, That all men have eyes in
their heads, as well as the Pope; that every one has a Judicium privatae
Discretionis, which is the Rule of Practice, as to himself; and though we
freely allow a Ministerial Power, under Christ, in the Governors af the
Church, yet that extends not to an obligation upon men, to go against the
Dictates of their Reason and Conscience. Their Power is only directive and
declarative, and in matters of duty can bind no more, then Reason and Evidence
brought from Scripture by them does.

Though in all Ages Christians of different opinions and persuasions, may have
Communicated with one another in the Offices of Religion wherein they agreed,
(which is but what this Query calls for) yet they never Communicated with one
another, (at least ought not so to have done) in those things they judged
sinful or superstitious; nor forced each other thereunto. But the Orthodox,
the Arians, and the Novatians might lawfully enough join together in Prayer,
where their errors were not mixed with their Prayers, and made a part of their
worship. And in that Christ and his Apostles, as he says, frequented the
public Assemblies both in the Temple and Synagogues; it is evident* though the
worshippers, many of them at least, were guilty of great corruptions and
impieties; yet their worship it self was free from them; they could not else
have Communicated with them in their worship, and not have Communicated with
them in their corruptions and impieties, which were Blasphemous to imagine. And
though our Blessed Savior Encouraged all due Reverence and Ohedience to be
paid to public Laws and Governors, in commanding the multitude to do whatever
the Scribes and Pharisees, Matt. 23.
who sat in Moses seat, bid them to observe and do; yet it was to be
understood, when according to Moses Law; not that they had Power to ad ^o, or
diminish from, what God had appointed; or were implicity to be obeyed: He
having elsewhere charged his Disciples to Take heed* and beware of the leaven,
Matt. 16.
i. e. Doctrine of the Pharisees and of the Sadduces. So that, though all due
Rererence and Obedience be to be paid to public Laws and Governors; yet is
not blind Obedience to be yielded unto either, being inconsistent with those
Gospel precepts, which command us to, 1 Th^ss. 5. 21.
Prove all things: To take heed that no man deceive as; Ephesians. 5. 6.
and, as has been said, 1 Cor. 7. 23
That we be not the Servants of men; for that every ome must give an account of
himself to God. Romans 14. 12


When he says, That God has made sufficient discoveries of his blessed Will to
us, in his holy word: What us does he mean? For we cannot but think it all men's
duty, (with the Psalmist) still to pray, Psalm. 119. 18.
That God would open our eyes, that we may behold wondrous things out of his
Law; There being an Illumination of the Spirit of God, necessary for the right
understanding of those things that are revealed in the word of God, which is,
it seems, a revelation this Answerer is yet unacquainted with; for though the
Gospel be written, the saving Truths thereof are hid to those whom the God of
this world has blinded. This Query, therefore, grounded on the Apostles advice
to the Philippians, Chap. 3.
intends only the Revelation there mentioned, which we hope, is no Enthusiasm.

By saying, In doubts relating to Religion, men would do better to resign up
themselves to the Fathers of the Church; and seek satisfaction from the Prists
lips, then attend to the Dictates of their own dark minds. He plainly enough
tells what he would be at; and that it is blind obedience he would bring us to:
But before we thus resign up our selves, both Soul and Body, unto any, let him
tell us; who, amongst the many pretenders, are those Fathers of the Church, to
whom he would have us thus to resign up ourselves; Matt. 7. 15
our Blessed Savior himself having commanded us to Beware of false Prophets; 1 John 4. 1.
and the Holy Apostle, not to believe every Spirit; but to try the Spirits
whether they are of God: By which it is evident, there belongs by Divine Right,
unto all Christians, notwithstanding their dark minds, a private, discretive
and self-directive Judgment, by virtue whereof they not only ought to prove
all things recommended to them by their Teachers, but even to judge of their
Teachers themselves; between the true, and the false; between the Messengers of
Christ, and the Messengers of Antichrist* so far is it from the mind of God,
that any should pin their Faith upon their Teachers sleeves; Captivate their
Judgments unto theirs; and believe and do whatever they shall think meet. It
were, indeed, happy, if men could receive satisfaction from the Priests lips,
as those which should keep knowledge; But it may be said to too many of them in
our days, as the Prophet said to them of old, Mal. 2. 8, 9.
Ye are departed out of the way; ye have caused many to stumble at the Law; ye
have corrupted the Covenant nant of Levi, says the Lord of Hosts: therefore
have I also made you contemptible and base before all the People, according as
ye have not kept my ways, but have been partial in the Law.

Query XVIII.
Whether in these duties whereon Eternity depends, it be not the highest
absurdity, to force any against their own light, to be guided by others who are
not infallible?

Reply to the Answer to this Query.
It Is no very pleasing employment to have to do with those who either do not*
or will not, understand the Questions they take upon them to answer: But it is
that we must be content with in this Contest.

What this* Answerer finds in this Query inferring a necessity of Infallibility
in all Guides and Governors, whether Sacred or Civil, we are yet to seek;
there being, as we conceive, some difference between being guided in duties of
Religion, by those that are fallible, which we never thought unreasonable; and
being forced to follow them therein, against a man's own light and knowledge,
which is the thing here questioned. It being an implicit Faith and blind
obedience only, (and even the worst of these, a man's acting against his own
light and Conscience) and only in the concerns of Eternity, that this Query
opposes. And where has this been, as he tells us, before answered? Or to what
purpose does he here tell us, It is no higher absurdity in these days of the
Gospel, for men (in matters of Religion) to be guided by a Learned and Pious
Minister; and much more by all the Governors of a National Church; then it was
under the Mosaic Economy, to seek the Law at the Priests mouth, who was the
Messenger of the Lord of Hosts; since we never denied either: but say, that
blind obedience was never to be yielded unto any; much less that any ought to
be forced in any Religious duties, against their own light. The Priests lips,
indeed, should keep knowledge; and they should seek the Law at his mouth; but,
as has been before said, they departed out of the way; they caused many to
stumble at the Law, and corrupted the Covenant of Levi: So that a Judgment of
discretion was then, as well as now, to be exercised by the people, and they
were not always to hearken unto the words of the Prophets that Prophesied unto
them; Jer. 23. 16.
their directions and instructions therefore, with this Answerers good leave,
might sometimes be rejected. And since our Blessed Savior has himself
commanded us to Beware of false Prophets; and the Apostle, not to believe every
Spirit, but to try the Spirits whether they are of God, it is undoubtedly the
duty of all Christians to examine the Authority and Mission of their Teachers;
and to Query who are the true, and who the false; who the Messengers of Christ,
who of Antichrist; that so they may receive the one, and reject the other, with
all their Doctrines and Instructions; if, upon trial, they square not with the
Rule by which they are commanded to prove them. Yet does not this render, as he
says, the Ministry of the Christian Church, (much less all Offices and
Dignities of the Commonwealth) void and useless: It only cautions Christians
not to esteem of them above what is meet; in yielding that blind obedience the
Gospel Prohibits, and which is unbecoming the nature and being of a Rational
Creature to give: when therefore God commands the people to obey those that
have the Rule over them; Heb. 13. 17
and to submit to them; as they that watch for their Souls; It is to be
understood so far forth only, as they Teach according to the Rule of his word;
their Authority, as we have before told you, from the Reverend Dr.
Stillingfleet, Being only directive and declarative; and in matters of duty can
bind no farther then Reason and Evidence brought from Scripture by them does.

But he goes on with his Infallibility, and says, the Argument holds as much
against any Judge or Magistrate in the civil concerns of Humane life, as
against the Ministry of the Church: But he may be therein mistaken; for it is
all men's Interest to acquiesce in the Determinations of civil Judicatories, in
the concerns of Humane life, how Erroneous or unjust soever they may apprehend
them to be, for the preservation of a greater good; public peace and quiet:
but that will never make it reasonable, in the concerns of Eternity, which
admit of no compensation, for a man to put out his own eyes, to be guided by
others; who perhaps, see no better, it may be not so well as himself. For we do
not say, it is absurd for a man to be guided by such as are fallible; but to be
guided by such against their own Light and Reason: As for a man to follow one
who tells him, He will guide him the next way from York to London; though he
leads him still Northward, when he knows the way thither to lie Southward: But
could I believe my guide Infallible, I might renounce my own Reason, and
disbelieve my very senses, to follow him which way soever he lead me; but till
then shall think it absurd in any to force me so to do; which is but the
genuine import of this Query.

But our Answerer tells us, A man may act infallibly in his station, though he
be not himself infallible; For he, he says, does so, who acts and proceeds by
infallible unerring Rule. Yet with his good leave, he may herein be again
mistaken; For, though the Rule he acts and proceeds by, be straight; yet if the
Agent be not infallible, he may through error or inability draw crooked lines
by it; and so cannot be said to act infallibly: And indeed, if what he here
says were true; instead of our infallible Pope, he has set up Thousands of
Infallible Priests, who pretend to Act and precede by an Infallible unerring
Rule; the Infallible and unerring word of God. But to proceed, by what Logic
does he frame an Argument from this Query, against punishing an Atheist? Does
it say, as he would have it, that none ought to be punished, who are not
Infallibly convic't? or any thing to that purpose? why then does he entertain
his Readers with these impertinences? Yet has Truth so far prevailed on him,
that he here acknowledges, All Doctrines ought to be tried and examined by
their proper measures and standards, etc. But what he means by his mean between
this; and for men to be allowed a Liberty to deal with their Religion, and the
Truths of God, as they do with their Clothes, which they put on and off, and
change as their fancies prompt them* or as the weather or fashion alters, we
are yet to learn. For, whether are the more likely to change their Religion,
they who use their Reason in the choice and continuance thereof; or they who
therein blindly follow the guidance of their Teachers; since the first are as
fixed and steadfast therein; as the nature of man, upon the best and surest
foundation, is capable off; while the latter, whose Religion depends on the
guidance of his Teacher or Leader, is liable to change the one, as often as he
happens to change the other. Yet we do not say, as this Answerer would have us,
That a man ought only to be guided by his own light; But we do say and affirm,
that in the concerns of Eternity, a man ought not to be forced, against his own
light, to be guided by others, who are not Infallible; and defy him to prove
the contrary.

The instances of this Age, which (he says,) are innumerable, of those, who so
soon as they separate from their Mother Church, know not where to abide and
fix, etc. Are the objections of an elder Mother Church, against those who
forsake and separate from her: But such as are United unto that Church, which
is the Mother of us all, will not be to seek where to abide and fix, though
separated from all the Mother Churches in the World. They are not the rational
and diligent enquirers into the Grounds and Reasons of their Religion; but the
blind followers of their, perhaps, blind guides, that commonly take sanctuary
in Popery.

Query XIX.
Whether at the great day of account, it will excuse false worshippers to say,
They therein followed the guidance of those, who pretended to have Authority to
Conduct, and Govern them in the duties of Religion? And whether, if the blind
lead the blind, they will not both fall into the Ditch?

Reply to the Answer to this Query.
WE have not from him the least Answer to this Query; which is no more, then
whether false worshippers will, at the great day of account, be excused in
following the guidance of those who pretended to have Authority to Conduct and
Govern them in the Duties of Religion: But instead thereof, are told, with many
unhandsom and undue reflections, That by false worshippers are meant, either
those who serve God according to the Liturgy of the Church of England, or some
other Assemblies of Christians: if the former, the Gentleman that prop^ses it,
is extremely uncharitable; if the latter, the Query is impertinent: But why
uncharitable or impertinent? is it so improbable or unreasonable to think there
should be false worshippers in any of those Assemblies of Christians who serve
God either with, or without the Liturgy of the Church of England? If it be not,
the Gentleman may neither be uncharitable, nor the Query impertinent. This
Answerer therefore, must either have so good an opinion of all Dissenters from
the Church of England, as well as of those who serve God according to her
Liturgy, as to esteem it impertinent to doubt of the Truth of their worship; or
to enquire concerning the future state and condition of such of them as may be
therein misled; or he will approve himself to be the uncharitable person he
speaks of; against all Ingenuity and Reason, to apply what was indefinitely
spoken to the Church of England, when it is more applicable unto others. And, I
shall be bold to tell him in his own Language, It is as great an untruth as
ever came from the Father of Lies, to say that this, or any of these Queries,
obtrude that which is false and slanderous upon any; or that they were chiefly
designed for the unwary Countryman: who is not the Person that imposes upon
others in things of Divine and Supernatural Revelation; or persecutes any on
the account of Religion. And now, (though it be still nothing to the present
Question) he tells us what false-worship is; (viz.) Men's drawing nigh to God
with their lips, and putting him far away from their hearts. And how does this
Query charge this upon the Church of England, who is neither said, nor intended
in it, to Teach any so to do? and yet there are those of her Communion, who
Teach, Indulgence not justified Sect 2. Tolerat. Discust in two Dialogues p.
246.
Preach and Print, that men's Practices (even in the duties of Religion) whether
conformable or not, to their apprehensions, are the Subject of Laws: And that
where Truth and Authority draw contrary ways; we are to follow Truth with our
Soul^, and Authority with our Bodies. So that with these men, Divisum Imperium
cum Jove Caesar hab^t. But I would gladly know of them, or of this Answerer;
whether, what is not of Faith, be not Sin? Or whether it be not false-worship
in any to worship God otherwise then they are persuaded he will, or ought to be
worshipped? or whether following the guidance of these, or the like; though they
pretend Authority to Conduct and Govern them in the duties of Religion; will,
at the last day, excuse those who shall be thus misled by them? and yet we
charge not this on the Church of England; nor have we said, That they who serve
God according to her Liturgy, were false-worshippers. These are but the
uncharitable Inferences and Surmises, of a strangely ignorant, or immeasurably
malicious Person; who wanting strength of Reason or Argument, to oppose the
Truths he likes not, thus loads them with Reproach and Calumny.

And to what purpose does he tell us, it being nothing still to this Query,
That there is no Congregated Independent Congregation in England; but the
respective Pastor of it* assumes to himself more Power and Authority to Govern
and Conduct the sworn Members of it, in the ways and duties of Religion, then
the greatest Prelate in our Church does in his Province or Diocese, unless to
manifest how difficult it is for him to write one true Period, there being
amongst them, no such sworn Members, as he mentions, and whether of them
exercise most Power and Authority, to Conduct and Govern their respective
Members in the ways and duties of Religion, let those concerned determine. But
this; he says, He will not prove from their Practices; the thing being apparent
from the very Principles of Independency, which aim at little else but Tvranny
and Pre eminence: as appears by the Independent Pastors excluding whom they
please from the means of Salvation; and making that a condition of their
Communion, which is impossible. I hope he does not mean here, that in making
the conditions of their Communion impossible, they exclude whom they please
from the means of Salvation; as if there were no Salvation out of their
Communion; and yet I know not what else he means by it; and if that be his
meaning, they do not yet exclude any from the means of Salvation, in making
that a condition of their Communion which is impossible; for if the condition
were impossible, the Communion which depended on it, would be so too; but the
contrary is very well known; and so, in good time, will the credit of this
Reporter likewise be.

But as a farther instance of their Tyranny and Prae^eminence, he tells us,
They pry into the very secrets of men's Souls, Lives and Actions, by severe
Scrutinies and Examinations. If they do, it is not by the Oath, etc. we have
heard much talk of. But they will not, he says, admit of any to be Members of
their gathered Churches, till they have satisfied the curiosity of their
guides. That is, they will perhaps, have no Communion with unbelievers; nor
Fellowship with the unfruitful works of darkness; a great Crime, and worthy
this Answerer's rebuke. But, is it more then probable, as he politickly
observes, That this, and not meanness of Trade, impoverishes City and Country;
or, supposing they who having been made partakers of their Spiritual things;
Romans 15. 27.
should, according to duty, administer unto them in carnal things; How should
this occasion the Nations poverty? What do they receive which they give not
again? Or which of them has such plenty, as to enable them to hoard up any
thing? No, no; we are told by a wiser and more pious Politician, That a
fruitful Land is turned into barrenness, Psalm. 107. 34.
for the wickedness of them that dwell therein. And the Holy Prophet tells us,
Jer. 12. 4.
The Land mourns, and the Herbs of every field wither, (not for Peoples meeting
together, to pray for a blessing upon themselves, their Governors, and the
Land of their Nativity, but) for the wickedness (still) of them that dwell
therein: thus we see how persons differ in Judgment, according to the
diversity of their spirits and passions.

But to return to the Query, charged in the Rear with blind Leaders and
Followers; he wishes the Gentleman would not make such sly and unworthy
reflections upon the conformable Laity and Clergy of this Kingdom: And the
Gentleman wishes likewise this Answerer would also forbear applying to
particulars, what is indefinitely spoken, and was not by him intended to one
party more than another. But it is a shrewd sign of some very sore place in the
Ass that kicks and winches upon every approach, before he is touched.

Query XX.
Whether it be not most unreasonable in the concerns of Eternity, to tie men by
Temporal penalties to fallible guides, whom to follow, may be their Eternal; to
forsake, their Temporal Ruin?

Reply to the Answer to this Query.
HE has nothing, it seems, to say against it, and therefore very advisedly
sends his Reader, he knows not whither; for satisfaction in, he knows not what.

Query XXI.
Whether the main inlet of all the Distractions, Persecutions, and Divisions in
the Christian World; has not been by adding and requiring other conditions of
Church Fellowship and Communion, than Christ, or his Apostles did?

Reply to the Answer to this Query.
THe enquiry here is only into the original of the Distractions, Persecutions
and Divisions, which have been in the Christian world: i. e. among Christians,
or such as have made profession of Christianity, not of the Persecutions raised
against them by Heathens and Infidels. The Ten Persecutions therefore against
the Primitive Christians, and the Inroads of the Goths and Vandals into Italy,
come not within this enquiry. But says this Answerer, If it be understood in
this sense, there are very great mistakes in it; for that severe proceedings of
Christian Emperors against Heretics; and of Heretics against the Orthodox
Christians; were not for Innovations brought into the Church, as conditions of
Christian Communion, but for the Truths of Christ, etc. That Is the Query, and
wherein ^y the great mistakes in asking it? But he may be pardoned this, for so
ingeniously professing himself Ignorant of any Distractions, Persecutions, and
Divisions, that were ever raised in the Christian World, upon the account of
adding and requiring new or unheard of conditions of Church. Fellowship; unless
it were the difference between the Western and Eastern Churches; about the
Observation of Easter: So that, it seems, he is ignorant of the Persecutions
and Divisions that were amongst Christians, in the Reigns of Constantine,
Constantius, and some following Emperors, upon the imposition of differing, if
not contradictory Creeds: For it was not the Doctrine of the Trinity, Three
Persons and one God; as expressed in Scripture, that caused the breach of
Communion and Church Fellowship, between the Arians and the Orthodox
Christians; but the Orthodox forcing the Arians to subscribe to their newly
invented Homoousian; as did afterward the Arians, where they prevailed,
requiring the Orthodox to subscribe to their Homoiousian: whereas (as a Learned
Prelate has well observed) had both parties acquiesced in the very Scripture
expressions, without their own additions, they might have lived peacably and
quietly together; and the Arian Heresy, probably, have soon expired. Error,
divested of Secular Force and Support, not being long able to withstand the
^ower of Truth.

He is, it seems, likewise Ignorant of the great Divisions which after arose in
the Church about the Procession of the Holy Ghost; whereas (as the said Learned
person likewise observes) had they acquiesced also, in what the Scripture
plainly declares, (viz.) That the Holy Ghost proceeds from the Father; and that
he is sent by the Father, and also by the Son; but whether he proceeds from the
Son, or by the Son, the Scripture being silent, they ought to have been so too
as to that Question, and (...) they had avoided the unhappy breach which ensued
thereon.

But is it possible this Answerer should be Ignorant of the sad Persecutions
and Divisions, which have been amongst Christians, upon the account of Rites
and Ceremonies, imposed as conditions of Church Fellowship and Communion, which
neither Christ, nor his Apostles ever required. For; not to instance in those
between Austin and the Monks of Bangor, with others we read of in ancient
story; what thinks he of the unhappy Breaches and Divisions which have been
thereby occasioned, even in this Church ever since the Reformation: he that is
Ignorant thereof, must be something more then I am here willing to express.

But he tells us the difference between the Eastern and Western Churches, about
the observation of Easter, can by no means be applied to the present case of
the Church of England, and those that separate from its Communion. Nor have I
heard of any that ever so applied it; and yet for any thing he says to the
contrary, it may be applicable enough: For his presuming does not prove, That
every National Church, has a more indispencible Power over its own Members,
(if, as we have Reason to believe, he takes every one for such, who is born or
Inhabits within that Nat^on,) than either the Western Church had over the
Eastern, or the Eastern over the Western. And Secondly, There is no such wide
difference as he alleges between the conditions of Communion required in the
Church of England; and those that were between the Eastern and Western Churches
about the Celebration of Easter: For if, as he tells us, the one was about a
trivial inconsiderable business; the other being about indifferent things only,
cannot certainly be thought very considerable.

But, says he, every Church has a Power to Guide and Govern its own Members in
all indifferent things pertaining to its Communion; which if true,
Communicating under one or both kinds by some, Said to be indifferent*
Catholics no Idolators, by T. G. p. 33.
yet is not every Member bound to believe all things to be indifferent, which
their Ecclesiastical Guides or Governors shall call so; and if they require
other conditions of Communion, than their Members shall approve of, or Judge
lawful; 'twill, undoubtedly, cause differences and divisions amongst them.

What Rites the Church of England tenders as conditions of Church Fellowship to
those within her Pale, we meddle not with; our Query being only, Whether the
requiring other conditions of Church Fellowship and Communion then Christ or
his Apostles did, have not been the main inlet of all the Distractions,
Persecutions and Divisions in the Christian world; which but for asking we are
judged Criminal; though the Reverend and Learned Dr. Stilling fleet sticks not
to affirm, Pref. to his Irenicon.
That the main Inlet of all the Distractions, Confusions and Divisions of the
Christian world, have been by adding other conditions of Church Communion, then
Christ has done. And has this Answerer the confidence, or impudence rather,
to suppose this Reverend Dr. herein charge the Church of England, with all
the Distractions and Divisions that now abound in this Nation? or that he
causelessly and falsely accuses a whole Church and Kingdom, as the Fountain of
all the Distractions and Divisions that abound in it? or will he not himself be
found to be the false accuser he speaks of? The Church of England being no more
concerned in this Assertion or Query, then the Church of Scotland, or the
Church at Geneva, or any other Church whatever; unless this Answerer will say,
she requires other conditions of Church Fellowship and Communion, than Christ
or his Apostles did; which neither the Doctor, nor the Gentleman have yet said,

But to conclude, he tells us, St. James acquaints us with another cause of
Wars and Persecutions then the Imposition of a few Rites and Ceremonies in
matters of Religion; which are from men's Lusts, which war in their Members: But
may not the Imposition of those Rites and Ceremonies, proceed from those Lusts,
they first rebelling against the Law of their minds, and then against the Law
of their Maker? And whether argues the greater Pride, the imposing upon men's
Judgments, or the leaving unto every man that Judgment of discretion God has
given him, and requires the exercise of in all the duties of Religion; and will
not, as the Reverend and Pious Bishop Davenant has told us, hold those
excused, who with a blind zeal follow their Leaders.

The removing Old Landmarks, with Innocent and useful constitutions; is but
the old objection of the Papists against the Reformers; and of them borrowed by
this Answerer, to help to fill up his Pamphlet. And though he cannot, as he
tells us, forbear mentioning one passage more, it (...) seems to be but to
usher in his following Rhyme; as a grave and gracious Author has it.

One verse for Sense, and one for Rhyme,
Is sufficient for one time.
Yet are we more beholding to him for this, than for most of his preceding
Answers, which have neither Rhyme, nor Reason, in them.

Query XXII.
Whether Jesus Christ, who came to take away the Yoke, and Burden of Jewish
Ceremonies, appointed by God himself; has given Power and Authority unto any,
to Institute in their room, such others as they shall think good?

Reply to the Answer to this Query.
NOthing is more evident in holy writ, than that God will be worshiped, Lev.
10. 1.
but in the way, Deuteronomy. 4.
and by the means of his own appointment; Jer. 7.
and that no Service is acceptable unto him; Mat. 28. 10
but what is performed in obedience unto his commands: it may not therefore be
unreasonable or unseasonable to ask, Whether Jesus Christ has given Power or
Authority unto any, to Institute in the Worship and Service of God, such Rites
and Ceremonies as they shall think good. And to this, our Answerer tells us,
The words cited by him from Mr. Hooker, would be a sufficient Answer; which we
deny not, according to his way and method of Answering Queries; otherwise they
are far enough from it; for, though many things which God has Ordained, have
been changed, and that for the better; they have been still changed by himself
only, or by Jesus Christ, whom he has sent. And if seven Churches, as he
says, have declared, That Ceremonies of humane Institution are Lawful in the
worship of God; it does not follow, that Christ has given Power, as he
affirms, to some Persons to Institute in the room of the Jewish Ceremonies,
such others as they shall think good. And as little to the present Question, is
any thing in the words of the Ingenious Gentleman he commends to his Reader. To
all which I shall oppose as more pertinent to the matter in Question, the words
of the but now mentioned Reverend and Learned Dr. Stillingfleet, who, Preface
to his Iren.
speaking of the Meekness, Sweetness, and Gentleness of our Blessed Savior,
tells us, His design was to ease men of their former burdens, and not to lay on
more. That the duties he required, were no other, but such as were necessary,
and withal, Just and Reasonable; That he that came to take away the
insupportable Yoke of Jewish Ceremonies, certainly did never intend to gall the
necks of his Disciples with another instead of it; (and if so, did not
certainly, give Power or Authority unto any to Institute in their room such
others as they should think good) it would be strange, says he, the Church
should require more then Christ himself did; and make other conditions of her
Communion, then our Savior did of Discipleship. Then asks, What ground there
can be, why Christians should not stand upon the same terms now, which they did
in the times of Christ and his Apostles? Whether Religion were not sufficiently
guarded and fenced in them? Whether there was ever more true and cordial
reverence in the worship of God? What Charter Christ has given his Church to
bind men up to more then himself has done? And then tells us, The grand
Commission the Apostles were sent out with, was only to Teach what Christ had
commanded them; not the least intimation of any Power given them to impose or
require any thing beyond what himself had spoken to them; or they were directed
to, by the immediate guidance of the spirit of God. What Power or Commission,
therefore, any have since received to Institute such Ceremonies in the Worship
and Service of God, as they shall think good, this Answerer, or his Adherents,
may do well to inform us. But instead thereof, he tells us, Nothing is more
evident in the New Testament, than that Christ did entrust those whom he
appointed in his absence to be the Ministers of his Church, with the Government
of it. He did so; and yet he did not Empower or Authorize them to Institute in
the Worship and Service of God such Ceremonies as they should think good. But
says, our Politic Answerer, This Government could not subsist without the
Enacting of Laws for its own, and the Churches preservation, for that Christ
intended, etc. How does that appear? we find nothing in his Gospel of any such
intention, nor have we reason to believe he intended any should Enact other
Laws for the Government of his Church, than what himself Enacted; since 'twere
to deny the Scriptures sufficiency unto that end; and its being a perfect Rule
of our Faith and Obedience, in all Gospel Duties and Administrations; and, in
plain term's to tell us, that Christ was not faithful to him that appointed
him, as was Moses, in all his House, in that he left not, as did Moses, a
complete Volume of Laws for its Rule and Government. We wish therefore, this
Answerer would acquaint us with the Instrument, by which the Apostles made over
their Authority of Enacting Laws, for the Government of the Church, to their
Successors; in that it would tend greatly to their conviction who have hitherto
been in an error, and very much deceived, if the Lord Christ be not the sole
Lord over, and Lawgiver to his Church; and that the Apostles neither did, nor
could Delegate a Legislative Power to their Successors; being themselves
Ministers only of the Gospel of Jesus Christ; the Power of the Keys committed
unto them, not being a Power of giving Laws to the Church, but a Power of
Teaching and Ruling the Church according to the Laws which Christ himself had
given; and those, as he says, not to that present Age of Christians, but to all
Succeeding Ages in which his Church was to continue in the World; they being
evey way sufficient to continue and preserve upon Earth, a visible Church
until his Second coming. But so far this Answerer is in the right, That there
could have been no such Society, if there had been no Law for its Unity; But he
should withal have considered, that there neither could, nor can, be any Law
for its Unity, but from an Universal Lawgiver; the obligation of no Law,
extending farther then the Iu^^^^^tion or Authority of the Legislator: So that
it is altogether impossible for any but the Lord Christ, to Enact Laws for the
visible Unity of Christian Communion, in the external Administration of Gods
sacred Worship; since the Jurisdiction or Authority of none other can reach or
oblige all Christians.

That our Blessed Savior was greatly concerned for the Unity of his Church,
none sure, ever doubted. But the words quoted by this Answerer from St. John's
Gospel, relate not so much to the external visible Unity of the Church, as to
the internal mystical Union that is between Christ and his Members. Yet he
tells us, That which he would principally have the Reader observe in them, is,
The care that our Blessed Lord and Master took for that great Essential of
Christianity, the Unity of the Church; No doubt he did, both for the internal
and external Unity thereof, and that not only in his frequent calling on his
Disciples to Unity, and to love one another; making it a Caracteristical note
of their relation unto him; By this shall all men know that ye are my
Disciples, if ye love one another; But also in commanding them to teach the
observation of all things whatsoever he commanded them; which would all, who
would be accounted his Disciples, likewise, observe and do, without setting up
their Posts (as the Prophet speaks) by his Posts; Unity would not be wanting
among Christians; nor yet throughout the Christian world, a due uniformity in
the external Administration of Gods Sacred worship; which, variety of Rites and
Ceremonies in particular Churches, destroys. And it may be truly enough said by
him, That it is impossible for the Gospel to be propagated and upheld by Faith
and Charity only; as they are lodged in men's Hearts, unless the Fruits of these
Graces were exerted in some things that were visible and obvious to sense; and
therefore outward worship is required, that the inward may be exercised and
expressed; for to talk of inward worship without any outward expressions
thereof, is but a Cloak for Atheism.

But for this Answerer to tell us, That the Churches Unity was the main thing
that Christ took care of, before his Crucifixion; That it is the great
Essential of Christianity, the very being of Christian Religion depending on
it; And that the main principle of all Christian Amity and affection, is the
visible Unity of Christian Communion, in the external Administration of Gods
Sacred Worship, which ought to be Uniform and undevided; and then conclude,
That variety of Rites in one National Church, would cause Division of
Judgment, and of affection; Is such an explanation of the Unity of the Church,
and visible Unity of Christian Communion, in the External Administration of
Gods Sacred Worship, as, I think, the world was never before blessed with; For,
was it the Unity of a National Church only that Christ took such care of, and
which is the great essential of Christianity? or is it the visible Unity of
Christian Communion, in the external Administration of Gods Sacred Worship in a
National Church only, that is the main Principle of all Christian Amity and
affection? certainly, if variety of Rites in a National Church cause divisions
of Judgment, and of affection; variety of Rites in the Universal or Catholic
Church, will cause the same also: so that it is a visible Unity of Christian
Communion, in the external Administration of Gods Sacred Worship, throughout
the Universal or Catholic Church, that is the main principle of all Christian
Amity and affection; experience telling us, what sad Divisions, Feuds and
Animosities, have, and do daily arise among Christians, from the variety of
Rites, in the external Administration of Gods worship, enjoined by particular
Churches of several Denominations; even to the destruction of that external, as
well as internal Unity, which is the great Essential of Christianity; and which
Christ so earnestly recommended to his Church. So that if the Internal Unity of
the Church, as well as External Unity of Christian Communion, in the public
Administration of Gods Sacred Worship, be desirable, as most certainly they
are, and ought to be: They are no otherwise to be attained, then by all
Christian Churches Universally adhering to the Rule of the Gospel; and
enjoining no other Rites or Ceremonies, in the external Administration of the
worship of God; and requiring no other conditions of Church Fellowship, and
Communion, then that enjoins and requires.

Nor has our Answerer more reason to say, That many Assemblies of Christians,
Independent one (...) of another, though living under the same civil
Government, do weaken, and will at last destroy Christianity; Than others* That
National and Provincial Churches, rejecting at the Popes Supremacy, destroy the
Unity of the Church, and endanger the very being of Christian Religion. Nor
yet, That from such small beginnings and Independent Communions, there would
have been no more possibility to have spread and propagated Christianity in the
world, than an Army divided and scattered into Parties, could be able Encounter
with another that was United, and observed all the Orders of the chief
commander; since, as the Apostle tells us, God has chosen the weak things of
the world to confound the mighty; and experience has told us, That from such
small beginnings and Independent Communions, Christianity has been spread and
propagated over the world, But if, as he intimates, An Army divided and
scattered into Parties, is not able to Encounter another that is United, and
observes all the Orders of the chief Commander. 1 Cor. 1. 27
How will those National and Provincial Reformed Churches, which are but
divided and scattered Parties of the Christian Army, and Independent one (...)
of another be able to Encounter the Papacy, which is United and observes all
the Orders of their chief Commander? So strangely does prejudice and Partiality
blind men, as that they see not how they argue against themselves, unless they
are of that Army, whose Principles and Practices they embrace and follow, while
they would be thought to skirmish with it. This Answerer may therefore know, if
he pleases, That though the Church be compared to an Army, it is not in being
like Officer'd, as having a Leiutenant, or Vicar General, Major-Generals,
Colonels, etc. or such like subordination of Officers, depending upon, or
centering in one; and yet the is not without her Officers; who, (though at the
head but of single Companies) observing all the Orders of their Chief
Commander; are, and have been, able to Encounter the United Power of Men and
Devils making War against the Lamb and his followers.

But our Answerer, having explained; as he tells us, One of the main vitals of
Christianity; (viz.) The Unity of the Church; advises his Reader farther to
consider, That in the days of Christ's abiding upon Earth, there could not
possibly be any Law for the preservation of its Unity, for the reason he
mentions; and therefore Jesus Christ gave Power and Authority to his Apostles
and their Successors, to Institute such Ceremonies and Rituals in Religion, as
they in their own Prudence should judge most agreeable to the manners and
Customs of the Nations they should convert; and which tended to promote true
Piety and goodness in their hearts and lives. But for this the Reader is
desired likewise to consider, we have but his bare word; he not offering the
least proof of any such Power committed by Jesus Christ, to his Apostles, and
their Successors; the Commission he gave unto his Apostles, being but to teach
the observation of such things as he had commanded them; so far was he from
leaving it to them (and much less to the prudence of their Successors) to
Institute and appoint such Rituals in Religion, as they should think good.
These things therefore, are fondly and groundlessly asserted; and no less
inconsistent with what himself but now said, than repugnant to the Gospel. For,
if those Rites which were agreeable to one sort of People, would not be so unto
others; and the Governors of the Church were to appoint, as he says, such
Rituals in Religion, as in their prudence they should judge most agreeable to
the manners and Customs of those Nations they should convert; what becomes of
his main principle of all Christian Amity and Affection, The visible Unity of
Communion in the external Administration of Gods Sacred Worship; which he but
now told us, ought to be uniform and undevided? (...) it is so far from being
impossible that in the days of Christ's abode upon Earth, there should be, as he
says; any Law made for the preservation of the Churches Unity; that it is
altogether impossible, as has been demonstrated, that any but Jesus Christ, or
less then an omnipotent Power, should be able to Enact any such Law. Neither
has our Lord Christ, Instituted any Rite or Ceremony in Religion, but what
will very well suit with the Manners and Customs of all Nations. He would never
else have commanded his Disciples, to teach all Nations to observe all things
whatsoever he commanded them. Yet so fond is our Answerer of his fancies, as to
repeat them, in telling us, That when Christ made void the Law of Ceremonies in
the Jewish Church, he intended (though he gives us no evidence of such his
intention) to inspire the minds of his Apostles and their Successors, with so
much soundness, and integrity of wisdom and understanding; that they should be
able by their own Reasons, to Enact such Laws and Orders as should preserve the
external Unity of the Church, and render Religion so amiable, as that it should
not be quite naked and destitute of all external Ornament and Beauty. In which
he expresses but his own vain and carnal thoughts of Religion; Christian
Religion being certainly, most amiable, when most suitable to the simplicity of
the Gospel; the beauty of whose worship, consists not in external Rites and
Ceremonies, in which, even where they most exceed, it comes far short of the
Ceremonies and Ordinances under the Law; and yet the Apostle prefers the Gospel
worship, far above that for Glory, Beauty, and Comeliness; which shows that
these things have no respect unto outward Rites and Ceremonies. And though he
tells us, It is not in the least repugnant to the wisdom of Christ toward his
Church, to invest the Governors of it, with Authority to Institute new
Ceremonies in his worship, etc. Yet the contrary is evident, in that it speaks
him either wanting toward it, in not appointing things necessary; or not so
wise as others, to find out such things as conduce to its Edification and
Beauty. And in Commissioning his Disciples to teach only the observation of
such things as he commanded them; rejecting the honor given unto him, by those
whose worship of him, is taught them by the precepts of men; he sufficiently
declares, That no other Rites or Ceremonies but what are Divine of Institution,
are to be enjoined, or made necessary to be observed by any, in the Worship and
Service of God.

If by positive Laws made for the external Regiment of the Church, the Bishop
cited by him, means Laws only for the ordering and disposing of things without
the Church, though about it; we have nothing more to say against it, than that
it is not the present Question. Nor do we argue from Christ's abrogating those
Ceremonies that God himself had appointed; that no others ought to be
introduced into the Church. We only ask, Whether Jesus Christ, who came to take
away the Yoke of Jewish Ceremonies appointed by God himself, has given Power
and Authority unto any, to Institute in their room such others as they shall
think good. And are persuaded he has not; not because he abrogated those,
which were appointed by God himself; but because no worship is acccptable unto
God, but what is of Faith; for without Faith, it is impossible to please God;
Heb. 11. 6.
and Faith in all things respects the commands and Authority of God: So that
the Governors of the Church can have no Authority to Institute or Appoint any
thing in the Worship and Service of God, either as to matter, or manner,
(beyond the orderly observance of such circumstances, as necessarily attend
such Ordinances, as Christ himself has Instituted) but by express command or
Commission from God. Let this Answerer therefore show their Authority to
Institute new Ceremonies in his Worship; and he may be better thought of then
otherwise, I presume, he will be; by those who fear God, and desire to keep his
commandments.

Nor does it in the least reflect upon the wisdom and goodness of God, as he
says, to give unto Civil Powers, Commissions to make such Laws as they please,
for securing the Peace and civil Rights of their People; and none unto the
Guides of the Church, to make Laws for the preservation of Religion, etc. But
is rather an Argument of his great love and care of his Church, not to leave
her to the ordering and disposing of men, which unavoidably (as woeful
experience manifests) must fill her with Schisms and Divisions; but to have
himself given her a standing Rule or Law, whereby she ought to be Universally
Go^vern'd; and which is every way sufficient, would her Guides and Governors
faithfully and diligently attend unto it, for the preservation of Religion
against the Deluges of Heresies and Schisms; and to secure Christians in the
Paths, of Piety and Order; of Unity and Peace; which as has been shown, it is
altogether impossible for any other Law, or Lawgivers ever to effect.

Nor was it from the dullness and Indocibleness of the Jews, as our Answerer
would have it; That God gave them Rules for their behavior in the civil
concerns of their lives, and the smallest instances of his worship; But for
that he had chosen them, Deuteronomy. 14 2
above all the Nations of the Earth, to be a peculiar People unto himself; Isa.
49. 2.
in whom he would be glorified: Psalm. 78. 5.
therefore Established he a Testimony in Jacob, and appointed a Law in Israel.
And that he gave them Rules in the smalest instances of his worship, was that
he would be worshipped in the way, and by the means only, of his own appointment.
Ans. to the 17. Q.
But the appearing of Christ, says this Answerer, Has abolisht the darkness
of men's minds, etc. though but now, to serve another turn, he told us, Men's
minds were dark; and they were therefore blindly to resign up themselves, to
they knew not whom; such is his dexterity in blowing hot and cold with the same
breath; and men are sometimes to be men, and sometimes Bruits, as he has
occasion to serve himself of them. Yet is Life and Immortality brought to light
through the Gospel, and Gods Image in a great measure repaired and restored in
the soul of man. But of what man? not of the Carnal or unregenerate, but of him
that is born again: Col. 1. 2, 12. 13.
They are the Saints only and faithful Brethren in Christ, who are delivered
from the Power of Darkness; the God of this world still blinding the eyes of
those that believe not. And they are the Regenerate only who are endeud with
the Spirit of Power and Wisdom, of knowledge and a sound mind. But we do not
yet find, that even they are empowered to make Laws for Ceremonies and Rituals
in Religion; or that such Ceremonial Laws, as by some have been made, have much
conduced to common benefit; or conspired to the glory of God and mutual good of
Christians: But on the contrary have introduced a Theatrical, Pompous, Carnal,
worship among the generality of Christians; instead of that spiritual worship
which God requires; and without which, no other worship will ever be acceptable
unto him, And he that will look back, as our Answerer advises, To the first
Ages of the Church, wherein the Offices of Christian Religion, were adorned
with that comely simplicity, modest magnificence, and awful Reverence, etc. He
speaks of; will not find any other Laws, for Rites and Ceremonies in Religion,
than the Law of the Gospel, or Canon of the Holy Scriptures.

But our Answerer comes now to his Argument, a fortiori, and tells us, That if
it were in the Power of the Primitive guides of the Church; to enjoin
Christians the abrogated Ceremonies of the Jewish Law, for the Propogation of
the Christian Faith; much more must it be in the Power of their Successors, to
Institute others, and so many in their stead, as may conduce to so high and
generous an end: But the abolisht Ceremonies of Moses were observed by
Christians; and that by ^he express warrant and command of the Apostles, (...)
in their abstaining from blood, from things ^rangled, and from things offered
to Idols. But (...) he not herein mistaken, for these were not ^ommanded as
Ceremonies; but prohibited as ^candals, to the new Converted Jews. Nor do we
find any Warrant or Command, either express or implicit, of the Apostles, for
the Observation of Easter: Or that they ever enjoined or commanded
circumcision; but we find them declaring they commanded it not: And St. Paul
tells the Galatians, Act. 16. 24
If they be circumcised, Christ shall profit them nothing. Gal. 5. 2.
So far were the Apostles from commanding the Observation of the abrogated
Ceremonies of the Jewish Law: which is indeed, a contradiction interminis; for
if they had Aposto^ical warrant and command, they were not abrogated; but we
must bear with small slips, if we will not Create to our selves endless trouble.

But, it is at length acknowledged, That Gods will is to be the Rule of his
worship; and our Answerer hopes to salve all, in saying, That it were the most
sacrilegious Invasion of Gods Prerogative to make humane Inventions the
essentials of his worship. But for Rites and Ceremonies, the Governors of the
Church may, it seems, Institute such, and so many, as they shall think good.
And if so; let him tell us why the Church of Rome has not the same Authority,
as other Churches, to Institute such Ceremonies, as she also shall think good?
and how comes he to censure hers, as vain and foolish, ridiculous and
superstitious; while she exercises but the Authority he allows her, Instituting
no other Ceremonies, then she judges conducive to so high and generous an end,
as the propogation of the Christian Faith; and which render Religion amiable,
by its external Ornaments and Beauty. But what may this Answerer mean by the
essentialls of worship? Eccl. Pali. ch 3. Sect. 4
A dear friend of his tells us, The essence of Religious worship consists in
nothing else, but a grateful sense and temper of mind toward the Divine
goodness: and as for all that concerns external worship, it is no part of
Religion it self; and if this be his Judgment also; he may tell us, It Is the
most sacrilegious Invasion of Gods Prerogative to make humane Inventions the
Essentials of his worship; and yet retain a liberty of introducing all the vain
and foolish, ridiculous superstitious Ceremonies now in use in the Roman
Church, when ever he shall change his thoughts of them; and judge them to
render Religion amiable and beautiful. But certainly, nothing is more evident
in Scripture, than that the due observance of the outward Institutions in
Religion, come under the notion of the worship of God: So did the Sacrifices of
old, and so do the present Sacraments of the Church; which were, and are, parts
of outward worship; and I suppose of Religion too: and whatever is made so
necessary to be observed in the worship of God, that without it, the worship is
not to be performed, is thereby made an essential of worship; for that which is
so the matter of a thing, that without it the thing cannot be, is of the
essence of that thing.

But he tells, us, All* that is pleaded, is but that the Church of England, may
be allowed the same privilege, which all Sects and Parties assume to
themselves, (viz.) To determine the circumstances of Religion; which is so
reasonable, that it cannot either in Reason or Justice be denied. Then he tells
us, There is no Sect, but the Authority of their Teachers prevails in those
Instances and Rites, where there is no word of God to warrant the things that
are practiced by them; Instancing in the worship performed, as he says* by
Independents; asking what Scripture they have to prove their Covenant which the
Members of their Churches swear to* before they are admitted by their Pastors
and Elders. Though he finds no mention of any such Covenant sworn to, in the
declaration of the Faith and Order owned and Practiced in their Churches;
wherein as well their Order as common Faith is declared* Neither of which do
they, or did they ever, that I have heard of, impose upon any; and yet are
able, 1 Pet. 3. 15
I presume, to give an Answer unto every man that asks them a reason of the
hope that is in them: To them therefore I shall refer him for farther
satisfaction, in the particulars he mentions, if he desires it. And for the
present shall only tell him, There is some difference between a confession of
Faith, and imposing Articles of Faith; Yea, or Rites and Ceremonies. And will
he now say, In verbo Sacerdotis, or upon his Reputation, That the Church of
England in appointing of her Rites and Ceremonies, does no more, then appoint
circumstances concerning the worship of God, common to humane Actions; which
are to be ordered by the light of nature and Christian Prudence, according to
the general Rules of the word? Or why does he thus impose upon his credulous
and unwary Reader?

But he tells us, If the Governors of the Church of England did command such
and such things, then Dissenters had some reason to separate from its
Communion; which is but a copy of his countenance; he elsewhere telling us,
That the Governors of the Church have Power to Institute such Ceremonies as
they shall think good; and that it is the peoples duty to obey; Yea, he advises
them to resign up themselves to the Fathers of the Church, rather than attend
to (...) the Dictates of their own dark minds: which takes away, not only the
liberty of separating; but even of examining the commands of their Spiritual
guides. And having thus reduced them to an implicit Faith, he may be bold to
tell them, There were as many, or more Ceremonies made use of in the very Age
of the Apostles, and then Instituted by them, than are now in the Church of
England: and instance in half a score, not one of which were ever Instituted by
the Apostles. Yet after all his boldness, he speaks but faintly, in saying, If
he be mistaken in his conjecture about this matter; yet it is no way injurious
to the present Power of the Church of England, in appointing symbolical or
significative Ceremonies in Gods worship: for that the Primitive Christians
under the Heathen Emperors, were much like the Israelites in their Egyptian
Bondage; rather concerned to maintain the life and being of Religion, then to
be curious about the Apparel and Ornament thereof. And would to God there were
no pretended Christians in these days, more concerned about the Apparel and
Ornament (as they term them) of Religion; then to maintain the life and being
thereof. And how unhandsomly does he reflect here on the Primitive Christians,
in saying, When Kings and Emperors became Christian, then they began to
glorify God with their bodies, and to honor him with their substance and
Estates, etc. As if till then, they had been unmindful of the Apostles precept,
of glorifying God in their bodies, 1 Cor. 6. 10
and in their spirits: or what thinks he of those who before that, sold their
Possessions and goods, Acts 24. 6.
and parted them to all men, as every man had need; Did not they as much honor
God with their substances and Estates, as those who adorn Temples? But such
gross and carnal thoughts have some, of the most High, Who dwells not in
Temples made with Hands; Acts 7. 48.
as to think him still delighted and pleased, with men's Erecting, Dedicating,
and Adorning of Temples; in which they generally place more of their Religion,
than in the performance of the most spiritual and Christian duties, which God
requires of them.

Query XXIII.
Whether are they who separate, or they who give the cause of separation, the
Schismatics.

Reply to the Answer to this Query.
WE have here a full and satisfactory Answer^r, In that it is acknowledged,
That not they who separate, but they who give just cause of separation, are the
Schismatics. But then he tells us, St. Paul has as clearly and fully
determined this Query, as if it had been proposed in his days: Though you will
find him here, as well as elsewhere to handle the word of God deceitfully. 1 Timothy 6. 2^
For St. Paul in that place speaks only of the duty of Servants; exhorting
those who are under the Yoke, to count their Masters (though Infidels) worthy
of all honor: and not to depise their believing Masters* because they are
Brethren; but rather do them service, because they are Faithful and beloved;
and these things he directs Timothy, to Teach and Exhort; and then s^bjoyns, If
any man, teach otherwise, etc. He is proud, etc. Where observe, how instead of
Master, he foists in Superior, a word of a more extensive signification; for,
though every Master be a Superior, every Superior is not a Master: and yet we
do not say, that obedience may be withdrawn from Superiors of any kind;
Christianity laying the greatest obligation immaginable upon its Professors, to
be obedient to their Superiors. But as the Authority of Superiors is not
despotical or absolute, so neither ought the obedience of Inferiors, to be
blind or Brutish; both the one and the other being regulated by a Supreme
Power. For where Superiors have no Right to command, there lies no obligation
on Inferiors to obey: So that whether Conformists, in commanding, or
Non-conformists, in not obeying, are the Schismatics; depends on the formers
having right and Authority to require; what the latter judges sinful or
unlawful to observe; which being beyond the present Question, we shall not
meddle with.

But he tells us, If the Church of England had forsaken the common Faith, it
had been no Schism to forsake the Church of England, and if she did so and so;
then that command in the Revelation, Come out of her my people, etc. had been
applicable to our Dissenters. B^t this is still but pretended, being against
his principle of blind obedience, and men's resigning up themselves to the
Fathers of the Church; without leaving them so much as a Power to Examine what
is commanded; for where that is, there must likewise be allowed a dissent in
all things they judge evil or unlawful. And though he tells us, A good
Christian ought as much to dread the imposing upon his Judgment an Assent to
known errors; and upon his Practice the acting of known Sins, as the suffering
the very pains of Hell it self; he does, we doubt, but equivocate, alallowing
none to be known errors, or known sins; but such as Superiors shall judge so:
for if he allow Inferiors to judge thereof, and act accordingly; there is no
difference between us.

But having told us, what the Church of England does not; he now tells us what
many of our Dissenters do: And first, he says, They Question not only the Power
of Bishop to Govern the Church; but that of Kings, to make Laws for the
Security of their own Crown and Government, as well as the common Christianity.
If such there are, I am sure no sober or Rational man will justify, or excuse
them in it. That they make the people Judges of their own Pastors, etc. That
they may have reason for; how else can they beware of false Prophets, and try
the spirits; as they are commanded; or distinguish between the Ministers of
Christ, and the Ministers of Antichrist: But no sober man sure will allow any
to withdraw their obedience from those who are lawfully Ordained, and ought to
superintend over them. That they forsake their old guides, etc. This is but the
old Popish objection new vampt; nor is such forsaking Criminal, but where
causeless: And who are they that renounce in their Assemblies, as he says, the
ancient Creeds which were in all Ages esteemed the Badges of Christianity? And
wherein lies the Crime of not reading the Scriptures to the people, without
expounding them? But sure they make it not indifferent to be of any Communion,
who are so great sufferers because they cannot be so. And if, as he says, they
gather Churches, not only without, but against all A^thority, Let him not be
thereat troubled since every Plant which our Heavenly Father has not Planted,
Matt. 15.
shall be root^d up. Which is due, or undue ordination, will hardly be
determined till we have an affirmative Answer to the sixth Query. But 'twere
happy for the Church of God, if none who are not gifted and qualified for the
work of the Ministry; were empowered to read Sermons in the Pulpit; Profane
the Sacraments, etc. But who are they that as he says, Evacuate one main
Article of the Christian Creed; Faith in one Catholic Church? besides himself
and the Papists? All others, believe their is one Catholic Church; but do not
believe in one Catholic Church; we are taught to believe only in God, not in
the Church; but he, it seems, has resigned up his Faith to the Fathers of the
Church; believing only as the Church believes. No wonder therefore he should
talk of a Yearly, Monthly, and Daily Faith; which his Principles lead him to,
if he chance so often to change his Fathers, or they their Faith. Who they are
that go out of their Callings and Stations to Usurp the Office of Bishops, as
well as of the Inferior Clergy, will hardly be determined here: Yet I shall
tell him what a Reverend and Learned Prelate of the Church of England once
answered to the like objection; Bilson's true differ. Part 3 Page 535.
So long, said he, as they taught the same Doctrine which the Apostles did;
they had the same Power and Authority to Preach, which they had: biding them to
keep their competent Jurisdictions, Judicial Cognitions, and legal Decisions to
themselves: For that, as he truly told them, The Son of God first founded, and
still gathers his Church by the mouths of Preachers, not by the Summons of
consistories; and he that is sent to Preach, may not hold his Tongue, and
tarry, till my Lord the Pope, and his Miter'd Fathers can intend to meet, and
list to consent, to the ruin, as they think, of their Dignities and Liberties.

But to return to our Answerer, How do they as he says, break the bonds of
Unity, and Line of Apostolical Succession, who adhere to the Universal and
Uniform Law of the Gospel? or do not they rather break both, who make their
own, or other men's wills, the Rule of the Churches; and found their Ordination,
on uncertain tradition.

I know of no Dissenters, that obtrude Oaths and Covenants, as he says, on
their Proselites; though it be no Crime for Christians to Covenant to serve
God, as God will be served.

Every man has a Judgment of discretion, Which is the Rule of Practice, as to
himself; and must direct him with whom to join, and not to join, in the
performance of all Religious duties; nor may he therein do ought against his
Light. But what means he, in saying here, They will submit to no Law, nor admit
of any Discipline, but what is erected and Executed by themselves, (a thing
never known for Criminals to make choice of their own Punishment;) For do they
not submit to the Laws of the Land, in all civil things and concerns? and what
Law of the Gospel submit they not to in the duties of Religion? but to talk
here of Criminals making choice of their own Punishment is very extravagant.

And lastly they will, he says, have no public Acts pass among them, without
the free consent of all, A^s. to the 19 Query.
as satisfied in Conscience, that what is decreed, is Gods will. And is it for
this he elsewhere so boldly avers, There is no Congregated Independent
Communion in England, but the respective Pastor of it, assumes to himself more
Power and Authority to Govern and Conduct the sworn Members of it, in the ways
and duties of Religion, then the greatest Prelate in our Church does in his
Province or Diocese? or is this one of the principles of Independent Tyranny?
But some, are said to have need of good memories, and our Answerer seems to be
of them. Yet he would be thought to have reason* for what he here says, telling
us, The thing is impossible in nature; for, if all are satisfied, they are not
men, there being among all men difference in Judgment. How unreasonable then
is it, to require of any such an Assent or Consent, as must render them either
Beasts, or not men? But so it seems, it is and must be; for he tells us, In the
enacting of all Laws, the lesser part is determined by the greater: which is
true in all civil things and concerns which are in a man's choice, and at his
own disposal; and it is for the public good and benefit, it should be so. But
it is otherwise in matters of duty and obedience unto God; in which every man
ought to be satisfied that what is Decreed, is the will of God; for that none
may follow a multitude to do evil; nor in the neglect or omission of the least
known duty.

Whether the Church of E^gland or Dissenters are the Schismatics, I shall
nowise take upon me to Determine; but leave it, as he does to the Rational
Reader to judge; and only take leave to say, That what his eminent Prelate
says, proves not Dissenters to be Schismatics.

If there be any, who as he says, account the King and Parliament, or Clergy of
England Heretics and Schismatics, for maintaing the Essentials of
Christianity; and doing what they can to hinder and diswade men from offering
the most insufferable affronts to Gods Being and Majesty; They ought not
certainly to be tolerated, much less countenanced in a Christian Commonwealth.

Query XXIV.
Whether they, who in the exercise of Church Discipline, never cease calling on
the civil Magistrate, to assist them with his Secular Force, do not therein
give an evident sign and token, that all true Ministerial and Spiritual Power
is dead in them?

Reply to the Answer to this Query.
THE Question here, is not whether these or those give the greater evidence
that all true Ministerial and Spiritual Power is dead in them: But whether such
practices in any be not an evident sign and token of it? And had all Orthodox
Bishops, in all Ages of the Church, relied upon the Spiritual means by (...)
appointed in the Gospel, for the suppressing and ^ooting out of Heresies and
(...), without applying themselves to the (...) for his assistance therein;
Christian^ (...); had not suffered, as it afterward^ (...) H^reticks using the
same means, for (...) faith And yet we say not, But (...) and ought to call
upon the (...) do his duty in the Protection (...); by supporting and (...) in
the due exercises thereof (...) of w^^ked and unreason^ (...) not faith.
Neither do we (...), or extinction of the function of Bishops, if they use all
due and proper means, to accomplish and bring about lawful and charitable
ends: nor that any end can be more generous and Christian, than to secure
People in the performance of their duty to God, to man, and to themselves, But
we do say, that Secular Force and Compulsion, are not the proper and due means
to effect all these. And whatever sense some may have of Moral Honesty and
Justice, or of Piety and Religion; the Civil Magistrate ought not, certainly,
to permit them to express or declare, their scorn or contempt of either. I will
not say, with this Answerer, That it is since men have assumed so great a
liberty in Religion (as not well understanding what he thereby means,) but
agree with him, There is less regard had to those external Rules of right and
wrong; Virtue and Vice; by some persons who make high pretenses to
Christianity, than has been observed in many Pagan Nations; but who those
Persons are, their Professions and Practices will best declare.

But he tells us, It Is Presumption and not Faith, for the Clergy of England (as
things are now amongst us) to expect Gods miraculous concurrence with them, in
the management and exercise of their Ministerial Office, when there are
ordinary means at hand, etc. What may this Answerer mean here, by Gods
miraculous concurrence with them? His continual presence, with the assistance
of his holy Spirit, he has promised unto them who observe his commands, unto
the worlds end; as the ordinary means to render their Ministry effectual, for
the Conversion of sinners, and the calling of those who are yet Aliens and
Strangers to the Covenant of Grace; And our Blessed Savior, Ephesians. 4.
when he ascended up on High, gave Gifts unto men, for the perfecting of the
Saints; for the work of the Ministry, and for the edifying of the Body of
Christ. But if this Answerer, who is of the Clergy, be conscious that things
are now so amongst them; that the presence of God, and assistance of his holy
Spirit, are to be looked upon, as miraculous concurrences with them, in the
management and exercise of their Ministeririal Office; he is to be excused for
having recourse unto other means, to render his labors so considerable, as to
make him see some fruits of the Travel of his Soul; though, possibly, it may
prove but bitter fruit in the end.

The Gentleman, I can assure him, never thought, as he intimates, That the
Peoples forsaking of any Assemblies, was a certain Prognostic that the
Ministerial Power was quite extinguished in all that were so forsaken; as
knowing there are, and may be defects and faults on all sides. But this the
Gentleman thinks, That wherever any People manifest a desire, and thirst after
knowledge in the things, and ways of God, (as God be thanked, very many within
these Nations, at this d^y do,) and after trial and experience of the
Ministerial Power of any, do yet leave and forsake them, it is no very good sign
or token of their Ministerial Gifts and Abilities. But it is a presumptuous and
too bold comparison he here makes, between the Success of Christ's Ministry,
while he exercised it in his own Person upon Earth, and that of the Clergy of
England: For, though taking on him the form of a Servant, he was made in the
likeness of men; yet could he have Converted Millions of sinners, as well as
have commanded Legions of Angels, if it had so pleased him.

The Cases of Elijah, and of Athanasius, he instances in, are not at all to the
present purpose; for we do not say, that Peoples leaving or forsaking their
Pastors, is an Argument of their having lost all spiritual Power and Authority.
But Pastors leaving or forsaking the Spiritual means by Christ appointed for
the Rule and Government of his Church; and applying to, and using of other
means, than he appointed and commanded them; to the subversion and ruin of his
Discipline, is an Argument of it. And here I cannot but take notice of the
great Pique our Answerer has against liberty in Religion, in that he would
have the Prophets apprehension, That the whole Israel of God had forsaken his
Covenant, to proceed from the general indulgence granted by Ahab, to all kinds
of Religion, as well as Impieties; when, 1 Kings 16 33.
though there may be reas^n enough to believe he indulged all kind of
Impieties, in that it is said, He did more to provoke the Lord God of Israel to
anger, then all the Kings of Israel that were before him; there is not the
least evidence of his indulging all Kinds of Religions; in that, though there
were 7000 who had not bowed the knee to Ball; the Prophet knew not of one true
worshipper besides himself; which is no great Argument of their being indulged,
among the all kind of Religions, he talks of.

But to conclude, whoever, as he says, shall seriously consider the depraved
Nature of Man; how much more prone it is to embrace Vice, than Virtue; Error
than Truth; and the Novel, rather than the good old way of Religion; Joh 16. 33
will not be much startled or wonder that the greatest part of mankind, 2 Timothy
3. 12
should forsake the Truth and true Religion, which have Persecution and outward
sufferings usually accompanying them; to embrace those Religions, which not
only indulge them in their Lusts, but have the greatest worldly Interests and
advantages attending them.

Query XXV.
Whether are not they Strangers to the Power and efficacy of the Divine Spirit;
or distrustful of Gods Providence, to be always with his Church; who think
Christianity, which both began and spread it self over the world for several
hundreds of years, under Heathen and Persecuting Emperors, cannot stand or
continue supported by the same Divine Presence and Protection to the Worlds
end, without the Aid and Assistance of the Civil Magistrate?

Reply to the Answer to this Query.
WE do not say, nor did we ever think, the first Reformers of Religion in this,
or any other Nation, were Strangers to the Power and Efficacy of the Divine
Spirit, or distrustful of Gods Promise to be always with his Church; Because
the whole Reformation was not without the Aid and Assistance of civil
Magistrates: But bless God rather for their Cooperating in so good a work. And
yet we shall not scruple to say; They had been strangers to the Power and
Efficacy of the Divine Spirit, and its operations on the Souls of men; had they
believed the Reformation could not have been effected without them. And to ask
what Archbishop Cranmer, Hooper, Ridly. etc. could have done to restore
Religion to its Purity and Truth; had they not been seconded and Assisted by
the civil Magistrate would have better become a Turkish Mufti, then a Gospel
Minister. Does he think the Power and Efficacy of Gods Spirit, in the mouths of
his Preachers, not sufficient to convert the most obstinate; and to bring into
Captivity every thought to the obedience of Christ? How then did, not only
Peter and Paul, with the rest of the Apostles; but the Primitive Christians for
several Ages after them, propagate Christianity, and the Truths of the Gospel;
not only without the assistance, but even against the greatest opposition of
civil Magistrates? And what can be more to the disparagement of the then
English^ Clergy; and derogatory to the Spirit of God, then to say as he does,
they might as well have attempted to have pulled the Sun out of its Orb, as
ever to have Reformed Religion, (by the Aid and Assistance of the Holy Spirit)
without the Aid and Assistance of the civil Magistrate. Does he think things
were then amongst them, as he would have them thought to be amongst us, That
the Presence of God, and Assistance of his Holy Spirit, were to be looked upon
as miraculous concurrences with the Clergy in the management and Exercise of
their Ministerial Office? I trust they are not; and that he judges both of the
one, and of the other; but by himself. But so far I agree with him, That as
Kingdoms, and States, so Religion and the Church are to be secured and npheld,
by the very same means and methods, by which they were established: And so the
Church of England, as founded in Prelacy by the Kings and Nobles of England, as
has been shown, must be secured and upheld by the same means and methods; or
it will not long so continue, but as Christian, wherein it was founded by the
mouths of Preachers with the Aid and Assistance of the Holy Spirit, it will, I
trust, be so secured and upheld to the worlds end: Yet that God will withal
vouchsafe her, so great a blessing. That Kings and Queens may ever be her
Nursing Fathers and Nursing Mothers, to protect and defend her from the rage
and violence of wicked and unreasonable men, since all men have not Faith, is
my hearty desire.

But our Clergy man (sensible, it seems, how things are now amongst them) is
distrustful of Gods continuing his Church with us; and therefore would have the
Gentleman consider, in what Scripture he has promised, that either
Christianity in general, or Protestantism in particular, should for ever
continue the Established Religion of this Kingdom. We know, indeed, of no
particular promise concerning the Established Religion of this Kingdom; but this
we know, That where two or three are gathered together in Christ's name, he has
promised to be in the midst of them; and that he told his Disciples, while they
taught the observation of all things which he commanded them, he would be with
them to the worlds end; So that if Christianity continue not with us, it is by
o^r own default, in forsaking Christ, and disobeying his commands.

He is pleased to acknowledge here, what could not well be denied, That
Christianity spread it self over the world, under Heathen and Persecuting
Emperors, only by the Power of the Divine Presence and Protection, without the
Aid of the civil Magistrate: But looks upon it as miraculous, and not to be
depended on; and would not, because some have been fed from Heaven, without the
help of ordinary and common sustenance, that others, therefore, should refuse
their daily bread. No certainly, no wise or sober man will ever do that, but
rather thankfully accept of the Magistrates favor and assistance, if he will
have that to be the Churches daily bread; though I should have thought, the
Divine presence and Influences of the Holy Spirit, might rather have been so
esteemed; and to substitute in the place thereof, the Magistrates Coercive and
Compulsive Power, savours more of Mahumetism, than of Christianity. So little
reverence has he for our Blessed Savior, as to tell us, with a seeming
contempt of him* That true Religion flourisht before ever he came in the flesh;
though he acknowledges, it was by the Divine Protection without the Aid of the
civil Magistrate: But so soon as the Israelites were settled in the Land of
Promise, The true Religion he says, no longer thrived and prosper'd, among
them; then it was encouraged and protected against all false and Foreign
Religions, by the civil Magistrate: God having then, as he would have us to
believe, withdrawn his Divine and Spiritual Assistances from it; committing the
sole care and concerns thereof to the civil Magistrate. What then became of
Religion when those Magistrates neglected their duty both toward it, and
toward God? was there then no true Religion in Israel? or does he think it did
not then thrive or prosper in the hearts of any, which is the proper Seat of
Religion? The Apostle tells us, Godliness is great gain; but gain with some is
the only godliness; and they think Religion never thrives or prospers, but in
the outward Prosperity of its Professors; though the contrary be evident, and
so David tells us; Before I was afflicted, says he, I went astray, but now
have I kept thy word: and again; It is good for me that I have been afflicted;
Psalm. 119. 67, 71.
that I might learn thy Statutes. Yet will it not be denied, but that the
example and countenance of Superiors, has a great influence on the behavior
and conversation of Inferiors, according to the old saying, Regis ad exemplum,
totus componitur orbis: yet Religion does not stand and fall with them, for
even in Ahab^ Reign, there were 7000 who bowed not the knee to Baal: who yet
were neither Schismatics, nor to be censured as disobedient to Superiors,
because they were not of the then established national Religion.

But to conclude, our Answerer tells us in plain terms, Although Christianity
were planted by miracles, (i.e. By the Power of the Divine Presence, and its
Protection only, without the aid of the civil Magistrate) yet its preservation
can be effected by no other means than Laws: forgetting what he but now told
us, That as Kingdoms and States, so Religion and the Church, are to be secured
and upheld, by the very same means and methods by which they were a^quired. But
Mahum^^atism prevailing, has, it seems, altered his mind, and now he judges
the Sword of the Spirit, unable to preserve Christianity, without the aid of
the Civil Sword; and that Christ's promised Presence with his Church to the
worlds end; together with the Gifts he gave unto men, for the perfecting of the
Saints; for the work of the Ministry, and for the edifying of his body; are not
of themselves sufficient for the preservation of Christianity. Yea, he sticks
not to tell us, That these have slept for these fifteen hundred years; (judging
it seems, others, as things are now amongst us, such as himself) and
consequently that Christ continued not his Gifts unto men for the ends
beforementioned, nor yet his Presence for the preservation of his Church above
one hundred and fifty years; so leaving her for an hundred and odd years,
without either Civil or Spiritual means for her Preservation; it being 300
years after Christ, before she had the Aid or Protection of the Civil
Magistrate: such an excellent Advocate for Christ and his Church, has this
Learned and Judicious Answerer approved himself.

Query XXVI.
Whether to Persecute upon the account of Religion, be not an Indication of a
Cainish, Ishmalitish, and Wolfish Nature; and a certain sign, that such are
none of Christ's Sheep?

Reply to the Answer to this Query.
THis Answerer is sure the first that ever quarreled at the severities of any
expressions, against such as persecuted on the accouut of Religion; there being
certainly no viler miscreants on the Earth, than they who molest or trouble any
for rendering only unto God, the Homage due from the Creature to the Creator.
And though he knows of none of the Socinian writers, that press, as he says,
this Argument with that bitterness as is expressed in the Query. Yet he may
soon find some among the Orthodox, who have pressed it in the same words; and
from whom indeed, the Query was but borrowed.

The Reverend, Learned and Pious Dr. Henry More of Cambridge, Mist of
Godliness, l. ^0. c. 11. P. 521. Lib 2 c 10. Sect 48.
having declared Liberty of Religion to be the common and Natural right of al^
Nations and Persons, tells us how Grotious gives several instances thereof in
his De jure belli and Pacis: where he cites one of the Canons of the Council of
Toledo; Praecipit Sancta Synodus, etc. The Holy Synod Decrees that none
hereafter shall by Force he compelled to the Faith, for God has mercy on whom
he will have mercy; and whom he will be hardneth. Also Tertullian, lex nova non
se vindicat ultore gladio: The Gospel supports not it self by the punishing
Sword. He Cites also the constitutions of Clemens, Athanasius, and Chrysostom
to the same purpose; who expressly exclude Force and Compulsion in bringing
over to Christianity. And certainly they who are brought over to it, ought not
therefore to be treated with less of Reason and Moderation.

That also, says our Reverend and Learned Doctor, is remarkable which Bishop
Jewel notes out of Chrysostom, in the 19th Homily on St. Matthew, Nunquid ovis
lupum persequitur aliquando, etc. Does the Sheep ever persecute the Wolf? no,
but the Wolf the Sheep: so Cain persecuted Abel, not Abel Cain: so Ishmael
persecuted Isaac not Isaac Ishmael: so the Jews persecuted Christ, not Christ
the Jews: Heretics persecute Christians, not Christians Heretics; by their
fruits therefore ye shall know them: whereby he plainly implies, that
Persecution for Conscience sake, is A very Unchristian or Antichrstian Symptom.
And smartly again in the same Homily, Quem vides in sangnine persecutionis
gaude^^tem, lupus est, He that is a Persecutor, is no Sheep of Christ's, but a
Wolf. And lastly (for it were an infinite business, says he, to prosecute this
common place) that is a shrewd intimation of the Apostle, be that was after the
flesh, persecuted him that was after the Spirit; so great an Antipathy is there
between the carnal and truly Regenerate Christian; which should make any man
afraid to feel any persecuting motions arise in his breast; as being
Indications of a Cainish, Ishmaelitish, and Wolvish Nature; and a certain sign
that such are none of Christ's Sheep. These are the bitter expressions which our
sweet-natur'd, and tenderhearted Answerer, has not met with among his
Socinian acquaintance; and which his meek and gentle Spirit cannot bear against
his Brethren.

But the Reverend and Pious Dr. More farther tells us, Mist. of Iniq. l. 2. c.
15. page 166.
That the cruel and bloody Persecution of the true and living Members of the
Kingdom of Christ; for their faithful adhering to the plain and undoubted
commands of their Heavenly Sovereign, who is styled King of Kings, and Lord of
Lords, is certainly the most signal and capital Antichristianism that any
Policy can be corrupted with; and the most grossly and visibly opposite, both
to the nature of Christianity, which bears all things, and endures all
things; which will not be over severe to the wicked, much less cruel to the
good. Psalm. 72.
And also to the description of Christ's Government; who is said, Isa. 40.
to redeem the Souls of the needy from deceit and violence; and that their
blood is precious in his sight: he shall feed his Flock like a Shepherd; he
shall gather his Lambs with his Arms, and carry them in his bosom. This is the
genuine Spirit of the true Christian Pastors, whether of higher or lower
degree, to be thus tenderly affected toward their Sheep. But such as thwack
and beat them, and violently drive them; instead of going before them in a way
of Christian example, these are not Shepherds, but Butchers; and will easily
drive them to the Shambles, and see their throats cut without remorse.

This being the genuine Spirit, as he truly says, of the true Christian
Pastors; to be thus tenderly affected toward their Sheep; what shall we judge
of those, who not only thwack and beat; and violently drive them: but are so
tenderly affected toward their Persecutors, they cannot bear their being
hardly spoken of? And how impertinent are we here told (while inquiring only
after the nature of those, who persecute upon the accouut of Religion) of the
enacting Laws to punish those that violate and deflowr Religion; as if to
persecute for Religion, and punish the Violaters of Religion, were the same
thing. We diswade not, as he insinuates, inflicting punishments upon sensual
and unrighteous Persons, such as violate the Laws of either Table; and are far
from thinking Christian Justice and Righteousness, inconsistent with Clemency
and Lenity, of Spirit. Yet is it neither just nor righteous to Execute before
Judgment. And as our Blessed Savior is styled the Shepherd of Souls; and as
he says, That Title imports, that he would have not only his Lambs and Sheep
fed, but grievous Wolves watch, and their mouths stopped too, when they devour
the flock, and teach things which they ought not for filthy Lucre' s sake; It
becomes a duty to stop his mouth, who endeavors what he can, that Christ's
flock should be devoured; teaching notorious untruths, and things which he
ought not for filthy. Lucer's sake. Nor will it, I doubt, advantage him, That
as Christ is a meek Savior to returning sinners; so he is a terrible Judge to
Apostates and evil doers, while he continues a Persecutor, since against such,
as himself has told us, His Arrows are ordained. And though, as he says, he
begins to Execute vengeance in this world, by raising up men of undaunted
Spirits, who make Righteousness the girdle of their Loins, and Judgment their
Robe and Diadem; to succor his Church, support his Worship and punish his
Enemies, yet such will never persecute for Religion, nor think those to give
ill example unto others, or to become Schismatical and disorderly in their
Stations, who serve God according to the rule and order of the Gospel; nor
judge any evil Doers, for rendering unto him the Homage due from the Creature to
the Creator; seeing by this no occasion is given to the Enemy to reproach and
blaspheme the good ways of God; whatever occasion some Cainish or Ishmalitish
spirits may thence take so to do. But for such as have erred and strayed from
the flock of Christ; or neglect the Christian duties he requires of them; let
the Magistrate, in Gods name, and by the ways and means of his appointment,
reduce or otherwise punish them; no good Christian will certainly ever be
displeased thereat.

But, says our Answerer, It Is no indication of any such nature as the Query
mentions to punish evil Doers; It is not indeed, nor does the Query say it is:
but to persecute on the account of Religion, as Cain persecuted Abel, Ishmael,
Isaac, etc. and as their followers at this day persecute such as are more
righteous than themselves, is an Indication of such a nature as the Query
mentions. And now if Magistrates will not do as he would have them, He declares
them wickedly unjust, and all those terrible Epithetes mentioned in the Query
to be ascribed to them what then is it he would have them to do? To break the
Jaw Bone of the wicked, and pluck the spoil out of their teeth. So would every
honest and good man. To repay men according to their deeds, fury to his
Adversaries, and recompense to his Enemies; and who desires not the same? to
employ their Power for his honor from whom it descends; nothing sure is more
just. Not to permit the Christian Faith to be torn in pieces, by a thousand
Sects and Factions, and Wolves to prey upon Christ's flock: This above all, is,
indeed, their duty; and 'twere to be wished they would carefully observe it,
and not suffer, much less assist, any to impose their thoughts or fancies in
the Agenda and Credenda of the Gospel upon others: but permit the Scriptures to
be the Sole Rule of all men's Faith and Obedience, in all Gospel Duties and
Administrations: Nothing being more evident than that particular Churches or
Persons, assuming to themselves a Power to Decree Articles of Faith, and impose
them upon others; is that which has torn the Christian Faith in pieces; and
divided the Church into Sects and Factions; and which gives opportunity unto
Wolves to prey upon Christ's flock; and to the great Enemy of mankind and his
wicked Instruments to sport themselves in her ruin, corrupting the worship of
God with their additions, and bringing scorn and contempt upon all the Offices
of Christianity, and the whole Ministry thereof. Let all men, says the Learned
and Judicious Mr. Chillingworth, Pres. to the Author of cha. Main.
Believe the Scripture, and that only; and endeavor to believe it in the true
sense, and require no more of others; and they shall find this not only a
better, but the only means to suppress Heresies, and restore Unity: For he that
believes the Scripture sincerely, and endeavors to believe it in the true
sense, cannot possibly be an Heretic. And if no more than this were required
of any man, to make him capable of the Churches Communion, then all men so
qualified, though they were different in opinion, yet notwithstanding any such
difference, must be of necessity one in Communion.

And if, as he says, To tolerate unruly and vain Talkers and Deceivers, who
vent their idle fancies to corrupt and withdraw others from the simplicity of
the Truth; be an Indication of more cruelty, than to Tolerate so many Thieves
and Murderers upon public Roades and Highways; This Answerer is by no means
to be tolerated, having manifested himself, so unruly and vain a Talker, and
Deceiver, as he has done,

Query XXVII.
Whether can any think. That they who Persecute Christ in his Members,
despoiling them of their goods, and Imprisoning their Persons; and that too,
for their faithful adhering to the plain and undoubted commands of their
Heavenly Sovereign; will speed better at the great day of account, than those
whom Christ himself has told us, shall be then rejected, but for not visiting
and relieving his poor Members, when in want, in sickness, or any other
Adversity?

Reply to the Answer to this Query.
INstead of Answering this Query, It Is very judiciously objected, It has many
things questionable in it. And with as great Judgment, and to as little
purpose; he likewise tell us, That none are true Members of Christ, besides
those that are United to his Church; for that Christ is the Head, and his
Church his Body; and (as he also judiciously observes) no one can be a Member
belonging to the Head, unless he be some way or other United to the Body. But
sure, our Answerer is the first pretended Christian, that ever questioned the
soundness of Christ's Body, the Holy Catholic Church; or that a Christians
joining to it might endanger his internal Union to Christ who is H^^d. And
wherefore does he here tell us, what the Query neither denies, nor questions;
That the Church of England, is a sound part of the Catholic Church; unless to
manifest his Dialectick Art, in proving, That whoever, (in any thing) withdraw
themselves from any part of Christ's Body, cut themselves off from Christ the
Head: and therefore they who withdraw Communion from the Church of England,
(though but in the least minute Circumstances or Ceremonies) belong not unto
Christ. So that, it seems, with this Learned and Judicious Answerer, out of the
Ceremonial Pale of the Church of England, there is no Salvation: and if any are
punished for so cuting themselves off from Christ the Head, their punishment is
no persecution: Quod erat demonstrandum.

Great wits according to the Proverb, have short memories; he could not else
have so soon forgotten, which he but now reproved the Independants for, (viz.)
Their eva^uating one main Article of the Christian Creed; Faith in one
Catholic Church: For that, as he said, They restrained it to themselves,
whereas he so restrains it to the Church of England, as that he allows of none
withdrawing themselves from her Communion, to belong unto Christ, the one main
Article therefore of his Christian Creed, Faith in one Catholic Church; is, it
seems, Faith in the Church of England, (or rather Faith in whatever Church is
uppermost.) And though out of her there is no Salvation; yet, for Arguments
sake, he will suppose, That those who separate from her Communion (even in her
very Ceremonies) are notwithstanding (such) their separation, real Members of
Christ's mystical body; yet none of them, he says, are persecuted for their
faithful adhering unto Christ, or the undoubted and plain commands of their
Heavenly Sovereign: nor does the Query say they are. But supposing, as he
supposes, That any should be punished for assembling together to Pray, or
partake of the Ordinances of the Gospel, which Christ has Instituted, and
requires the observation of; would not such be persecuted, for their faithful
adhering unto Christ; and to the plain and undoubted commands of their Heavenly
Sovereign?

But says our Answerer, Let the Gentleman produce one Person that ever suffered
for performing any essential duty of Christian Religion. We know not what he
may esteem an essential duty of Christian Religion; who is one with him, who
declares the outward worship of God, Eccl. Pol. p. 99.
to be no part of Religion. But if he will allow Praying, Preaching, and
Administering the Sacraments, to be essential duties of the Christian Religion;
as by all good Christians they have hitherto been esteemed. He need not go
beyond his own Parish to meet with those, who have suffered, and deeply
suffered, even by his Instigation, for the performance of those duties.

But he tells us, It Is not for the performance of those duties, but for the
disorderly and Irregular way of performing them, that they are punished. Very
good: By what Rule then does he judge the way of their performance Disorderly
and Irregular; all order consisting in the due observation of some Rule: Now if
he will tell us of any Rule they therein transgress, which he will abide by; he
has said something to the purpose. He tells us, indeed, They are punished for
not doing them in that due manner, as is enjoined them by their Superiors; yet
does not say, The injunction of Superiors, is the Rule whereby they are to be
performed. Ans. to the 21. and 22 Query.
Nay, he says, If the Governors of the Church did command a worship that were
Idolatrous or superstitious; or did appoint vain, foolish, and ridiculous
Ceremonies; they were not therein to be complied with. So that the Injunctions
or Commands of Superiors, are not, by his own confession, this Rule. But he
tells us, They are punished for being disorderly in their Stations and Callings,
and for being disobedient to Government and Laws. If by being disorderly in
their Stations and Callings, he means, as he elsewhere says, Their Usurping the
Office of Bishops, as well as of the Inferior Clergy: He has thereon, already
had the Judgment of as Learned and Judicious a Divine, as most the Church of
England can boast of. And for their being disobedient; though he has advised
us to resign up our selves unto the Fathers of the Church; He has not yet told
us, they are to be obeyed in whatever they shall, or may, command us, So that
neither can the commands of Governors, nor Laws of Superiors, be this Rule;
nor indeed, ought else but the will of God, revealed in his word: To the Law,
and to the Testimony, was the old Rule; and the Divine Institution is still the
only Rule, to judge of the Orderly and Disorderly performance of all Religious
duties ^ by and if the manner of their performance be not according unto this
Rule; it is, indeed, Disorderly and Irregular; and suffering upon that account,
may be esteemed a punishment, rather then a persecution; as may likewise their
sufferings, who are disobedient to the Laws and Governments of men, in all
civil and secular matters and concerns; and theirs also, who censure the
Actions of Authority; Vsurp the Office of the Ministry; endanger the peace of
the State, and violate the Unity of the Church. Nor are there greater violaters
of the Churches Unity; than they who impose on Christ's Disciples, other
conditions of Church Fellowship and Communion, than Christ or his Apostles,
ever enjoined or required. And so far I agree with this Answerer, That the not
punishing of these, is prejudicial both to Church and State; the one being
thereby overrun with Factions and Seditions; and the other, (as woeful
experience tells us,) with Schisms, Heresies and Contentions.

But our Answerer grows pleasant, and plays with his Reader, in telling him,
Dissenters are persecuted to, what the Primitive Christians were persecuted
from, (viz.) Their Churches, or Public place of Divine worship; for Dissenters
are, not certainly, persecuted to their Churches; though some may account it a
persecution to be compelled unto his.

There has been, and may be, great difference in the Causes, as well as
Degrees, of Persecution; but whoever suffers in any kind for his faithful
adhering unto the plain and undoubted Commands of his Heavenly Sovereign; the
Author^ thereof, will not be excused, because others have been more barbarous
and cruel than they. And yet, that even these are not as bad as the worst; may
be ascribed rather to the good hand and providence of God; and moderation of
those in Authority, restraining them, than to their good wills or desires.

The instance he gives us, of a Father's correcting his child, and the child's
crying out M^ther; is very impertinent here. Parents may correct their
children, and Princes their Subjects; but as the cause makes the Martyr, so
it is that must denominate it either persecution or punishment. It Is Christ
alone knows who are his; yet thus much we shall presume to say; That they who
persecute him in his Members, will not speed better at the great day of
account, than they whom himself has told us, shall be then rejected, but for
not visiting and relieving his poor Members, Matt. 25.
when in want, in sickness or in any other adversity.

Query XXVIII.
Whether, since offenses will come, it be not every ones concern, to be more
than ordinary careful, he involves not himself in that dreadful woe, pronounced
against those by whom they come? Matt. 18. 7.

Reply to the Answer to this Query.
QUoting the Text, might have satisfied this Answerer, That by offenses here,
no more is understood, then what our Blessed Savior intended when he
pronounced that dreadful woe against those by whom they come: and whether they
be the persecutions which discourage Christians from owning of his name;
attending upon his Ordinances; adhering unto his Truth; or ought else that
administers occasion to another to transgress any Law of God; neglect his duty,
or obstruct him in a course of Piety and good works; it certainly concerns
every one to be more than ordinarily careful, he involves not himself in that
dreadful woe, pronounced against those by whom they come. The Query, indeed,
cautions all to beware splitting on so dangerous a Rock; but charge none with
running, or driving others, upon it. Evil therefore be to him that evil thinks.

Mr. Baxter, as quoted by him, says very well, That a Minister should not more
fear offending his particular flock, than offending the Catholic Church; but
this will neither justify, nor excuse his offending of either. And
notwithstanding this Answerer's hope; he will not find a National Church of
humane Institution, to have that Authority over its Members, (even when it
shall be determined who are so) as a private Minister has over the flock, over
which the Holy Ghost has made him Overseer. Whether Dissenters take no
offense, as he says, but what they bring upon themselves by their own perverted
Judgments, etc. Let them see too, who are therein concerned; and must one day
answer for it.

There is no doubt, but it may, and often does so happen, That one man is the
occasion of another man's sin; and yet the guilt of him who sins, not to be
changed upon him, whose action occasioned it; which yet hinders not, but that
many may likewise occasion others to sin, for which they must be accountable.
And yet none sure doubts, but that, as he says, in the enacting of Laws,
Authority is not so much to consider, what will please the humors, as advance
the benefit of those under its Charge and Protection: Nor can we have so hard
thoughts of any in Authority, as to imagine they should make Laws thwart or
contradict those that are Divine: Nor yet who takes or gives offenses; Romans 14.
12.
for as every one must give an account of himself to God; so let every one look
to himself, and his own duty. And as (he tells us) the day is coming, when all
men's Disguises and Vizards shall be pulled off, and their most retired thoughts
and actions laid open and manifest to men and Angels; (...) 'twere well if all
men had a serious and due sense thereof; and so lived and behaved themselves in
the whole course of their lives, as to convince the world, they spoke as they
thought, and believed as they professed.

But who are they this Libellous Answerer accuses of charging the Church of
England with offenses; and denying the Magistrates Power and Supremacy in
matters of Religion; as by Law declared? These Queries being no ways guilty
thereof; for, as they respected, so they were directed only to such as himself;
who against the Doctrine of the Church of England, and Principles of the
Reformation, require an Implicit Faith, and worse than blind obedience from the
People: And `tis beyond his Power and malice, to find any thing in them,
inconsistent with their receiving the Holy Eucharist according to Law; who
scruple not the lawfulness thereof. And who are they this Libeller would have
to Question, not only the Kings Coercive Authority, but the whole Ministry and
being of the Church of England, and accuse her Government of more Tyranny and
Persecution, then ever yet was objected against her, by the most violent of her
Romish Adversaries? Not those sure, who are against secular Force and
Compulsion in Religion; which is the utmost import of these Queries; for then
the charge will reach all those Reverend and Learned Divines of the Church of
England before mentioned; with most others of Name and Fame in the Christian
World, who have decry'd the same as Unscriptural, and Inconsistent with the
Precepts of the Gospel, and Principles of Christianity; and will, indeed, argue
him to be the Person of that evil and depraved temper of spirit he speaks of.
Yet I agree with him, That men Eminent in their Country, and such as have a
reputation for Knowledge and Wisdom, might do more good by their examples; than
in this Age, the Church can do with its censures, or Churchmen with their
instructions. But let him be assured, none shall ever have a Reputation for
Wisdom and Knowledge, who give not unto God, the things that are Gods; as unto
Caesar, things that are Caesar's; Fear to whom Fear; and Honor to whom Honor
is due. And let him not deceive himself in thinking Men of Wisdom and Knowledge
separate from the Church, because they separate from some Churchmen of vicious
and depraved spirits; or to have Enmity against that, because they will have no
Fellowship or Communion with these: it not being their duty to follow any,
farther then they are followers of Christ; Christians being obliged to walk
together, so far only as they have attained. To require more of any; is,
indeed, (as the Apostle at large declares in his 14 chapter to the Romans) to
lay a stumbling block in the way of their Christian Brethren; and infallibly to
involve those that so do, in that dreadful woe pronounced by our Blessed
Savior in the Text cited.

But has this Answerer the vanity to think, his Illogical and undue Inferences;
false suggestions, Impertinent and Ridiculous Reasonings; and nonsensical
Answers, should convince any of guilt? yet if he know of any who are fallen
from their first works; or otherwise wanting in their duty; let him not spare
to charge and charge them home; and if they cannot acquit themselves; let not
reproach and shame only befall them; but whatever severity Law and Justice can
inflict, upon them.

It Is very much, That notwithstanding all, so Learned and Judicious a Person
has written in the Churches vindication; any should yet reply, the
Ecclesiastical Laws and Constitutions do little or no good; and therefore were
better, for the reasons mentioned to be repealed: against which, besides what
he has already said; He adds the saying of a Roman, when Rome, as he says,
resembled England by the ill Government of Galba; That it is far better to live
where nothing is lawful, then where all things are lawful; which is such a
reflection on the Government, as those Queries, with all their Sedition, shall,
I hope, never be found guilty of. But what may be the instance of ill
Government which is here so severely reflected on? it will, upon inquiry, be
found to be no other; Than His Majesty's late gracious Declaration of
Indulgence to Dissenters in Religion; the which, though it secured to the
Church all its Rights Privileges, and Emoluments, was yet so intolerable to
some Churchmen; in restraining them only from, falling upon and ruining their
poor, peaceable and pious Neighbors, that none have more, and few, I think^ so
much reflected on Authority, as some of them have thereon done; an evident
demonstration what Loyal and Faithful Subjects they would quickly be, should
Authority deal with them, as it has done with some others: for who would not
be Loyal, to kind and bountiful Masters? Wolves and Tigers are so to those who
feed and favor them: But they only are to be accounted Loyal Subjects, who are
so for Conscience Sake, to severe and froward Governors; as well as to the
kind and courteous; and not as their Benefactors, but as Gods Ministers; which
is a Loyalty, few of these Loyalists can boast of.

But he again tells us, The Scripture compares the Church to an Army, which it
does, for terror; but not for being alike Officer'd: And for an Army, says he,
to be left to its own Liberty; and every common Soldier to observe no Order,
nor live under any Discipline, is the ready way to expose it as a prey to the
first Invader; It is so indeed; who is it, therefore that would have no common
Soldier, observe any Order, nor live under any Discipline? Not they certainly,
who would have both the Officers and Soldiers of this Army, to observe all the
Orders of the Chief Commander; the Officers in commanding, as well as Soldiers
in obeying, which will be found to be the Order and Discipline, that ought to
be observed.

But this Answerer tells us, The little good that is done by the Laws of this
Church and Kingdom, proceeds either from the want of their due Execution (which
is still a reflection on the Government; as is, his elsewhere saying, The
vigorous Execution of one Law, would do more good than a Million of
Proclamations, etc.) or from the indisposition of those Persons, who expect
Protection from Laws, without paying any Reverence or Obedience to them, etc.
'Twas never denied, but that in Civil and Secular Affairs and Concerns, Force
and Compulsion, is and must be used; or there can be no Rule or Government
amongst men: But in the Concerns of Religion, abstracted from secular Interests
and advantages, it is otherwise; men are therein to be gained and Governed, by
persuasion and conviction only; Religion cannot be imposed; nor is any thing
more absurd, than to endeavor to promote the Truths of the Gospel, contrary
to the Laws of the Gospel; Virga Regum, as Rupertus truly tells us, Est virga
Dominationis; virga Discipulorum Christi, virga est Dilectionis: or as Hieron
has it Rex praeest nolentibus, Episcopus volentibus. ^ Cor. 10.
And the Apostle tells us, There is a way of bringing every thought into
captivity to the obedience of Christ; But the weapons whereby that Victory is
atcheived are not Carnal; which is, indeed, the cause of the little good that
is therein done by Civil and Ecclesiastical Laws. This Answerer may therefore
very well ask, What effect Ecclesiastical Laws can have upon Atheists and
Infidels; all the Ecclesiastical Laws in the world, Seconded and Assisted by
the Laws of the State; not being able to Convince or Convert one Atheist or
Infidel: Hypocrities, or dissembling Professors, they may, indeed make, but can
never make one true or sincere Christian: Penal Laws, therefore, concerning
Religion, have ever respected more the Civil Peace and Interests of Kingdoms
and Commonwealths, (That under pretense of Religion, the Rights of Princes, and
Liberty of the People, be not invaded or injured) then the Truths of the
Gospel, which are not by those means or Methods, to be preserved or propagated.
So a late great Minister of State, speaking of penal Laws against Papists,
tells them; E^o^ Clar. Anim. on Cres. p. 10. 11.
It Is not against their Opinions of Purgatory or Transubstantiation, though
errors; but against their owning the personal Authority of the Pope, within His
Majesty's Dominions, as dangerous to the State, that those Laws are provided,
disclaming therefore of that, they should find themselves at great ease. And it
was the great business of the Chief Ministers of State in Queen Elizabeth's
Reign, As appears by the jeveral Treatises written to that purpose by their
Order.
to satisfy the world, that none ever suffered in England for Religion, but
for Treason or Treasonable practices, under color or pretense of Religion. Nor
can we believe some late Laws concerning Religion were ever intended to molest
or punish any for the performance of any truly Religious duty; but of such only
as under pretense thereof, met to contrive Insurrections and Rebellions; and
thereby became dangerous to the State; and such certainly, of all men, ought to
be the most severely dealt with, as well for their Hypocrisy, and abuse of
Religion, as for such their disloyal practices: For none, sure, can imagine His
Majesty would ever have indulged Dissenters the Exercise of their Religion, had
it been against that the Laws had provided, and not rather against the danger
that might from some meetings have accrued to the public; the preservation of
the public peace, being the ground both of those Laws, and likewise of His
Majesty's Declaration of indulgence, upon the difference of times, and
circumstances of Affairs; as is evident from the praeamb'es of those Statutes;
and His Majesty's gracious Answer of the 24th of February 1672, to the Petition
and Address of the House of Commons, as follows,

C. R.

His Majesty has received an Address from you, which he has seriously
considered of, and returns you this Answer, That he is much troubled, That
that Declaration, which he put out for ends so necessary to the Quiet of the
Kingdom; and especially in that conjuncture; should have proved the cause of
disquiet to the House of Commons; and have given occasion to question his Power
in Ecclesiastics; which he finds not done in the Reign of any of his
Ancestors. And he is sure he never had thoughts of using it otherwise, than as
it has been entrusted in him to the Peace and establishment of the Church of
England, and to the ease of all his Subjects in general. Neither does he
pretend to the right of suspending Laws wherein the Properties, Rights, or
Liberties of his Subjects are concerned; nor to alter any thing in the
Established Doctrine or Discipline of the Church of England.

The only design of this was, to take off the penalties the Statutes inflicted
upon Dissenters; and which he believes, when well considered of you, Your
selves would not wish Executed according to the Rigor and Leter of the Law.

Neither has he done this with thought of avoiding or precluding the advice of
his Parliament. And if any Bill shall be offered him which shall appear more
proper to attain the aforesaid ends, and secure the Peace of the Church and
Kingdom, when tendered in due manner to him, he will show how ready he will be
to concur in all ways, that shall appear good for the Kingdom.

How expressive of Royal goodness, and Heavenly Benignity and Compassion
toward mankind, is this gracious Answer; which cannot but endare His Majesty
unto all sober and Pious Persons, of what Judgment or persuasion soever in
Religion. Nor were the Commons against the Indulgenee, but the way and manner
of it; in that they immediately upon this pes^a Bill of ease for Protestant
Dissenters, which was sent up to the Lords; But the differences that after
happened between the two Houses about Jurisdiction and Privilege, with other
greater Affairs of State, has hitherto obstructed its farther progress.

But to return to our Answerer, who tells us, That to repeal the Churches Laws,
would administer too just an occasion to the Papists, to triumph in the ruin
of it: for what Truth or Being, says he, could that Church pretend to, That
had neither Ephod nor Traphim; no Order, no Law, no Liturgy, no Bishop, no
Discipline.

It seems then, in his Judgment, all these in the Chnrch of England depend
wholly upon the Ecclesiastical Laws; although the Primitive Church, in, and
after, the Apostles time, had both Order, Law, Discipline, Bishops or
Overseers, without other Laws, than what were Divine, or of Apostolical
Institution: Though I am absent in the flesh, Chap. 2. 5.
yet am I with you in the Spirit, joying and beholding your Order, etc. says
the Apostle to the Colossians. And is not the good word of God, a Law to all
Believers? But this Law, Ezekiel. 7. 26.
it seems, is perished from our Priest: who yet, we hope, will not deny the
Holy Ghost a Power, without the aid of Ecclesiastical Laws, of making Bishops
or Overseers, over the Churches of Christ's Institution; and such, certainly,
are not without Discipline; nor deprived of Law, Order, or Overseers; nor
consequently of Truth or Being; upon the repeal of Ecclesiastical, or the
Churches Laws. Yea, God forbid, the Christian Church should depend upon the
continuance or alteration of these or those Civil or Ecclesiastical Laws; which
we see changed and altered, as often almost, as we change our Governors, which
is, indeed, a consideration that ought seriously to be thought on, by all the
lovers of Religion; and who have any regard or concern, for the Truths of the
Gospel, and purity of ^hrists Institutions.

But says this Answerer, we have now unanswerable Arguments to justify our
departure from Rome, but if all our Laws and constitutions be laid aside and
abrogated; we should be just like the Israelites, when they waged War with the
Philistines; in the day of Battle, there was neither Sword nor Spear found in
the hand of any of the People.

If then our Laws and Constitutions, be our only unanswerable Arguments to
justify our departure from Rome, and our only Swords and Spears, to fight
against those Adversaries an abrogation or change of those Laws, and
Constitutions would, indeed, disarm, and silence us; and might as well justify
our return to Rome, as now our departure from it: But I trust, though this be
Rati^ ultima, the best Arms and Argument, of our Answerer; we have yet other
Arms and Arguments to justify our departure from Rome; and fight against those
Philistines.

But he now tells us, It Is none of his bufiness or intention, to exasperate any
man's Spirit, much less to direct his Governors, etc. Yet he admonishes them to
stand up in a zealous vindication of their own Liberty and Power; and to
provoke them to it, upbraides them with Cowardice if they do it not; telling
them, It is there neglect thereof, that encourages men in their (...)
Separations; Disobedience and (...) provokes God to deprive them (...) Power
and Authority, with which be entrusts them, and which they have betrayed and
exposed to scorn and insolence of his and their greatest Enemies. Yea, tells
them, Histories are not barren of instances, how God has revealed his wrath
from Heaven against those Governors, and deprived them of the Honor of being
his Deputies, when their Spirits have been softened with sensuality and ease,
and they have lived in fear of their Inferiors, who ought to live in fear of
them. Which is such a menace of, and reflection on Authority, and our
Governors; as none but this Bold and Insolent Answerer, would ever have dared
to publish. He does well, therefore, to recollect himself, and tell us, He has
proceeded too far on this Argument; which indeed, speaks him a Person so highly
impudent and immeasurably malitions, that (as himself has elsewhere said) he
is fitter to receive a confutation from the penalties of Laws, and the Seutence
of a Judge, than from the Strength of Reason or Argument.

But he concludes in the words of, indeed, a truly wise and Learned Statesman;
That Herefies and Scisms are of all others the greatest scandals; yea, more
than corruption of manners, etc. which being so, all just and lawful means
ought, certainly, to be used; not only for their Suppression, but prevention;
in removing the Causes of them; of which, there is not a greater, than the
Authority by some ascribed to the (...) yea to particular Churches,
Church-(...) imposing upon Christians in the (...) ^^^nda, of the Gospel; which
is, indeed, as that Learned and Judicious Statesman says, A wound or solution
of continuity, destructive of the Churches Unity; dividing her into as many
Sects or Parties, as there are particular Churches, or Societies of Churchmen,
assuming such Authority in the Christian world. I shall therefore conclude the
whole in the words of a Learned and Judicious Son of the Church of England,
Chil. safe way to Sal. Part. 1. chapter 4.
who, in vindicating his Friend for not taking on him that Authority his
Adversary would have had him, That is, for not playing the Pope, thus expresses
himself: Certainly says he, If Protestants be faulty in this matter, it is for
doing it too much, and not to little. This presumptious imposing of the senses
of men, upon the words of God; the special senses of men, upon the general
words of God; and laying them upon men's Consciences together, under the equal
penalty of death and Damnation; This vain conceit that we can speak of the
things of God, better than in the words of God: This defying our own
Interpretations, and Tyrannous enforcing them upon others; this restraining of
the word of God from that Latitude and generality, and the understandings of
men from that Liberty, wherein Christ and the Apostles left them; is, and has
been, the only Fountain of all the Schisms in the Church, and that which makes
them immortal; the common Incendiary of Christendom, and that which tears in
pieces, not the Coat, but the Bowels and Members of Christ. Ridente Turca, nec
dolente Judaeo. Take away these walls of Separation, and all will be one: Take
away this Persecuting, Burning, Cursing, Damning of men, for not subscribing to
the words of men, as the words of God; require of Christians, only to believe
Christ, and to call no man Master but him only; let those leave claiming
Infallibility, that have no Title to it; 'and let those that in their words
disclaim it, disclaim it likewise in their actions:' In a word, take away
Tyranny, which is the Devils Instrument to support Errors, Superstiti^^s and
'Impieties, in the several parts of the world; which could not otherwise long
withstand the Power of Truth; I say take away Tyranny and restore Christians to
their just and full Liberty of captivating their understandings to Scripture
only; and as Rivers, when they have a free passage, run all to the Ocean; so it
may well be hoped, by Gods blessing, that Universal Liberty thus moderated, may
quickly reduce Christendom to Truth and Unity.

FINIS.

