A Copy of VERSES. PRESENTED To all my Worthy Masters and Mistrisses In the
Town of LAMBETH.
By THOMAS OULDMAN, BELL-MAN for that part of the Parish.
The PROLOGUE.
My Masters all, I willing am to show,
What my poor weak Endeavors strives to doc
What can expected be from any Man,
More, than to strive to do the best he can?
But if you are Displeased at what is here,
I hope I shall Experienced be next Year,
And then, perhaps, I may my Masters please,
Who may, perhaps, Laugh at such Lines as these.
On Christmas Day.
ALL Christians ought with joy for to remember
The Blessed Five and Twentieth of December;
For then our Blessed Savior Christ was Born,
Whom unbelieving Jews did mock and scorn:
But such was our most blessed Creators love,
He, Man to save, descended from above:
Then let us praise his Everlasting Name,
Who came to save us from Eternal Flame.
On St. Stephen's Day.
THis Day St. Stephen he was Stoned to Death,
Yet praised his Savior with his dying breath;
How cruel and unworthy were the Jews
Falsely of Blasphemy him to accuse?
But though with Stones they knocked this Martyr down,
He Is now Rewarded with a Heavenly Crown:
Lord grant that we may all with Christ remain,
Where Saints rejoice, and never shall complain.
On St. John's Day.
SAint John, whom Christ did love so well and dear,
(As Holy Scripture plainly makes appear)
Was, for his Masters sake, tormented sore,
Such Cruelty, I think, was never before:
For in a Caldron of Oil, boiling hot,
They cast this Saint, but yet it hurt him not:
Such is our Savior's Everlasting love,
He saves his Saints to dwell with him above.
On Innocents Day.
HErod the King was a Tyrannick Prince,
And showed no mercy to poor Innocents;
He sought most earnestly Christ's Blood to spill,
But God, the Father, him preserved still.
O Lord preserve the Ruler of this Nation,
And make him happy by thy preservation;
That all his Subjects cheerfully may sing,
Long let us flourish under Charles our King.


On our Savior's Passion.
THe Earth did tremble, and Heavens closed eye
Was loath to see the Lord of Glory dye;
The Skies were clad in mourning, and the Spears
Forgot their harmony; the Clouds dropped tears:
The ambitious Dead arose to give him room;
And every Grave did gape to be his Tomb:
The affrighted Heavens sent down elegious Thunder;
The Worlds Foundation, loosed, to lose their Founder;
The impatient Temple rent her Veil in two,
To teach our hearts, What our sad hearts should do:
Shall senseless things do this, and shall not I
Melt one poor drop to see my Savior dye!
Drill forth, my Tears; and trickle one by one,
Till you have pierced this heart of mine, this Stone.
Of Death.
SO frail and senseless is poor mortal Man,
That he but seldom counts his life a span;
But often looks on his desert and merit,
Who ought to strive Christ's Kingdom to inherit,
Where Angels do rejoice, and hourly sing
Blessed Hallelujahs to the Eternal King,
Who lives for ever in Triumphant Peace,
Where joys abound, that never-more shall cease.
On Riches and Honor.
TRust not to Riches that may slye away,
But aim at that which never will decay;
Thirst after Christ, and his blessed Diadem,
Which is the most and valuable Gem:
Can you so happy be, this to obtain,
No Mortals Pen can e're express your gain;
Then shall you live in Everlasting bliss,
And Flames Eternal shall for certain miss.
On Eternity.
Would thou for ever happy be,
And live in blessed Eternity,
Obey God's Laws while here ^live,
And thou for ever shall Survive;
But if thou will go on in Sin.
Which long to some have pleasure been;
At God's Great Bar you must appear,
To answer for your Misdeeds here.
A Thankful Verse.
E'Re I conclude, my Masters, you shall see,
For all your Favors I will Thankful be;
And from you all I have a many found,
Which I do hope will every Year abound:
I Will strive to serve my Worthy Masters all,
And proud I am, you me your Servant call:
For never any that yet handed BELL,
More willing was to please my Masters well.
The EPILOGUE.
WHen these poor Lines do to some Scholar come,
Perhaps they may be Laughed at, but some,
It may be, will in pity please to say,
He was but Raw, and knew not well the way:
But if again such VERSES I present,
My Masters, I shall hope to give Content.
When poor Illiterate Men, who scarce can Write,
Have many Judges of what they Indite;
That they should all Men please, it cannot be,
For he that does, a happy Man is he:
My Masters all, whose Goodnesses excel,
Till Christmas next I bid you all Farewell.
LONDON, Printed for the Author THOMAS OVLDMAN: 1684.


