EIGHTEEN REASONS Propounded to the Soldiers of the Body of the Army, Why they
ought to continue the several Adjutators of their respective Regiments,
Troops, and Companies, for the good of he Army, Parliament and Kingdom.
1. BEcause, their dissolution as yet either in part or in whole, is contrary
to the solemn engagement of the Army (founded upon the Pillars of justice,
mercy, reason and necessity) read assented unto, and subscribed by a general
Randesvouz near New Market: as apeareth ^^o^their own exp^e^ in their said
Engagement (dated July 5. 1647.) which runs thus we the Officers and Soldiers
of the several Regiments, now met at the general Randesvouz, have subscribed
unto the said solemn Engagement, and do hereby declare, agree, and promise
to, with each other; to, and with the Parliament, and Kingdom; at follows.

First, that we shall cheerfully and readily disband etc. having first such
SATISFACTION and SECVRITY in those things as SHALL BE AGREED unto by a
COUNCIL, to consist of those General Officers of the Army (who have
concurred with the Army in the premises) with TWO COMMISSION OFFICERS, and TWO
SOVLDIERS to be chosen for each Regement, who have concurred and shall concur
with us in the premises, and in this Agreement, and by the Major part of such
of them, who shall meet in Council for that purpose etc.

Secondly, that without such satisfaction, and security as aforesaid, we
shall, not willingly disband, nor divide, nor suffer our selves to be
disbanded, or divided.

Whence Observe.
That you of the Body of the Army together with this Council (thus and no
otherwise constituted) are firmly bound each unto other, severally and
conjunctively to maintain and defend, and protect each other both in your
Individual and contract capacity; to wit, the Body natural, and the Body
representive to be a mutual and safe protection and preservation each to other
as much as in each other lies till satisfaction and security, as aforesaid: so
that the Army is hereby bound, not to suffer itself, or its council, not the
Council to suffer it self or the Army as much as in each other lies to be
disbanded or divided without satisfaction and security first in those things as
shall be agreed unto by the said Council: now as yet there is neither
satisfaction nor security concerning the manifold Representations proposals and
desire of the said council in behalf of the army King Parliament and Kingdom.

Therefore, by the said solemn Engagement (made severally and jointly to
themselves, to and with the Parliament and Kingdom) they are bound to
themselves, and have bound themselves to the Parliaments Kingdom, not to
suffer any disbandment of the Army division or dissolution of themselves or of
their council, either in partor in whole, outing the time of dissatisfaction
and non-security to such things for the safety of the Army, Parliament and
Kingome as hitherto has, or shall for the future be agreed unto by the said
council of Officers and Soldiers.

And so every Officer, Soldier person whatsoever which hitherto has or for
the future shall enter himself into the (...) Engagement and become a Member of
the Army, is bound not to disband himself, dissert of forsake the Army, or to
the utmost of his power to suffer the Army or its Council of Officers and
Soldiers to be disbanded, disserted, divided or destroyed, but with his life
and his fortunes is bound to preserve, continue and uphold both Army and
Council inuire and firm even if possible to the period of the work.

And he or they of what quality or conditon soever, whether Officer or Soldier,
that shall before the said satisfaction and security endeavor the disbandment
of the Army (...) part or in whole, or shall endeavor the disbandment,
division or dissolution of this Counsel either in part or in whole, are
falsifiers of their own solemn Engagement to themselves and one with another
to the Parliament and Kingdom; and out of their own mothes even from the Equity
of their own Engagement are to be adjudged (as indeed they are in so doing)
Enemy to the Army, Parliament and Kingdom.

Now if as some object, it be answered, that the Engagement extends only to
the prevention of the disbandment or division of the Army, and not o^ the
council till the said satifaction and security without breach of the says and
solemn Engagement of the Army. I reply.

That if it extend to the body of the Army then much more to the Council: for
the good of the Army, (for matter of safety, preservation and union thereof, as
also for the peace tranquillity and freedom of Parliament and Kingdom) is
precisly wrapped up, and comprised in that Council as in the head of that Body:
so that if the head of it should be cut off, cleft, or the brams of it pathed
out how shall the body of the Army retain its perfect life and being?

Now the Council (according the Engagement) is (as before was expressed) to
consist of those general Officers of the Army (who have concurred with the
Army in the premises) with two Commission Officers and two Soldier to be chosen
out of every Regement, who have concurred or shall concur in the premises: so
that the Council (according the Armies Engagement) is not to consist of
officers without two soldiers out of every Regement, or of the soldiers
without the aforesaid officers; but jointly the said Officers and Soldiers
together make up the said council, or representive Body of the Army, according
to the solemn agreement and Engagement of the Army: no other Council
whatsoever though under the name and guise of the Army being the council of
the Army for their present expedition (in behalf of the Army, the Parliament
and Kingdom.) it being of a different kind and nature, of a different
Election, Authority Original and end from that of the council of war; and
all such not so elected and constituted as aforesaid as shall assume or presume
upon the name or authority of that Council are invaders and usurpers and
abusers of the name power and authority of the Army; and at their results,
actions and transactions under that guise are not there. sults, actions and
tran^sactions of the Army, but are all as concerning the Army, illegitimate,
irregular, and unjust, contradictory and abusive to the Army.

And hence it is, that this great Council of the Army so elected and deputed
has proceeded by virtue of their free Election and Deputation in the name
power and authority of the Army to (...) represent and propose several things,
not only as Soldidiers for the good (...) of the Armies but as Commoners, for
the peace, freedom, and liberty of the Kingdom, from time to time, agreed
(...) council of the Army, and so is properly and truly the sense, intend, and
mind both of the head and body of the Army, truly undertaken and prosecuted by
the (...), legigitimate, natural Power, and Right, of the Army both as
Soldiers, and Commoners.

So that it is most evident and plain, that the Soldier-Adjutators as well as
the Officer-Adjutators have an undoubted right in this counsel, betrusted and
conveyed unto them by the Army, even in as large a measure both as Soldiers
and Commoners, as the Officers can plead it for themselves; not to be informed,
invaded or destroyed either by the General, Officer or Officers whatsoever
until such satisfaction and security in and for those things which have or
shall be agreed (...) by the said elected Officers and Soldiers for the good of
the Army, the Parliament and Kingdom.

And this right can no more be taken from the Officer then from the Soldier,
and from the Soldier no more then from the Officer,

2. One reason, power and authority (which may serve as a second reason for the
continuance of the Solder) being for the orginal and constitution of both, and
one reason power and authority for the continuance and termination of both;
that which pleads the continuance or removal of the one, pleads the
continuance or removal of the other therefore that Soldier which shall invade,
infringe or destroy the right and power of the Officer, or that Officer which
shall invade, infringe or destroy the right and power of the Soldier in the
said Counsel, is an enemy both to Officer and Soldier, an underminer,
subverter and confounder of the said solemn Engagement for the Army,
Parliament and Kingdom, and so undoubtedly an enemy unto all: whatsoever his
deluded intention, and supposalls may be, such and no other are his said
actions, and so are the Authors and Actors thereof to be adjudged and esteemed,
if it be lawful and safe to judge the tree by its fruit. For he that shall
plead for and endeavor the removal of the Soldier out of this Council, and
thereby shall accomplish the same, may when he has so done by the very same
reason endeavor and accomplish the removal of the Officers, both being
grounded upon one bottom, and so totally dissolve and consummate this counsel
of the Army, and utterly make ubide the Engagement thereof, as also undo all
again which has thereby been done, to the utter ruin both of the Army, the
Parliament and Kingdom, especially of the honest and godly party therein. So
that this power of consultation and proposal, as well in order to themselves,
and their respective Regiments, Troops and Companies, whom they present, and to
the Parliament and Kingdom, as Commoners, as in order to themselves and the
Army as Soldiers, being thus radical and indivisible in the Soldier til such
satisfaction and security as aforesaid, it may preventer else give answer to
another objection, which is, that the election and function of the Soldier
Adjutators, was and is only for the Army as Soldiers about the point of
disbandment, Indemnity, pay and the like; and further to disprove this
objection, and to render the matter void of all exception, their continued
practice, progress and proceedings jointly in this counsel, for consultation,
proposal and conclusion of things for themselves the Army and Kingdom as
Commoners gives a sufficient and publiqve testimony to all men.

3. The Body of the Army, by virtue of their own proper Engagement, have no
power (in being to the said Engagement for the good of the Army, Parliament and
Kingdom) to dis^^^ull, repeal or destroy the said Council or Engagement,
either in part or in whole (...) the safety of the Army Parliament and
Kingdom, according to what either has been, is, or shall be proposed and
agreed unto by the said Council of Officers and Soldiers, for by the general,
joint and Solemn Agreement of the Army, the body thereof has firmly obliged
and bound it self neither to terminate, nor dissolve it self or its Council,
nor suffer it self nor its Council to be terminated, divided, or dissolved
till full accomplishment and such satisfaction and security as aforesaid,
according to the agreement, conclusions results and proposals of the said
Council both for the Army and Kingdom. And if such satisfaction and security as
by the said Counsel shall be agreed unto must first be, (as you have engaged)
then it may not, neither are you to divide or dissolve before. If such, first
and by this counsel and not before, then this counsel is of equal duration
with the Army, even to disbandment. For should the Body of the Army or any part
thereof recall or attempt to recall their said Adjutators or Representors
either in part or in whole from their service and function in the said
Council, the Body or party in so doing would visibly and palpably destroy and
subvert the very essence and being of the said Solemn Engagement; for only in
order and Council is safety, and take away order and Council, and safety must
needs give place, and ruin succeed. Therefore, all that or of the Body of the
Army a^e finaly bound (as they tender the good of the Army, the Parliament and
Kingdom) faithfully and precisely to preserve, defend, protect and continue the
said Honorable Solemn engagement and Council till the full accomplishment,
establishment and security of all things for the good, safety and sallary of
the Army, the peace security and freedom of the Parliament and Kingdom,
assented or agreed unto, or to be assented or agreed unto by the said Council
conjunctively of Officers and Soldiers.

4. It is no true representation of the Army where the free Elected
Representors of the Body are subtracted and taken away.

Therefore, the Soldiers which are representors of the several Regiments,
troops and Companies of the Army neither can nor may, in Being to the
Representation it self be dispowered, removed divided or disolved, for in so
doing the Representation would cease, and all would be tumbled into confusion
or irrigularity at least.

5. The Soldier is concerned in the safety of the Army both as Soldiers and
Commoners, and in the peace safety and freedom of the Parliament and Kingdom
equally with, and as deeply even as the General Officers themselves; and
therefore to be no more ejected then any of the General Officers whatsoever out
of this Council, without apparent violation of their Right, and hazard of
their safety both as Soldiers and Commoners.

6. In case the General Officers should suppress, make void and disolve the
other Officer and Soldier adjutators, and proceed of themselves in their single
Capacity they could no more be termed or accounted this foresaid Council of the
Army then the leg or arm of (...) without the rest of his members can be
termed or accounted the man: neither can that which is but in part be a
representor of the whole.

And so they would become only Representors of themselves not of the Body of
the Army, and their actions, proposals and desires not be the Actions proposals
and desires of the Army but of themselves.

7. Neither General Officers nor other Officers ever had or can have a
general Monopoly of all just Council and wisdom, but as ever there has, so
still in the multitude of councellers there is safety and wisdom, and
wisdom as the wise man says Eccle. 7.21.) shall streng then the wise man
more then ten mighty Princes that are in the Gitty.

8. A Millitary Commission does not confer wisdom to the Officer, but it is
properly and purely the gift of God, distributed according to his good
pleasure: Therefore wisdom in their Council, is as probably to be expected
from the Soldier, as well as from the Officer, and so as much ground to
continue the one as the other.

9. It is against the just Nature, and being of any free Council for any party
thereof to usurp over the rest in any wise, or to impropriate or incroach to
themselves, the whole power into their hands, to the dispossession or
displacing of others.

10. It tends to the perversion of the Engagement of the Army from general
safety and peace to the private interests, factious and sinister designs of
some sew.

11. The Soldier was not only appearing and active in the foundation,
prosecution and settlement of the said solemn Engagement, when few or none of
the Officers either durst not, or would not, engage or be seen therein, till
the work was even fitted to their hands.

Therefore, not now to be dispowred by the Army, or in reason, justice or
honor to the equity of the said solemn Engagement, to be slighted or
disesteemed by the Officer; but by all honest and just men to be esteemed
instruments, to be continued till the accomplishment and perfection of the
work.

12. Their assistance, agitation, and counsel has hitherto been successful,
faithful, wholesome and conducent to the good and safety of the Army,
prosperous, judicious and upright for the peace, prosperity, and settlement of
the Kingdom, honor of the King, freedom of Parliament and people.

Therefore, there is no reason for their dissolution before satisfaction and
security as aforesaid, till they have committed matter of crime worthy thereof.

13. Such as shall so attempt their dissolution before any just desert or
reason for the same, and contrary to the Engagement it self, may justly be
suspected of some evil intent to their persons, or to the Engagement it self:
or else why should their wholesome advice be despised, or themselves without
all desert be cast out of the Counsel? For who knows, after they are so
ejected and dispossessed of all power that through the change of times, and
things cooperating with natural corruption and vanity too subject to places
of command and profit, those Soldiers who with great wisdom, hazard and
difficulty, begun, and hitherto with prudence and fidelity, proceeded in the
carriage on of the work, may be cast upon the pikes of destruction, and so
left to the mercy of their enemies.

Therefore, no Officer or Soldier that is honest and wise, and simply and
faithfully intends and endeavors the good, safety and preservation of the
Adjutators, the Army and Kingdom, will not in any wise except against making
sure the safety of the Adjutators, whether Officer or Soldier. And all the
world knows, that there is more probabillity and certainty of their safety;
while they keep the power or staff in their own hands, till all things be
firmly settled and secured for their safety and peace, then when they are
dispowred, and the staff in the hands of another before the said covenanted
satisfaction and security: And who knows what a day may bring forth? therefore
it is good to make sure of the worst.

14. The best pretense may be suspected, but where no manner of good is or can
be pretended or proposed, there evil of necessity must be concluded; but there
is no manner of good to the Army, to the Adjutators, or to the Kingdom
pretended, or can be pretended or proposed for the dissolution of those
faithful Adjutators. For what good can be intended to the Army, Adjutators, or
their solemn Engagement, by impairing, distroying and dismembring the lively
useful members of the body of this Counsel, Therefore evil must needs be
intended and concluded, in the design; and from whence it comes, I leave that
to the judgment of the dilligent and wise observator.

15. It is a great disparagement and dishonor to those Adjutators that now
after the heat of the day, and their toylesome and faithful endurance thereof,
they should not be esteemed as worthy to continue and help to carry on the
work to a period, as well as to undertake and begin, or as such as at the
beginning thereof either durst not or would not appear in the undertaking,
countenance, or management of the work.

16. The Soldiers are more knowing of the mind of their several Regiments,
Troops and Companies, then the general Officers probably can be; for they are
more conversant, free and familiar one with another, then with their head
Officers, and can unto them (as unto their Peers and Equals) more freely
communicate their minds, and deliver the sense of the Countries gathered from
their several quarters all ever the Kingdom. So that no sort of people can be
more experimentally knowing of the several oppressions, grievances and
necessities of the people in general then themselves.

Therefore there is as little, if not less reason to dissolve or devide the
Soldier from this Counsel, as the Officer therefrom.

17. It is a limitation of the wisdom of the Army, which God in a wonderful
manner has dispersced and conveyed through the Body thereof; yea, an ablolute
stoppage to the inlets and influence thereof upon its Counsels; For the
Adjutators of the several Regiments, Troops, and Companies, are as the
Cunduit^pipes from the several parts of the body of the Army, or as meet
instruments at all times and occasions, at all straights and necessities for
communication and conveyance of the wisdom thereof, for the safety of the
Army, the Parliament and Kingdom: And on the contrary, a contrary effect must
be concluded: if the whole body of the Army were an eye, where were the
hearing? if the whole were hearing, where were the smelling? but now in their
wise and regular disposal, they are many members, yet but one body: And the
eye cannot say unto the hand, I have no need of thee, nor again the head to
the feet, I have no need of you: Nay, much more those Members of the body which
seem to be more feeble are necessary.

Therefore, I hope it will be the industry of every wise and judicious person
that minds the safety of that body, and the prevention of Scisme, imperfection
or lamenesse therein, to preserve it entire and safe in all its members
accordingly, as wherewith all it has pleased God to indow it.

18. The Dissolution of the Adjutators of the several Regiments, Troops and
Companies, will necessitate and reduce the Army to a blind ignorant and
implicit faith, even in that work wherein their very lives and liberties does
consist, and which has been begun, and hitherto continued, and must be
continued in the name of the Army: which kind of blind course in such a matter
wherein most light is required, will to the knowing and judicious persons of
the Army be so offensive and burdensome and so fill them with fears and
jealousies over those which lead them hood winked, that they will never be able
to bear it, neither indeed ought they to bear it, the which will be so
extremely dangerous to the unity of the body, that nothing but discord,
heart-burnings, repinings, distraction and mutiny may justly be expected
thereby: For persons who have their sight, and enjoy the light, cannot endure
to be led as if they were blind over hedge and ditch at the pleasure of their
leader, or to be made a nose of wax, or hurried hither or thither to this or
that; they know not whether or to what, as they must needs be if those their
meet instruments of mutual communication of the mind of the one and
proceedings of the other be taken away.

Lastly, All that I shall say to you of the body of the Army concerning this
new enterprise of recalling and suppressing the Adjutators is this, Let reason
go before every enterprise, and counsel before every action. Eccles. 37.16.
And so I shall refer my reasons and advice to be pondered before you proceed
to the action, and remain.

Your Cordial friend and servant Richard Overton.
Newgate August 13. 1647.

