OUR Ancient Testimony RENEWED. Concerning our Lord and Savior Jesus Christ,
THE HOLY SCRIPTURES, AND THE Resurrection, Occasioned at this time by several
Unjust Charges published against us, and our Truly Christian Profession, by G.
Keith, who has Unfairly and Untruly Misrepresented us.

Given forth by a Meeting of Public Friends, and Others, at Philadelphia in
Pensylvania.

Psalm. 41.2. Yea, mine own Familiar Friend in whom I trusted, and has eaten of
my Bread, has lifted up his Heel against me.

Obad. Ver. 10. Because of the Violence against thy Brother Jacob, shame shall
cover thy Face, etc.

LONDON, Printed and Sold by T. Soul, in White-Hart-Court in Gracious-Street.
1695.

To the READER.
THAT we faithfully and sincerely own and confess Christ Jesus our Lord and
Savior, according to the Divine Testimones of the Holy Writ, and according to
his Spiritual Manifestations upon our Souls; and it is for our Christian
Vindication herein, and not for Controversy; (for a Contest with Contentious
Persons is endless) this following Confession is writ and submitted to thy
perusal. Farewell.

Our Scripture Confession Concerning our Lord Jesus Christ.
I. Concerning his Divinity, and his Being from the Beginning.
WE believe, That in the Beginning was the Word, Jo. 1.1, 2, 3.
and that the Word was with God, and the Word was God, the same was in the
beginning with God; all things were made by him, and without him was not any
thing made that was made. Whose Goings forth have been from of old, from
Everlasting: Mic. 5.2. Ephesians. 3.9.
For God Created all things by Jesus Christ, who is the Image of the Invisible
God; the Firstborn of every Creature, the Brightness of the Father's Glory,
Col. 1.15.
and the express Image of his Substance. Heb. 1.3.


II. Concerning his Appearance in the Flesh.
WE believe, That the Word was made Flesh, Joh. 2.14.
for he took not on him the Nature of Angels, but took on him the Seed of
Abraham, Heb. 2.16, 17.
being in all things made like unto his Brethren; Touched with a feeling of our
Infirimities, Heb. 4.15.
and in all things tempted as we are, yet without Sin: He died for our Sins,
according to the Scriptures, and he was buried, and he rose again the Third
day, 1 Cor. 15.3, 4.
according to the Scripture.

III. Concerning the End and Use of that Appearance.
WE believe, That God sent his own Son in the likeness of sinful Flesh, Jo. 8.3.
and for Sin condemned Sin in the Flesh. For this purpose the Son of God was
manifested, that he might destroy the Works of the Devil. 1 Jo. 3, 8.
Being manifested to take away our Sins, for he gave himself for us, an
Offering and a Sacrifice to God for a sweet smelling savor; Heb. 9.12.
having obtained Eternal Redemption for us: And through the Eternal Spirit
offered up himself without spot to God, Heb. 9.14.
to purge our Consciences from dead Works to serve the Living God -- He was the
Lamb that was slain from the Foundation of the World; Rev. 13.8.
of whom the Fathers did all drink; for they drank of that Spiritual Rock that
followed them, 1 Cor. 10.4.
and that Rock was Christ, the same yesterday, to day, and for ever: Who
suffered for us, Heb. 13.8.
leaving us an Example, that we should follow his steps, 1 Pet. 2.21.
that the Life also of Jesus may be made manifest in our mortal Flesh! 2 Cor.
4.11.
that we may know him, and the power of his Resurrection, and the Fellowship of
his Resurrection, Phil. 3.10.
and the Fellowship of his Sufferings, being made Comformable to his Death.

IV. Concerning the Inward Manifestation of Christ.
WE believe, That God dwells with the Contrite and Humble in Spirit; Isa.
57.17.
for he said, he will dwell in them, and walk in them; 2 Cor. 6.16.
and that Christ stands at the Door and knocks, if any Man hear his Voice,
Rev. 3.20.
and open the Door, he will come into him, and sup with him. 2 Cor. 13.5.
And therefore ought we to examine our selves, and prove our own selves,
knowing how that Christ is in us, unless we be Reprobates; for this is the
Riches of the Glory of the Mystery which God would make known among (or rather
in) the Gentiles, Col. 1.27.
Christ within the hope of Glory.

V. Concerning his being our Mediator and Advocate.
WE believe, There is one God and one Mediator between God and Man, even the
Man Christ Jesus, i Tim. 2.5, 6.
who gave him self a Ransom for all, to be testified in due time -- My little
Children, these things write I unto you, that ye sin not; and if any Man sin*
we have an Advocate with the Father, Christ Jesus the Righteous -- And he is
the Propitiation for our Sins, 1 Jo. 2.1, 2.
and not for ours only, but for the Sins of the whole World. He sits on the
Right Hand of God the Father, Heb. 7.25.
and ever lives to make Intercession for us.

VI. Concerning his Unity with the Saints.
WE believe, That he that sanctifies, and they who are sanctified, Heb. 2.11.
are all of one; for by the exceeding great and precious Promises that are
given them, they are made pertakers of the Divine Nature; 2 Pet. 1.4.
because for this end prayed Christ, saying, That they all may be one, as thou
Father art in me, and I in thee, that they also may be one in us; and the Glory
which thou gave me I have given them, that they may be one, even as we are, I
in them, and thou in me, Jo. 17.21, 22, 23.
that they may be made perfect in one.

VII. Concerning his Coming to Judgment.
WE believe, That we must all appear before the Judgment Seat of Christ, 2 Cor.
5 10, 11.
that every one may receive the things done in his Body, according to that he
has done, whether it be good or bad -- Knowing therefore the Terror of the
Lord, we persuade Men.

VIII. Concerning the Resurrection.
WE Believe, There shall be a Resurrection of the Dead, both of the Just and
Unjust; they that have done good to the Resurrection of Life, and they that
have done evil to the Resurrection of Damnation; 1 Cor. 15.37, 38, 44, 50.
Flesh and Blood cannot Inherit the Kingdom of God, neither does Corruption
Inherit Incorruption. Nor is that Body sown that shall be, but God gives it a
Body as it has pleased him, and to every Seed his own Body: It is sown in
Dishonor, it is raised in Glory; it is sown in Corruption, it is raised in
Incorruption; it is sown in Weakness, it is raised in Power; it is sown a
Natural Body, it is raised a Spiritual Body.

IX. Concerning the Scriptures.
WE Believe, Romans 15.4.
That whatsoever things were written for our Learning; that we through Patience
and Comfort of the Scriptures might have hope -- Which are able to make wise
unto Salvation through Faith, which is in Christ Jesus: 2 Timothy 3.15, 16, 17.
All Scripture given forth by Inspiration of God (as we believe the Holy
Scriptures of the Old and New Testament are) is profitable for Doctrine, for
Reproof, for Correction, for Instruction in Righteousness, that the Man of God
may be perfect, thoroughly furnished unto all good Works: -- And knowing also,
that no Prophecy of the Scriptures is of any private Interpretation; 2 Pet.
1.20, 21.
for Prophecy came not in old time by the Will of Man, but Holy Men of God
spoke as they were moved by the Holy Ghost.

Our Solemn Confession, in the Holy Fear of God, concerning our Lord and
Savior Jesus Christ, according to the several Testimonies given forth by our
Faithful Brethren.
WE sincerely believe, own and confess no other Lord and Savior than our Lord
Jesus Christ, the Son of the Living God, to whom the Prophets and Apostles give
witness, and who in the fullness of Time took Flesh of the Seed of Abraham, and
of the Stock of David: We confess to his Miraculous Conception by the Power of
the Holy Spirit overshadowing of the Virgin Mary; and to his being Born of her
(according to the Flesh) and that he took upon him a Real Body, and that he was
a Real Man; and that in the Days of his Flesh he Preached Righteousness,
wrought Miracles, was Crucified, being put to Death by Wicked Hands; and that
he was Buried, and Rose again the Third Day according to the Scriptures; and
after he Rose he really appeared to many Brethren, and afterward he ascended
into Glory according to the Wisdom and Power of the Heavenly Father, and is
Glorified with the same Glory which he had with the Father, before the World
began, being ascended far above all Heavens, that he might fill all things,
whose Glory is Incomprehensible. And we also believe, That he is that one
Mediator between God and Man, viz. that Entire, Perfect, Heavenly, and most
Glorious Man, Christ Jesus, who ever lives, and endures in his Soul (or Spirit)
and Glorious Body. We further believe, That according to his Promise to his
Disciples before he left them, (viz.) That he would come unto them again, and
that he that was with them should be in them, and they in Christ, and Christ in
them, John 14.20. and that accordingly he came; and that he who appeared in
that Body which was prepared for him, was full of Grace and Truth, and received
the Spirit not by measure, appeared by a measure of his Grace and Spirit in his
Apostles and Disciples, and does since in all his Faithful Followers; And that
he is their King, Prophet, and High Priest, and Interceeds and Mediates in
their behalf, bringing in Everlasting Righteousness, Peace and Assurance for
ever into their Hearts and Consciences, to whom be everlasting Honor and
Dominion, Amen.

Concerning the Soul's Immortality, and the Resurrection.
WE believe our Souls are Immortal, and shall be preserved in their distinct
and proper Beings, and shall have Spiritual, Glorious Bodies, such as shall be
proper for them, as it shall please God to give them in the Resurrection, that
we may be capable of our particular Rewards, and different Degrees of Glory
after this Life in the World to come.

Griffith Owen, John Wilsford, George Maris, John Adams, Nicholas Walln,
William Biles, Robert Owen, John Lynam, John Humphreys, Caleb Pusey, Alex
Beardsley, Samuel Richardson, Ralph Jackson, Richard Gove, Richard Ormo,
William Southby, David Lloyd, Samuel Jennings, Thomas Duckett, Thomas Janney,
Arthur Cook, John Symcock, Robert Ewer, Samuel Carpenter, Phin. Pemberton,
John Bevan, Cadder Morgan, Richard Walter, Lewis David, Edward Jones, Reece
John William, Griffith John, John Roberts, Robert Jones, Robert David, William
Edward, Edward Rees, Thomas Jones, James Fox.


FINIS.

