THE Soldiers Fortune: A COMEDY. Acted by their Royal Highnesses SERVANTS AT
THE Duke's Theater.

Written by THOMAS OTWAY.

Quem recitas meus est O Fidentine libellus,
Sed male cum recitas incipit esse tuus.
LONDON, Printed for R. Bentley and M. Magnes, at the Post House in
Russel Street in Covent Garden, 1681.

THE DEDICATION.
Mr. Bentley,
I Have often (during this Plays being in the Press) been importuned for a
Preface; which you, I suppose, would have speak something in Vindication of the
Comedy: Now to please you, Mr. Bentley, I will as briefly as I can speak my
mind upon that occasion, which you may be pleased to accept of, both as a
Dedication to your self, and next as a Preface to the Book.

And I am not a little proud, that it has happened into my thoughts to be the
first who in these latter years, has made an Epistle Dedicatory to his
Stationer: It is a Complement as reasonable as it is Just. For, Mr. Bentley,
you pay honestly for the Copy; and an Epistle to you is a sort of an
Acquittance, and may be probably welcome; when to a Person of higher Rank and
Order, it looks like an Obligation for Praises, which he knows he does not
deserve, and therefore is very unwilling to part with ready Money for.

As to the Vindication of this Comedy, between Friends and Acquaintance, I
believe it is possible, that as much may be said in it is behalf, as heretofore
has been for a great many others: But of all the Apish qualities about me, I
have not that of being fond of my own Issue; nay, I must confess my self a very
unnatural Parent, for when it is once brought into the World, Even let the Brat
shift for it self, I say.

The Objections made against the merit of this poor Play, I must confess, are
very grievous.

First, Says a Lady, that shall be nameless, because the World may think
civilly of her; Fogh! oh Sherru! it is so filthy, so bawdy, no modest Woman
ought to be seen at it: Let me dye, it has made me sick: When the World lies,
Mr. Bentley, if that very Lady has not easily digested a much ranker morsel in
a little Alehouse toward Paddington, and never made a Face at it: But your
true Jilt is a Creature that can extract Bawdy out of the chastest sense, as
easily as a Spider can Poison out of a Rose: They know true Bawdy, let it be
never so much concealed, as perfectly as Falstaff did the true Prince by
instinct: They will separate the true Metal from the Allay let us temper it as
well as we can; some Women are the Touch-stones of filthiness. Though I have
heard a Lady (that has more modesty than any of those the Critics, and I am
sure more wit) say, She wondered at the impudence of any of her Sex, that would
pretend to understand the thing called Bawdy. So, Mr. Bentley, for ought I
perceive, my Play may be innocent yet, and the Lady mistaken in pretending to
the knowledge of a Mystery above he^; though, to speak honestly, she has had
besides her Wit a liberal Education; and (...) we may credit the World has not
buried her Talent neither.

This is, Mr. Bentley, all I can say in behalf of my Play: Wherefore I throw it
into Your Arms, make the best of it you can; praise, it to your Customers: Sell
ten thousand of them if possible, and then you will complete the wishes of

Your Friend and Servant, THO. OTWAY.

Dramatis Personae.
CApt. Beaugard. Mr. Betterton. Courtine. Mr. Smith. Sir Davy Dunce. Mr. Nokes.
Sir Jolly Iumble. Mr. Leigh. Fourbin, A Servant to Beaugard. Mr. Ievon.
Bloody-Bones. Mr. Richards. Vermin Servant to Sir Davy. A Boy. Lady Dunce. Mrs.
Barry. Sylvia Mrs. Price. Maid A Constable, and Watch.
SCENE, London.

PROLOGUE, by the Lord Falkland
FOrsaken Dames with less concern reflect
On their inconstant Hero's cold neglects,
Than we (provoked by this Ungrateful Age,)
Bear the hard Fate of our abandoned Stage;
With grief we see you ravished from our Arms,
And Curse the Feeble Virtue of our Charms:
Curse your false hearts, for none so false as they,
And curse the Eyes that stole those hearts away.
Remember Faithless Friends there was a time,
(But oh the sad remembrance of our Prime!)
When to our Arms with eager Ioys ye flew,
And we believed your treacherous Hearts as true
As e're was Nymph of ours to one of you:
But a more powerful Pope (...)
Saint enjoys ye now;
Fraught with sweet sins and absolutions too:
To her are all your pious Vows addressed,
She Is both your Loves, and your Religion's Test,
The fairest Prelate of her time and best.
We own her more deserving far then we,
A just excuse for your inconstancy.
Yet 'twas unkindly done to leave us so:
First to betray with Love, and then undo,
A horrid Crime you are all addicted to.
Too soon, alas, your Appetites are cloyed,
And Phillis rules no more, when once enjoyed:
But all rash Oaths of Love and constancy,
With the too short forgotten Pleasures dye,
Whilst she, poor Soul, robbed of her dearest ease,
Still drudges on, with vain desire to please;
And restless follows you from place to place,
For Tributes due to her Autumnal Face:
Deserted thus by such ungrateful men,
How can we hope you will e're return again?
Here Is no new Charm to tempt ye as before,
Wit now is our only Treasure left in store,
And that is a Coin will pass with you no more*
You who such dreadful Bullies would appear,
(True Bullyes! quiet when there is danger near)
Show your great Souls in damning Poets here.
A Catalogue of some Plays Printed for R. Bently and M. Magnes, (...)
Russel Street, near Covent Garden.
ALL the Tragdies and Comedies of Francis Be^mont and John Fle^^er, in one
Volume, containing fifty one Plays. Tartuss, or the French Puritan. Forced
Marriage, or the Jealous Bride. English Monsieur. All Mistaken, or the mad
Couple. Generous Enemies. Andromacha: A Tragedy. Calisto: or the Masque at
Court. Country-Wit, A Comedy. Destruction of Jerusalem, 2 parts. Miseries of
Civil War. Henry 6. with the Murder of the Duke of Gloucester. Nero, a Tragedy.
Gloriana, a Tragedy. Sophonisba, or Hanibals overthrow. Alexander the Great,
or the Rival Queens. Mithridates King of Pontus. Caesar Borgia, Son of Pope
Alexander 6. Oedipus, King of Thebes. Theodosius, or the Force of Love, The
Plain Dealer. The Town-Fop, or Sir Timothy Taudry. Abdellazar, or the Moors
Reveng. Madam Fickle: or the Witty False one. The Fond Husband, or the Plotting
Sisters. The Virtuous Wife, or good luck at last. The Fool turned Critic, a
Comedy. Squire Oldsap, or the Night Adventurers. The Mistaken Husband, a
Comedy. Mr. Limberham, or the Kind Keeper. Notes and Observations on the
Empress of Morocco. The Orphan, or Unhappy Marriage. The Soldiers Fortune.
Sertorius, A Tragedy.
Novels Printed this Year, 1680.
The Amors of the King of Tamaran. The Amors of the French King and Madam
^aniler. The Amors of Madam and the Count de Guich. The Pilgrim: A Satirical
Novel on the horrible Villainies of those persons. The Secret History of the
Earl of Essex and Q. Elizabeth.
THE Soldiers Fortune.
ACT. I. SCENE I.
Enter Beaugard, Courtine, and Fourbin. Beau. APox of Fortune! Thou art always
teizing me about Fortune: Thou risest in a Morning with ill luck in thy Mouth;
Nay, never eatest a Dinner, but thou sighest two hours after it, with thinking
where to get the next. Fortune be damned, since the worlds so wide.


Cour. As wide as it is; it is so thro^g'd, and crammed with Knaves and Fools,
that an honest man can hardly get a living in it.


Beau. Do, rail, Courtine, do, it may get thee employment.


Cour. At you I ought to rail* 'twas your fault we left our Employments abroad
to come home, and be Loyal, and now we as Loyally starve for it.


Beau. Did not thy Ancestors do it before thee, man? I tell thee, Loyalty and
Starving are all one: The old Cavaliers got such a trick of it in the Kings
Exile, that their posterity could never thrive since.


Cour. It Is a fine Equipage I am like to be reduced to: I shall be e're long as
greasy as an Al^ati^ Bully; this a flopping Hat, pined up on one side, with a
sandy weather-beaten Perruque, dirty Linned, and to complete the Figure, a long
s^^ndalous Iron Sword jarring at my Heels, like a --


Beau. Snarling thou meanest like it is Master.


Cour. My Companion's the worthy Knight of the most Noble Order of the Post:
Your Peripatetrick Philosophers of the Temple walks, Rogues in Rags, and yet
not honest: Villains that undervalue Damnation, will forswear themselves for a
Dinner, and hang their Fathers For half a Crown.


Beau. I am ashamed to hear a Soldier talk of starving.


Cour. Why, what shall I do? I cannot steal! --


Beau. Though thou can not steal, thou have other vices enough for any
Industrious young fellow to live comfortably upon.


Cour. What would thou have me turn Rascal, and run cheating up and down the
Town for a livelihood? I would no more keep a Blockhead company, and endure his
Nauseous nonsense in hopes to get him, then I would be a druge to an old
Woman, with Rheumatick Eyes, hollow Teeth, and stinking breath for a pensioa:
Of all Rogues I would not be a Foolmonger.


Beau. How well this niceness becomes thee! I Would fain see thee even turn Parson
in a pet, o'purpose to rail at all those vices which I know thou naturally art
fond of: Why surely an Old Ladies pension need not be so despicable i^ the eyes
of a disbanded Officer, as times go Friend.


Cour. I am glad, Beaugard you think so.


Beau. Why thou shall think so too man; be ruled by me, and I Will bring thee
into good company, Families, Courtine, Families, and such ^amilies, where
formality's a scandel and pleasure is the bus'^ess, where the Women are all
Wanton, and the Men all Witty, you Rogue.


Cour. What, some of your Worships Wapping acq^^intance that you made last time
you came over for recruits, and Spirited away your Landladies Daughter, a
Volunteering with you into France.


Beau. I Will bring thee, (...), where Cuckoldom^ in credit, and lewdness
laudable, where thou shall wallow in pleasures and preferments, r^v^l all day,
and every Night lie in the Arms of melting beauty, sweet as Roses, and as
Springs refreshing.


Cour. (...) thou would tell me where new Levies are to be raised; a Pox of
Who^^e^ when a man has not Money to mak'e^^ Comfortable.


Beau. That shall shower upon us in abundance, and for instance, know to thy
eve^lasting amazement all this dropped ou^ of the Clouds so day.


Cour. Hah! Gold by this light! --


Fourb Out of the Clouds! --


Beau. Ay ^old! does it not smell of the sweet hand than (...), smell -- smell
you dog --


[ To Fourbin. [ Fourbin smells to the handful of gold, and gathers up some
pi^ces in hi^ Mouth. Four. Truly, Sir, of Heavenly sweetness: and (...)


Cour. Dear, (...) if thou have* any good Nature (...) thee; if thou would
not have me hang my self before my time, tell me where the Devil (...) that
helped thee to this, that I may go make a bargain with him presently: Speak,
speak, or I am a lost Man.


Beau. Why thou must know this Devil which I have given my Soul too already,
and must, I suppose have my Body very speedily lives I know not where, and may
for ought I know be a real Devil; but if it be it is the best natured Devil
under Beelzebubs dominion that I Will swear too.


Cour. But how came the gold then?


Beau. To deal freely with my Friend, I am lately happened into the acqaintance
of a very Reverend pimp, as fine a discreet sober gray bearded old Gentleman as
one would wish; as good a natured public spirited Person as the Nation holds;
one that is never so happy as when he is bringing good people together, and
promoting civil understanding betwixt the sexes: Nay, rather then want
employment, he will go from one end of the Town to the other to procure my Lords
little Dog to be civil to my Ladies little languishing Bitch.


Cour. A very worthy Member of the Commonwealth!


Beau. This noble Person one day -- but Fourbin can give you a more particular
account of the matter; sweet Sir, if you please tell us the story of the first
encounter betwixt you and Sir Jolly Iumble, you must know that is his Title.


Fourb. Sir, it shall be done -- walking one day upon the Piazza about three of
the Clock in the after Noon, to get me a Stomach to my din^er, I chance to
encounter a Person of goodly presence, and worthy appearance, his Beard and
Hair white, grave and comely, his countenance ruddy Plump smooth and cheerful;
who perceiving me also equipt as I am with a mien and Air which might well
inform him, I was a Person of no inconsiderable quality, came very respectfully
up to me, and, after the usual ceremonies between Persons of parts and breeding
had past, very humbly enquired of me what is it a Clock -- I presently
understand by the question, that he was a man of parts and business, told him,
I did presume it was at most but nicely turned of three --


Beau. Very Court-like, civil, quaint, and new I think.


Fourb. The freedom of comerce increasing after some little inconsiderable
questions pour po^^er^le temps and so he was pleased to offer me the courtesle
of a glass of Wine: I told him I very seldom drank, but if he so pleased, I
would do my self the honor to present him with a dish of meat at an eating
House hard by, where I had an interest.


Cour. Very well: I think this Squire of thine, Beauggard, is as accomplished a
Person as any of the employment I ever saw.


Beaug. Let the Rogue go on.


Four. In short we agreed and went together as soon as we entered the Room* I am
your most humble Servant, Sir, says he -- I am the meanest of your Vassals,
Sir, said I -- I am very happy in lighting into the acqaintance of so worthy a
Gentleman as you appear to be, Sir, said he again -- worthy, Sir Jolly, then
came I upon him again of the other side (for you must know by that time I had
gropt out his Title) I kiss your hands from the bottom of my heart, which I
shall be always ready to lay at your Feet.


Cour. Well, Fourbin, and what replied the Knight then?


Four. Nothing, he had nothing to say, his sense was transported with
admiration of my parts, so we sat down, and after some pause, he desired to
know by what title he was to distinguish the person that had so highly honored
him --


Beau. That is as much as to say* Sir, whose Rascal you were.


Fourb. Sir, you may make as hold with your poor Slave as you please -- I told
him those that knew me well were pleased to call me the Chevalier Fourbin, that
I was a Cadel of the Ancient Family of the Fourbinois and that I had had the
honor of serving the great Monarch of France in his Wars in Flanders, where I
contracted great Familiarity, and Intimacy with a gallant Officer of the
English, Troops in that service one Captain Beaugard.


Beau. Oh, Sir, you did me too much honor, what a true bred Rogue's this! --


Cour. Well but the Money, Fourbin, the Money.


Four. Beaugard, (...) Beaugard, says he ^ -- ay it must be so, -- a black man,
is he not? -- (...), says I, blackish -- a dark brown -- full Faced -- yes, --
a sly subtle observing eye? -- the same -- a strong built well made man? --
right -- a devellish fellow for a Wench, a devilish fellow for a Wench, I
warrant him; a thundering Rogue upon occasion, Beaugard! a Thundering fellow for
a Wench, I must be acquained with him.


Cour. But to the money, the money man, that is the thing I would be acquainted
withal.


Beau. This civil Gentleman of the Chevaliers acquaintance comes yesterday
morning to my Lodging, and seeing my Picture in Minature upon the Toylet, told
me with the greatest ecstasy in the World, that was the thing he came to me
about: He told me there was a Lady of his acquaintance had some favorable
thoughts of me and I gad, says he, she is a hummer, such a bona Roba ah-h-h. So
without more ado begs me to lend it him till dinner (for we concluded to eat
together) so away he scuttled with as great joy as if he had found the
Philosophers stone.


Cour. Very well.


Beau. At Lockets we met again: where after a thousand grimaces to show how
much he was pleased, instead of my Picture, presents me with the contents
aforesaid; and told me the Lady desired me to accept of 'em for the Picture
which she was much transported withal, as well as with the Original.


Cour. Hah! --


Beau. Now, whereabouts this taking quality lies in me, the Devil take me Ned
if I know: But the Fates Ned, the Fates!


Cour. A Curse on the Fates! Of all Strumpets Fortunes the basest, 'twas
Fortune made me a Soldier, a Rogue in Red, the gri^vance of the Nation,
Fortune made the peace just when we were upon the brink of a War; then Fortune
disbanded us, and lost us two Months pay: Fortune gave us Debentures instead of
ready Money, and by very good Fortune I sold mine, and lost heartily by it, in
hopes the grinding ill natured dog that bought it will never get a sh^lling
for it --


Beaug. Leave off thy railing for shame, it looks like a Cur that barks for
want of bones; come times may mend, and an honest Soldier be in fashion again
--


Cour. These greasy fat unwieldy wheeting Rogues that live at home and brood
over their bags, when a fit of fear's upon 'em then if one of us pass but by,
all the Family is ready at the door to cry, Heaven's bless you, Sir, the Lord
go along with you.


Beau. Ah good men, what pity it is such proper Gentlemen should ever be out of
Employment.


Cour. But when the business is over, then every Parish Bawd that goes but to a
Conventicle twice a Week, and pays but scot and lot to the Parish, shall roar
out fogh, ye Lowsy Red-coat rake hells* hout ye Caterpillars, ye Locusts of the
Nation, you are the Dogs that would enslave us all, plunder our Shops, and
ravish our Daughters, ye Scoundrels.


Beau. I must confess ravishing ought to be regulated, it would destroy
commerce, and many a good Sober Matron about this Town might loose the selling
of her Daughters Maidenhead, which were a great grieyance to the people, and a
particular Branch of property lost, Fourbin.


Four. Your Worships pleasure.


Beau. Run like a Rogue as you are, and try to find Sir Jolly, and desire him
to meet me at the blew Posts in the Hay-market about 12, we'll Dine together; I
must inquire farther into yesterdays adventure, in the mean time, Ned, here is
half the prize to be doing withal, old friends must preserve Correspondence,
we have shared good Fortune together and had shall never part us.


Cour. Well, thou will certainly die in a Ditch for this, have thou no more
grace then, to be a true Friend, nay, to part with thy money to thy Friend; I
grant you a Gentleman may swear and lie for his Friend, pimp for his Friend,
hang for his Friend, and so forth: but to part with ready money is the devil.


Beau. Stand aside either I am mistaken, or yonder is Sir Jolly coming; now
Courtine, will I show thee the Flower of Knighthood* Ah, Sir Jolly.


Enter Sir Jolly. Sir Iol. My Hero! my darling! my Ganimede! how do thou?
Strong! wanton! lusty! rampant! hah, ah, ah! She Is thine Boy* odd she is thine,
plump, soft, smooth, wanton! hah, ah, ah! Ah Rogue, ah Rogue! here is
shouldiers, here is shape! there is a Foot and Leg, here is a Leg, here is a Leg --
Quaa-a-a-a.


[Squeaks like a Cat, and tickles Beaugards Legs. Cour. What an old Goat's this.


Sir Iol. Child, Child, Child, who is that? A friend of thine! a friend o'thine?
A pretty fellow, odd a very pretty fellow, and a strong dog I Will warrant him,
how do do dear heart? prithee let me kiss thee, I Will swear and vow I will
kiss thee, ha, ha, he, he, he, he, a Toad, A Toad, ah Toa-a-a-ad --


Cour. Sir, I am your humble Servant.


Beau. But the Lady, Sir Jolly, the Lady, how does the Lady, what says the
Lady, Sir Jolly?


Sir Iol. What says the Lady! why she says -- she says -- odd she has a
delicate Lip, such a Lip, so red, so hard, so plump, so blub* I fancy I am
eating Cherries every time I think on it -- and for her Neck and Breasts and her
-- odds life; I Will say no more, not a word more, but I know, I know --


Beau. I am sorry for that with all my Heart; do you know, say you, Sir, and
would you put off your mubled orts, your offall upon me --


Sir Iol. Hush, hush, hush! have a care, as I live and breathe, not I; alack
and well a day I am a poor old fellow decayed and done: Alls gone with me
Gentlemen, but my good Nature, odd I love to know how matters go, though now
and then to see a pretty Wench, and a young Fellow Towze and Rowze and Frouze
and Mowze; odd I love a young fellow dearly, faith dearly --


Cour. This is the most extraordinary rogue, I ever met withal.


Beau. But Sir Jolly, in the first place, you must know, I have sworn never to
marry.


Sir Iol. I would not have thee man, I am a Bachelour my self, and been a whore
Master all my life, besides she is married already man, her Husband's an old
greasy, untoward, ill natured, slovenly, Tobacco taking Cuckold, but plaguey
^ealous.


Beau. Already a Cuckold, Sir Jolly.


Sir Iol. No that shall be my Boy, thou shall make him one, and I Will pimp for
thee dear heart, and shall not I hold the door, shall not I peep hah, shall not I you
devil, you little dog shall not I? --


Beau. What is it, I Would not grant to oblige my Patron.


Sir Iol. And then do hear, I have a lodging for thee in my own house; do
hear old Soul, in my own house: She lives the very next door man, there is but a
Wall to part her Chamber and thine, and then for a peep hole, odds fish I have
a peep hole for thee; sbud I Will show thee, I Will show thee --


Beau. But when, Sir Jolly, I am in haste, impatient.


Sir Iol. Why this very night man; poor Rogue's in haste, poor Rogue; but hear
you --


Cour. The matter?


Sir Iol. Shall Not we dine together?


Beau. With all my heart.


Sir Iol. The Maw begins to empty, get you before and bespeak Dinner at the
blew posts; while I stay behind and gather up a dish of Whores for a desert.


Cour. Be sure that they be lewd drunken stripping Whores, Sir Jolly, that
will not be affectedly squeamish and troublesome.


Sir Iol. I warrant you.


Cour. I love a well disciplined Whore, that shows all the tricks of her
profession with a wink; like an old Soldier that understands all his exercise
by beat of Drum.


Sir Iol. A Thief, say thou so! I must be better acquainted with that
fellow; he has a notable Nose; a hard brawny Carle -- true and trusty, and
mettle I Will warrant him.


Beau. Well, Sir Jolly, you will not fail us? --


Sir Iol. Fail ye! am I a Knight? hark ye Boys. I Will muster this evening, such a
Regiment of Rampant. Roaring, Roysterous Whores, that shall make more noise
than if all the Cats in the Hay market were in Conjunction: Whores ye Rogues,
that shall swear with you, drink with you, talk Bawdy with you, fight with you,
scratch with you, lie with you, and go to the Devil with you, shall not we be very
merry, hah! --


Cour. As merry as Wine, Women and Wickedness can make us.


Sir Iol. Odd that is well said again, very well said, as merry as Wine, Women
and wickedness can make us: I love a fellow that is very wicked dearly;
methinks there is a spirit in him, there is a sort of a tantara, rara, tantara,
ra ra, ah ah h h well, and will not ye, when the Women come, will not ye, and shall I
not see a little sport amongst you; well get ye gone; ah Rogues, ah Rogues, da
da, I Will be with you, da da --


[ Exeun^ Beaugard, and Courtine. Enter several Whores, and three (...). 1 Bull.
In the name of Satan what Whores are those in their Copper (...), yonder?


1 Who. Well I Will swear, Madam, it is the finest Evening: I love thee, Mall,
mightily.


2 Bull. Let Us huzza the Bulkers.


2. Whor. Really, and so do I, because there is always good company, and one
meets with such Civilitys from every body.


3. Bull. Damned Whores, hout ye filthies.


3. Whor. Ay, and then I love extremely to show my self here, when I am very
fine, to vex those poor Devils that call themselves Virtues, and are very
scandalous and Crapish, I Will swear; O Crimine, who is yonder! Sir Jolly Iumble,
I vow.


1 Bull. Fogh! Let Us leave the nasty Sowes to Fools, and Diseases.


1 Where* Oh Papa, Papa! where have you been these two days, Papa?


2 Who. You are a precious Father indeed, to take no more care of your
Children: We might be dead for all you, you naughty Dady, you.


Sir Iol. Dead, my poor Fubses! odd I had rather all the Relations I have were
dead, a dad I had: Get you gone you little Devils Bubbies; oh Law there is
Bubbies! odd I Will bite 'em, odd I will.


1 Whor. Nay, fie, Papa; I swear you will make me angry, except you carry us, and
treat us to Night, you have promised me a treat this Week, wont you Papa.


2 Whor. Ay, wont you Dad.


Sir Iol. Odds so, odds so, well remembered! get you go^, don't stay talking;
get you gone, yonder is, a great Lord, the Lord Beaugard, and his Couzin the
Baron, the Count, the Marquis, the Lord knows what, Monsieur Courtine newly
come to Town, odds so.


3 Whor. Oh Law, where Dady where? Oh dear, a Lord.


I Whor. Well, you are the Purest Papa; but when be dey mun, Papa --


Sir Jolly. I will not tell you, you Jipsies, So I wont -- except you tickle me --
'sbud they are brave fellows all Tall, and not a bit small, odd one of 'em has
a devilish deal of Money.


1 Whor. Oh dear, but which is he, Papa.


2. Whor. Shall Not I be in Love with him, Dady.


Sir Iol. What no body tickle me! no body tickle me? -- not yet, tickle me a
little Mally -- tickle me a little Ienny -- do He he he he he he -- (They
tickle him. No more, oh dear, oh dear! poor Rogues, so so, no more, nay, if you
do, if you do, odd I Will I Will I Will --


3 Wh^ What, what will you do trow? --


Sir Iol. Come along with me, come along with me, sneak after me at a distance,
that no body take notice, Swinging fellows Mally -- Swinging fellows Ienny, a
Devilish deal of Money, get you before me then, you little d^ppappers, ye
Wasps, ye wagtails, get youg on, I say, swinging fellows --


(Ex^ut Sir Jolly, with the Whores. Enter Lady Dunce and Sylvia. Lady D. Dye a
Maid, Sylvia! sie for shame! what a scandalous resolution's that; five thousand
Pounds to your Portion and leave it all to Hospitals, for the innocent
recreation hereafter of leading Apes in Hell, fie for shame!


Sylvia. Indeed such another charming Animal as your Consort, Sir David, might
do much with me; it is an unspeakable blessing to lie all night by a Horse-load
of diseases; a beastly, unsayory, old, groaning, grunting, wheazing Wretch,
that smells of the Grave he is going to already, from such a curse and
Hair-Cloath next my skin good Heaven deliver me!


Lady D. Thou mistakest the use of a Husband, Silvia. They are not meant for
Bedfellows, heretofore indeed 'twas a fulsome fashion, to ly o'nights with a
Husband; but the worlds improved and Customs altered.


Sylv. Pray instruct then what the use of a Husband is.


Lady D. Instead of a Gentleman Usher for Ceremonies sake to be in waiting on
set days, and particular occasions; but the Friend Cozen is the Jewel
unvaluable.


Sylv. But, Sir David, Madam will be difficult to be so Governed; I am
mistaken, if his Nature is not too Jealous to be blinded.


Lady Du. So much the better, of all, the jealous Fool is easiest to be
deceived: For observe, where there is jealousy there is always fondness; which
if a Woman, as she ought to do, will make the right use of the Husband's fears
shall not so awake him on one side as his dotage shall blind him on the other.


Sylv. Is your Piece of mortality such a do^eing Doodle, is he so very fond of
you.


Lady D. No, but he has the vanity to think that I am very fond of him, and if
he be jealous, it is not so much for fear I do abuse, as that in time I may, and
therefore imposes this consinement on me though he has other divertisments that
take him off from my enjoyment; which make him so loathsome no Woman but must
hate him.


Sylv. His private divertisements I am a stranger to.


Lady D. Then for his Person it is incomparably odious, he has such-a breath,
one kiss of him were enough to cure the fits of the Mother, it is worse then Asa
foetida.


Sylv. Oh hideous!


Lady D. Every thing that is nasty he affects, clean Linen he says is
unwholesome, and to make him more charming he is continually eating of Garlike
and chewing Tob^cco.


Silv. Fogh! this is love! this is the blessing of Matrimony.


Lady Du. Rail not so unreasonably against love, Silvia; As I have dealt freely
and acknowledged to thee the passion I have for Beaugard; so methinks, Silvia
need not conceal her good thoughts of her Friend; do not I know Cour^^ne sticks
in your stomach?


Sylv. If he does, I Will assure you he shall never get to my heart, but can you
have the Conscience to love another man now you are married? what do you think
will become of you.?


Lady D. I ^ell thee, Sylvia, I never was married to that Engine we have been
talking of, my parents indeed made me say something to him after a Priest once,
but my heart went not along with my tongue, I minded not what it was for my
thoughts, Sylvia, for these seve^ years have been much better employed --
Beaugard! Ah curse on the day that first sent him into France!


Sylv. Why so I beseech you?


Lady D. Had he stayed here, I had not been sacrificed to the Arms of this
monument of Man, for the bed of death could not be more cold, then his has
been, he would have delivered me from the Monster, for even then I loved him,
and was apt to think my kindness not neglected.


Sylv. I find indeed your Ladyship had good thoughts of him.


Lady D. Surely it is impossible to think too well of him, for he has wit enough
to call his good nature in question, and yet good nature enough to make his wit
be suspected.


Sylv. But how do you hope ever to get sight of him, Sir David's watchfulness
is invincible. I dare swear he would smell out a Rival if he were in the house
only by natural instinct, as some that always sweat when a Cat's in the Room,
then again, Beaugard's a Soldiers and that is a thing the old Gentleman you
know loves dearly.


Lady D. There lies the greatest comfort of my uneasy life he is one of those
Fools forsooth, that are led by the Nose by Knaves to rail against the King and
the Government, and is mightly fond of being thought of a party, I have had
hopes this twelve month to have heard of his being in the Gate House for
Treason.


Sylv. But I find only your self the Prisoner all this while.


Lady D. At present indeed I am so, but Fortune I hope will smile, would thou
but be my Friend, Sylvia.


Sylv. In any mischievous design withal my heart.


Lady D. The conclusion, Madam, may turn to your satisfaction, but you have no
thoughts of Courtine.


Sylv. Not I, I Will assure you Cozen.


Lady D. You don't think him well shaped, straight and proportionable.


Sylv. Considering he eats but once a Week, the man is well enough.


Lady D. And then wears his Clothes you know ^ilthily and like a horrid Sloven.


Sylv. Filthily enough of all Conscience, with a thread bare Red-Coat, which his
Tailor ^^ns him for to this day, over which a great broad greasy bu^^ Belt,
enough to turn any ones Stomach but a disbanded Soldier; a Perruquety'd up in
a knot to excuse its want of combing, and then because he has been a Man a
Arms, he must wear two Tussles of a Beard forsooth, to lodge a dunghill of
snuff upon, to keep his Nose in good humor.


Lady D. Nay, now I am suro that thou love him.


Sylv. So far from it, that I protest eternally against the whole sex.


Lady D. That time will best demonstrate, in the mean while to our business.


Sylv. As how, Madam.


Lady* D. To night must I see Beaugard, they are this minute at Dinner in the
hay-market; now to make my evil genious, that haunts me every where, my thing
called a Husband, himself to assist his poor Wife, at a dead lift, I think
would not be unpleasant.


Sylv. But 'twill be impossible


Lady D. I am apt to be persuaded rather very easy, you know our good and
friendly Neighbor, Sir Jolly.


Sylv. Out on him beast, he is always talking silthily to a body, If he sits but
at the table with one, he will be making nasty figures in the Napkins.


Lady D. He and my sweet yoke fellow are the most intimate friends in the
world, so that partly out of neighbourly kindness, as well as the great delight
he takes to be meddling in matters of this nature, with a great deal of pains
and industry procured me Beaugards picture, and given him to understand how
well a Friend of his in Petticoats, called my self, wishes him.


Sylv. But what is all this to the making the Husband instrumental, for I must
confess of all creatures a Husbands the thing that is odious to me.


Lady D. That must be done this night: I Will in^stantly to my chamber take my
bed in a pet and send for Sir David.


Sylv. But which way then must the Lover come?


Lady D. Nay, I Will betray Beaugard to him, show him the picture he sent me, and
beg of him as he tenders his own honor, and my quiet, to take some course to
secure me from the scandalous solicitations of that innocent Fellow.


Sylv. And so make him the property, the go-between, to bring the affair to an
issue the more decently.


Lady D. Right, Sylvia, it is the best office a Husband can do a Wife; I mean an
old husband; bless us to be yoked in Wedlock with a paralitick, coughing,
decrepid Dotrell, to be a dry Nurse all ones life time to an old Child of sixty
five, to lie by the Image of Death a whole night, a dull immovable, that has
no sense of life, but through it is pains, the Pigeons as happy that is laid to
a sick man's feet, when the world has given him over; for my part this shall
henceforth be my prayer,

Cursed be the memory; nay, double cursed,
Of her that wedded Age for interest first;
Though worn with years, with fruitless wishes full,
It Is all day troublesome, and all night dull,
Who wed with Fools indeed lead happy lives,
Fools are the fittest finest things for Wives;
Yet old men Profit bring as Fools bring ease,
And both make Youth and Wit much better please.

ACT. II
Enter Sir Jolly, Beaugard, Courtine, and ^ourbin. Court. SIR Jolly is the
glory of the Age.


Sir Iol. Nay now, Sir, you honor me too far.


Beang. He Is the delight of the young, and wonder of the old.


Sir Iol. I swear Gentlemen you make me blush.


Gour. He deserves a Statue in Gold, at the charge of the Kingdom.


Sir Iol. Out upon it, fie for shame: I protest I Will leave your comcompany if
you talk so; but faith they were pure Whores, daintily dutiful Strumpets, ha!
udds-bud, they would -- have stripped for the other Bottle.


Beau. Truly, Sir Jolly, you are a man of very extraordinary discipline, I
never saw Whores under better command in my life.


Sir Ioll. Pish, that is nothing man, nothing, I can send for forty better when
I please, Doxies that will skip, strip, leap, trip, and do any thing in the
world, any thing old Soul.


Gour. Dear, dear Sir Jolly, where and when?


Sir Iol. Odd as simply as I stand here her Father was a Knight.


Beau. Indeed Sir Jolly, a Knight say you?


Sir Iol. Ay, but a little decayed, I Will assure you she is a very good
Gentlewoman born.


Cour. Ay, and a very good Gentlewoman bred too.


Sir Iol. Ay, and so she is.


Beau. But Sir Jolly, how goes my business forward, when shall I have a view of
the quarry I am to fly at?


Sir Iol. Alas a day, not so hasty, soft and fair I beseech you, ah my little
Son of thunder, if thou had her in thy arms now between a pair of sheets, and
I under the Bed to see fair play Boy, gemini! what would become of me? What
would become of me? there would be doings, oh Lawd, I under the bed!


Beau. Or behind the hangings, Sir Jolly, would not that do as well.


Sir Iol. Ah no, under the bed against the world, and then it would be very
dark, hah!


Beau. Dark to choose.


Sir Iol. No, but a little light would do well, a small glimmering Lamp, just
enough for me to steel a peep by; oh lamentable! oh lamentable, I will not speak a
word more, there would be a trick! oh rare you friend, oh rare! odds so not a
word more, odds so yonder comes the Monster that must be the Cuckold Elect,
step step aside and observe him, if I should be seen in your company, 'twoud
spoil all.


Beau. For my part I Will stand the meeting of him, one way to promote a good
understanding with a Wife, is first to get acquainted with her Husband.


Enter Sir David. Sir Dav. Well of all blessings, a discreet Wife is the
greatest that can light upon a man of years: had I been married to any thing
but an^ Angel now, what a Beast had I been by this time, well I am the happiest
old Fool! it is an horrid Age that we live in, so that an honest man can keep
nothing to himself; if you have a good estate, every covetous Rogue'ls longing
for (...) (truly I love a good estate dearly my self;) if you have a handsome
Wife, every smooth^ac'd Coxcomb will be combing and cocking at her, flesh-^lies
are not so troublesome to the shambles, as those sort of Insects are to the
Boxes in the Playhouse: But virtue is a great blessing, an unvaluable
treasure, to tell me her self that a Villain had tempted her, and give me the
very Picture, the enchantment that he sent to bewitch her, it strikes me dumb
with admiration; here is the Villain in effigy. [ Pulls out the Picture] Odd a
very handsome fellow, a dangerous Rogue I Will warrant him, such fellows as these
now should be fettered like unruly Colts, that they might not leap into other
men's pastures; here is a Nose now, I could find in my heart to cut it off,
damned Dog, to dare to presume to make a Cuckold of a Knight! bless us what
will this world come to! well poor Sir David down, down, on thy knees and thank
thy stars for this deliverance.


Beau. 'Sdeath what is that I see? Sure it is the very Picture which I sent by
Sir Jolly, if so, by this light, I am damnably Jilted.


Sir Da. But now if. --


Beau. Surely he does not see us yet.


Four. See you, Sir, why he has but one eye, and we are on his blind side; I Will
dumb found him.


[Strikes him on the shoulder. Sir Da. Who the Devils this? Sir, Sir, Sir, who
are you Sir?


Beau. Ay, ay, it is the same, now a pox of all amorous adventures, 'sdeath I Will
go beat the impertinent pimp that drew me into this fooling.


Sir Da. Sir, methinks you are very curious.


Beau. Sir, perhaps I have an extraordinary reason to be so.


Sir Da. And perhaps, Sir, I care not for you, nor your Reasons neither.


Beau. Sir, if you are at leisure, I would beg the Honor to speak with you.


Sir Da. With me, Sir? What Is your business with me?


Beau. I would not willingly be troublesome; though it may be I am so at this
time.


Sir Da. It may be so too, Sir.


Beau. But to be known to so worthy a Person as you are, would be so great an
honor, so extraordinary a happiness, that I could not avoid taking this
opportunity of tend'ring you my Service.


Sir Da. Smooth Rogue, who the Devil is this fellow? (Aside.) But Sir, you were
pleased to nominate business Sir, I desire with what speed you can to know your
business, Sir, that I may go about my business.


Beau. Sir, if I might with good manners, I should be glad to inform my self,
whose picture that is which you have in your hand, methinks it is very fine
painting.


Sir Da. Picture, Friend, picture! Sir, it is the resemblance of a very impudent
fellow, they call him Captain Beaugard forsooth, but he is in short a rakehell,
a poor louzy beggarly disbanded devil, do you know him friend? --


Beau. I think I have heard of such a vagabond, the truth on it is he is a very
impudent fellow.


Sir Da. Ay, a damned Rogue.


Beau. Oh a notorious scoundrel!


Sir Da. I expect to hear he is hanged by next Sessions.


Beau. The truth on it is, he has deserved it long ago; but did you ever see
him, Sir David.


Sir Da. Sir -- does he know me?


[Aside. Beau. Because I fancy that Mignature is very like him, pray Sir,
whence had it you? --


[Compares the Picture with Beaugard's Face. Sir Da. Had it, Friend? had it!
whence had it I -- bless us* what have I done now this the very Traitor
himself, if he should be desperate now, and put his sword in my guts! --
s^itting my nose will be as bad as that, I have but one eye left neither, and
may be -- oh but this is the Kings Court, odd tha's well remembered he dares
not but be ^ivil here; I Will try to out-huff him, whence had it you?


Beau. Ay, Sir, whence had it you? that is English in my Country, Sir.


Sir Da. Go, Sir, you are a Rascal.


Beau. How!


Sir Da. Sir, I say, you are a Rascal, a very impudent Rascal, nay, I Will prove
you to be a Rascal, if you go to that --


Beau. Sir, I am a Gentleman and a Soldier.


Sir Da. So much the worse, Soldiers have been Cuckold makers from the
beginning; Sir, I care not what you are; for ought I know you may be a -- come
Sir, did I never see you? answer me to that did I never see you? for ought I
know you may be a Jesuit; there were more in the last army beside you.


Beau. Of your acquaintance, and be hanged!


Sir Da. Yes to my knowledge, there were several at Hounslow Heath disguised in
dirtie Petticoats, and cried Brandy, I knew a Sergeant of foot that was
familier with one of them all night in a Ditch, and fancied him a woman, but
the Devil is powerful.


Beau. In short, you worthy Villain of Worship, that picture is mine, and I
must have it, or I shall take an opp^rtunity to kick your Worship most
inhumanly.


Sir Da. Kick Sir,


Beau. Ay, Sir, kick, it is a recreation I can show you.


Sir Da. Sir, I am a free born Subject of England, and there are Laws, look
you, there are Laws; so I say you are a Rascal again, and now how will you help
your self? poor Fool!


Beau. Hark you Friend, have not you a Wife?


Sir Da. I have a Lady, Sir -- oh and she is mightily taken with this Picture of
yours, she was so mightily proud of it, she could not forbear showing it me,
and telling too who 'twas sent it her.


Beau. And has she bin long a Gilt? has she practiced the Trade for any time?


Sir Da. Trade! humph, what Trade! what Trade? Friend?


Beau. Why the Trade of Whore and no Wh^re, Catterwauling in jest, putting out
Christian Colors, when she is a Turk under Deck: A curse upon all honest women
in the flesh, that are Whores in the Spirit.


Sir Da. Poor Divil, how he rails, ha, ha, ha, look you sweet Soul, as I told
you before, there are laws, there are laws, but those are things not worthy
your consideration: Beautie's your business; but dear vagabond trouble thy self
no further about my Spouse, let my Doxie rest in peace, she is meat for thy
Master, old boy; I have my belly full of her every Night.


Beau. Sir, I wish all your noble Family hanged from the bottom of my heart.


Sir Da. Moreover Captain Swash I must tell you my Wife is an honest Woman, of
a virtuous disposition, one that I have loved from her ^nfancy, and she
deserves it by her faithful dealing in this affair, for that she has discovered
loyally to me the treacherous designs laid against her Chastity, and my Honor.


Beau. By this light the Beast weeps.


Sir Da. Truly I cannot but weep for Joy; to think how happy I am in a sincere
faithful and loving Yoke Fellow, she charged me too to tell you into the
bargain, that she is sufficiently satisfied of the most secret wishes of your
heart.


Beau. I am glad on it.


Sir Da. And that it is her desire, that you would trouble your self no more
about the matter.


Beau. With all my heart.


Sir Da. But henceforward behave your self with such discretion as becomes a
Gentleman.


Beau. Oh to be sure most exactly!


Sir Da. And let her alone to make the best use of those innocent Freedoms I
allow her without putting her reputation in hazard.


Beau. As how I beseech you --


Sir Da. By your impertinent and unseasonable address.


Beau. And this news you bring me by a particular commission from your sweet
Lady.


Sir Dav. Yea Friend I do, and she hopes you will be sensible, Dear heart, of her
good meaning by it: these were her very words, I neither add nor diminish, for
plain d^aling is my Mistresses Friend.


Beau. Then all the Curses I shall think on this twelvemonth light on her, and
as many more on the next Fool that gives credit to the Sex.


Sir Dav. Well, certainly I am the happiest Toad; how melancholy the Munkey
stands now? Poor Pug have thou lost her?


Beau. To be so sordid a Jilt, to betray me to such a Beast as that, can she
have any good thoughts of such a Swine? Dam her, had she abused me handsomely it
had never ^ext me.


Sir Dav. Now Sir with your permission I Will take my leave.


Beau. Sir, If you were gone to the Devil, I should think you very well disposed
of.


Sir Dav. If you have any Letter, or other commendation to the Lady that was so
charmed with your Resemblance there, it shall be very faithfully conveyed by --


Beau. Fool.


Sir Dav. Your humble Servant Sir, I Am gone, I shall disturb you no further,
your most humble Servant Sir.

[Exit.
Beau. Now Poverty, Plague, Pox and Prison fall thick upon the head of thee
Fourbin.


Fourb. Sir! --


Beau. Thou have been an extraordinary Rogue in thy time.


Fourb. I hope I have lost nothing in your Honors service Sir.


Beau. Find cut some way to revenge me on this old Rascal, and if I do not make
thee a Gentleman. --


Fourb. That you have been pleased to do long ago, I thank you; for I am sure
you have not left me one shilling in my pocket these two Months.


Beau. Here, here is for thee to Revel withal.


Fourb. Will your Honor please to have his Throat cut?


Beau. With all my heart.


Fourb. Or would you have him decently hanged at his own door, and then give
out to the World he did it himself?


Beau. That would do very well.


Fourb. Or I think [to proceed with more safety] a good stale Jakes were a very
pretty expedient.


Beau. Excellent, excellent Fourbin.


Fourb. Leave matters to my discretion, and if I do not --

Exit.
Beau. I know thou will, go, go about it, prosper and be famous: now e're I
dare venture to meet Courtin again. will I go by my self, rail for an hour or
two, and then be good company.

Exit.
Enter Courtine and Silvia. Silv. Take my word Sir, you had better give this
business over, I tell you there is nothing in the World turns my Stomach so much
as the man, that man that makes Love to me. I never saw one of your Sex in my
life make love, but he looked so like an Ass all the while, that I blushed for
him.


Court. I am afraid your Ladyship then is one of those dangerous Creatures they
call She-wits, who are always so mightily taken with admiring themselves: that
nothing else is worth their notice.


Sylv. Oh! who can be so dull not to be ravished with that roysterous mein of
yours? that russling Air in your gate, that seems to cry where e're you go,
make room, here comes the Captain: that Face the which bids defiance to the
Weather; bless us! if I were a poor Farmers wife in the Country now, and you
wanted Quarters, how would it fright me? But as I am young, not very ugly, and
one you never saw before, how lovingly it looks upon me.


Court. Who can forbear to sigh, look pale and languish, where Beauty and wit
unite both their forces to enslave a heart so tractable as mine is. First, for
that modish swim of your Body, the victorious motion of your Arms and Head, the
toss of your Fan, the glancing of the Eyes, bless us! If I were a dainty fine
dressed Coxcomb with a great Estate and a little or no wit, vanity in abundance,
and good for nothing, how would they m^lt and soften me? but as I am a
scandalous honest Rascal, not Fool enough to be your sport, nor rich enough to
be your prey, how glotingly they look upon me! --


Silv. Alas, alas! What pity it is your honesty should ever do you hurt, or your
wit spoil your preferment.


Court. Just as much fair Lady, as that your Beauty should make you be envi^d
at, or your Virtue provoke scandal.


Silv. Well the more I look, the more I Am in love with you.


Court. The more I look, the more I am out of Love with you.


Silv. How my heart swells when I see you!


Court. How my Stomach rises when I Am near you!


Silv. Nay, then let us bargain.


Court. With all my heart, what?


Silv. Not to fall in love with each other, I assure you Monsiour Captain.


Court. But to hate one another constantly and cordially.


Silv. Always when you are drunk, I desire you to talk scandalously of me.


Court. Ay, and when I am sober too, in return whereof when e're you see a
coquet of your acquaintance, and I chance to be named, be sure you spit at the
^ilthy remembrance, and rail at me as if you loved me.


Silv. In the next place, when e're we meet in the Mall, I desire you to humph,
put out your Tongue, make ugly mouths, laugh aloud, and look back at me.


Court. Which if I chance to do, be sure at next turning to pick up some tawdry
sluttering Fop or another.


Silv. That I made acquaintance with all at the Musique-meeting.


Court. Right, Just such another Spark to saunter by your side with his Hat
under his Arm.


Silv. Harkening to all the bitter things I can say to be revenged:


Court. Whilst the dull Rogue dare not so much as grin to oblige you, for fear
of being beaten for it, when he is out of his waiting.


Silv. Counterfeit your Letters from me.


Court. And you to be even with me for the scandal, publish to all the World I
offered to marry you.


Silv. Oh hideous marriage'


Court. Horrid, horrid marriage!


Silv. Name, name no more of it.


Court. At that sad word let us part.


Silv. Let Us wish all men decrepid, dull and sill^y


Court. And every woman old and ugly.


Silv. Adieu! --


Court. Farewell! --


Enter a young fellow, affectedly dressed, several others with him. Silv. Ah me,
Mr. Frisk.!


Frisk. Madamoisel, Silvia! sincerely as I hope to be saved, the Devil take me,
Dam me Madam, who is that?


Silv. Ha, ha, ha, hea.


[Exit with Frisk. Court. True to thy failings always Woman, how naturally is
the Sex fond of a Rogue! What a Monster was that for a Woman to delight in, now
must I love her still, tho I know I am a Blockhead for it, and she will use me like
a block-head too, if I don't prevent her: what is to be done? I Will have three
Whores a day, to keep Love out of my head. Enter Beaugard. Beaugard will met
again, how go matters? Handsomely!


Beau. Oh very handsomely! had you but seen how hadsomly I was used just now,
you would swear so, I have heard thee rail in my time, would thou would
exercise thy talent a little at present.


Court. At what?


Beau. Why can thou over want a subject! rail at thy self, rail at me, I
deserve to be raild at, see there, what think thou of that Engine, that
moving lump of filthiness miscalled a Man.


[A Clumsie fellow marches over the Stage dressed like an Officer. Court. Curse
on him for a Rogue, I know him.


Beau. So*


Court. The Rascal was a Retailer of Ale but yesterday, and now he is an
Officer and be hanged; it is a dainty sight in a morning to see him with his
Toes turned in, drawing his Legs after him, at the head of a hundred lusty
Fellows, some honest Gentleman or other stays ^ow, because that Dog had money
to bribe some corrupt Colonel withal.


Enter another gravely dressed. Beau. There, there is another of my acquaintance,
he was my Fathers Footman not long since, and has pimpt for me oftener than he
prayed for himself; that good quality recommended him to a noble man's service,
which together with ^lattering, fawning, lying, spying and informing, has
raised him to an employment of trust and reputation, though the Rogue cannot
write his ^ame, nor read his neck Verse, if he had occasion.


Court. It Is as unreasonable to expect a man of Sense should be preferred, as
it is to think a Hector can be stout, a Priest religious, a fair Woman chaste, or
a pardoned Rebel loyal.


Enter two more seeming earnestly in discourse. Beau. That Is seasonably thought
on, look there, observe but that Fellow on the right hand, the Rogue with the
busiest Face of the two, I Will tell thee his History.


Court. I hope hanging will be the end of his History, so well I like him at
the first sight.


Beau. He was born a Vagabond, and no Parish owned him, his Father was as
obscure as his Mother public, every body knew her, and no body could guess at
him.


Court. He comes of a very good Family, heaven be praised.


Beau. The first thing he chose to rise by, was Rebellion, so a Rebel he grew,
and ^^ourisht a Rebel, fought against his King, and helped to bring him to the
Block:


Court. And was he not Religious too?


Beau. Most devoutly! He could pray till he cried, and preach till he foamed,
which excellent Tallent made him popular, and at last preferred him to be a
worthy Member of that never to be forgotten Rump Parliament.


Court. Tray Sir be uncovered at that, and remember it with Reverence.


Beau. In short, he was Committee man, Sequestrator and persecutor General of a
whole County, by which he got enough at the Kings Return to secure himself in
the general Pardon.


Court. Naufeous Vermin: That such a Swine with the mark of Rebellion in his
Forehead, should wallow in his Luxury whilst honest men are ^orgotten!


Beau. Thus forgiven, thus raised, and made thus happy, the ungrateful Slave
disowns the hand that healed him, cherishes Factions to affront his Master, and
once more would Rebel against the Head, which so lately saved his from a Pole.


Court. What a dreadful Beard and swinging Sword he wears*


Beau. It Is to keep his Cowardice in countenance, the Rascal will endure
kicking most temperately for all that, I know five or six more of the same
stamp; that never came abroad without terrible long Spits by their sides, with
which they will let you bore their own Noses if you please, but let the Villain
be forgotten.


Court. His Co-Rogue I have some knowledge of, he is a tatt^r'd worm-eaten
Case-putter, some call him Lawyer, one that takes it very ill he is not made a
Judge.


Beau. Yes, and is always repineing that men of parts are not regarded.


Court. He has been a great noise-maker in factious Clubs these seven years,
and now I suppose is courting that Worshipful Rascal to make him Recorder of
some factious Town.


Beau. To teach Tallow-chandlers and Chees-mongers how far they may rebel
against their King by virtue of Magna Chart^


Court. But friend Beaugard methinks thou art very spleenatick of a sudden, how
goes the affair of Love foreward, prosperously hah!


Beau. Oh I assure you most Triumphantly, Just now you must know I am parted
with the sweet civil enchanted Ladies Husband.


Court. Well and what says the Cuckold is he very kind and good natured as
Cuckolds use to be?


Beau. Why he says, Courtine in short, that I am a very silly fellow, (and
truly I am very apt to believe him) and that I have been Jilted in this affair
most unconscionably, a Plague on all P^mps, say, a man's business never thrives
so well, as when he is his own Solicitor.


Enter Sir Jolly and Boy. Sir Jolly. Hist* hist. Capt. Capt. Capt. Boy.


Boy. Sir.


Sir Jolly. Run and get two Chairs presently, besure you get two Chairs,
Sirrah, do you here? here is luck, here is luck, now or never Capt. never if not
now Captain! here is luck.


Beau. Sir Jolly, no more adventures sweet Sir Jolly, I am like to have a very
sine time o^'t truly.


Sir Jolly* The best in the World dear Dog, the very best in the World,'s bud
she is here hard by man, stays on purpose for thee finely disguised, the Cuckold
has lost her too; and no body knows any thing of the matter but I, no body but
I, and I you must know, I am I, hah! and I you little Toad, hah!


Beau. You are a very fine Gentleman.


Sir Jolly. The best natured Fellow in the World I believe of my years! now
does my heart so thump for fear this business should miscarry; why I Will warrant
thee, the Lady is here man, she is all thy own, it is thy own fault if thou art
not in terra incognita within this half hour: come along prithee come along,
fie for shame, what make a Lady loose her longing, come along I say, you -- out
upon it.


Beau. Sir your humble, I shall not stir.


Sir Jolly. What? not go!


Beau. No Sir, no Lady for me.


Sir Jolly. Not go! I should laugh at that Faith.


Beau. No, I will assure you, not go Sir.


Sir Jolly. Away you Wag, you jest, you jest you wag; not go quotha?


Beau. No Sir, not go I tell you, what the Devil would you have more.


Sir Jolly. Nothing, nothing Sir, but I am a Gentleman.


Beau. With all my heart.


Sir Jolly. And do you think then that I Will be used thus.


Beau. Sir!


Sir Jolly. Take away my Reputation and take away my Life; I shall be disgraced
for ever.


Beau. I have not wronged you Sir Jolly.


Sir Jolly. Not wronged me! But you shall find you have wronged me, and wronged
a sweet Lady, and a fine Lady: -- I shall never be trusted again! never have
employment more! I shall dye of the Spleen -- prithee now be good natured,
prithee be persuaded, od I Will give thee this Ring, I Will give thee this Watch,
it is Gold, I Will give thee any thing in the World, go.


Beau. Not one Foot Sir.


Sir Jolly. Now that I durst but murder him -- well, shall I fetch her to thee?
What shall I do for thee?

Enter Lady Dunce. 'Ods fish here she comes her self, now you ill natured
Chunl, now you Devil, look upon her, do but look upon her, what shall I say to
her?


Beau. Even what you please Sir Jolly.


Sir Jolly. it is a very strange Monster this -- Madam this is the Gentleman,
that is he, though (as one may say) he is something bashful, but I Will tell him who
you are [goes to Beaugard. If thou art not more cruel then Leopards, Lyone,
Tigers, Wolves, or Tarters don't break my Heart, don't kill me, this unkindness
of thine goes to the Soul of me. [goes to the Lady.

Madam, he says, he is so amazed at your Triumphant Beauty, that he dares not
approach the excellence that shines from you.


Lady D. What can be the meaning of all this?


Sir Jolly. Art thou then resolved to be remorseless? can thou be insensible,
have thou Eyes? have thou a Heart? have thou any thing thou should have? cdd
I Will tickle thee, get you to her you Fool, get you to her, to her; to her, to
her, ha, ha, ha.


Lady D. Have you forgot me Beaugard?


Sir Jolly. So now to her again I say, to her, to her and be hanged, Ah Rogue!
Ah Rogue! now, now, have at her, now have at her, there it goes, their it goes,
Hey -- Boys! --


Lady D. Methinks this Face should not so much be altered, as to be nothing
like what once I thought it, the object of your Pleasure and subject of your
Praises.


Sir Jolly. Cunning Toad! Wheadling Jade! you shall see now how by degrees
she will draw him into the Whirl pool of Love, now he leers upon her, now he deers
upon her, Oh law! there is Eyes! there is your Eyes! I must pinch him by the Calf
of the Leg.


Beau. Madam, I must confess I do remember, that I had once acquaintance with a
Face, whose Air and Beauty much resembled yours, and if I may trust my Heart,
you are called Clarianda.


Lady D. Clarinda. I was called till my ill Fortune Wedded me, now you may have
heard of me by another Title, your friend there I suppose, has made nothing a
secret to you.


Beau. And are you then that kind enchanted fair one who was so passionately in
Love with my Picture, that you could not forbear betraying me to the Beast your
Husband, and wrong the Passion of a Gentleman that languisht for you, only to
make your Monster merry, hark you Madam, had your fool bin worth it, I had
beaten him, and have a Months mind to be exercising my parts that way upon your
go between, your Male-Bawd there.


Sir Jolly. Ah Lord! Ah Lord! All Is spoiled again, all is ruined. I shall be
undone for ever, why what a Devil is the matter now? what have I done? what
sins have I committed.


Lady D. And are you that passionate Adorer of our Sex? who cannot Live a Week
in London without Loving, are you the Spark that send y^u Picture up and down
to longing Ladies, longing for a pattern of your Person.


Beau. Yes Madam when I receive so good H^stages as these are [shows the Gold.
that it shall be well used, could you find out no body but me to play the Fool
withal.


Sir Jolly. A lack a day!


Lady D. Could you pitch upon no Body but that wretched Woman, that has loved
you too well to abuse you thus?


Sir Jolly. Thatever I was Born!


Beau. Here, here Madam, I Will return you your dirt, I scorn your Wages, as I do
your Service.


Lady D. Fie for shame what refund? That is not like a Soldier to refund,
keep, keep it to pay your Sempstress withal.


Sir Jolly. His Sempstress, who the Devil is his Sempstress? Odd what would I
give to know that now!


Lady D. There was a Ring too, which I sent you this Afternoon, if that fit not
your Finger, you may dispose of it some other way, where it may give no
occasion of Scandal, and you will do well.


Beau. A Ring Madam!


Lady D. A small triffl^, I suppose Sir David delivered it to you when he
returned you your Mignature.


Beau. I beseech you Madam!


Lady D. Farewell you Traitor.


Beau. As I hope to be saved, and upon the word of a Gentleman.


Lady D. Go you are a falfe ungrateful Brute, and trouble me no more.

[Exit.
Beau. Sir Jolly, Sir Jolly, Sir Jolly.


Sir Jolly. Ah thou Rebel!


Beau. Some advice, some advice, dear Friend e're I Am ruined.


Sir Jolly. Even two pennyworth of Hemp for your Honors supper that is all the
remedy that I know.


Beau. But pri^hee hear a little reason.


Sir Jolly. No Sir I have done, no more to be said, I have done, I am ashamed of
you, I Will have no more to say to you, I Will never see your Face again, good b'w'y.

[Exit. Sir Jolly.
Beau. Death and the Devil, what have my Stars been doing to day! a Ring! --
delivered by Sir David! -- what can that mean? -- Pox on her for a Jilt, she
lies, and has a mind to amuse and laugh at me a day or two longer, hist* here
comes her Beast once more; I'I use him Civilly, and try what Discovery I can
make.


[Enter Sir Davy Dunce.] Sir Da. Ha, ha, ha! here is the Captains Jewel, very
well: In troth I had like to have forgotten it, Ha, ha, ha, -- how damnable Mad
he will be now, when I shall deliver him his Ring again, ha ha! -- Poor Dog he will
hang himself at least, ha, ha, ha, -- Faith, it is a very pretty Stone, and
finely set: Humph! if I should keep it now! -- I Will say I have lost it, no I Will
give it him again, of purpose to vex him, ha, ha, ha.


Beau. Sir David, I am heartily sorry.


Sir Da. Oh Sir, it is you I was seeking for, ha, ha, ha, what shall I say to
him now to terrify him?


Beau. Me, Sir! --


Sir Da. Ay, you Sir, if your name be Captain Beaugard: how like a Fool he
looks already? --


Beaug. What you please, Sir.


Sir Da. Sir, I should speak a word with you, if you think fit, what shall I do
now to keep my countenance.


Beau. Can I be so happy, Sir, as to be able to serve you in any thing.


Sir Da. No Sir, ha, ha, ha, I have commands of service to you Sir, oh Lord!
ha, ha, ha.


Beau. Me, Sir.


Sir Da. Ay Sir, you Sir, but put on your hat, Friend, put on your hat, be
covered.


Beau. Sir, will you please to sit down on this bank?


Sir Da. No, no, there is no need, no need, for all I have a young Wife I can
stand upon my legs, Sweetheart.


Beau. Sir, I beseech you!


Sir Da. By no means, I think friend, we had some hard words just now, 'twas
about a paultry baggage, but she is a pretty baggage and a witty baggage, and a
baggage that --


Beau. Sir, I am heartily ashamed of all misdemeanour on my side.


Sir Da. You do well, though are not you a damned Whore-master, a devilish
Cuckold-making fellow? here, here, do you see this? here is the Ring you sent a
Roguing; Sir, do you think my Wife wants any thing that you can help her too?
-- Why I Will warrant this Ring cost fifty pound: What a prodigal Fellow are you
to throw a way so much money; or did thou steal it old Boy? I believe thou
may be poor I Will lend thee money upon it, if thou think fit at thirty in the
hundred, because I love thee, ha, ha, ha.


Beau. Sir, your humble Servant, I am sorry 'twas not worth your Ladies
acceptance, now what a dog am I!


Sir Da. I should have given it thee before, but faith I forgot it, though it
was not my Wives fault in the least, for she says as thou likest this usage,
she hopes to have thy custom again Child; ha, ha, ha.


Beau. Then Sir, I beseech you tell her, that you have made a Convert on me,
and that I am so sensible of my insolent behavior toward her --


Sir Da. Very well, I shall do it.


Beau. That it is impossible I shall ever be at peace with my self till I find
some way how I may make her reparation.


Sir Da. Very good, ha, ha, ha.


Beau. And that if ever she find me guilty of the like offense again.


Sir Da. No Sir, you had not best, proceed, ha, ha, ha.


Beau. Let her banish all good opinion of me for ever.


Sir Da. No more to be said, your Servant, good b'w'y.


Beau. One word more, I beseech you, Sir Davy.


Sir Da. What Is that?


Beau. I beg you tell her that the generous reproof she has given me has so
wrought upon me --


Sir Da. Well, I will:


Beau. That I esteem this Jewel, not only as a wreck redeemed from my folly,
but that for her sake I will preserve it to the utmost moment of my life.


Sir Da. With all my heart, I vow and swear.


Beau. And that I long to convince her I am not the Brute she might mistake me
for.


Sir Da. Right; well, this will make the purest sport, (Aside;) let me see,
first you acknowledge your self to be a very impudent Fellow.


Beau. I do so, Sir.


Sir Da. And that you shall never be at rest, till you have satisfied my Lady.


Beau. Right, Sir.


Sir Da. Satisfied her, very good, ha, ha, ha, and that you will never play the
fool any more, be sure you keep your word, Friend.


Beau. Never, Sir.


Sir Da. And that you will keep that Ring for her sake, as long as you live,
hah! --


Beau. To the day of my death, I Will assure you.


Sir Da. I protest that will be very kindly done -- and that you long mightily,
long, to let her understand that you are another guess Fellow than she may take
you for.


Beau. Exactly Sir, that is the sum and end of my desires.


Sir Da. Well, I Will take care of your business, I Will do your business, I Will
warrant you, this will make the purest sport when I come home, no, (Aside) Well
your Servant, remember, be sure you remember, your Servant.


Beau. So, now I find a Husband is a delicate instrument rightly made use of;
-- To make her old jealous Coxcomb pimp for me himself, I think it is as worthy
an emploiment as such a noble Consort can be put to.

Ah were ye all such Husbands and such Wives,
We younger Brothers should lead better lives.

Act. III.
SCENE Covent Garden.
Enter Sylvia, and Courtine. Sylv. TO fall in love, and to fall in love with a
Soldier! nay, a disbandded Soldier too, a fellow with the mark of Cain upon
him, which every body knows him by, and is ready to throw stones at him for.


Cour. Dam her, I shall never enjoy her without ravishing; if she, were but
very rich and very ugly, I would marry her: Ay, it is she, I know her
mischievous look too well to be mistaken in it, -- Madam! --


Sylv. Sir.


Cour. It Is a very hard Case, that you have resolved not to let me be quiet.


Silv. It Is very unreasonably done of you, Sir, to haunt me up and down every
where at this scandalous rate, the world will think we are acquainted shortly.


Cour. But, Madam, I shall fairly take more care of my Reputation, on, and from
this time forward shun and avoid you most watchfully.


Sylv. Have you not haunted this place these two hours.


Cour. 'Twas because I knew it to be your Ladyships home then, and therefore
might reasonably be the place you least of all frequented, one would imagine
you were gone a Coxcomb-hunting by this time, to some place of public
appearance or other, it is pretty near the hour, twill be twilight presently,
and then the Owls come all abroad.


Sylv. What need I take the trouble to go so far a fowling when there is game
enough at our own doors.


Cour. What game for your Net, fair Lady.


Sylv. Yes, or any woman's Net else, that will spread it.


Cour. To show you how despicablie I think of the business, I will here leave
you presently, though I lose the pleasure of railing at you.


Sylv. Do so I would advise you; your raillery betrays your wit, as bad as your
clumsey civility does your breeding.


Cour. Adieu! --


Sylv. Farewell! --


Court. Why do not you go about your business?


Sylv. Because I would be sure to be rid of you first, that you might not dog
me.


Cour. Were it but possible that you could answer me one question truly, and
then I should be satisfied.


Sylv. Any thing for composition to be rid of you handsomely.


Cour. Are you really very honest? Look in my Face and tell me that.


Sylv. Look in your Face and tell you, for what? To spoil my Stomach to my
Supper.


Cour. No, but to get thee a Stomach to thy Bed, Sweetheart, I would if
possible be better acquainted with thee because thou art very ill-natured.


Sylv. Your only way to bring that business about effectually, is to be more
troublesome, and if you think it worth your while to be abused substantially;
you may make your personal appearance this Night.


Cour. How? where? and when? and what hour I beseech thee?


Sylv. Under the Window, between the hours of eleven and twelve exactly.


Cour. Where shall these lovely Eyes, and Ears hear my Plaints and see my Tears.


Sylv. At that kind hour thy griefs shall end if thou can know thy Foe from
thy Friend.

[Exit. Syl.
Cour. Here Is another trick of the Devil now, under that Window between the
hours of eleven and twelve exactly, I am a damned Fool, and must go, let me
see, suppose I meet with a lusty beating! pish, that is nothing for a man that is
in love, or suppose she contrive some way to make a public Coxcomb of me, and
expose me to the scorn of the World, for an example to all amorous Block-heads
hereafter? why, if she do, I Will swear I have lain with her, beat her Relations,
if they pretend to Vindicate her, and so there is one love intrigue pretty well
over.

Exit Cour.
Enter Sir David, and Vermin. Sir Da. Go get you in to your Lady now, and tell
her, I am comeing.


Verm. Her Ladyship, Right-worshipful is pleased not to be at home.


Sir Da. How Is that? my Lady not at home! run, run in and ask when she went
forth, whether she is gone, and who is with her, run and ask, Vermin.


Ver. She went out in her Chair presently after you this Afternoon.


Sir Da. Then I may be a Cuckold still for ought I know, what will be comeof
me? I have surely lost, and never shall find her more, she promised me strictly
to stay at home, till I came back again; for ought I know she may be up three
pair of stairs in the Temple now.


Verm. Is her Ladyship in Law then, Sir.


Sir Da. Or it may be taking the Air as far as Knights-bridge with some smooth
faced Rogue or another: it is a damned house, that Swan, that Swan at
Knights-bridge is a confounded house, Vermin.


Verm. Do you think she is there then? --


Sir Da. No, I do not think she is there neither; but such a thing may be, you
know; would that Barn-Elms was under water too, there is a 1000 Cuckolds a Year
made at Barn-Elms, by Rosamonds ponds, the devil if she should be there this
evening, my heart's broke.


Enter Sir Jolly. Sir Iol. That must be Sir Davy; Ay, that is he, that is he, ha,
ha, ha, was ever the like heard of? was ever any thing so pleasant?


Sir Da. I Will lock her up three days, and three nights, without meat, drink or
light, I Will humble her in the Devils name.


Sir Iol. Well, could I but meet my Friend, Sir Davy, it would be the
joyfullest news for him --


Sir Da. Who Is there that has any thing to say to me.


Sir Iol. Ah my Friends, of Friends, such news, such tidings.


Sir Da. I have lost my Wife Man.


Sir Iol. Lost her! She Is not dead I hope.


Sir Da. Yes, Alas, she is dead, irrecoverably lost.


Sir Iol. Why I parted with her within this half hour.


Sir Da. Did you so, are you sure it was she? where was it? I Will have my
Lord-Chief-Justices Warrant and a Constable presently.


Sir Iol. And she made the purest sport now, with a Young Fellow, Man, that she
met withal accidentally.


Sir Da. Oh Lord! that is worse and worse, a Young fellow! -- my Wife making
sport with a young fellow! oh Lord! here are doings! here are vagaries! I Will
run mad, I Will climb Bow Steeple presently, bestride the Dragon, and preach
Cuckoldom to the whole City.


Sir Ioll. The best of all was too, that it happened to be an Idle Coxcomb that
pretended to be in lover with her Neighbor.


Sir Da. Indeed! in love with her! who was it? what is his Name* I warrant you
will not tell a Body, -- I Will indite him in the Crown Office; no I Will ^ssue
Warrants to apprehend him for Treason upon the Statue of Edw. 19th. will not you
tell me what young Fellow it was, was it a very handsome young Fellow, hah --


Sir Iol. Handsome? yes hang him the fellow's handsome enough; he is not very
handsome neither, but he has a devilish leering black-eye.


Sir Da. Oh Lord?


Sir Iol. His face to is a good rideing Face,'it is no foft effeminate complexion
indee^, but his count^nance is ruddy, sanguine and cheerful, a devilish fellow
in a Corner, I Will warrant him.


Sir Da. Bless us! what will become of me, why the devil did I marry a young
Wife? Is he very well shaped too, tall, straight, and proportionable, hah! --


Sir Iol. Tall? No, he is not very tall neither, yet he is tall enough too, he is
none of your overgrown lubberly Flanders Jades, but more of the true English
breed, well knit, able, and fit for service old Boy; the Fellow is well shaped
truly, very well proportioned, strong, and active; I have seen the Rogue leap
like a Buck.


Sir Da. Who can this be? Well, and what think you, Friend, has he been there?
Come, come, I Am sensible she is a young Woman, and I am an old Fellow, troth a
very old Fellow, I signify little or nothing now, but do you think he has
prevailed? am I Cuckold, Neighbor.


Sir Iol. Cuckold! what! a Cuckold in Covent Garden? No I Will assure you, I
believe her to be the most virtuous Woman in the World; but if you had but
seen! --


Sir Da. Ay, would I had, what was it?


Sir Iol. How like a Rogue she used him: First of all comes me up the Spark to
her, Madam, says he -- and then he bows down, thus -- how now, says she, what
would the impertient Fellow have.


Sir Da. Humph! ha! well, and what then?


Sir Iol. Madam, says he again (bowing as he did before) my heart is so
entirely yours, that except you take pity of my sufferings I must here die at
your Feet.


Sir Da. So, and what said she again, Neighbor? ha!


Sir Iol. Go, you are a Fop.


Sir Da. Ha, ha, ha, did she indeed? Did she say so indeed? I am glad on 't,
troth I am very glad on it; well, and what next? And how, and well, and what?
ha! --


Sir Ibl. Madam, says he, this will not do; I am your humble Servant, for all
this, you may pretend to be as ill-natured as you please, but I shall make bold.


Sir Da. Was there ever such an impudent Fellow?


Sir Iol. With that, Sirrah, says she, you are a sawsi^ Jackanapes and I Will
have you kicked.


Sir Da. Ha, ha, ha! Well I would not be unmarri'd agam to be an Angel.


Sir Iol. But the best Jest of all was, who this should be at last.


Sir Da. Ay, who indeed! I Will warrant you some silly Fellow or other; poor Fool!


Sir Iol. Even a scandalous Rake hell, that li^gers up and down the Town by the
Name of Captain Beaugard* but he has been a bloody Cuckold-making Scoundrel in
his time.


Sir Da. Hang him Sot, is it he? I don't value him thus, not a wet finger Man,
to my knowledge she hates him, she scorns him Neighbor, I know it, I am very
well satisfied in the point, besides I have seen him since that, and
out-hector'd him: I am to tell her from his own mouth, that he promises never
to affront her more.


Sir Iol. Indeed.


(A Letter.) Sir Da. Ay, Ay --


Enter Lady Dun^e, paying her Chairman. Chairman. God bless you, Madam, thank
your Honor.


Sir Iol. Hush, hush, there is my Lady, I Will be gone, I Will not be seen, your
humble Servant, God b'w'y.


Sir Da. No faith, Sir Jolly, even go into my house now, and stay Supper with
me, we have not supt together a great while.


Sir Iol. Hah! say you so, I don't care if I do, faith withal my heart; this
may give me an opportunity to set all things right again.


[Aside. Sir Da. My Dear!


Lady D. Sir!


Sir Da. You have been abroad, my Dear, Isee!


Lady D. Only for a little Air, truly I was almost stiffled within doors, I
hope you will not be angry, Sir David, will you?


Sir Da. Angry Child! no Child, not I; what should I be angry for!


Lady D. I wonder Sir David, you will serve me at this rate. Did you not
promise me to go in my behalf to Beaugard and correct him according to my
instructions for his insolence.


Sir Da. So I did, Child; I have been with him, Sweetheart, I have told him
all to a tittle, I gave him back again the Picture too, but as the Devil would
have it, I forgot the Ring, faith I did.


Lady D. Did you purpose, Sir Sodom, to render me ridiculous to the man I
abominate, what scandalous interpretation think you must he make of my
retaining any trifle of his sent me on so dishonorable terms.


Sir Da. Really, my Lamb, thou art in the right, yet I went back afterward,
Dear-heart, and did the business to some purpose.


Lady D. I am glad that you did with all my heart.


Sir Da. I gave him his lesson, I Will warrant him.


Lady D. Lesson! what lesson had you to give him?


Sir Da. Why I told him as he liked that usage he might come again ha, ha, ha.


Lady D. Ay, and so let him.


Sir Da. With all my heart, I Will give him free leave or hang me: though thou
wou'd'st not imagine how the poor Devil's altered. La you there now, but as
certainly as I stand here, that man is troubled that he swears he shall not
rest day nor night till he has satisfied thee; prithee be satisfied with him if
it is possible, my Dear, prithee do, I promised him before I left him to tell
thee as much, for the poor wretch looks so simply, I could not choose but pity
him I vow and swear, ha, ha, ha,.


Iol. Now, now, you little Witch, now you Chitsface, odd I could find in my
heart to put my little Finger in your Bubbies.


Lady D. Sir Da. I must tell you, that I cannot but resent your so soon
reconcilement with a man that I hate worse then death, and that if you loved me
with half that tenderness which you profess, you would not forget an affront so
palpably, and so basely offered me.


Sir Da. Why Chicken where is the remedy? what is to be done? how would thou
have me deal with him?


Lady D. Cut his throat.


Sir Da. Bless us for ever? cut his throat? what do murder?


Lady D. Murder, yes, any thing to such an incorrigible Enemy of your honor,
one that has resolved to persist in abusing of you, see here this letter this I
received since I last parted with you just now it was thrown into my Chair by
an impudent Lacquey of his, kept of purpose for such employments.


Sir Da. Let me see: A Letter indeed! -- for the Lady Dunce -- damned Rogue,
treacherous dog, what can he say in the inside now, here is a Villian.


Lady D. Yes, you had best break it open, you had so, it is like the rest of
your discretion.


Sir Da. Lady, if I have an enemy it is best for me to know what mischief he
intends me, therefore, with your leave I will break it open.


Lady D. Do, do, to have him believe that I was pleased enough with it to do it
my self, if you have the Spirit of a Gentleman in you, carry it back, and dash
it as it is in the face of that audacious Fellow.


Sir Iol. What can be the meaning of this now?


Sir Da. A Gentleman, yes, Madam, I am a Gentleman, and the world shall find
that I am a Gentleman -- I have certainly the best Woman in the World.


Lady D. What do you think must be the end of all this? I have no refuge in the
world, but your kindness, had I a Jealous Husband now, how miserable must my
life be!


Sir Iol. Ah Rogues. Nose ah Devil! ah Toad! cunning Thief, wheed ling Slut,
I Will bite lier by and by.


Sir Dav. Poor Fool! no Dear, I am not Jealous, nor never will (...) of thee:
Do what thou will thou shall not make me Jealo^^ (...) love thee too well to
suspect thee.


Lady D. Ah but how long will you do so?


Sir Da. How long! as long as I live I warrant thee, I -- don't talk to a bod^
so: I cannot hold out if thou do, my eyes will run over, poor (...), poor
Birdsnies! poor Lambki^^.


Lady D. But will you be so kind to me to answer my desires, will you once more
endeavor to make that Traitor sensible that I have too just an esteem of you,
not to vallue his addresses as they deserve.


Sir Da. Ay, Ay, I will.


Lady D. But don't stay away too long Dear, make what haste you can I shall be
in pain till I see you again.


Sir Da. My hear, my Love, my Babby, I Will be with thee in a moment, how happy
am I above the rest of men: Neighbor, dear Neighbor, walk in with my Wife,
and keep her company, till I return again, Child don't be troubled, prithee
don't be troubled, was there ever such a Wife, well da, da, da, don't be
troubled, prithee, don't be troubled, prithee don't be troubled, Da, da,

[Exit.
Lady D. Sir Jolly, Sir Jolly, Sir Jolly.


Sir Iol. Don't be troubled, prithee don't be trouled, da, da.


Lady Du. But Sir Jolly, can you guess whereabout my wandering Officer may be
probably found now?


Sir Iol. Found Lady? he is to be found, Madam, he is to be at my house
presently Lady, he is certainly one of the (...) Fellows in the World.


Lady D. You speak like a Friend, Sir Jolly.


Sir Iol. His Friend, Lady; no Madam his Foe, his utter Enemy, I shall be his
ruin, I shall undo him.


Lady D. You may, if you please, then come both and play at Dards this evening
with me for an hour or two, for I have contrived it so that Sir David is to be
abroad at Supper to night, he cannot possibly avoid it; I long to win some of
the Captains Money strangely.


Sir Iol. Do you so, my Gamester? Well, I Will besure to bring him, and for what
he carries about him I Will warrant you -- odd he is a pretty Fellow, a very
pretty Fellow, he has only one fault.


Lady D. And what is that I beseech you Sir?


Sir Iol. Only too Loving, too good Natured, that is all; it is certainly the
best natured Fool breathing, that is all his fault.


Lady D. Hist, hist, I think I see company coming, if you please, Sir Jolly
we'll go in.


Enter Beaugard followed by Sir Davy, Vermin. Sir Iol. Mum, mum, mum, it is he
himself the very same; odds so Sir Davy after him too, hush, hush, hush, let us
be gone, let us re^ire, do but look upon him now, mind him a little, there is a
(...)* there is an Air, there is a motion! Ah Rogue, ah Devil, get you in, get
you in, I say there is a shape for you.

[Exit.
Beau. What the Devil shall I do to recover this days loss again, my honorable
Pimp too, my Pander Knight has forsaken me, methinks I am quandari'd like one
going with a party to discover the Enemies Camp; but had lost his guide upon
the mountains: Curse on him, old Angus is here again, there can be no good
Fortune toward me when he is at my he^ls


Sir Da. Sir, Sir, Sir, one word with you Sir! Captain, Captain, noble Captain,
oneword, I beseech you.


Beau. With me Friend?


Sir Da. Yes with you, my no Friend.


Beau. Sir David my intimate my Bosom Physician --


Sir Da. Ah Rogue! damned Rogue!


Beau. My Confessor, my dearest Friend, I ever had --


Sir Da. Dainty Wheedle, here is a Fellow for ye.


Beau. One that has taught me to be in love with Virtue and shown me the ugly
inside of my Follies.


Sir Da. Sir, your humble Servant.


Beau. Is that all? if you are as cold in your Love as you are in your
Friendship, Sir Davy, your Lady has the worst time o'nt of any one in
Christendom.


Sir Da. So she has, Sir, when she cannot be free from the insolent
solicitations of such Fellows as you are, Sir.


Beau. As me, Sir? why who am I, good Sir Domine Doddle-pate?


Sir Da. So take notice he threatens me, I Will have him bound to the peace
instantly, will you never have remorse of Conscience Friend? have you banished
all shame from your Soul? Do you consider my name is Sir Davy Dunce? that I
have the most virtuous Wife living: Do you consider that? Now, how like a Rogue
he looks again; what a hang-dog leer was that?


Beau. Your virtuous Wife, Sir, you are always harping upon that string Sir
Davy.


Sir Da. No it is you would be harping upon that string, Sir, see you this? cast
your eyes upon this, this Letter Sir, did not you promise this very day, to
abandon all manner of proceedings of this Nature tending to the dishonor of me
and my Family?


Beau. Letter, Sir? what the devil does he mean now? Let me see, For the Lady
Dunce, this is no scrawl of mine, I Will be Sworn by Jove her own hand! What a
Dog was I! forty to one but I had played the Fool, and spoiled all again; was
there ever so Charming a Creature breathing -- did your Lady deliver this to
your hands Sir.


Sir Da. Even her own self in person, Sir, and bad me tell you Sir, that she
has too just an esteem of me Sir, not to vallue such a Fellow as you are as you
deserve.


Beau. Very good: (Reads the Letter) I doubt not but this Letter will surprise
you -- (in troth, and so it does extremely) but reflect upon the manner of
conveighing it to your hand as kindly as you can.


Sir Da. Ay a damned Thief to have it thrown into the Chair by a Footman.


Beau. (Reads) Would Sir Davy were but half so kind to you as I am.


Sir Da. Say you so you insinuating Knave.


(Sir Jolly Reads. Beau. But he I am satisfied is so severely Jealous, that
except you contrive some way to let me see you this evening: I fear all will be
hopeless


Sir Da. Impudent Traitor I might have been a Monster yet before I had got my
Supper in my Belly.


Beau. In order to which either appear your self, or some body for you, half an
hour hence in the Piazza, where more may be considered of, adieu.


Sir Da. Thanks to you noble Sir, with all my heart, you are come I see
accordingly, but as a Friend I am bound in Conscience to tell the business
will not do, the trick will not pass Friend, you may put up your Pipes, and march
off! Oh Lord! he lie with my Wife, Pug^^^ he make Sir Davy Dunce a Cuckold,
poor wretch, ha, ha, ha.


Sir Iol. Hist, hist, hist.


Enter Lady Dunce, and Fourbin disguisd. Lady D. That Is he, there he is!
succeed and be rewarded.


Four. Other people may think what they please; but in my own opinion, I am a
very pretty Fellow now, if my design but succeed upon this old Baboon, I Will be
canonized Sir, Sir, Sir.


Sir Da. Friend! with me? Would you speak with me, Friend.


Fourb. Sir, my commands were to attend your Worship.


Sir Iol. Beaugard, Beaugard, hist, hist, here here, quickly hist.


Sir Da. Where do you live, Sweetheart, and who do you belong too?


Fourb. Sir I am a small Instrument of the City, I serve the Lord Mayor in his
Office there.


Sir Da. How the Lord Mayor!


Four. Yes, Sir, who desires you by all means to do him the Honor of your
company at supper this evening.


Sir Da. It will be the greatest honor I ever received in my Life, what my
Lord Mayor Invite me to supper? I am his Lordships most humble servant.


Four. Yes, Sir, if your name be Sir Davy Dunce, as I have the honor to be
informed it is, he desires you moreover to make what haste you can, for that he
has some matters of importance to communicate to your honor which may take up
some time.


Lady D. I hope it will succeed.


Sir Da. Communicate with me, he does me too noble a favor, (...) upon the
wings of Ambition to say my self at his Footstool; My Lord Mayor sends himself
to invite me to Supper, to confer with me too: I shall certainly be a great Man.


Fourb. What Answer will your Worship charge me back withal?


Sir Da. Let his Lordship know that I am amazed, and confounded, at his
generosity, and that I am so transported with the honor he does me, that I
will not fail to wait on him in the roasting of an Egg.


Fourb. I am your Worships lowly Slave.


Sir Da. Vermin, go get the Coach ready, get me the Gold Medal too and Chain
which I took from the Roman Catholic Officer for a Popish Relick; I Will be fine,
I Will shine and drink Wine that is Divine, My Lord Mayor invite me to Supper!


Lady D. My Dearest, I Am glad to see thee returned in safety from the bottom of
my heart, have thou seen the Traitor?


Sir Da. Seen him? hang him, I have seen him, Pox on him, seen him.


Lady D. Well, and what is become of him! Where is he?


Sir Da. Why do thou ask me where he is? what a Pox care I what becomes of
him, prithee don't trouble me with thy impertinence, I am busy.


Lady D. You are not Angry, my Dear, are you?


Sir Da. No, but I am pleased, and that is all one, very much pleased let me
tell you, but that I am only to Sup with my Lord Mayor, that is all, nothing
else in the World, only the business of the Nation calls upon me, that is all,
therefore once more I say don't be troublesome, but stand off.


Lady D. You always think my company troublesome, you never stay at home to
comfort me, what think you I shall do alone by my self all this Evening?
mopeing in my Chamber, pray my Joy stay with me for once; I hope he will not take
me at my word.


[Aside. Sir Da. I say again and again, Tempter stand off, I will not lose my
preferment for my pleasure, Honor is toward me, and slesh and blood are my
Averllon.


Lady D. But how long will you stay then?


Sir Da. I don't know, may be not an hour, may be all night, as his Lordship
and I think fit, what is that to any body.


Lady D. You are very cruel to me*


Sir Da. I cannot help it, go get you in and pass away the time with your
Neighbor, I Will be back again before I die, in the mean time be humble and
conformable, go: is the Coach ready?


Verm. Yes Sir.


Sir Da. Well, your Servant, what nothing to my Lady Mayoress! you have a great
deal of Breeding indeed, a great deal, nothing to my Lady Mayoress?


Lady D. My service to her, if you please.


Sir D. Well, Da, da, the poor fool cries of my conscience! Adieu, do you hear,
farewell.

[Exit.
Lady D. As well as what I love can make me.


Enter Sir Jolly. Sir Iol. Madam, is he gone.


Lady D. In post haste I assure.


Sir Iol. In troth and joy go with him.


Lady D. Do you then, Sir Jolly, conduct the Captain hither, whilst I go and
dispose of the Family that we may be private.

[Ex.
Enter Sir Davy. Sir Da. Troth I had forgot my Medal and Chain, quite and
clean, forgot my Relic, I was forced to come up these back stairs, for fear
of meeting my Wife again, it is the troublesom'st loving Fool, I must into my
^loset and write a short Letter too, it is Post night, I had forg^t that* well,
I would not have my Wife catch me for a Guinny.

[Exit.
Enter Beaugard and Lady D. Beau. Are you very certain, Madam, no body is this
way? I fan^y as we ^nter'd I saw the glimpse of something more than ordinary.


Lady D. Is it your care of me? or your personal fears, that make you so
supsitious, whereabouts was the Apparition?


Beau. There, there, just at the very door.


Lady D. Fie for shame, that is Sir Davy's Closet, and he I am satisfied is far
enough off by this time, I Am sure I heard the Coach drive him away. But to
convince you, you shall see now; Sir Davy, Sir Davy, Sir Davy, [knocking at the
Closet door] look you there, you a Captain and afraid of a shadow, come Sir,
shall we call for the Gards?


Beau. And what shall we play for pretty One!


Lady D. Even what you think best, Sir.


Beau. Silver Kisses or Golden Joys! come let us make Stakes a little.


Enter Sir Jolly. Sir Jolly. Ah Rogue, ah Rogue! are you there? have I caught
you in Faith now, now, now!


Lady D. And who shall keep them?


Beau. You, till Sir Davy, returns from Supper.


Lady D. That may be long enough, for our Engine Fourbin has Orders not to give
him over suddenly I assure you.


Beau. And is it to your self then I Am obliged for this blessed opportunity? Let
us improve it to Love's best advantage.


Sir Jolly. Ah, h, h, h! Ah, h, h, h!


Beau. Let Us vow eternal, and raise our thoughts, to 'expectation of immortal
pleasures, in one another eyes let us read our joys till we have no longer power
over our desires, drunk with this dissolving, oh! --


Enter Sir Davy from his Closet. Lady D. Ah!

[Squeaks.
Beau. By this light the Cuckold, Presto. nay then Hallo.


[Gets up and runs away. Sir Da. Oh Lord, a Man! a Man in my Wife's Chamber;
Murder, Murder, Thieves, Thieves, shut up my Doors! Madam! Madam! Madam!


Enter Sir Jolly. Sir Iol. Ay, Ay, Theives, Thieves, urder, Murder, where
Neighbor, where, where?


Lady D. Pierce, pierce this wretched Heart hard to the Hilts, dye this in
deepest crimson of my Blood, spare not a miserable Woman's life, whom Heaven
designed to be the unhappy object of the most horrid usage Man ever acted.


Catches up Beaugard's sword which he had left behind him in the burry, and
presents it to Sir Davy. Sir Da. What in the name of Satan does she mean now?


Lady D. Curse on my fatal beauty! blasted ever be these two baneful eyes, that
could inspire a barbarous Villain to attempt such crimes as all my blood's too
little to atone for: Nay, you shall hear me. --


Sir Da. Hear you, Madam? No, I have seen too much I thank you heartily, hear
you Quotha! --


Lady D. Yes, and before I die too I Will be justified.


Sir Iol. Justified, oh Lord, justified! --


Lady D. Notice being given me of your return, I came with speed to this
unhappy place, where I have often been blessed with your Embraces, when from behind
the Arras out starts Beaugard; how he came there heaven knows.


Sir Da. I Will have him hanged for Burglary, he has broken my House, and broke
the Peace upon my Wife, very good!


Lady D. Straigh^ in his Arms he graspt me fast, with much ado I, plunged and
got my freedom, ran to your Closet door, knock^ and implored your aid, called
on your name, but all in vain --


Sir Da. Hah!


Lady D. Soon again he seized me, stopped my mouth, and with a Conquerors fury --


Sir Da. Oh Lord! oh Lord! no more, no more, I beseech thee, I shall grow mad,
I will grow mad, and very mad, I Will plough up Rocks and Adamantine Iron bars,
I Will crack the frame of nature, sally out like Tamberlain upon the Trojan Horse,
and drive the Pigmies all like Geese before me; Oh Lord stop her mouth! well*
and how? and what then I stopped thy mouth! well! hah!


Lady D. No, though unfortunate I still am innocent, his oursed purpose could
not be accomplished, but who will live so injured? No I Will die to be revenged on
my self, I never can hope that I may see his streaming Offers to run upon the
sword. gore: and thus I let out my own --


Sir Da. Ha! what would thou do my love, prithy don't break my heart,? If
thou will kill, kill me; I know thou art innocent, I see thou art; though I had
rather be a Cuckold a thousand times than loose thee, poor Love, poor Dearee,
poor Baby.


Sir Iol. Ala^k a day --

[Weeps.
Lady D. Ah me! --


Sir Da. Ah, prithee be comforted now, prithee do, why I Will love thee the better
for this, for all this Mun, why should he troubled for another Ill doings! I
know it was no fault of thine.


Sir Iol. No, no more it was not I dare swear.


Sir Da. See, see, my Neighbor weeps too, he is troubled to see thee thus.


Lady D. Oh, but revenge!


Sir Da. Why thou shall have revenge, I Will have him murderd, I Will have his throat
cut before to morrow morning Child, rise now, prithee rise.


Sir Iol. Ay do Madam, and smile upon Sir Davy.


Lady D. But will you love me then as well as e're you did?


Sir Da. Ay, and the longest day I live too.


Lady D. And shall I have Justice done me on that prodigious Monster?


Sir Da. Why, he shall be Crows meat by to morrow night, I tell thee he shall
be Crows meat by midnight Chicken.


Lady D. Then I will live, since so it is something pleasant. When I in Peace
may lead a happy Life, With such a Husband --


Sir Da. I with such a Wife.


ACT. IV.
SCENE The Tavern.
Enter Beaugard, Courtine and Drawer. Draw. WElcome Gentlemen, very welcome
Sir: will you please to walk up one pair of stairs.


Beau. Get the great Room ready presently, carry up too a good stock of Bottles
before hand, with Ice to cool our Wine, and Water to refresh our Glasses.


Draw. It shall be done Sir; Coming, coming there, Coming: speak up in the
Dolphin some body.


Beau. Ah Courtine, must we be always idle I must we never see our glorious
days again? when shall we be rolling in the Lands of Milk and Honey* incampt in
large luxuriant Vineyards, where the loadded Vines Cluster about our Tents,
drink the rich Juice, just pressed from the plump Grape, feeding on all the
fragrant golden Fruit that grow in fertile Climes, and ripened by the earliest
vigor of the Sun.


Court. Ah Beaugard! those days have been, but now we must resolve to content
our selves at an humble rate: methinks it is not unpleasant to consider how I
have seen thee in a large Pavillion; drowning the heat of the day in Campaign
Wines, sparkling sweet as those charming Beauties, whose dear remembrance every
glass recorded, with half a dozen honest Fellows more, Friends Beaugard,
faithful hearty Friends, things as hard to meet with as preferment here:
Fellows that would speak truth boldly, and were proud on it, that scorned
flattery, love'd honesty; for 'twas their portion, and never yet learned the
Trade of case and lying, but now. --


Beau. Ay, now we are at home in our natural Hives, and sleep like Drones; but
there is a Gentleman on the other side the Water, that may make work for us all
one day.


Gour. But in the mean while --


Beau. In the mean while patience, Courtine, that is the English man's Virtue:
Go to the man that ows you money, and tell him your are necessitated, his
answer shall be, a little patience I beseech you, Sir: Ask a Cowardly Rascal
satisfaction for a sordid injury done you, he shall cry, alas a day, Sir, you
are the strangest Man living, you will not have patience to hear one speak: Co^^
(...) to a great Man that you want preferment, that you have forsa^^
^^^siderable advantages abroad, in obedience to public (...) all you shall get
of him is this, you must have patience, Sir.


Court. But will patience feed me, or cloth me, or kee^ (...)


Beau. Prithee no more hints of Poverty: it is scandalous,'s Death I would as
soon choose to hear a Soldier brag as complain, do thou want any Money?


Court. True indeed I want no necessaries to keep me alive; but I do not enjoy
my self with that freedom I would do, there is no more pleasure in living at
stint, then there is in living alone. I would have it in my power (when he
needed me) to serve and assist my Friend, I would to my Ability deal handsomely
too be the Woman that pleased me.


Beau. Oh ^fy for shame! you would be a VVhoremaster, Friend, go, go, I Will have
no more to do with you.


Court. I would not be forced neither at any time to avoid a Gentleman that had
obliged me, for want of Money to pay him a debt contracted in our old
acquaintance, it turns my Stomach to wheedle with the Rogue I scorn when he
uses me Scurvily, because he has my Name in his Shop-Book.


Beau. As for example, to endure the familiaritys of a Rogue, that shall cock
his greasy Hat in my Face, when he duns me, and at the same time vail it to an
overgrown Deputy of the Ward, though a ^rowzy Fellmonger.


Court. To be forced to concur with his Nonsense too, and laugh at his Parish
Jests.


Beau. To use respects and ceremonies to the Milch-Cow his Wife, and praise her
pretty Children, though they stink of their Mother, and are uglier than the
issue of a Baboon, yet all this must be endured.


Court. Must it Beaugard.


Beau. And since it is so let us think of a Bottle.


Court. With all my Heart, for railing and drinking do much better together
then by themselves; a private room, a trusty Friend or two, good Wine and bold
Truths, are my happiness; but where is our dear Friend and intimate, Sir Jolly,
this Evening.


Beau. To deal like a friend Courtine, I parted with him but just now, he is
gone to contrive me a meeting is possible this ^ight with the Woman my Soul is
most fond of: I was this Evening just entering upon the Palace of all Joy,
when I met with so damnably a disappointment -- in short, that Plague to all
Well meaning Women, the Husband came unseasonably and sorc't a poor Lover to
this Heels that was fairly making his progress another way Courtine, the Story
thou shall here more at large hereafter.


Court. A Plague on him, why did thou not Murder the presumptious Cuckold?
saucy intruding Clown? to dare to disturb a Gentleman's privacies, I would have
beaten him into Sense of his trangression; enjoyed his Wife before his Face,
and a taught the Dog his Duty.


Beau. Look you Courtine, you think you are dealing with the Landlord of your
Winter Quarters in Alsatia now? friend, friend, there is a difference between a
freeborn English Cuckold, and a sheaking Wittal of a Conquered Province.


Court. Oh by all means! there ought to be a difference observed between your
arbitr^ry Whoring and your limited Fornication.


Beau. And but reason: for though we may make bold with another man's Wife in a
friendly way: yet nothing upon compulsion Dearheart.


Court. And now Sir Jolly, I hope is to be the instrument of some immortal
Plot, some contrivance for the good of thy body, and the old fellows soul
Beaugard, for all Cuckolds go to Heaven, that is most certain.


Beau. Sir Jolly! Why on my Conscience he thinks it as much his undoubted Right
to be Pimp Master-General to London and Middlesex, as the Estate he possesses
is, by my consent his worship should, even have a Pattent for it.


Court. He is certainly the fittest for the employment in Christendom; he
knows more Families by their Names and Titles, than all the Bellmen within and
without the walls.


Beau. Nay he keeps a Catalogue of the choicest Beauties about Town,
illustrated with a particular account of their Age, Shape, proportion, color
of Hair and Eyes, degrees of Complexion, Gunpowder Spots and Moles.


Court. I wish the old Pander were bound to satisfy my experience; what marks
of good nature my Sylvia has about her.


Sir Jolly. My Captains! my Sons of Mars, and Imps of Venus! well encountered,
what shall we have a sparkling Bottle or two, and use Fortune like a Jade?
Beaugard you are a Rogue, you are a Dog, I hate you, get you gone, go.


Beau. But Sir Jolly, what news from Paradise Sir Jolly? Is there any hopes I
shall come there too Night!


Sir Jolly. May be there is, may be there is not; I say let us have a Bottle,
and I will say nothing else without a Bottle, after a Glass or two my Heart may
open.


Court. Why then we will have a Bottle Sir Jolly.


Sir Jolly. Will? we will have dozens* and drink till we are wise, and speak well
of no body, till we are lewder than midnight-whores, and out-rail disbanded
Officers.


Beau. Only one thing more my noble Knight, and then we are entirely at thy
disposal.


Sir Jolly. Well and what is that? what is the business?


Beau. This Friend of mine here stands in need of thy Assistance, he is damnably
in Love Sir Jolly.


Sir Jolly. In love is h^ so! in Love! 'ods my Life! is she! what is her Name?
where does she live? I warrant you I know her, she is in my Table Book I Will
warrant you: Virgin, Wise, or Widow!


[pulls out a Table Book. Court. In troth Sir Jolly, that is something a
difficult question, but as Virgins go now, she may pass for one of them.


Sir Jolly. Virgin very good: let me see; Virgin: Virgin, Virgin, oh here are
the Virgins, truly I meet with the sewest of this sort of any, well and the
first Letter of her Name now! for a wager I guess her.


Court. Then you must know Sir Jolly, that I love my Love with an S.


Sir Jolly. S. S. S. Oh here are the Esses, let me consider now -- Sappho.


Court. No sir.


Sir Jolly. Selinda.


Court. Neither.


Sir Jolly. Sophronia.


Court. You must guess again I assure you.


Sir Jolly. Silvia.


Court. Ay, Ay, Sir Jolly, that is the fatal Name, Silvia the fair, the witty,
the ill-natured, do you know her my Friend?


Sir Jolly. Know her? Why she is my Daughter, and I have adopted her these
seven years: Silvia, let me look; Light Brown Hair, her Face Oval and Roman,
quick sparkling Eyes, plump pregnant Ruby Lips, with a Mole on her Breast, and
the perfect likeness of a Heart-Cherry on her left Knee; Ah Villain! Ah sly
Cap! have I caught you; are you there in faith? well and what says she? is she
coming? do her Eyes betray her? does her Heart beat, and her Bubbies rise, when
you talk to her, hah? --


Beau. Look you sir Jolly, all things considered, it may make a shift to come
to a Marriage in time. --


Sir Jolly. I Will have nothing to do in it, I will not be seen in the business of
Matrimony; make me a Match-maker? a filthy Marriage Broker, Sir I scorn, I know
better things; look you Friend, to carry her a Letter from you or so, upon good
Terms, though it be in a Church I Will deliver it, or when the business is come to
an issue, if I may bring you handsomely together, and so forth; I Will serve thee
with all my Soul; and thank thee into the bargain: thank thee heartily dear
Rogue, I will you little Cock-sparrow, faith and troth I will; but no Matrimony
Friend, I Will have nothing to do with Matrimony; it is damned invention worse than
a Monopoly, and a destroyer of civil correspondence.


Enter Drawer. Drawer. Gentlemen your room is ready, your Wine and I^e upon
the Table, will your Ho^ours please to walk in?


Sir Jolly. Ay wine, wine, give us wine, a pox on Matrimony, Matrimony in the
Devils name.


Court. But if an honest Harlot or two chance to enquire for us Friend.


Sir Jolly. Right Sirrah, if Whores come never so many, give 'em reverence, and
reception, but nothing else, let nothing but Whores and Bottles come near us,
as you tender your Ears.


[they go within the Scene where is discovered Table and Bottles. Beau. Why
there is, there is the land of Canaan now in little, hark you, Drawer, Dog, shut,
shut the Door Syrrah, do you hear, shut it so close, that neither cares, nor
necessitys may peep in upon us.


[Enter Sir Davy, Fourbin and Bloody Bones, Drawer.] Fourbin. Bloody-bones be
you sure to behave your self handsomely and like your profession, show your
self a Cutthroat of parts, and we will fleece him.


Blood. My Lady says, We must be expeditious, Sir Jolly has given notice to the
Capt. by this time, so that nothing is wanting but the management of this
oven-grown Gull to make us Hectors at large, and keep the Whore Fortune under.


Drawer. Welcome Gentlemen, very welcome Sir, will it please you to walk into a
Room? or shall I wait upon your Honors pleasure here.


Sir Da. Sweet heart let us be private, and bring us Wine hither, so -- [sits
down. From this moment, War, war; and mortal dudgeon against that enemy of my
Honor, and Theif of my good Name called Beaugard. you can cut a Throat upon
occasion you say Friend.


Fourbin. Sir cutting of Throats is my Hereditary vocation, my Father was
hanged for cutting of Throats before me, and my Mother for cutting of Purses.


Sir Da. No* more to be said, my Courage is mounted like a little Frenchman
upon a great Horse; and I Will have him murdered.


Fourbin. Sir, Murdered you say Sir?


Sir Da. Ay Murdered I say Sir, his Face slay'd off, and nayl'd to a post in my
great Hall in the Country, amongst all the other Trophies of wild Beasts slain
by our Family since the Conquest: there is never a Whore-Masters head there yet.


Fourbin. Sir for that let me recommend this worthy Friend of mine to your
Service, he is an industrious Gentleman and one that will deserve your Favor.


Sir Da. He looks but something ruggedly though methinks.


Fourbin. But Sir his Parts will atone for his Person: forms and fashions are
the least of his study: he affects a sort of Phylosophical negligence indeed,
but Sir make trial of him, and you will find him a Person fit for the work of this
World.


Sir Da. What trade are you Friend?


Blood. No trade at all Friend, I profess Murder: Rascally Butchers make a
trade on it, it is a Gentleman's Divertisement.


Sir Da. Do you profess Murder.


Blood. Yes sir, it is my Livelihood: I keep a Wife and six Children by it.


Sir Da. Then Sir here is to you withal my Heart; would I had done with these
Fellows.


Fourb. Well Sir if you have any Service for us; I desire we may receive your
Gold and your instructions so soon as is possible.


Sir Da. Soft and fair Sweetheart, I love to see a little how I lay out my
Money: have you very good trading now a days in your way Friend?


Blood. In peaceable times a man may eat and drink comfortably upon it, a
private Murder done handsomely is worth Money: but now that the Nation's
unsettled there are so many general undertakers* that it is grown almost a
Monopoly, you may have a man Murdered almost for little or nothing and no Lady
ever know who did it neither.


Sir Da. Pray what Country man are you? where were you born most Noble Sir?


Blood. Indeed my Country is Foreign, I was Born in Argier; my Mother was an
Apostate Greek my Father a Ranegado English Man, who by oppressing of Chistian
Slaves grew Rich; for which when he lay sick, I Murdered him one day in his
Bed: made my escape to Maltha, where embracing the Faith I had the Honor given
me to command a thousand Horse aboard the Galleys of that State.


Sir Da. Oh Lord Sir! my humble Service to you again.


Fourbin. He tells you Sir but the naked Truth.


Sir Jolly. I doubt it not in the least most worthy Sir: these are devilish
^ellows I Will warrant 'em


[Aside. Fourb. War Friend, and shining Honor has bin our Province, till rusty
peace* reduced us to this base obscurity, Ah Bloody Bones! Ah when thou and I
commanded that party as the Seige of Philipsburgh! where in the Face of the
Army we took the impenetrable half Moon.


Blood. Half Moon Sir! by your Favor 'twas a whole Moon.


Fourbin. Brother thou art in the right, 'twas a full Moon, and such a Moon
Sir! --


Sir Da. I doubt it not in the least Gentlemen, but in the meanwhile to our
business.


Fourbin. With all my Heart so soon as you please.


Sir Da. Do you know this Beaugard, he is a devlish fellow I can tell you but
that, he is a Captain.


Fourbin. Has he a Heart think you Sir?


Sir Da. Oh like a Lion! he fears neither God, Man, nor Devil.


Blood. I Will bring it you for your Breakfast to Morrow, did you never eat a Man's
Heart Sir?


Sir Da. Eat a Man's Heart Friend!


Fourb. Ah, Ay, a Man's Heart Sir, it makes absolutely the best Raggoust in the
World: I have eaten forty of 'em in my time without Bread.


Sir Dav. Oh Lord! a Man's Heart! my humble service to you Both Gentlemen.


Blood. Why your Algerine Pirates eat nothing else at sea, they have them
always potted up like Venison, your well-grown Dutchmans Heart makes an
excellent Dish with Oil and Pepper.


Sir Dav. Oh Lord! oh Lord! Friend, Friend, a word with you: how much must you
and your Companion have to do this business?


Fourb. What and bring you the Heart home to your house?


Sir Dav. No, no, keeping the Heart for your own eating, I Will be rid of 'em as
soon as possible I can.


Fourb. You say Sir he is a Gentleman? --


Sir Dav. Ay such a sort of Gentleman as are about this Town: the Fellow has a
pretty handsome outside, but I believe little or no money in his Pockets.


Fourb. Therefore we are like to have the honor to receive the more from your
Worships bounty.


Blood. For my part I care for no man's bounty: I expect to have my bargain
perform'ed, and I Will make as good a one as I can.


Sir Dav. Look you Friend,: don't you be angry Friend, don't be angry Friend
before you have occasion: you say you will have -- let us see how much will you
have now -- I warrant the Devil and all by your good will.


Fourb. Truly Sir David if as you say, the Man must be well murdered without
any remorse or mercy, betwixt Turk and Jew it is honestly worth two hundred
pounds.


Sir Dav. Two hundred pounds! Why I Will have a Physician shall kill a whole
Family for half the money.


Blood. Damme Sir, how do yemean?


Sir Dav. Damme Sir how do I mean? Damme Sir not to part with my money.


Blood. Not part Brother!


Fourb. Brother the Wight is improveable, and this must not be born withal.


Blood. Have I for this dissolved Cir^ean Charms? broke Iron durance: whilst
from these firm Legs the well filled useless Fetters dropped away, and left me
Master of my native freedom.


Sir Dav. What, what does he mean now?


Fourb. Truly Sir I am sorry to see it with all my heart, it is a distraction
that frequently seizes him, though I am sorry it should happen so unluckily at
this time.


Sir Dav. Distracted say you! is he so apt to be distracted?


Fourb. Oh Sir rageing mad: we that live by Murder are all so: Guilt will never
let us sleep. I beseech you Sir stand clear of him, he is apt to be very
mischievous at these unfortunate hours.


Blood. Have I been drunk with tender Infants blood? and ripped up teeming Wombs?
Have these bold hands ransackt the Temples of the Gods, and stabbed the Priests
before their Altars? Have I done this? hah!


Sir Dav. No Sir, not that I know Sir, I would not say any such thing for all
the World Sir, worthy Gentleman, I beseech you Sir, you seem to be a civil
person: I beseech you Sir to mitigate his passion, I Will do any thing in the
World, you shall command my whole Estate.


Fourb. Nay after all Sir, if you have not a ming to have him quite murdered,
if a swinging drubbing to bedridden him or, so, will serve your turn, you may
have it at a cheaper rate a great deal.


Sir Dav. Truly Sir, with all my heart, for methinks now I consider matters
better, I would not by any means be guilty of another man's blood.


Fourb. Why then let me consider -- to have him beaten substantially, a beating
that will stick by him, will cost you -- half the money.


Sir Dav. What one hundred pounds! Sure the Devil's in you, or you would not be
so unconscionable.


Blood. The Devil! where? where is the Devil? show me; I Will tell thee Belz^bub
thou have broke thy Covenant, did thou not promise me eternal plenty, when I
resigned my Soul to thy allurements'


Sir Dav. Ah Lord!


Blood. Touch me not yet: I Have yet ten thousand Murders to Act before I Am
thine: with all those sins I Will come with full damnation to thy Caverns of
endless pain and houl with thee for ever.


Sir Dav. Bless us! what will become of this mortal Body of mine? Where am I?
Is this a house? do I live? am I Flesh and Blood?


Blood. There, there is the Feind again! don't chatter so, and grin at me, if
thou must needs have prey, take here, take him, this Tempter that would bribe
me with shining Gold, to stain my hands with new iniquity.


Sir Dav. Stand off I charge thee Stain, wheresoe'r thou art, thou have no
right nor claim to me, I Will have thee bound in Necromantick Charms. Hark you
Friend, has the Gentleman given Soul to the Devil?


Fourb. Only pawned it a little: that is all.


Sir Dav. Let me beseech you Sir to dispatch, and get rid of him as soon as you
can. I would gladly drink a Bottle with you Sir, but I hate the Devils Company
mortally, as for the hundred pound here, here it is ready, no more words, I Will
submit to your good nature and d^scretion.


Fourb. Then Wretch take this and make thy peace with the infernal King, he
loves Riches, sacrifice and be at rest.


Blood. It Is done: I Will follow thee, lead on, nay if thou smile, I more defy
thee* Eee, Fa, Fum.

[Exit.
Fourb. It Is very odd this.


Sir Dav. Very odd indeed I Am glad he is gone though.


Fourb. Now Sir, if you please we will refresh our selves with a cheerful glass,
and so Chaque un chez lui -- I would fain make the Gull drunk a little to put a
little mettle into him*


Sir Dav. With all my heart Sir, but no more words of the Devil, if you love me.


Fourb. The Devil's an Ass Sir, and here is a Health to all those that defy the
Devil


Sir Dav. With all my heart, and all his works too.


Fourb. Nay Sir, you must do me right I assure you.


Sir Dav. Not so full, I not so full, that is too much of all Conscience: in
(...) Friend these are sad times, very sad times: but here is to you.


Fourb. Po^ of the times, the times are well enough so long as a man has money
in his Pocket.


Sir Dav. It Is true, here I have been bargaining with you about a Murder, but
never consider that Idolatry is coming in full speed upon the Nation, pray what
Religion are you of Friend?


Fourb. What Religion am I of sir? Sir your humble Servant.


Sir Dav. Truly a good Conscience is a great happiness; and so I Will pledge you,
hemph, hemph, but shall not the Dog be Murdered this Night.


Fourb. My Brother Rogue is gone by this time to set him, and the business shall
be done effectually I Will warrant you, here is rest his soul.


Sir Dav. With all my Heart Faith, I hate to be uncharitable.


Enter Courtine, and Drawer. Cour. Look you it is a very impudent thing not to
be drunk by this time, shall Rogues stay in Taverns to sip Pints, and be Sober,
when honest Gentlemen are drunk by Gallons, I Will have none on it.


Sir Da. Oh Lord, whose's there?


[Sit up in his Chair. Drawer. I beseech your Honor, our house will be utterly
ruined by this means.


Cour. Damn your house, your Wife and Children, and all your Family, you Dog!


Beau. Sir, who are you.


[To Sir David. Sir Da. Who am I Sir? what is that to you, Sir? will you tickle
my Foot you Rouge!


Cour. I Will tickle your Guts you Paultroon presently.


Sir Da. Tickle my guts you Mad-Cap, I Will tickle your Toby if you do.


Cour. What with that circumsis'd Band? That grave hypocrytital Beard of the
reformation Cut? Old Fellow, I believe your a Rogue.


Sir Da. Sirrah you are a Whore, an errant Bitch-Whore, I Will use you like a
Whore, I Will kiss you, you Jade, I Will Ravish you, you Buttuck, I am a Justice of
the Peace, Sirrah, and that is worse.


Court Dam you, Sir, I care not if you were a Constable and all his Watch;
what, such a Rogue as you send honest Fellows to prison, and countenance Whores
in your Jurisdiction for bribery, you Mongrel, I Will beat you, Sirrah, I Will
brain you, I Will murder you, you Moon-Calf.


[Throws the Chairs after him. Sir Da. Sir, Sir, Sir, Constable, Watch, stokes,
stokes, stokes, murder --

[Ex.
Caur. Huzza, Beaugard!


[ Enter Beaugard, Sir Jolly. Four. Well, Sir, the busiuefs is done, we have
bargained to Murder you.


Beau. Murdered! whose to be murdered? ha, Fourbin!


Sir Iol. You are to be murdered, Friend, you shall be murdered, Friend.


Beau. But how am I to be murdered? Who Is to murder me, I beseech you?


Four. Your humble Servant, Fourbin, I am the man with your worships leave, Sir
David, has given me this gold to do it handsomely.


Beau. Sir David! uncharitable Cur, what Murder an honest Fellow for being
Civil to his Family? What can this mean Gentlemen?


Sir Iol. No it is for not being Civil to his Family, that it means Gentleman,
therefore are yo^ to be murdered to Night, and buried a Bed with my Lady, you
Jack Straw, you.


Beau. I understand you Friends, the old Gentleman has designed to have me
butchered and you have kindly contrived to turn it to my advantage in the
affair of Love, I am to be murdered but as it were Gentlemen, hah!


Four. Your Honor has a piercing Judgment: Sir, Captain Courtines gone.


Beau. No matter let him go, he has a design to put in practice this Night too,
and would perhaps but spoil ours; but when, Sir Jolly, is this business to be
brought about.


Sir Iol. Presently, it is more then time 'twere done already, go, get you gone
I say* hold, hold, let us see your left Ear first, hum -- ha -- you are a Rogue,
you are a Rogue, get you gone, get you gone, go.

[Exeunt.
SCENE changes to Covent Garden Piazza. Enter Sylvia and Maid in the Balcony.
Maid. But why Madam, will you use him so inhumanly? I Am confident he loves you.


Sylv. Oh! a true Lover is to be found out like a true Saint, by the Trial of
his patience; have you the Cords ready.


Maid. Here they are, Madam.


Sylv. Letv 'em down, and be sure what it comes to Trial, to pull lustily; is
Will. the Footman ready.


Will. At your Ladyships command, Madam.


Sylv. I wonder he should stay so long, the Clock has struck twelve.


Enter Courtine. Court. Sings. And was she not frank and free*
And was she not kind to me.
To lock up her Cat in her Cupboard,
And give her key to me, to me:
To lock up her Cat in her Cupboard,
And give her key to me.

Sylv. This must be he: Ay it is he, and as I am a Virgin roaring drunk; but if
I find not a way to make him sober --


Court. Here, here is the Window: Ay, that is Hell-door, and my damnation's in
the inside: Sylvia, Sylvia, Sylvia: Dear Imp of Satan appear to thy Servant.


Sylv. Who calls on Sylvia in this dead of night, when rest is wanting to her
longing eyes.


Cour. It Is a poor wretch can hardly stand upright drunk with thy Love, and if
he falls he lies.


Sylv. Courtine, is it you?


Court. Yes, Sweetheart it is I, art thou ready for me?


Sylv. Fasten your self to that Cord there; there, there it is.


Court. Cord! where? Oh, oh, here, here, so now to Heaven in a string.


Sylv. Have you done.


Court. Yes, I have done Child, and would sain be doing too Hussy.


Sylv. Then pull away, hoa up, hoa up, hoa up, so avast there, Sir.


Court. Madam.


Sylv. Are you very much in Love, Sir?


Court. Oh damnably Child, damnably.


Sylv. I Am sorry for it with all my heart, good Night Captain.


Court. Ha gone, what left in Erasinus Paradise between Heaven and Hell? If the
Constable should take me now for a straggling Monkey hung by the Loins, and hunt
me with his cry of Watchmen! Ah Woman, Woman, Woman, well a merry Life, and a
short, that is all.


Sings. God prosper long our Noble King,
Our Lives and Safeties all.
I am mighty loyal to Night.
Enter Fourbin, and Bloody-bones as from Sir David's House. Fourb. Murder,
Murder, Murder! help, help, Murder.


Court. Nay, if there be murder stirring, it is high time to shift formy self.


[Climbs up to the Balcony. Sylv. (Squeaking,) A h h h h!


Blood. Yonder, yonder he comes murder, murder, murder.

[ Ex. Blood, and Fourbin.
Enter Sir David. Sir Da. It Is very Late; but Murder is a melancholy business,
and Night is fit for it, I Will go home.


[Knocks. Verm. Who Is there?


Sir Da. Whose there? open the door you Whelp of Babylon.


Verm. Oh Sir, you are Welcome home; but here is the saddest news! here has been
murder committed, Sir.


Sir Da. Hold your Tongue you Fool, and go to sleep, get you in do you hear,
you talk of Murder you Rogue? you meddle with State Affairs? Get you in.


The Scene opens the middle of the House and discovers Sir Jolly and the Lady
putting Beaugard in order as if he were dead. Sir Iol. Ly still, ly still you
Knave, close, close when I bid you, you had best quest, and spoil the sport,
you had!


Beau. But pray how long must I lie thus?


Lady D. I Will warrant you, you will think the time mighty tedious.


Beau. Sweet Creature, who can counterfeit Death when you are near him?


Sir Iol. You shall Sirrah, if a body desires you a little, so you shall, we
shall spoil all else, all will be spoiled else Man, if you do not: Stretch out
longer, longer yet, as long as ever you can, so so, hold your breath, hold your
breath, very well.


[Enter Maid. May. Madam, here comes Sir David.


Sir Iol. Odds so, now close again as I told you, close you Devil, now stir if
you dare; stir but any part about you if you dare now; odd I hit you such a rap
if you do, lie still, lie you still.


[Enter Sir David. Sir Da. My Dear, how do thou do, my Dear? I am come.


Lady D. Ah Sir! what is it you have done? You Have ruined me, your Family, your
Fortune, all is ruined, where shall we go, or whither shall we fly?


Sir Da. Where shall we go, why we'll go to bed you little Jackadandy, why you
are not a Wench you Rogue, you are a Bo^, a very Boy, and I love you the better
for it, Sirrah hei! --


Lady D. Ah Sir, see there.


Sir Da. Bless us, a man! and bloody! what upon my Hall Table!


Lady D. Two Ruffians brought him in just now pronouncing the inhumane deed,
was done by your command, Sir Jolly came in the distracting Minu^e, or sure I
had died with my distracting Fears, how could you think on a revenge so horrid?


Sir Da. As I hope to be saved Neighbor I only bargained with 'em ^o Bastinado
him in a way, or so, as one Friend might do another, but do you say that he is
dead?


Sir Iol. Dead, dead as Clay; stark stiff and useless all, nothing about him
stirring, but all is cold and still, I knew him a lusty Fellow once, a very
metteled Fellow, it is a thousand pitties.


Sir Da. What shall I do? I Will throw my self upon him, kiss his wide wounds and
weep till blind as Buzzard.


Lady D. Oh come not near him, there is such horrid Antipathy follows all
murders, his wounds would stream afresh should you but touch him.


Sir Da. Dear Neighbor, Dearest Neighbor, Friend, Sir Jolly as you love
Charity pity my wretched Case, and give me Counsel, I Will give my Wife and all
my Estate to have him live again, or shall I bury him in the Arbor at the
upper end of the Garden.


Sir Iol. Alas a day Neighbor, never think on it, never think on it, the dogs
will find him there, as they scrape holes to bury bones in, there is but one
way that I know of.


Sir Da. What is it dear Neighbor, what is it? you see I am upon my knees to
you, take all I have and ease me of my fears.


Sir Iol. Truly the best thing that I can think of, is putting of him to bed,
putting him into a warm bed, and try to fetch him to life again, a warm bed is
the best thing in the World, my Lady may do much too, she is a good Woman, and
as Iv'e been told, understands a green wound well.


Sir Da. My dear, my dear, my dear!


Lady D. Bear me away, oh send me hence far off, where my unhappy name may be a
stranger; and this sad accident no more remembered to my dishonor.


Sir Da. Ah but my Love! my Joy! are there no bowels in thee.


Lady D. What would you have me do?


Sir Da. Prithee do so much as try thy skill, there may be one dram of life
left in him yet, take him up to thy Chamber, put him into thy own bed, and try
what thou can do with him; prithee do, if thou can but find motion in him,
all may be well yet, I Will go up to my Closet in the Garret, and say my prayers
in the mean while.


Lady D. Will ye then leave this ruin on my hands.


Sir Da. Pray, pray my Dear, I beseech you Neighbor help to persuade her if it
be possible.


Sir Iol. Faith Madam do, try what you can do, I have a great fancy you may do
him good: who can tell but you may have the gift of stroaking; pray Madam be
persuaded.


Lady D. I Will do what e'r's your pleasure.


Sir Da. That Is my best Dea^: I Will go to my Closet and pray for thee heartily,
Alas, alas, that ever this should happen --

Exit.
Beaug. So, is he gone, Madam my Angel!


Sir Iol. What no thanks, no reward for old Jolly now? Come hither Hussie, you
little Canary -bird, you little Hop of my thumb come hither: make me a
Court'sie, and give me a kiss now, hah! give me a kiss I say, odd I will have a
kiss, so I will, I will have a kiss if I set on it; shoogh, shoogh, shoogh, get
you into a corner when I bid you, shoogh, shoogh, shoogh, what there already?
[She goes to Beaugard. Well, I have done, I have done, this it is to be an old
Fellow now.


Beau. And will you save the life of him you have wounded?


Lady D. Dare you trust your self to my skill for a cure?


[ Sir Davy appears at a Window above. Sir Iol. Hist! hist! close, close, I say
again, yonder is Sir Davy, odds so!


Sir Da. My dear, my dear! my dear! --


Lady D. Whose that calls? my Love, is it you.


Sir Da. Ah some comfort, or my heart's broke* is there any hopes yet? I Have
tried to say my Prayers and cannot: if he be quite dead* I shall never pray
again; Neighbor, no hopes?


Sir Iol. Truly little or none, some small pulse I think there is left, very
little, there is nothing to be done if you don't pray, get you to prayers, what
ever you do, get you gone, nay don't stay now, shut the Window I tell you.


Sir Da. Well this is a great trouble to me, but good night.


Sir Iol. Good night to you dear Neighbor. Get ye up [ to Beaugard and Lady
D.] get ye up and be gone into the next room, presently, make haste: but don't
steal away till I come to you, be sure ye remember, don't ye stir till I come;
Pish, none of this bowing and fooling, it but loses time, I Will only bolt the
door that belongs to Sir Davy's Lodgings, that he may be safe, and he with you
in a twinkle, Ah, h, h, h! so now for the door, very well, Friend you are fast.


[Bolts the door. Sings. Bonney Lass began thou were mine,
And twonty thoosand poonds aboot thee, etc.
ACT. V.
Courtine bound on a Couch in Sylvia's Chamber. Cour. HEigho! heigho! ha! where
am I? was I drunk or no last night? something leaning that way. But where the
Devil am I? sincerely in a Bawdy House: Fogh! what a smell of sin is here! let
me look about; if there be ever a G^neva Bible or a Practice of Piety in the
room. I am sure I have guest right, what is the matter now! tied fast! bound
too! what tricks have I played to come into this condition! I have lighted into
the Territories of some merrily disposed Chamber maid or other, and she in a
witty sit forsooth has trust me up thus, has she pinned no rags to my tail, or
chalkt me upon the back trow? would I had her Mistress here at a venture:


Sylv. What would you do with her my enchanted Knight if you had her, you are
too sober for her by this time, next time you get drunk you may perhaps venture
to scale her Balcany like a valiant Captain as you are.


Cour. Have thou done this my dear destruction ^ and am I in thy limbo? I must
confess when I am in my Beer, my Courage does (...) away with me now and then:
but let me loose and thou shall see what a gentle humble Animal thou have made
me. Fie upon it, what tie me up like an ungovernable curr to the frame of a
table, let, let thy poor dog loose that he may fawn and make much of thee a
little.


Sylv. What with those Paws which you have been ferreting Moorfields withal,
and are very dirty still? after you have been daggling your self abroad for
prey, and can meet with none, you come sneaking hither for a crust, do you?


Maid. Shall I fetch the Whip and the Bell, Madam? and flash him for his
roguery soundly?


Cour. Indeed, indeed! do you long to be forking of man's flesh, Madam
Flea-trap? does the Chaplain of the Family use you to the exercise, that you
are so ready for it?


Sylv. If you should be let loose and taken into favor now; you would be for
rambling again so soon as you had got your liberty?


Cour. Do but try me, and if ever I prove recreant more, let me be beaten and
used like a dog in good earnest.


Sylv. Promise to grant me but one request, and it shall be done


Cour. Hear me but Swear.


Sylv. That any body may do ten thousand times a day.


Cour. Upon the word of a Gentleman, nay as I hope to get Money in my Pocket.


Sylv. There I believe him l^lye, you will keep your Word you say.


Cour. If I don't, hang me up in that Wenches old Garters.


Sylv. See Sir, you have your freedom.


Cour. Well now name the price; what must I pay for it?


Sylv. You know Sir, considering our small acquaintance, you have been pleased
to talk to me very freely of love matters.


Cour. I must confess, I have been something to blame that way, but if ever
thou hear more of it from my mouth after this nights adventure, would I were
well out of the House!


Sylv. Have a care of swearing, I beseech you, for you must understand, that
spite of my teeth, I am at last fallen in love most unmercifully.


Cour. And do thou imagine I am so hard-hearted a Villain as to have no
compassion of thee.


Sylv. No, for I hope he is a man you can have no exceptions against.


Cour. Yes, yes, the man is a man, I Will assure you, that is one comfort


Sylv. Who do you think it may be now? try if you can guess him.


Cour. Whoever he is, he is an honest fellow I Will warrant him, and I believe will
not think himself very unhappy neither.


Sylv. If a Fortune of 5000 pounds, pleasant nights, and quiet days can make
him happy, I assure you he may be so, but try once to guess at him.


Cour. But if I should be mistaken.


Sylv. Why who is it you would wish me to?


Cour. You have 5000 pound you say?


Sylv. Yes.


Cour. Faith Child to deal honestly I know well enough who it is I wish for, but
Sweetheart, before I tell you my inclinations, it were but reasonable that I
knew yours.


Sylv. Well Sir, because I am confident you will stand my friend in the
business, I Will make a discovery, and to hold you in suspense no longer, you must
know I have a months-mind to an Arm full of your dearly beloved friend and
brother Captain, what say you to it?


Cour. Madam your humble Servant, good buy, that is all.


Sylv. What thus cruelly leave a Lady that so kindly took you in in your last
nights pickle into her Lodging, whither would you rove now, my Wanderer?


Cour. Faith Madam, you have dealt so gallantly in trusting me with your
passion, that I cannot stay here without telling you, that I am three times as
much in love with an acquaintance of yours, as you can be with any friend of
mine.


Sylv. Not with my waiting Woman I hope, Sir.


Cour. No, but it is with a certain Kinswoman of thine Child, they call her my
Lady Dunce, and I think this is her House too, they say she will be civil upon
a good occasion, therefore prithee be charitable, and show me the way to her
Chamber a little.


Sylv. What commit Adultery Captain, fie upon it! What hazard your soul!


Cour. No, no, only venture my body a little, that is all; look you, you know
the secret, and may imagine my desires, therefore as you would have me assist
your inclinations, pray be civil and help me to mine, look you, no demurring
upon the matter, no qualms, but show me the way, or you Hussie, you shall do it,
any ^awd will serve at present, for I will go.


Sylv. But you shall not go, Sir.


Cour. Shall Not go, Lady?


Sylv. No, shall not go, Sir* did I not tell you when once you had got your
liberty, that you would be rambling again.


Cour. Why Child, would thou be so uncharitable to tie up a poor Jade to an
empty Rack in thy Stable, when he knows where to go elsewhere and get Provender
enough.


Sylv. Any musty Provender, I find, will serve your turn, so you have it but
cheap, or at another man's charges.


Cour. No Child, I had rather my Ox should graze in a Field of my own, than
live hide-bound upon the Common, or run the hazard of being Pounded every day
for ^respasse^.


Sylv. Truly all things considered, it is great pity so good a Husband man as
you should want a Farm to cultivate.


Cour. Would thou be but kind, and let me have a ^argain in a Tenement of
thine, to try how it would agree with me.


Sylv. And would you be contented to take a Lease for your Life.


Cour. So pretty a Lady of the Manor and a moderate Rent.


Sylv. Which you will be sure to pay very punctually.


Cour. If thou doubtest my honesty, faith even take a little earnest before
hand.


Sylv. Not so hasty neither, good Tenant; Imprimis, You shall oblige your self
to a constant residence, and not by leaving the House uninhabited, let it run
to repairs.


Cour. Agreed.


Sylv. Item, For your own sake you shall promise to keep the Estate wel^ (...),
and enclosed least sometime or other your Neighbors Cattle break in and spoil
the crop on the Ground Friend.


Cour. Very just and reasonable, provided I don't find it lie too much to
Common already.


Sylv. Item, You shall enter into strict Covenant, not to take any other Farm
upon your hands, without my consent and approbation, or if you do, that then it
shall be lawful for me to get me another Tenant, how and where I think sit.


Cour. Faith that is something hard though, let me tell you but that Landlady.


Sylv. Upon these terms we will draw Articles.


Cour. And when shall we Sign 'em.


Sylv. Why this morning as soon as the ten a Clock Office in Covent Garden is
open.


Cour. A bargain, but how will you answer your entertainment of a drunken
Red-coat in your Lodgings at these unseasonable hours.


Sylv. That Is a secret you will be hereafter obliged to keep for your own sake,
and for the Family, your Friend Beaugard shall answer for us there.


Cour. Indeed I fancied the Rogue had mischief in his head, he behaved himself
so soberly last night, has he taken a Farm lately too.


Sylv. A trespasser, I believe, if the truth were known upon the Provender you
would fain have been biting at just now.


Enter Maid. Maid. Madam, Madam, have a care of your self; I see Lights in the
great Hall, whatever is the matter, Sir Davy and all the Family are up.


Cour. I hope they will come and catch me here: Well, now you have brought me into
this condition, what will you do with me, hah!


Sylv. You will not be contented for a while to be tied up like a ^ade to an empty
Rack without Hay, will you?


Cour. Faith even take me, and put my mark upon me quickly, that if I light
into strange hands they may know me for a Sheep of thine.


Sylv. What by your wanting a Fleece do you mean? If it must be so come follow
your Sheperdess B a a a.


[Exeunt. Enter Sir. Davy and Vermin. Sir Da. I cannot sleep, I shall never
sleep again, I have prayed too so long, that were I to be hanged presently, I
have never a prayer left to help my self, I was no sooner lay'n down upon the
Bed just now, and fallen into a slumber, but methought the Devil was carrying me
down Ludgate Hill a Gallop, six puny Fiends with flaming Fire-forks running
before him like Link boys, to throw me headlong into Fleet^^^ch, which seemed
to be turned into a lake of Fire and Brimstone; would it were Morning.


Verm. Truly, Sir, it has been a very dismal night.


Sir Da. But did thou meet never a white thing upon the stairs.


Verm. No, Sir, not I, but methoughts I saw our great Dog Touzer, with his
brass Collar on, stand at the Cellar-door as I came along the old Entry.


Sir Da. It could never be, Touzer has a Chain, had this thing a Chain on?


Verm. No Sir, no Chain but it had Touzers eyes for all the World.


Sir Da. What ugly great frightful eyes?


Verm. Ay, Ay, huge sauser eyes, but mightily like Touzers.


Sir Da. Oh Lord! oh Lord! hark! hark!


Verm. What! what I beseech you Sir!


Sir Da. What Is that upon the stairs? did thou hear nothing? hist, hark,
pat, pat, pat, hark, heih!


Verm. Hear nothing! where Sir.


Sir Da. Look! look! what is that! what is that! in the corner there?


Verm. Where?


Sir Da. There.


Verm. What upon the Iron ^h^st?


Sir Da. No, the long black thing up by the old Clock-case, see! see! now it
stirs, and is coming this way.


Verm. Alas, Sir, speak to it, you are a Justice 'o peace, I beseech you, I
dare not stay in the House: I Will call the Watch and tell' em Hell's broke loose,
what shall I do? oh!

[Exit.
Sir Da. Oh Vermin, if thou art a true Servant have pity on thy Master, and do
not forsake me in this distressed condition, Satan ^e gone, I defy thee, I Will
repent and be saved, I Will say my prayers, I Will go to Church; help! help! help!
was there any thing, or no, in what hole shall I hide my self.

[Exit.
Enter Sir Jolly, Fourbin and Bloody-bones. Sir Iol. That should be Sir Davy's
voice, the waiting Woman indeed told me he was afraid and could not sleep,
pretty Fellows, pretty Fellows both you have done your business handsomely, what
I Will warrant you have been a Whoring together now hah! You do well, you do
dwell, I like you the better for it, what is a Clock?


Four. Near four, Sir, 'twill not be day yet these two hours.


Sir Iol. Very well, but how got ye into the House?


Fourb. A ragged retainer of the Family, Vermin I think they call him, let us
in as Physicians sent for by your Order.


Sir Iol. Excellent Rogues! and then I hope all things are ready as I gave
Directions.


Fourb. To a tittle, Sir, there shall not be a more critical Observer of your
Worships pleasure than your humble Servant the Chevalier Fourbin.


Sir Iol. Get you gone you Rogue, You have a sharp Nose, and are a nimble
Fellow; I have no more to say to you, stand aside* and be ready when I call,
here he comes, hist, hem, hem, hem.


Enter Sir Dary. Sir Da. Hah! what art thou? approach thou like the rugged
Bank-side Bear, the Eastcheap-bull, or Monster shown in Fair, take any shape
but that, and I Will confront thee.


Sir Iol. Alas unhappy Man! I am thy Friend.


Sir Da. Thou caust not be my Friend for I defy thee, Sir Jolly! Neighbor!
hah! is it you? are you sure it is you, are you? Your self? if you be give me
your hand, Alas a day I have seen the Devil.


Sir Iol. The Devil Neighbor!


Sir Da. Ay, Ay, there is no help for it, at first I fancied it was a young white
Bears Cub danceing in the shadow of my Candle, then ^ was turned to a pair of
blew Breaches with wooden legs on, stamped about the room as if all the
Cripples in Town had kept their Rendezvouze there, when all of a sudden it
appeard like a leathern Serpent, and with a dreadful clap of Thunder flew out
of the Window.


Sir Iol. Thunder! Why I heard no Thunder.


Sir Da. That may be too, what were you asleep?


Sir Iol. A sleep quotha, no, no, no sleeping this Night for me I assure you.


Sir Da. Well what is the best news then? How does the Man?


Sir Iol. Even as he did before he was born, nothing at all, he is Dead.


Sir Da. Dead! what quite dead!


Sir Iol. As good as dead, if not quite dead, 'twas a horrid Murder, and then
the terror of Conscience, Neighbor.


Sir Da. And truly I have a very terrified one, Friend, though I never found I
had any Conscience at all till now, pray where about was his death's wound?


Sir Iol. Just here, just under his left Pap, a dreadful gash.


Sir Da. So very wide!


Sir Iol. Oh, as wide as my Hat, you might have seen his Lungs, Liver and
Heart, as perfectly, as if you had been in his Belly.


Sir Da. Is there no way to have him privately Buried and conceal this Murder,
must I needs be hanged by the neck like a Dog, Neighbor; do I look as if I
would be hanged?


Sir Iol. Truly, Sir Davy, I must deal faithfully with you, you do look a
little suspitiously at present; but have you seen the Devil, say you?


Sir Da. Ay surely, it was the Devil, nothing else could have frighted me so.


Sir Iol. Bless us and guard us all the Angels, what is that?


Sir Da. Potestati sempiternaec ujus benevolentia servantur gentes, and cujus
m^sericordia.


Kneels, holding up his hands and mut'ring as if he prayed Sir Iol. Neighbor,
where are you, Friend, Sir Davy.


Sir Da. Ah, what ever you do, be sure to stand close to me, where, where is it?


Sir Iol. Just, just there, in the shape of a Coach and six Horses against the
wall.


Sir Da. Deliver us all, he will not carry me away in that Coach and six will he?


Sir Iol. Do you see it?


Sir Da. See it! plain, plain, dear Friend advise me what I shall do? Sir
Jolly, Sir Jolly, do you hear nothing? Sir Jolly, Hah! has he left me alone!
Vermin.


Verm. Sir.


Sir Da. Am I alive? do thou know me again? Am I thy Quondam Master, Sir Davy
Dunce?


Verm. I hope I shall never forget you, Sir.


Sir Da. Did thou see nothing?


Verm. Yes, Sir, methought the House was all of fire as it were.


Sir Da. Did thou not see how the Devils grinn'd and gnasht their teeth at
me Vermin?


Verm. Alas, Sir, I was afraid one of 'em would have bit off my Nose, as he
vanished out of the door.


Sir Da. Lead me away, I Will go to my Wise, I Will die by my own dear Wife; run away
to the Temple and call Councellor my Lawyer, I Will make over my Estate presently,
I shall not live till noon, I Will give all I have to my Wife, Hah Vermin!


Verm. Truly, Sir, she is a very good Lady.


Sir Da. Ah much, much too good for me Vermin, thou can not imagine what she
has done for me Man, she would break her heart if I should give any thing away
from her, she loves me so dearly: Yet if I do die, thou shall have all my old
Shoes.


Verm. I hope to see you live Many a fair day yet though.


Sir Da. Ah, my Wife, my poor Wife, lead me to my poor Wife.


[Exeunt. Scene draws and discovers Sir Jolly, Beaugard, and Lady in her
Chamber. Lady D. What think you now of a cold wet March over the Mountains,
Your men tired, your Baggage not come up, but at night a dirty watery Plain to
Encamp upon, and nothing to shelter you, but an old Leager Cloak as tattered as
your Colors? is not this much better now than lying wet and getting the
Sciatica?


Beaug. The hopes of this made all Fatigue easy to me, the thoughts of
Clarinda have a thousand times (...) me in my solitude, when e're I Marched, I
fancied still it was to my Clarinda! when I fought, I imagined it was for my
Clarinda! but when I came home, and found Clarinda lost! -- how could you think
of wasting but a night in the rank surfeiting arms of this foul feeding
Monster? this rotten trunck of a Man* that lays claim to you.


Lady D. The persuasion of Friends and the Authority of Parents!


Beaug. And had you no more Grace, than to be ruled by a Father and Mother?


Lady D. When you were gone, that should have given me better Counsel, how
could I help my self?


Beaug. Methinks then you might have found out some cleanlier shift to have
thrown away your self upon, than nauseous old age and unwholesome deformity.


Lady D. What upon some overgrown full fed Country Fool, with a Horse Face, a
great ugly Head, and a great fine Estate, one that should have been drained and
squeezed, and jolted up and down the Town in (...) with Cheats and Hectors, and
so sent home at three of Clock every Morning like a lolling Booby stinking,
with a belly full of s^^mm'd Wine, and nothing in's Pockets.


Beaug. You might have made a tractable Beast of such a one, he would have been
young enough for Training.


Lady D. Is youth then so gentle if age be stubborn? Young men like Springs
wrought by a subttle work man, easily ply to what their wishes press 'em, but
the desire once gone that kept 'em down, they soon start straight again, and no
signs left which way they bent before.


Sir Jolly (...) the door peeping. Sir Iol. So, so, who says I see any thing
now? I see nothing not I, I don't see, I don't see, I don't look, not so much
as look not I.


[Enters. Enter Sir Davy. Sir Da. I will have my Wife, carry me to my Wife, let
me go to my Wife, I Will live and die with my Wife, let the Devil do his worst;
Ah, my Wife, my Wife, my Wife! --


Lady D. Alas, alas, we are ruined, shift for your self, counterfeit the dead
(...) more, or any thing.


Sir Da. Hah! what foe're thou art, thou can not eat me, speak to me, who has
done this? thou can not say I did it.


Sir Iol. Did it, did what? here is no body says you did any thing that I know,
Neighbor, what is the matter with you? what ailes you? whither do you go?
whither do you (...)? I tell you here is no ^ody says a word to you.


Sir Da. Did you not see the Ghost just now?


Sir Iol. Ghost! prithee now here is no Ghost, whither* would you go? I tell
you, you shall not stir one foot farther Man, the Devil take me if you do;
Ghost, prithee here is no Ghost at all, a little flesh and blood indeed there
is, some old, some young, some alive, some dead, and so forth, but Ghost! Pish,
here is no Ghost.


Sir Da. But, Sir, If I say I did see a Ghost, I did see a Ghost, and you go to
that, why sure I know a Ghost when I see one: Ah my Dear, if thou had but
seen the Devil half so often as I have seen him.


Lady Da. Alas, Sir Davy, if you ever loved me, come not, oh come not near me*
I have resolved to waste the short remainder of my Life in Penitence, and taste
of Joys no more.


Sir Da. Alas my poor Child, but do you think then there was no Ghost indeed.


Sir Iol. Ghost! Alas a day, what should a Ghost do here?


Sir Da. And is the man dead?


Sir Iol. Dead, Ay, ay, stark dead, he is stiff by this time.


Lady D. Here you may see the horrid ghastly Speetacle the sad effects of my
too rigid Virtue, and your too ^ierce resentment --


Sir Iol. Do you see there?


Sir Da. Ay, ay, I do see, would I had never seen him, wou^ld he had lain with
my Wife in every House between Charen-Cross and Ald-Gate, so this had never
happened.


Sir Iol. In Troth, and would he had, but we are all mortal Neighbor, all
mortal, to day we are here, to morrow gone, like the shadow that vanishes,
like the Grass that withers, or like the Flower that ^adeth, or indeed like
any thing, or rather like nothing: but we are all mortal.


Sir Da. Heigh! --


Lady. D. Down, down that trap door, it goes into a bathing-Room, for the rest,
leave it to my Conduct.


Sir Iol. It Is very unfortunate that you should run your self into this
praemunire, Sir David.


Sir Da. Indeed, and so it is.


Sir Iol. For a Gentleman, a man in Authority, a person in years, one that used
to go to Church with his Neighbors.


Sir Da. Every Sundy, truly, Sir Jolly.


Sir Iol. Pay Scot and Lot to the Parish.


Sir Da. Six pounds a year to the very Poor without abatement or deduction,
it is very hard, if so good a common-Wealths-man should be brought to ride in a
Cart at last, and be hanged in a Sun-shiny morning, to make Butchers and suburd
Apprentices a Holyday; I Will even run away.


Sir Iol. Run away! why then your estate will be forseited, you will loose your
Estate man.


Sir Da. Truly, you say right, Friend, and a Man had better be half hanged then
loose his Estate, you know.


Sir Iol. Hanged! no, no, I think there is no great fear of Hanging neither;
what, the Fellow was but a sort of an unaccountable Fellow as I heard you say.


Sir Da. Ay, ay, a (...) on him, he was a Souldierly sort of a Vagabond, he had
little or nothing but his sins to live upon* If I could have had but Patience,
he would have been hanged within these two Months, and all this mischief saved.


Beaugard Rises up like a Ghost at a trap door, just before Sir David. Sir Da.
Ah Lord! the Devil, the Devil, the Devil.


[Falls upon his Face. Sir Iol. Why, Sir Davy, Sir Davy, what ailes you? What Is
the matter with you?


Sir Da. Let me alone, let me lie still, I will not look up to see an Angel, O
h h h.


Lady D. My Dear, why do you do these cruel things to affright me? Pray rise
and speak to me.


Sir Da. I dare dot stir, I saw the Ghost again just now.


Lady D. Ghost again! what Ghost? Where?


Sir Da. Why, there, there.


Sir Iol. Here has been no Ghost.


Sir Da. Why did you see nothing then?


Lady D. See nothing! no, nothing but one another.


Sir Da. Then I am enchanted, or my end near at hand, Neighbor, for Heavens
sake Neighbor advise me what I shall do to be at rest.


Sir Iol. Do! why what think you if the Body were removed?


Sir Da. Removed! I Would give a hundred pound the Body were out of my House; may
be then the Devil would not be so impudeut.


Sir Iol. I have discovered a door place in the Wall, betwixt my Ladies Chamber
and one that belongs to me, if you think fit, we'll beat it down and remove
this trouble some lump of Earth to my House.


Sir Da. But will ye be so kind!


Sir Iol. If you think it may by any means be serviceable to you.


Sir Da. Truly if the Body were removed, and disposed of privately that no more
might be heard of the matter -- I hope he will be as good as his word.


Sir Iol. Fear nothing I Will warrant you, but in troth, I had utterly forgot one
thing, utterly forgot it.


Sir Da. What Is that is?


Sir Iol. Why it will be absolutely necessary that my Lady staid with me at my
House for one day till things were better settelled.


Sir Da. Ah, Sir Jolly! whatever you think fit: any thing of mine that you have
a mind to; pray take ^er, pray take her, you shall be very welcome; hear you my
dearest, there is but one way for us to get rid of this untoward business, and
Sir Jolly has found it out, therefore by all means go along with him, and be
ruled by him, and whatev^r Sir Jolly would have thee do, even do it, so heaven
prosper ye, good b'w'y, good b'w'y till I see you again.

[Exit.
Sir Iol. This is certainly, the civillest Cuckold in City, Town or Country.


Beau. Is he gone?

[Steps out.
Lady D. Yes, and has left poor me here.


Beau. In troth, Madam, it is barbarously done of him, to commi a horrid murder
on the Body of an innocent poor Fellow, and then leave you to stem the danger
of it.


Sir Iol. Odd an I were as thee Sweetheart I Would be revenged on him for it, so I
would: Go get ye together, steal out of the house as softly as you can, I Will
meet ye in the Piazza presently, go, be sure ye steal out of the House, and
don't let Sir Davy see you.

The Scene shuts, and Sir Jolly comes forwards. Enter Bloody-bones.
Bloody-bones.


Blood. I am here, Sir.


Sir Iol. Go you and Fourbine to my House presently, bid Monsieur Fourbin
remember that all things be ordered according to my directions, tell my Maids
too I am coming home in a trice, bid 'em get the great Chamber, and the Banquet
I spoke for ready presently, and do you hear carry the minstrells with ye too,
for I Am resolved to rejoice this morning, let me see -- Sir Davy.


Enter Sir Davy. Sir. Da. Ay Neighbor, it is I; is the business done? I cannot
be satisfied till I am sure, have you removed the body, is it gone?


Sir Iol. Yes, yes, my Servants conveyed it out of the House just now; well Sir
Davy, a good morning to you: I wish you your health with all my Heart Sir Davy,
the first thing you do though, I Would have you say your prayers by all means if
you can.


Sir Da. If I can possibly, I will.


Sir Iol. Well God b'w'y.

[Exit Sir Jolly.
Sir Da. God b'w'y heartily good Neighbor -- Vermin, Vermin.


Enter Vermin. Verm. Did your Honor call?


Sir Da. Go, run, run, presently over the square, and call the Constable
presently, tell him here is murder committed, and that I must speak with him
instantly -- I Will even carry him to my Neighbors, that he may find the dead
body there, and so let my Neighbor be very fairly hanged in my stead, hah! a
very good jest as I hope to live, ha, ha, ha* hey, what is that?

Watchmen at the Door. Almost 4 a Clock and a dark cloudy morning, good morrow
my Masters all, good morrow.


Enter Constable, and Watch. Constable. How Is this! a door open, come in Gentlemen,
-- ah, Sir Davy, your honors humble servant! I and my Watch going my morning
Rounds, and finding your door open made bold to enter to see there were no
danger, your Worship will excuse our care, a good morning to you, Sir.


Sir Da. Oh Mr. Constable, I Am glad you're here, I sent my man just now to call
you, I have sad news to tell you, Mr. Constable.


Constable. I am sorry for that, Sir, sad news!


Sir Da. Oh ay, sad news, very sad news truly: here has been murder committed.


Constable. Murder; if that is all we are your humble servants, Sir, we'll bid you
good morrow, murders nothing at this time of night in Covent Garden.


Sir Dav. Oh but this is a horrid bloody murder, done under my Nose, I cannot
bu^ take notice of it; though I am sorry to tell you the Authors of it, very
sorry truly.


Constable. Was it committed here near hand?


Sir Da. Oh at the very next door, a sad murder indeed; after they had done
they carried the body privately into my Neighbor Iollies House here, I am
sorry to tell it you Mr. Constable, for I am afraid it will look but scurvily
on his side; though I am a Justice o'Peace Gentlemen, and am bound by my Oath
to take notice of it, I cannot help it.


^ Watch. I never liked that Sir Jolly.


Constable. He threatened me the other day, for carrying a little dirty draggle-tail'd
Whore to Bridewell, and said she was his Cousin, Sir if your Worship thinks
sit, we'll go search his house.


Sir Da. Oh by all means, Gentlemen it must be so, Justice must have it is
course, the Kings liege subjects must not be destroyed, Vermin, carry Mr.
Constable and his Dragons into the Cellar, and make (...) drink, I Will but step
into my study, put on my Face of Authority, and call upon ye instantly.


All Watchm. We thank your honor.


Scene changes to Sir Jollies, A Banquet. Enter Sir Jolly, Beaugard, and Lady
Dunce* Sir Iol. So, are ye come? I am glad on it, odd you are welcome, very
welcome, odd ye are, here is a small Banquet, but I hope 'twill please you, sit
ye down, sit ye down, both together, nay, both together: A Pox o'him that parts
ye, I say.


Beaug. Sir Jolly, this might be an entertainment for Anthony and Cleopatra,
were they living.


Sir Jolly. Pish! A Pox of Anthony and Cleopatra, they are dead and rotten long
ago, come, come, time's but short, time's but short, and must be made the best
use of; for Youth's a flower that soon does fade,
And life is but a span,
Man was for the Woman made,
And Woman made for Man.
Why now we can be bold, and make merry, and frisk, and be brisk, rejoice and
make a noise, and -- odd, I am pleased, mightily pleased, odd I am.


Lady D. Really, Sir Jolly, you are more a Philosopher then I thought you were.


Sir Iol. Philosopher, Madam! Yes, Madam, I have read Books in my times; odd
Aristotle, in some things, had very pretty notions, he was an understanding
Fellow. Why don't ye eat odd an' ye don't eat, -- here Child, here is some
Ringoes, help, help your Neighbor a little, odd they are very good, very
comfortable, very cordial.


Beaug. Sir Jolly, your Health.


Sir Iol. With all my heart, old Boy.


Lady D. Dear Sir Jolly what are these? I never tasted of these before.


Sir Iol. That! eat it, eat it, eat it when I bid you; odd it is the root
Satyrion, a very precious plant, I gather 'em every May my self, odd they will
make an old Fellow of sixty-five cut a Caper like a Dancing Master; give me
some Wine: Madam, here is a health, here is a health Madam, here is a health to
honest Sir Davy, faith and troth, ha, ha, ha.


[Dance. Enter Bloody-bones. Blood. Sir, Sir, Sir! What will you do? yonder is
the Constable and all his Watch at the Door, and threatens demollishment, if
not admitted presently.


Sir Iol. Odds so! odds so! the Constable and his Watch! what is to be done now?
get ye both into the Alcove there, get ye gone quickly, quickly, no noise, no
noise, do you hear the Constable and his Watch! A Pox on the Constable and his
Watch, what the Devil have the Constable and his Watch to do here?


Enter Constable, Watch, and Sir Davy. Scene shuts, Sir Jolly comes forward.
Constable. This way, this way, Gentlemen, stay one of ye at the door, and let no
body pass, do you hear? Sir Jolly, your servant.


Sir Iol. What this outrage, this disturbance committed upon my House and
Family; Sir, Sir, Sir* What do you mean by these doings sweet Sir? h^h! --


Constable. Sir having received information that the body of a murdered Man is
concealed in your House, I am come, according to my duty, to make search and
discover the truth, -- stand to my assistance, Gentlem^n.


Sir Iol. A murdered man, Sir*


Sir Da. Yes a murdered Man Sir, Sir Jolly, Sir Jolly, I am sorry to see a
person of your Character and Figure in the Parish concerned in Murder I say.


Sir Iol. Here Is a Dog! here is a Rogue for you, here is a Villain, here is a
Cockoldly Son of his Mother, I never knew a Cuckold in my life, that was not a
false Rogue in his heart, there are no honest Fellows living but Whore-masters;
hark you, Sir, what a Pox do you mean* you had best play the fool and spoil
all, you had, what is all this for*


Sir Da. When your Worship's come to be hanged you will find the meaning on it,
Sir* I say once more, search the House.


Constable. It shall be done, Sir, come-a-long Friends.


( Exit Constable and Watch. Sir Iol. Search my House, oh Lord, search my
House, what will become of me? I shall lose my reputation with Man and Woman,
and no body will ever trust me again: Oh Lord, search my House, all will be
discovered do what I can; I Will sing a Song like a dying Swan, and try to give
'em warning.

Go from the Window, my Love, my Love, my Love,
Go from the Window, my Dear.
The Wind and the Rain
Has brought 'em back again,
And thou can have no L^dging here.
Oh Lord, search my House!


Sir Da. Break down that door, I Will have that Door broke open, break down that
door, I say.


[Knocking within. Sir Iol. Very well done, break down my doors! break down my
walls, Gentlemen! plunder my House! ravish my Maids! Ah cursed be Cuckolds,
Cuckolds, Constables and Cockolds.


Scene draws and discovers Beaugard and Lady Dunce. Beaug. Stand off, by heaven
the first that comes here comes upon his death.


Sir Da. Sir, your humble servant, I am glad to see you are alive again with
all my heart; Gentlemen, here is no harm done Gentlemen, here is no body murdered
Gentlemen, the Man's alive again Gentlemen, but here is my Wife Gentlemen, and a
fine Gentleman with her, Gentlemen and Mr. Constable, I hope you will bear me
witness Mr. Constable.


Sir Iol. That he is a Cuckold, Mr. Constable.


[Aside Beaug. Hark ye, ye Currs, keep off from snapping at my heels, or I
shall so feague ye.


Sir Iol. Get ye gone ye Dogs, ye Rogues, ye night Toads of the Parish Dungeon,
disturb my House at these unseasonable hours, get ye out of my doors, get ye
gone, or I Will brain ye, Dogs, Rogues, Villains.

[ Exeunt Constable and Watch.
Beaug* And next, for you Sir Coxcomb, you see I am not murdered though you
paid well for the performance; what think you of bribing my own Man to Butcher
me. Enter Fourbin and Bloody-bones. Look ye Sir, he can cut a Throat upon
occasion, and here is another dresses a man's heart with Oil and Pepper, better
than any Cook in Christendom.


Fourb. Will your Worship please to have one for your Breakfast this morning?


Sir Da. with all my heart, Sweetheart, any thing in the World faith and
troth, ha, ha, ha, this is the purest sport, ha ha ha.


Enter Vermin. Verm. Oh, Sir, the most unhappy and most unfortunate news! There
has been a Gentleman in Madam Sylvia's Chamber all this night, who just as you
went out of doors, carried her away, and whither they are gone, no body knows.


Sir Da. With all my heart, I am glad on it Child, I would not care if he had
carried away my House and all, Man; unhappy news quotha! poor Fool, he does not
know I am a Cuckold, and that any body may make bold with what belongs to me,
ha, ha, ha; I am so pleased, ha, ha, ha. I think I was never so pleased in all
my life before, ha, ha, ha.


Beaug. Nay, Sir, I have a hanck upon you, there are Laws for Cutthroats, Sir,
and as you tender your future credit, take this wronged Lady home, and use her
handsomely, use her like my Mistress, Sir, do you mark me, that when we think
fit to meet again, I hear no complaint of you, this must be done Friend.


Sir Iol. In troth, and it is but reasonable, very reasonable in troth.


Lady D. Can you, my Dear, forgive me one misfortune.


Sir Da. Madam, in one word, I am thy Lady-ships most humble Servant and
Cuckold, Sir Davy Dunce Knight. Living in Covent Garden, ha, ha, ha, well this is
mighty pretty, ha, ha, ha.


Enter Sylvia followed by Courtine. Sylv. Sir Jolly, ah, Sir Jolly, protect me
or I Am ruined.


Sir Iol. My little Minikin, is it thy squeek?


Beaug. My dear Courtine, welcome.


Sir Iol. Well Child, and what would that wicked Fellow do to thee Child? hah
Child, Child, what would he do to thee?


Sylv. Oh, Sir, he has most inhumanely seduced me out of my Uncle's House, and
threatens to marry me.


Court. Nay, Sir, and she having no more Grace before her eyes neither, has
even taken me at my word.


Sir Iol. In troth, and that is very uncivilly done* I don't like these
Marriages, I Will have no Marriages in my House, and there is an end on it.


Sir Da. And do you intend to marry my Niece, Friend?


Court. Yes, Sir, and never ask your consent neither.


Sir Da. In troth, and that is very well said, I am glad on it with all my heart,
Man, because she has five thousand pound to her Portion, and my Estate's bound
to pay it; well, this is the happiest day, ha, ha, ha.

Here, take thy Bride, like Man and Wife agree,
And may she prove as true -- as mine to me.
Ha, ha, ha.

Beaug. Courtine, I wish thee Joy, thou art come opportunely to be a Witness of
a perfect Reconcilement between me and that worthy Knight, Sir Davy Dunce,
which to preserve inviolate, you must, Sir, before we part enter into such
Covenants for performance as I shall think sit.


Sir Da. No more to be said, it shall be done Sweetheart, but don't be too
hard upon me, use me Gently as thou did my Wife, Gently, ha, ha, ha; a very
good Jest, I 'faith, ha, ha, ha, or if he should be cruel to me, Gentlemen,
and take this advantage over a poor Cornuto, to lay me in a Prison, or throw me
in a Dungeon, at least

I hope Amongst all you, Sirs, I shall not fail
To find one Brother-Cuckold out for Bail.

Epilogue.
WIth the discharge of Passions much oppressed,
Disturbed in Brain, and pensive in his Breast,
Full of those thoughts which make the unhappy sad,
And by Imagination half grown mad,
The Poet led abroad his Mourning Muse,
And let her range, to see what sport she would choose,
Strait like a Bird got loose, and on the Wing,
Pleased with her freedom, she began to Sing;
Each Note was Echoed all the Vale along*
And this was what she uttered in her Song.
Wretch, write no more for an uncertain fame,
Nor call thy Muse, when thou art dull, to blame:
Consider with thy self how thou art Unfit
To make that Monster of Mankind, a Wit:
A Wit's a Toad, who swelled with silly pride,
Full of himself, scorns all the World beside;
Civil would seem, though he good manners lacks.
Smiles on all faces, rails behind all backs:
If e're good natured, naught to Ridicule,
Good nature melts a Wit into a Fool;
Placed high, like some Iack-Pudding in a Hall
At Christmas Revels he makes sport for all.
So much in little praises he delights,
But when he is angry draws his Pen and Writes:
A Wit to no man will his dues allow,
Wits will not part with a good Word that is due:
So who e're Ventures on the Ragged Coast
Of starving Poets, certainly is lost,
They rail like Porters at the Penny-Post.
At a new Author's Play see one but sit
Making his snarling froward face of Wit,
The Merit he allows, and Praise he grants,
Comes like a Tax from a poor Wretch that wants.
O Poets, have a care of one another,
There Is hardly one amongst ye true to to'ther:
Like Trincalo's and Stephano's ye Play,
The lewdest tricks each other to betray.
Like Foes detract, yet flattering friendlike smile,
And all is one another to beguile
Of Praise, the Monster of your Barren Isle:
Enjoy the prostitute ye so admire
Enjoy her to the full of your desire,
Whilst this poor Sribler wishes to retire,
Where he may never repeat his Follies more,
But Curse the Fate that wrackt him on your Shore.
Now you, who this day as his Judges sit,
After you have heard what he has said of Wit,
Ought for your own sakes not to be severe
But show so much to think he meant none here.
FINIS.

