The EXTRAVAGANT POET Novel.



THE Extravagant POET.

A Comical NOVEL, Wherein is Described his many Pleasant Folies.

Translated out of French, by G. R. Gent.

Printed for B. M. at the Sign of Pegasus, at the Foot of Parnassus his Hill,
1681.

THE Extravagant POET.
UPon a certain time, as I went out of my Lodging in a Morning, with a design
to go a Walking, merely for a little Divertisement, and to pass away a few
Melancholy Love-fits; it was my Fortune, to light into a little blind Tavern;
and being set down upon a Bench, I began to say to my self (after a languishing
manner, with a deep and far-fetcht sigh): Ah, my dear Colombine, thou art the
only Object of my Affections, and ever shall be so, in spite of all the rigor
of my hard fate. But having no sooner uttered these words, but the Boy of the
House (who heard me speak such words as these) began to take me for a Poet; and
asked me, Whether I were not an Acquaintance of such a Person, who did very
often Eat at that House? And withal told me, That he had made most excellent
Verses: of which, he told me, That he had given him a very fine one to present
to his Mistress: And so, as soon puts a paper, greasy enough, into my hand,
which looked as if it had been bound about Bacon; but with this charge, That I
should not Foul it. So taking it into my hand, and opening it, I found it to be
an Elogy upon a General of the Army: which made me as soon to Reply, (without
any show of Laughter to the Boy, whose name was Cascaret) That those Verses
were very agreeable to the subject that they were composed for; and that
(without all doubt) they were the Works of some great Personage.

Yes indeed, replied Cascaret: And I will assure you, I have a great deal of
kindness for him, and should be very sorry to Disoblige him in any thing, or to
draw him any Wine that should be Flat, or Troubled; or any thing but the very
Best in the House was still, and so should always be at his Service.

All this is very well, I replied: But is not this person (whom you so much
applaud) gotten into your Debt for his Diet.

Yes, a little (said the Boy) but that signifies but little; for I have a very
good Pledge for it, therefore I fear it the less. And at the same time (by me)
pulls out of a Cupboard, a great bundle of Papers, in which were written many
Verses; but the greatest part so imperfect, and so much clothered or defaced
with one thing or other, that one could make very little Sense of any of them.

There were Inscriptions of several things; as namely, An Elogy for Dorothy; A
Complaint of Damon a Coeliste; A Crostick upon the Name of -- An Heroic Poem
for Monsieur Rondeau. At the End; Rimes, Epigrams, Sonnets, Epithetes, Stanzes,
Madrigalls, and a many of other things; but not one of all, that was there, was
finished: But some were begun in the Middle, others at the End, where they
should have Finished their Discourse: All which made me very much admire the
Excellency of the Poet, and the great Judgment of Cascaret, the Boy of the
Tavern.

But (as I was going out of the House) it was my hap to espy (at a great
distance in the Street) a man all alone Talking very busily to himself, and
sometimes Laughing, nodding with his Head, and sometimes making Motions with
his Arms; insomuch, that few Parts about him were idle. He was clad in a
White-Sattin Doublet, pinck't; his Breeches of Black Cloth, called Drap de
Berry; a Roupille, or Upper-Garment, like a Cloak, was made of a Mask-colour'd
Searge, (made at a Place in France, called d' Aumale); a Gray Hat, called a
Castor; Yellow Silk Stockins, and a pair of very light Shoes; which made me
for to behold him with Admiration, not knowing what to judge of so strange a
Personage. But Cascaret, who had Brought or Conducted me to the Door, told me,
That that was the Poet, of whom he had informed me; which caused me for to go
in again, to the intent that I might have a little Conference with him, because
by this time he was already at the Door: So we Kissed each other. But I found
him to be so very troublesome at that time, that I could not possibly speak two
Words together to him, without an Interruption: Yet, notwithstanding all this,
I used all possible Means to get my self acquainted with him, that I might
divert my self a little sometimes in his Company; for which cause we obliged
each other for a Rendezvous the next Morning, in the same Place: So, both
Parties being agreed, he told me, That he slept but very little, that he might
the better mind the Completing of those Works he had to do, the Composition
being great; therefore, he should be very Early.

So coming next Morning to the Place appointed, I found my Poet up Early
enough, and staying for me: And so, this rare Personage having laid many of his
Galemafreys upon the Table, upon a Carpet, such as it was, in as great State as
could be, I was Conducted into the Room where they were; but seeing them to be
of no greater Value, than those which I had already seen in the Hands of
Cascaret, I thought it convenient for that time, to dissemble my Thoughts, and
to make inquiry after some Verses, which would assuage the Cruelty of a Cruel
Mistress; making the Complaints of an Unhappy and Unfortunate Lover. Upon
which, he promised me, that the same Day before Night, I should not fail to
have them finished in their last Perfection: Telling me withal, That he was,
one of the Nimblest of all Parnassus's Disciples; for he has been sometimes so
encumbered with so much Business of this kind, that to give every one Content in
a very short time, he has been obliged to make many, far beyond the
Imaginations of the greatest Potentates: For within these Four Days, he had
Composed above Thirty Thousand of all sorts, which were to be sent to great
Personages, into strange Countries. And so swore by the Faith of a Poet, that I
should receive of him all the Satisfaction that could be promised by a Person,
who made the choycest, and best Works, that were to be made: For he wrought by
the same Rule and Order, that the best Composers, and most illustrious Authors,
both Ancient and Modern, wrought by; and therefore, when I should know him
well, I would have a very great Esteem for him.

But Hunger called for a Breakfast; which was as soon called for, and a Ragou
made, that we might break Fast together: But whilst the Poet was a babbling
about his Galemafreys, our Ragou was grown cold: Wherefore, the Poet runs away
to the Kitchen, and brings some Fire upon a Shovel; but instead of putting the
Fire into the Chafing Dish, he threw it into the Dish, to the Meat; which
caused me to burst out into a Laughter. But he told me, That the great Business
he had in his mind, did hinder him from taking notice of such small things as
this was. So that, by this first Interview that we had the one with the other,
the Poet gave me many Testimonies of his great Love to me, without knowing of
me: But we made our Reciprocal Promises of giving one another a Visit: he gave
me a Note of his Name, and Place of his Abode, in print; upon which we parted
at the present.

But some Days after, having a Fantasy to go to this Parnassus, I found his
Hostis, but not himself; who told me, That he was gone to walk abroad, that he
might ruminate and collect some pretty Fancies together, for the Composing of a
Book of Songs; for which he was Paid in part beforehand, by those that had
Employed him. But I answered the Woman; For all that I can see, the Works that
he makes ought to be very Excellent, that he is not afraid to put them to
public View, and to pass the Censures of all Men, without Control or
Molestation. To which she answered; That there were a great many good Poets,
that were not in nothing nigh so good an Esteem as he was; for his Company is
always almost every Day desired, and sought after by many honest Men, and
those of Fashion too: For it is he, that furnishes the Blind, and the Lame with
all their New Tunes and Airs, which are so much praised and extolled in all
your Victualling-Houses, as well as in your great Taverns, and other Places of
Entertainment. But as she was going to tell me more, in comes our Poet; who
with a hundred Complements and Reverences, to the very last Point of
Impertinent Importunities, he Conducted me into his Chamber; where he made as
many more Ceremonies, turning and winding a great many Papers over, in
testimony of abundance of Business upon his Hands; and that he was as eager
about it, as a Poltron, or heavy Cowardly Fellow, that was very earnest to go
Fight. And so, taking of his Ink-Horn, but not finding of a Pen at Hand, as he
looked for, he takes a Penknife, and cuts and points one of his Nails, which
was of an excessive Length, resembling more the Beak of a Horn, than the Nail
of a Man: This he cleft at the End, in form of a Pen, and run it into his
Ink-Horn, till he had made it moist; and then takes out a piece of Paper,
already made foul, and tumbled; and thereon writes Five or Six Verses, which he
very much praised and applauded them, in the Reading of them over and over
several times. The First of which was this, so near as I do remember:

Charmante, mais sier Inhumain.
Thou Charmest me, but O Inhuman Sister!
So, seeing no Hopes of getting any thing better from this my Extravagant Poet,
I took his Paper, and bid him the Good Night; and so went away straight to my
Lodging: But being arrived at my Lodging, I was much astonished to find my Poet
there as soon as my self, quite out of Breath, and blowing as if he had been
out of is Wits, puffing, and looking as if he had been a Bookseller, that had
lost his Book; his Business was so very great, making all the Petitions and
Requests, that might be, to me, that I would but give him the Paper again that
he had given me, to copy out some Verses of great Consequence, which were
written on the Backside of my Paper, which he had Composed for me: Telling me,
That it was impossible for him ever to get them into his Memory again, if once
rased out thence. So, considering his earnest Importunity, I granted his
Request, and gave him his Paper again: But as soon as he once had gotten it
into his Hands again, it was impossible for me to be gone from him, he did so
importune me with one thing or another; one time with the strange Strength of
Imagination, or else all was lost that he had so long and often occupied his
Senses about, and a deal of such like Stuff. But as I had read in the Paper,
that he was so very much troubled about, and found the thing that he so much
wanted, only to begin thus:

Le beau berger Philemon, etc.
Or in English:

Philemon, the brave Shepherd, etc.
So that, by This, and what I had gathered from his Hostis, obliged me to
believe him to be a new Bridge Poet, which was almost capable of making me
break my Correspondence with him; and to rally no more with him, and his Folly;
as finding him to be none of what I expected him, that is to say, an Author of
some Fame and Consideration. But yet however, for my Humors sake, I was
resolved to make him some Visits, although it was but for Divertisement:
Thereby hoping, that what by the Sight and Discourse of him, I might find a
Remedy against some Fits of the Melancholy, which I was very subject to; so
that, when I was minded to divert my self a little, I might make my Poet's
Lodgings serve me instead of an Academy: the which, I did very often, for those
Reasons above said. But by Chance coming one Morning, and finding of his
Chamber Door, as it were by the Latch, I went in without knocking, he being
still in his Bed; and making my Approaches near to his Bedside, perceiving his
Eyes to be wide open, I gave him a Salute, with a Good Morrow, Sir; and so set
my self down upon a lame Stool, that stood by his Beds-Head, waiting when he
would return me any Answer; and so, staying above half an Hour by him, without
his perceiving of any one to be by him; making it my only Delight, in watching
of his Motions to hear him murmur and mutter some Words between his Teeth, not
to be understood at all; and then again, sometimes he would squeeze out a Noise
much like unto a Swarm of Bees, coming out of their Hives in a Confusion: but
yet betwixt whiles, I could hear a Voice a little more Intelligible; but after
such a Broken Fashion, that there was not the least Order or Method in any
Subject that he spoke of; yet he would sometimes speak (it may be) two or three
Words to some very good Sense, fetched from some, as good Sentences: but as
soon again quitting of that Subject, and entering into another. This (says he)
may very well pass, and take its Turn upon the Theater. But as soon he
Contradicts himself, and says: But, What will or shall I do, or not do? And
again, with another Contradiction, he says: And, Why not? My Veins are strong
enough: And, What Poetical Fervency is there to be seen in another, that is not
in me? Or, What do you find more, at this present, in any of all these, than in
my self? As namely, these Measures: De Corneille, de L'Estoille, de La Serre,
Boyer, Pibrac, Beys, Desportes, Molierr, Hardy, Malherbe, La Calprenede,
Ronsard, de Ouvillr, Boisrobert, Chevalier Montfleury, Tristau, Boursault,
Scudry, Menage Racyne, Boileau, de Subligny; and many others, whose
Compositions or Works serves only to be gazed at by Five or Six Hundred Persons
at a time; who finding themselves to be shut into some Place, in the Hostel de
Bourgogn, or elsewhere; (which may be properly some great House, which now
serves for a Playhouse) and mine, which are produced with no less Boldness and
Courage than these, and will draw no fewer Spectators, than all Passengers;
although they were so many in number, that a good large Park would have much
ado to hold them all. Therefore, come let us put all to the Hazard; put forward
our Deserts, and we may be admired by all: For I will sooner lie down, and Dye,
than not to have my Name appear in Red Letters, in the Corners of every Street;
as well as any of all these, so very much esteemed Authors, which are so much
boasted of in the World. Come, I have employed so many Years already, in the
Composing of Strains, and the Songs of Bacchus. But as it is the usual Saying,
Paris was not all built in one Day; therefore, come this may serve very well
for a Piece of Three Acts. However, not so now; for we must suffer one to be a
little Ridiculous, and to make Sport: But these others are Heroical; and
therefore, proper to be inserted in some Great Work. Those there, are
Alexandrians; and therefore, strong enough. But let us see, what we shall do;
but look here, this cannot be bad for a Satyr.

He spoke all these Words without touching any one bit of Paper, making only
some Signs with his Fingers; with which he sometimes touched his Forehead so
hard, as if he had been going to cleave his Brains asunder.

But having ended his Discourse, he pulls out a Tinder Box from under his
Beds-Head, with which he struck Fire, and lighted a Wax-Candle, or Size: But it
so chanced, that a little Spark of Fire fell on his Hand, and burnt him a
little, with which he let all fall to the ground: But I stooped to take up his
Light, and gave it to him into his hand; but in so doing, I perceived him to be
a little surprised at the Sight of me; by which means I came to know, that he
had thought himself all alone in his Chamber, all this time: But so soon as he
perceived me to be there, he begun to ask me, What I made there so late in his
Quarters? I told him again, That I needed but to go to Bed, to make it Early in
the Morning; for it is but just now the Clock has struck Seven: Besides, the
Day being so much advanced, I am subject to admire you, for looking after any
other Light; being assured, that you cannot doubt, but that the one Light, will
infallibly extinguish the other. You are in the right of it, (says the Poet);
but this may serve to seal my Letters, when I have written them; therefore,
pray let him burn, and not put him out. But tell me, I pray, what it was, that
moved you to come hither into this Place? I do believe, you know your Friend to
be Ungrateful, and that she acts the Rude, because you endeavor to please her
too well; making her too much discourse of Loves Adventures; so that, you have
furnished her (it may be) with so much, that she has or will Compose a great
Romance of your Flaeurettes: But if she had but been an Apprentice in my
Science a little, she might have been persuaded to have Sighed a little, and
have shed some Tears, although but faintly: For we should speak some few Words,
and make them but a very easy show of our Motion toward them; and scarcely
give Permission to those that would Caress us, to let us pass amongst Women for
Babblers; although we seem to be very Eloquent, and study to Complement in the
French Tongue, and seemingly to have our Spirits occupied but in a very light
and tender Passion; nor make show of Abiding, but for a moment of time, and not
serve them with a too long Discourse, accompanied with Emphasis. This I have
learnt to my Cost; for the Prolixity, that I have used sometimes to my
Mistress, has rendered me very unhappy in my Love.

She that I loved so dearly, (continued my Poet) was a little merry Grig, who
gave me many a Nocturnal, or Nightly Assignment, where I always came; but
never could have the Power to come to her, or join with her; for she staid
always in her Chamber, and I upon the Pavements; where very often times I have
received some very ill Influences upon my Body by the Neighborhood; who
probably took me for the Conveyance of a House of Office, and so emptyed all
their Chamber-Pots upon me: Do but see, how my Clothes are accommodated with
it, (says he, showing me a great Spot with his Finger, that was in his Cloak,
which hung one part of it upon a Chair of Straw, and the other part upon the
Floor): And as I went to take a Turn round this Cartaw-Lodgings, I could get
nothing; for it should seem, the Place was accustomed to receive all such kind
of Filth; therefore, I had often a Design of Retiring my self, and so to leave
her: Well knowing, by a thousand of these Tricks, which were very disagreeable
to me, that it was altogether impossible for me to gather a Rose, that was so
environed about with Prickles.

So, feeling in his Pocket, he pulls out a little tiny Box, which I imagining
to have been his Tinder-Box: I told him, That his Candle was still burning; but
without hearkening to me at all, he opens his Box, and pulls out a short Pipe,
as Black as the Devil, and fills it with Tobacco, lights it; and so,
approaching to me in this manner, he blows such a thick Smoke of his Tobacco in
my Face, that I had much ado to see him: His Face was so besmothered also with
the same Perfume. And then he told me, That he would compare his Mistress to
his Pipe; reciting this Subject of Tobacco, in these following Verses:

Do but see how the Candle rises
The Tobacco that I will burn:
And let my Thoughts go free;
And she participate of my Ease.
The Air which served me for a match --
And of my Pipe to make a Flambeau;
Which, to my Taste, seems to be Ambrosia.
And in the Smoke, which I do make,
I do divert my Fantasy.
Imagining it to make a Thousand Pourtraitures, etc.
Phillis, like Tobacco I esteem you;
With both I have been surprised:
For both of you reign over my Spirits:
Of both I am become your Victim.
But if you will settle this a little stronger;
Phillis, I will not have all the Fault,
Of quitting the Ardure of my Pipe.
Your Eyes have given me the Trespass;
And in the Flambeau of my Pipe,
I will extinguish all your Charms.
You use then to take this kind of Perfume, (says I to him.) Yes, (replies he)
and I am so accustomed to this Smoke, that once upon a time, wanting Tobacco, I
was forced to cut the Bottom of my Pocket, that smelled of it, and to fill my
Pipe with it. But I had rather take it alone in my Chamber, than amongst a
Company of Coal-Carriers, and Porters, in Places where they do dispose of
themselves; which, one may, by good Right, call it a Forest of Fens, or
Rendezvous of Vagabonds, which do assemble themselves in this Place of their
Convenience, where Rudeness serves for an Ornament to a Rustic Company of
Black Fellows, in their Melancholy Debauches, which assemble themselves, in
order to attend the best and properest Hour to go, and (as they say) beat the
Pavements; which is, as we say, go a Padding, or Pilfering. These (says he)
are a certain sort of Men, which are much of the Nature of Owls; which care
not to be seen abroad at any time, but in the Night.

But, Are not you afraid of being Robbed, in going into this Forest, (then said
I to him?) No, (replied he) I rather fear the having some of my Bones broken by
these Thieves, for not having that about me, which may give them Content. But
in a word, I had rather take my Tobacco in my Chamber, where I can smoke with
Honor, and without Fear: For which Cause, I learnt the other Day an Air, which
was very proper to be sung in such sorts of Assemblies: I have never put it in
use yet; but it is good enough; and hear it.

We are Swallowers of good Beer,
Which, with Tobacco of a Thousand sorts,
We turn the Barrel upside down;
Which gives us a full Cariere.
Fie upon those, that drink by halves;
But those that will be drunk, are our Friends.
But his Favors still continuing to me, he shows me a Manuscript, which lay
upon his Table; saying, Take this, and go sit you down by yonder Window, and
divert your self, whilst I am busy in devising of some Thing of worth: it will
be worth your Reading; and so we may be both employed. So I took the Paper: and
when I had opened it, I found in it as follows, etc.

Theodore: OR, An Assembly of Felons, or Thieves, with their Ladies of Pleasure.
THeodore was a Young Man, of a Family good enough; and the Wisdom of his
younger Years made show of no less Success to those that had the Charge of his
Education; and that they hoped* all their Labor and Travel would have a happy
End: For which Cause, all honest Endeavors were used. But the Youth had no
sooner attained to the Age of Sixteen Years, but he began to change his Mind,
and to take other Measures, than those of his Tutor, and to frequent lewd and
debauched Company; and amongst these, he found out one, who went by the Name of
Rondrille, a very Felon, or Thief, who made it his business to go a Pilfering
in the Night, in the Streets: And on the New-Bridge, and elsewhere in Paris,
this Thief made show, as if he had known this Youth in the Army in Catalogne,
and saluted him by the Name of de La Breeche: To which the Youth answered very
freely, That he was overjoyed, to be taken for one, that had been seen in any
Noble Action, or to pass for any such Man. But all this time, he least thought,
that these Fellows were only the Searchers of good Fortunes; and that their
Business was only, how to draw him into their Cabal, by entertaining him at
several Feasts and Entertainments, to bring him into Love with their Company,
that he might taste of the Pleasures of their vicious, debauched, and
unregulated Lives.

For this purpose, they had a lusty Fellow, but lame, whose Name was Rustaut;
one, who had served in the Company of the Germans. This Man being a resolute
Person, was, by common Consent, made their Protector; who, so soon as he saw
Theodore, called for Bondrille, and asked him, If that Youth were in the Humor
to be Enrolled in their Company? To which Bondrille made Answer, That according
to the Dispositions that he had already seen in him, he thought, that he much
desired it, as being (as he thought) a little in love with it: However, this is
a New Pigeon; and therefore, may do well to be put into the Flight, amongst the
rest. Then pray, (says Rustaut) take you care, that he be well instructed; for
he seems to be a Youth of good Fashion; and I hope, in time, to do something
that is good with him. So Rustaut turning himself toward the Youth, Saluted
him with a Civility agreeable enough, So the next Morning, being the Day of
their Assembly, Rustaut prayed him to be with them, to break his Fast in
Rustaut's Lodgings; which Theodore (for we will leave for a time, to call him
by the Name of de La Breeche) promised him to do: And so accordingly, he came
with Bondrille to Rustaut's Lodgings; where they found him as a President,
sitting in the midst of a many very well liking Personages, and seeming to be
of very good Fashion; who talked to him with Hat in Hand, giving of him Reasons
of all that he demanded of them: And at the same time, they put many things
into his Hands, amongst which was both Gold and Silver of diverse sorts; some of
the Pieces being of your light or false Money; which Rustaut did not much
question, nor trouble himself to put it to a Trial, because he knew, that his
Emissaries did receive it, without looking on it; and therefore, they were not
obliged to give it him, as such as had been put to the Test.

So presently, they begin to talk of other Business, and of their Trade, and
how to excite one another to go forward in so weighty a piece of Work, whereof
every one was not capable of understanding it. But the Table being covered,
every one began at the same time; and in order to let their Hands, their Eyes,
and Teeth to keep time alike; so they all began to drink a Health to the right
Owners or Imployers of what they were eating of: For, as it is to be guessed
at, it was all stolen Goods; therefore, it was all one whom they drank to.
But, in the Height of their Combat in Bacchus's Cause, they were interrupted,
not with Pots and Glasses, of which there were enough; but by a Burger, who
addressed himself to Rustaut, with a Note from an unknown Hand: And this is the
Tenor of the Note.

The Note that came to Rustaut, from an unknown Hand, etc.
THe Bearer of this Note, is a Worthy Person, and one who deserves to be
obliged; and I dare promise you, that he will reward you well, after he has
received the Favor from you, which I demand of you for him; which is, to put
him again (by your Care) into the Possession of a Cloak of Black
Spanish-Cloath, laced with Black Silk Lace, and an Emrald set in a Gold-Ring;
and about fifteen Francks in Money, which was taken from him about Nine a Clock
last Night, upon the Bridge of Nosterdame, or our Ladyes-Bridge. This I pray
you, not to fail me in: And then to persuade your self, although I pass with
you for an unknown Person; yet I am capable of Serving, or Refusing, etc.


But when Rustaut had made an end of Reading his Letter, he begun to stand, and
muse a little by himself; imagining, that this Burgor might, by some Subtilty
or other, have invented and written this Note himself, only after the Report of
the Vulgar, and ignorant People; or else some certain People might be commanded
to stop the Thieves, and would not, as favoring their Actions, in hopes to
share the Cake with them. But on the other side, he thought it a great
Presumption of this Burgor, to throw himself, like a lost Body, into the middle
of his Enemies, without being backed or set on by some great and extraordinary
Might and Strength: Besides, he considered, that it might be a dangerous thing,
to make a Discovery in such a Rancounter as this; and if so it might happen,
that he might come to those that should be ordered to carry them to the Prison,
and from thence to the Bar, to be forced to beg their Pardon, or their Lives;
and to caress sometimes those that sought only the Means to take them at the
greater Advantage, and betray them at one time or other, and cause them early
or late, to fall into the Paws of the Woolf, such as they called their Sheep.

These Diversities of Cogitations, put Rustaut into a strange Perplexity of
Spirit, at the present: But, at the last, in Imitation of the Old Woman, which
gave a Wax-Candle to St. Michael, and (at the same time) gave another to the
Devil; answering those that asked her, why she did so, To get me a Friend in
Heaven, and another in Hell. So he was resolved in all he could, to keep the
Note, sooner than all his other Doubts; and so took a Resolution of rather
serving an unknown Person, than (at length) to run the hazard of knowing him so
well: And so, turning himself about to the Burgor, told him, although but
softly; We may do you reason to the Two first Articles, comprised in your
Demands; but for the Third, it is only Wine for the Company; and therefore,
Silver-Mony is never found amongst us, in case of a Restitution. I shall very
freely forgive my Money, (says the Burgor) with all my Heart (to Rustaut, for
Joy of the Hopes that was given him, of having the rest of his Things again)
and yet my Money shall be but (as it were) a taste of the Thankfulness, that I
intend to make you. Then go (says Rustaut) about your other Business, and come
hither again about Two Hours hence, and you shall have your Desire; for I will
go, and take care about it. But first, May we not take Leave to drink a Health
to a Stranger, and then I shall go, and acquit my self of this Business; and
so, Here Is to you; and you may, if you please, do me Reason, or Pledge me. This
being said, he caused two great Glasses to be filled with Wine, which were
reciprocally emptied: After which, the Burgor prayed Rustaut to give him leave
to send him in some Bottles of better Wine: But, as honest Men are always
suspected in such Company, Rustaut desired to be excused, giving him Thanks. So
the Burgor retired, till the Time appointed was come.

When the Burgor was gone forth, Rustaut began to speak to the whole Band that
was there, after a Majestical manner, saying; Children, Which of you can give
me any Tidings of that which was last Night, upon the Bridge of Nosterdame, and
have not given me an Account of it? At which Words, the Intermixed Discourse,
which made such a Confused Noise in that Place, was as soon Converted into as
great a Silence; as if every one had been struck Dumb, or had lost their
Tongues; the Guilty not daring to declare, and the Other fearing to be accused
of a Fault they had not committed; choosing rather to be silent, than speak,
except it came to be excused with a Heat. But when Rustaut saw that, he looked
as if his Eyes had been all in a Flame of Fire; and, Cocking up the Brims of a
Broad Hat, which he always wore, continued his Chiding, and said; Is there any
Rascal here, that dares afront me, and cosen his Comrades in this manner? Where
is the Brigadier? So, What Appartment had they Yester-day, for their Quarters?
Whom were they, that had this Side for their Station? But, What is this here?
But, Will no Body make me any Answer? It must be for all this, when you have
made your selves both Deaf and Dumb, that this certain Cloak, and certain Ring,
must be found, if the one were already converted into the Covers of Chairs, and
the other if it were beaten into Leaves, and those Leaves already applied for
the Gilding of the Leaves of some Books; yet these must be found, and restored.
And to show you, Gentlemen, that my Discourse is not without ground, but that I
have a very good Foundation for what I say, see this Note, (throwing of the
Writing down upon the Table, to them all, saying;) Gentlemen, This Letter
(without all doubt) was sent from some Body, whom we ought to give Respect unto
the Orders, or else we shall assuredly be forced to pay for the Prize that we
have taken: Wherefore, pray think of our Preservation betimes, and the
Preservation of the Goods of Violence from all such as may put a Scandal upon
us, and our Society. With that, up rises Bondrille, and another called
Brindestoc, and goes immediately out of the Chamber, without speaking one word
in Obedience to the Commands of Rustaut; which did but a little surprise our
Youth La Breeche, to see a Man, who could scarcely go without the Help of his
Staff, make those tremble at his Commands, who could make others Gallop at the
Sight of them, for very Fear.

With that, so soon as they were gone out, Rustaut addressed himself to La
Breeche, saying; That that Person, which was gone out with Bondrille, was the
Nimblest, and and most Activest Man, in all the whole Company, and brought in
much Profit into our Society: For, in the Markets, he will counterfeit the
Countryman; and in the Hall, a Practitioner; that is, amongst the Lawyers, he
is clad like a Student; and when amongst the Great Ones, he is clothed like a
Gentleman: But in any of these Places, he seldom miscarries. For if he sees any
thing that is proper or fit for his purpose, his Hand is upon it as soon as his
Eyes have discovered; and if he does but lay his Clutches on it, he assuredly
brings his Prey along with him. He will furnish his Companions with Blades for
their Swords, which he buys for nothing; for if he comes to a Cutlers with an
empty Scabbard by his Side* he will be sure to have one, whilst the Cutler is
looking for another to show him: And so likewise, it is his Custom too in Men's
Lodgings: and if he finds no Body in his way, he will take up that which he
thinks to be the Best; then bidding them very softly Farewell. And so, with a
wonderful Stupidity; and not like some, that sleeps upon the Brink of a
Precipice; or as some others, that will rather fly with all Might and Main, as
far from the Danger as they can, which makes them to be looked upon as Thieves.
But, on the contrary, when he has marched some Thirty Paces very modestly with
his Booty, instead of minding his Pace to gain ground, for fear he should be
followed or stopped, he will turn Tail about, and set his Face toward the
Place from whence he came out: And if he sees any Body in pursuit of him, he
goes softly up to them, and so passes by on the one side of them; and so saves
himself, and his Prey together. Sometimes, he will put on a Petty-Coat over his
own Clothes, a Scarf over his Head, and a Mask before his Face; and so, in this
Disguise, he will attack the Burgors in the Streets, in clear Day; making them
pay him Tribute, as they go along. Passengers, as they go by, imagining it to
be only a Contention betwixt Man and Wife; and therefore, will not meddle in
their Affairs. He carried out one Evening two Fancies made of Oziers, and
clothed them in light Garments, and so disposed of them in the Corner of the
Street; and then went, and demanded a Purse of a Man, which as soon delivered
it; because (as he said) he could not hold combat with Three at a time, which
appeared all very suitable to his Sight.

One of the Company, called Beauliou, which was lately come from serving the
King, under the Discipline of a Committee, began to inform Rustaut, That there
were many of the Brotherhood, which he could not see; asking, Where they were?
To which he answered him thus: Thy very good Friend, La Boline, being so well
known in the Town for a Boulineux, he is gone to Range the Country, with a
design of changing his Calling, and to betake himself to Play; for he is the
most Subtle of the Hand. But, as it is always a Truth, that the Affairs of a
Man cannot always prosper, or stand in the same Degree, as they are in when we
undertake them: So it is fallen out here of late: For, within these few Days
last past, it was his Fortune to take some certain Pieces of Gold out of a Cup
of a Church-Mans, pretending only to have changed them for a less: But he was
Coffered up, or Imprisoned, in true English; notwithstanding all that he could
allege for himself, that the Church was a Refuge for Sinners, and the like.
La Forest, and Du Buisson, after they had a little while used the Highways
about Normandy, and there-abouts, had the Fortune to be hurt at the Cross of
the Shooters, and are since dead of their Wounds, (that is, they are Hanged,
and so Dead.) Longeuin la Jeunesse, and La Fleur are gone to Fence against the
Bottom of the Sea, with Wooden-Swords; (that is, they are gone to the Galleys.)
I understand you now, (says Beaulieu) for you will say, They are gone to take
my Place. But for the following of St. John, St. Charles, and St. Andrew la
Balaffre, (replied Rustaut) they are Martyred with the Blows given them with
the Knees, and are inchased at the Chyrurgeons; (that is, being Martyred with
the Knees: It is a Custom in France, when a Man is Hanged, that he may be
quickly out of his Pain, the Hangman thumps him on the Breast with his Knees;
and being inchased, they were begged for Anatomies; and this is the Meaning of
it.) And La Ramce was called aside, and tied from his Meat in England: But, as
they were leading him out toward Tyburn, which is the Place of Execution out
of the City of London: This Fellow believing, that the People of that Country
were of another Understanding, than that of France, he prayed those that
guarded him to this Fatal Place, that they would permit him to make a Step over
into his own Country; for he had something of Consequence to say to his Father
before he dyed; making them to believe, that they ought not to deny any thing
to their Patient: But his Request was not heard, because he spoke to those that
were deaf in his Cause. Therefore, (says Rustaut) there is nothing more
certain than this; for when the Measure is full, it must be emptyed: Our poor
Young Man had by this time made many a fair Escape already; and, amongst the
rest, he had the good Fortune one Evening, being perceived a breaking in
through a Wall, he was immediately beset by the Archers of the Gust, or the
Sheriff's Watch; which enclosed him so quickly, that he by a Subtilty mingled
amongst them; so that they mistook the one for the other, seizing of their own
Comrades for the Thief, which they had away toward the Prison, whilst he got
away, and made his Escape to my Lodging, and no Body espied him running away:
So I put him into his Bed, with his Clothes on, and a Nightcap on his Head;
whilst the other was haled to the Prison-Door, and well beaten: But when they
found their Mistake, insomuch that they knew the Party in hand to be one of
their own Company; then they began to hunt as fast for the Thief, judging him
not to be far off, because they had not seen any Body run away: so they pursued
their Game too into my Chamber, where they found their Man in Bed; whom I told
them, was my Kinsman, and he was very Sick: And what served me better than all
the rest* was three Porringers of Blood, which I had sent for into the Town,
the Blood being still upon the Table; insomuch that my Lie passed for a perfect
Truth, and the Archers took it for no less; and so took their Leave of me:
Telling me withal, That if they had not found the Hat and Cloak lying on the
Ground, they should have taken this Encounter for an absolute Allusion.

Therefore, (says Rustaut) I would advise all the Brotherhood, be they
Travelers or others, that they, above all things, be sure to keep a fair
Correspondence of Love and Friendship with the Officers of Justice, or the
Executioners, and their Deputies: So that, they may be sure to have a Kindness
done them in time of need, when there is an occasion. That is Truth, (says
Beaulieu, laughing) for such an one may save a Man's Life, when he is Condemned
to be Hanged, by putting the Nose of a pair of Bellows down his Throat, like a
piece of Cinnamon; and so it may hinder him from Expiring. No, (says Rustaut,
Laughing also) that is not it; but they can put a Slice of Bacon on the
Patient's Shoulder, before they put the Princes Arms to it; besides many other
Favors, when the Patient's ill Fortune has destined him to their Discretion.

So, when Rustaut had ended his Discourse, the Cloak was brought, with the
Ring, to be put into the Possession of him that was the Master; who came in
very shortly after, and received them both, according to Promise. So the Burgor
made Rustaut a Present; but he was long deliberating, whether he should, or
should not receive it, as not being accustomed to part with any thing that he
had gotten, till now, so easily; neither did he ever make any Acquisition, but
only against the Prepriators, in any Degree whatsoever: But however, for fear
that the Burgor should see him make Ceremonies, and Complement with him, and so
might carry away his Present again, he as civilly took the Present, and
dismissed the Burgor.

This being no sooner ended, but in comes an old Man to Rustaut, named
Angleberge, and was accompanied by another old Man, that was Lean and Dry, and
as free from Moisture (almost) as a Stock Fish, in full hopes of marrying a
Maid, as he had been informed of, that was very Rich, and one who had served
already a long time for the Production of Mankind, and the Propagation of Human
Society: And this he spoke aloud, without fear of putting himself, or any of
the Company to the Blush. Why, how now Lucas, (says one to this old Man, for
so was his Name) What! Do you Court a Mistress without any Complement, or
Formality at all? With that a great lusty, fat, jovial Fellow, whose Name was
Roger, and one who had accompanied this old Man thither, replied, saying; That
one could not choose, but use more Ceremony than this to a Simple Girl, who
never had the Wit to be gotten with Child; and therefore, he must not expect to
gain this so easily, who was fitter for him by many degrees, than another, by
reason she was fitting to govern his House, and Houshold-Affairs.

But Rustaut, who was near of Kin to this Damosel, whose Name was Jacqueline,
having heard the Demands that Lucas made to have his Kinswoman; and seeing him
to be in a better Habit, than he was accustomed to be in; and withal, knowing
of him to be a Crier of Strong Water about the Street, he answered him thus:
My old Friend, It is certainly the Custom, for Lovers to put themselves into
their best Accoutrement, when they come to appear before their Mistresses; and
it is as certain, that an ample, and well made Beard, which you now have, was
(not long since) so heavy, that it covered almost all your Face; although it is
now abated, shows a great Disproportion in your Years; she not having much more
than one Quarter of your Age; so great is the Disparity of your Years: So that,
by the Course of Nature, you will be ready enough of your self, to sound your
own Retreat, rather than to make it your Business to charge your self with an
Equipage, which can stand you in no other stead, but only to hasten your
Dispatches into another World. This Buxom Girl, that you look after, were
fitter for a young Husband, and would agree much better with one that has not
nothing near so many Years over his Head, as you have. And besides, a young
Woman is like an old Clock, which never Goes well, except it be often Wound up:
But an old Man is like a Vessel of sour Wine: For you have not above a Turn of
Hair of the color of a Baracan, which looks on both sides of your Jaws, like
two Whisks, which are only to make clean Clothes; and the Hair of your Head
looks like a Cap of a flesh Color; and your Nose resembles more the Neck of an
Alimbeck, that is always dropping; and you are as wetted, as if it had rained
out of a Glass on your Stomach; and you are upon the very Brink of the Streams
of Forgetfulness: and you may travel a great way, before you arrive at the
Fountain of Pleasures; it being (as it were) in Retrograde against you: And
when you come there, you may chance to have the Cheat put upon you there also;
for, How can you expect to have a Wife to your Self, that is accustomed to
serve others? And now, What can you think of these Affairs, (says Rustaut,
turning himself toward Roger, who had very diligently hearkened to all their
Discourse; and made Answer to it thus:) Why truly, I think, (says he,
Laughing) that Lucas may be like one of those Cowardly Soldiers, which dares
not give the Assault, till the Breach be wide open: And Jacqueline makes Love
like the Wolves, who always make their Choice of the Ugliest Males.

But, in spite of all these Reasons, and the Jars of them all, Lucas and
Jacqueline pledged their Faith to each other in Marriage; and it was
stupiltulated betwixt them both, that she should have a Dowry of One Thousand
Crowns, to be raised upon the Goods and Estate of Lucas, although he could not
name to the Value of One Farthing, of his own proper Estate. And as for that
Jacqueline, her Riches consisted most in many good Acquaintance; which, she
swore, was worth a great deal of Money: But withal, she was very ill Clad; of
which, Lucas complained very much. But Roger answered him, That it was a very
good Commodity: For, (says he) you must undress her quite, before she goes to
Bed with you.

But at length, the Match was signed, and the Ceremony of Marriage
accomplished, and the Feast provided; which was some gross Meat, and some as
delicate Inter-Messes; and all was to be at an old Creator of Love, otherwise a
Bawd, called Ragonde, the most Experienced of all the Trade: And for her better
Traffic, she had made Choice of a House in a By-place, and in a Quarter of the
Town; where very seldom, or never any honest Man went, except by Accident, or
for a Wager. She used Divinations, lending of Money, treating of Marriages, and
traded in Brokery: But particularly, in Girls or, Whores; of which sort, she
had always a sufficient Number in her House; of whose Virginity, she had
already taken the first Tribute; but ceast not, every Day, to raise some new
Impost upon them: For this cunning Gipsey knows so well her Trade, that she can
tell how to Accommodate them with Roach-Allom, Salt of Saturn, le Consolida
Major, with other Ingredients, which she by her Subtilty made use of. So that,
she could oftentimes sell one Maidenhead in the same Person, for as good as it
was at the very first. And, in the mean time, she ordered her Affairs so well,
that the Thieves (for the most part) brought all, or the greatest part of their
Booty to that Place, or some such like; which always made the more Water come
to her Mill: and withal, the Burgors could live more secure, and at their
Liberty.

But the Pensioners of Ragonde, seeing of Jacqueline coming, they all went out
to meet and salute her; they being (as it were) then all undrest, and in such a
Confused manner, that it would have frightened any indifferent Beholder to have
seen them: For the one had a Bigen, so bedawb'd with the Yolks of Eggs, that
you would have thought her Head to have been wrapped up in a Namlet: Others
held a Box of Pumade, or the Shells of Vermillion: Another had her Hands so
besmeared with the Paste of Almonds, that she could not tell what Countenance
to make: Another had her Face cicatriced, by having received an unfortunate
Blow, (you may guess how) which she always, when Dressed, covered with false
Hair: Others, having no Neck Clothes, showed great Bunches, all swelled, which
by Day they kept bound up with Bands, that they might not be seen. But the most
Ridiculous of all, was to see a great foul Beast, with a piece of Sponge tied
to her Busk with the End of a Lace; which made Rustaut ask her, If she were
cleaning of her self with Sweet Water? To which, Roger, taking the word out his
Mouth, answered; That he had rather smell Piss, than that sweet Angle-Water,
(as he called it); and that, in his Opinion, seeing the Sponge hanging so near
her Navel, he guest that it might be employed rather about her Inferior, or
uncomly Parts, than about any thing else. At which, every one fell a Laughing,
But a little after, all these Curtizans were dressed in a little better Fashion,
and each appeared in their best Luster they could; and the Guests appeared
there, was all such as by hazard came thither: For, in that Lodging, every one
was as well received, as if he had been in his own proper Lodging. And Ragonde,
to do them the more Honor, seeing a great number of People, made them all sit
down to Table with them; where some fell to Eating, without saying of Grace
before Meat; of which Rustaut, the better to counterfeit the Judicious, told
some of the Company of it: At which, one of his own Disciples said a sorry
Grace; at the which, he declared himself to be at the very End of his Science;
and that he could never, in all his Lifetime, attain to any more, than what he
had now done. And yet, you have made a Shift to retain this still by rote,
replied Roger. Another said; If we were not accompanied with the Pottages, I
would willingly know, why we do not use this Ceremony at Breakfast? It is
(says another to this Twattle Basket) to hinder the Intrusions of the Demons,
or Goblings now, which will scarcely come to trouble you at that time; because
they have often heard say, by those that do prepare themselves for that
Exercise, That they are so Hungry, that they could eat the Devil Raw, if they
had him.

So, by and by, every one began his Discourse, according as his Fancy excited
him to it: So that, by this time, there was such a Medly of confused Noise
between both Sexes, that none could tell scarcely, what the other said.

One of the Damsels, named Cloris Jolygarcette, who was of Ragondes bringing
up, and one of the first Rank in her Assembly, says to La Breeche, that was
eating as fast as he could: My Dear, I think that an Alliance betwixt us, were
more Reasonable, than that, speaking of the Old Man, and his Bride. Why not?
truly, (replied he) the Difficulty would not be great neither to make it; for I
could find in my Heart, to love thee already: For such a Lickerish Bit as thou
art, would serve me to break my Fast upon.

By this time, Roger, who had heard all this Discourse betwixt the two Jollyest
of the whole Band, told her; That she might do well, to prefer those Advantages
to another; and that they would give her one of a more flourishing Age: For she
did not so much as look nor regard those brave Ancient Fellows, says Roger.

But Ragonde, when she knew that this Discourse made for her, began to lift up
her Voice so well as she could, for the Disability of her Stomach, which was
only sustained by the Help of some Glasses of Wine, which she swallowed, which
otherwise could hardly have subsisted: Yet being (as it should seem) somewhat
heated with Wine and Anger together, she took Roger by the Shoulder to put him
out of Doors; telling him, That she would be Respected in her own Lodigngs. But
another old Hagg, whose Name was Quintine, of a more amiable Humor, as being
the Mother of Angilberd, who was also come to the Feast, stood up, and appeased
her; telling her, That they were both Young enough to see the Production of
Lucas' s Children to the Third Generation, by this Marriage now Consummated.

So, this Stir being appeased* and as Roger, who had lighted* the Flambeau of
all this Discord, went to drink a Health to Ragonde, they heard a great Noise
in the Street; and Ragonde, believing it to have been the Commissary, with his
Attendance, who was coming to visit her Magazines, began to pray some of the
Company to be as Modest as they could, in their Countenance and Carriage: But,
without hearkening to her Discourse, they betook themselves to the Rout, with
all the Might and Main they could. And so, rising from the Table in a
Confusion, some run to save themselves in the Garret, and others in the Sellar;
and some, who knew neither Door nor Passage, nor how to save themselves in any
Place; these put themselves under the Protection of a Servant-Maid, who
conveyed them into a common Place of Safety; and so returned into the Chamber,
where she staid without Fear, because she had been often accustomed to these
Alarms. But, on the other side, they thought the House had been besieged: For
they without, continued knocking in such a Manner and Force, as if they would
have beat down the Door, or else have beat him in pieces; which obliged
Ragonde, to put her self out of the Window of an empty Chamber, where she had
conveyed her self for fear: and for fear of the worst, she made have down, and
cried out a main, A Wedding, a Wedding! Vivat, Vivat! and so sent her Maid
directly to open the Door to her new-come Guest; which proved to be Bondrille,
Brindestoc, Beaulieu, and others, all her very good Friends, and Rustaut's
Officers; who served as a Convoy, to a Broach full of Legs of Mutton, which one
of them had civilly taken up from a Rosissier, or (as we say) out of a
Cook's-Shop, ready Roasted, and conveyed them safe (with a great deal of
Hazard) to that Place; after having made many Turnings and Windings, to lose
the Sight of the Cook, who had pursued them very close at the Heels, for a
great while together.

But by the Arrival of this Troop from Abroad, our dispersed Troops at Home,
began to take Heart, and to Re-assemble themselves again; and so began to place
themselves in Order at the Table, which was now much better Furnished, than
before it was, and also better beset with Company; insomuch, that this supply
of Meat, made every one begin to think of disbursing for Wine, of which they
had quickly good store; for they filled a great many Bottles, of the which they
began every one to Drink heartily, and some whole Bottles at a Health; so that
in a short time, there was little Distinction to be made in that Assembly: For
the Fair and the Foul, the White and Brown, the Gentle-women, Towns-women, or
Country-women was all one, all were joval Dames alike; so were the Thieves,
Pick-pockets, Gentlemen, and Beggars were also mingled at this time: that it
seemed to be according to the sayings of Socrates, that for the better
Establishing of a Society, says, That every Man should Imagine himself to be
the Husband of each Woman, and every Woman to be the Wife of all those Men. At
which words, one of the Company being one of the most Rejoiced or Frollicksom,
began to look about her, saying, That if there were any Eunuchs in the
Company, they ought to be Expulsed out of the Company as useless, and rotten
Members, which to be cut away for the Preservation of the rest of the Body,
that was sound and good; to which Roger Answered, That those Men were very good
Coverers, for it never Rained where they Wrought; that is a Truth says she,
But they are very bad Arithn eticians, for they cannot Multiply, and they are
as troublesome in their Conferences, for they never come to a Conclusion. At the
same time, another who sought to lay hold on something, always began to tell
one, who was in her Year of Novice, or the beginning of her Practice; that he
had heard one say, That she was a Cuclet, to which she Answers, I do admire how
you come to know that already; for it is not long since my Whether go you? or,
Stay for this time here, or the like, was by me. O but (replied he) you should
have made him Answer to this half Term thus; And, I pray, How do you call the
next Week? for the People of Monasteries change often their Names and Habits.
So he finding, that he had not to do with a Fool, he left her, and addressed
himself to another Cocket, whose Name was Diana; and told her, That one of the
Company, (pointing at them with his Finger) had assured him, that it was not
long since, the best of her Employment was Shelling of Beans; and that she
could not go in high-Heel'd Shoes, as being only accustomed to wear only
Sabous, or Wooden-Shoes, having never wore any thing else, till now of late;
and that her Right Name was Friacrine.

But another, whose Name was Philipotte; but because she would have a more
Gallant Name, she was named Silvy: This took the Discourse upon her self,
because there was a Discourse about her Quality and Greatness; and, as if she
had been mounted upon her great Horse, replied, and swore, That those had
undertaken to talk on that Fashion, knew full e^sily, that she was a
Gentlewoman of good Fashion; and had paid a good Price for her Letters of
Testimony. That is a Truth indeed, (replied the abovesaid Roger, speaking into
the Air, like a Buffoon, or as he made himself, a Fool) that there were many,
as he had heard say, that could say as well as himself, That she was Noble: And
if she did want a more sufficien Testimony than this, she might apply her self
to some sweet and loving Notes, which he had sent her, whose Superscriptions
were thus; A Mademoiselle, Houst-Houst, a La Mothepress de Trouliput. But as
she had her Spirits at that time very slat, and stood as one speechless, she
could not revenge her self upon Roger by any thing, but by making an ugly Face
at him: But, by this time, Diana was come into the Light, and began as
furiously to attack Simonette, otherwise called Louyson du Marais, the same
which Roger had shown; and at this they joined with the above-known Silvia;
insomuch that these Three being become Enemies by the Force of the Wine, they
began so furiously to pull Quails, that in a little time they were obliged to
quit the Field and Combat, leaving the Place of Battle covered with their
Clothes, some of brave Gaze, Musline, Taffities, and other Silks; insomuch,
that about Daylight, the pieces of Ribbond, and other things, which before had
served to dress, and make them fine, lay all here to be seen in pieces: So
that, at last, they were fain to cover themselves with what was left of their
Clothes, which was torn almost as small as their Scarffs: And their Quoiffs
hung down to their Heels, which made look more like Witches, then Courtizans;
for they were obliged to put Patches upon their Faces, as big as Silkworms,
and as long, to serve for Plasters to cover the Scratchings of each other,
which were given in this Battle. Rustaut would have undertaken to have
interposed himself betwixt them, and so to have made them Friends again: But
Ragonde undertook the Charge, and made them Reciprocally give each other
Satisfaction upon the Field; insomuch, that they should all be acknowledged for
Gentlewomen. But then Roger, who had not only been the Author and Beholder of
their Combat, but was also a Witness to their Agreement; and so, to express his
Joy for the same, told them, That he would give them an Elogy, or a Song, which
he began after a rude and ridiculous Fashion: But yet after his manner, the
Verses were convenient enough for the Occasion; which are as follows.

To the end that we may finish all Contentions,
That swims above all Good Conditions:
A Maid, so soon as she is entered into the Commerce,
Ought not to dispute above her Quality:
For Love's Children are all in Equality,
And will not be suffered in a Controversy.
This Piece concluded, and every one having again taken his Place, they began a
fresh to fall a Drinking, and a Discoursing; where Mademoiselle Cloris, who had
an indifferent good Voice, began to sing.

Learn you first the Use of Wine,
Phillis, for it is a Beveridge Divine;
Which will increase your Glory:
If you can charm the Heart with your Divine Apparel,
When you have learned how to Drink,
You may make up all Breaches and Trespasses:
For your fine Eyes will give a better Luster,
And you may look more coyly there;
And make you Slaves every where,
Without using these Famous Warriors,
Who come from their Onyons and Radish,
And manage your Affairs for Lorilles.
And now, What think you of my Song Cupidon, with your wide Chops, (says
Cloris to Roger, who gad listened very attentively to her all the while?) Why,
(says he) I think it is very like you: she is displeased; I know it already by
Rote; and would Join with you in Consort, if my Fosset could but be
Accommodated to your Voice; but I can neither lead on my Party, nor bate of my
Measure. But this young Sleeper may (says she, speaking of Theodore, who
looked up with a kind of Lecherous Eye) be better for my turn. Yes, I believe
(says Roger) if he had his Spigot in your Fosset, called a Croperpice, he
might turn it easy enough, if not too easily; feeling for the Corners of it,
as a Shoo-maker does a Pair of Boots, when he stuffs them: But you answer not a
word to this. But with this, she replied to Theodore: Up my Lecherous Friend;
for I suppose, you hearken to all this Discourse, but for your better
Instruction. A-ho! says Theodore) it will take up a great deal of Time for a
Prentice to Learn a Trade so well, that he shall outdo his Master: But when
you please, that I shall teach ou to study the Metamorphosis upside down, I
will be Andromede, and you shall be Perseus. Do but behold this Knave, (says
she aloud, Laughing with a full Mouth): They say (says she) that he does not
know what is a troubled Water; and yet he is the nimblest Stalion in all our
Stable. But Lucas all this while was like one stupid, who spoke not one word,
nor moved at the Table so well as the others: But when Ragonde saw it, she
cries out; Why, how now Mr. Bridegroom? What, Can you make Money of nothing?
For by your sad and heavy Countenance, you are able of your self to put us all
into the Dumps: Come, warm your self well with your Wine, and cheer up a little
Mrs. Bride, your Spouse: What, Would you have her to leap about your Neck? But
if she should, it would be contrary to the Custom: Besides, she is too Modest,
and dares not now, since she is Married, so much as look upon a Man without
Blushing. But this Old Fool Lucas, being entered a little into Jollity, replied;
That he had seen her continually Twattling with one or other; and therefore, is
now more Reserved than she used to be; for she admits of none, but French and
Strangers. But as concerning the Affairs you spoke to me about, -- Me (says
Roger, who having by this time learnt, that she was English- Born, says to
her,) If this may pass for a Stable, you may also pass for one of the best
Geldings in it: And besides, having so good a Stalion as this, you may both
together Engender very good Colts. But there are more Days than Weeks;
therefore, you must give a little Rest. All this is Truth, (Replied Ragonde to
him) and yet you have already well beaten the Wood, since you were Conjugally
bound to Jacqueline in Marriage: And besides, you ought always to consider,
that a Place not well Victualled, is easily Taken by the Enemy. But she said
for Answer; That if she had not been Married, she must never have drank Wine;
Wherefore, it was rather to have the Entertainment of a Woman, than for Carnal
Actions: And that he believed his Wife to be wiser, than to go about by Force
to take that Purity from him, which he had so long preserved entirely to
himself. But this being overheard by Ragonde, and the rest of the Company, who
began all very heartily to laugh at such a Discourse as this; at which the Old
Belldam began to sing thus upon this Subject, as follows:

Ragonde's Song for Lucas.
When thou art in Hell, -- Biss,
The Old Man Lucifer, -- Biss,
Will ask out of what Mue
They have hunted this Faulcon,
Which has not led his Life
Neither amongst Wine nor Women?
But stay a little then, (cries La Breeche to another young Gentlewoman of the
Gang, which Ragonde had there to be Broken up) you have stolen away my Heart,
and I will feel in thy Belly to find him again. But the Woman was very much
troubled, that he should be so Insolent, as to offer such a rude Discourse
before those Girls: But Roger takes up the Word, and asked, If there were any
Body in that Place, that had their Ears more Chaste, than all the rest of their
Bodies? But as they were at that time, become all good Friends again, she made
him answer; That there was none but very honest Girls with her now, Laughing:
But that their Government was a little Scandalous, whilst Angilberd began to
sing the Song of Dupont and Guimbarde, upon which Quintine sung Prosperity to
Lubeine, and his Loyal and Noble Friends; and then every one in Course gave his
Song as he pleased; as some for Bacchus, some for Mars, and some in favor of
Vulcan's Wife: So that, every one gave a Song as they pleased, except
Bondrille, who could not possibly sing, because he had his Mouth always full;
which was espied by one, who loved Rallying as her Life; who says: Come on, my
brave Cavalier, now is your turn to sing; but you are above the Potter now.
Why, that were good for a Dance, says he) but do not speak one Word more of
Dancing above the Potter; for thereof I am suspected: And besides, I am Tall
enough, and need not to be stretched. After this Answer given, which was Merry
enough for the Matter it concerned. But this foolish Gigglet, that thought to
Laugh always, replied; That he was a very fit and proper Personage, to study
Youthfulness in the Doctors School. Which words, by a Misunderstanding, very
much offended Bondrille; insomuch, that he rose from the Table in a great Heat,
with a design to have evilly entreated her; but she fled amain, and he pursued
after to catch her; and when he had over-taken her, he went to pull her by the
Ears, and as he went to lay hold on them, he found none; which made him return
almost chok't with Laughter to the rest of the Company, to relate his
Adventure. That is very good, (cries Roger) and a most excellent Commodity for
a Comb to pass without Molestation: And so consequently, each had something or
other to say of Gallantry, about the Loss of the Ear. Some counseled her to
put some pieces of Carton colored for Ears; but to take heed of letting them
fall, for fear that People in the Street should cry after her, Madam, take up
your Ears before you go. Another made a kind of a Moral Discourse, by way of
Reflection upon this silly Fool, and her Talk; either as much discoursed her
manner of Life; saying, That she would not be exempted one Day or other, from
serving for a Model in the Academy of Death. But another made answer, That when
that Holy Day came, they would Consume her. But Ragonde, to reproach this Lady
without Ears, told her; That she would not have her to Dress her self in the
Mode, but with Coronets only. With that stood up one of the bravest of the
whole Company; who was dressed in a Coronet, with a few light Hairs over it; and
ruffled out in a Dozen of small Curles, or Trusses, saying, Hold there,
Governess; for I have taken part elsewhere. With that our Gentlewoman without
Ears, being a little freed of her Fears, and pretty well come to her self
again, would begin to enter the List to babble again; saying, That she would
take a new Party also, and would make her Quarters in Normandy, and had already
given Earnest for a Place in the Coach that goes to Roan. What then, you think
to do some strange Matters in that Country, (replies Roger) which is the only
Rendezvous of those Girls which are out of Trade, and Communes with these that
are here; or else, it may be, you imagine to draw great Profits from the
Portugals and Flemmines: But, by the Faith of Roger, thou will sooner cause all
the People in the Town to fly from thee, when thou comes there without thy
Ears, if they do but come to know it sooner, than thou will be able to induce
one to follow thee by all thy Charms.

But one whose Name was Thibaut, being Drunk, took an Occasion to quarrel with
Quintine, calling her Old, dressed up in Old Clothes. That is Truth, (says she)
thou Old Cuckold: At which he seemed to be very much troubled, and began to
strike Quintine; which, when Ragonde saw, she began to be angry, and put him
away, seeing him much in Drink, that she might appease the Noise. But Roger
seeing one of the Company endeavoring to bring him in again, called to him,
and bad him have a Care; For if she should chance to fall upon you by the way,
(says he) he might enganger the cleaving of you in two with his Horns.

By this time Ragonde begins to approach Theodore, for to Caress him; but he as
quickly flings himself from her: Telling her, That the very Strength of her
Breath would poison him, if his were not well fortified by the Quantity of
Wine which he had drank; which served as an Antidote against the Infection of
it: For, to say the Truth of it, she was Ptysical, and did throw out such
Glanders, so thick and ugly, that it would have turned any reasonable Stomach
of either Man or Beast: For one would have thought, that all that she did
either Eat or Drink, did convert it self into this filthy Excrement; and that
the only passage for it out of her Body, was through her Eyes and Nose.

But the most Charming amongst all those brave Dames, that showed themselves in
that Place, was one Clytie; but the most false Mistress of the Sun, who Adored
none so much as an Alchymist: But she quickly put her self out of the Company,
to follow a Woman whom she served underhand: feigning themselves to go to the
Market, came and whispered him in the Ear: But in their Absence, it was known,
that but a little before, she was a little Snotty Girl; who used in time of
Vintage, to go and work in the Country; and so continued in the Village for to
gather Hops, and such like, till she came to be in Love; and since that, she
undertook to counterfeit, or make the Gentlewoman; which she did so well, that
in those sweet Combats, she carried away the Prize from all the rest of her
Trade; having her VVitty and comely Gestures strong enough to move and invite
any Man, if he were not quite stupify'd and senseless, without having occasion
to use any other little Wheedling ARTS, for to invite Gentlemen, Courtiers,
Merchants, Lawyers, Scholars, and any others, were all wellcom; who, by the
Example of Layis, that Famous Sicilian, who was oftener weary, than satisfied
with her Lust; and that her House was no more without Gallants, than a good
Tavern without Drinkers: And he must of necessity be a Stranger to the Town,
that did not know her.

But in this meanwhile, Jacqueline had taken a Disgust against her Husband
Lucas; and so, making her Excuse to go out to Piss, and runs quite away;
insomuch, that he could not tell what was become of her, neither did he put
himself to any great trouble to know: But finding every one begine to Rail, and
Jeer at him, he also went his way without speaking one word at all: And when
Night came, some went to their Beds, and some abroad to their Good Fortunes
here and there, where they could find it: And when the Morning was come, those
that had staid at Ragonde's lodgings, had their Stomach up before their Eyes
were well open; and so began to gather the Fragments together that were left
over Night; and so make Griladoes for Breakfast, as fast they could.

But the Coming-in of Bondrille with Three or Four Cloaks upon his Back, as if
he had been afraid, that his Limbs should have been stiff, or numbed with Cold,
put them into a little Perplexity, having his Spirits a little troubled,
because they went out Four of them together, and none but himself was returned
of all the Night-Company, who had traced the Town about; notwithstanding he had
waited at the Corners of the Streets for them so long, till his Legs were
almost shrunk into his Body again. But by and by, comes one of them with a
great Sackful of Goods, which he had brought from a Coach, aiding of the
Passengers, as though he had been one of their Company, to place Them, and
their Affairs; and so made his Escape away. Soon after this, came another with
the Back-part of a Cloak, which he had cut from a Man's Back in a Crowd,
leaving only the two Fore-Lapets hanging like a pair of Hanging-Sleeves. But
the last of all, was the greatest VVonder of all; for he came all Cut and
Mangled, by getting out of a Sellar, where he was shut in to have been kept
till Day, that they might have conveyed him to Prison in the Morning, for
having visited some Lodgings, which he should not have done, to have been found
as he was at the Visit.

But Bondrille, seeing all of his Comrades met again, he began to reassume his
good Humor, and to take his turn; and to talk of his Comrades, and their
different Subtilities: For (says he) our Congregation is for the most part,
Composed of a sort of Men, which are good Takers up; but bear amongst us the
Name of Soldiers of the Short-Sword: And when they have served their
Apprenticeships, they go here and there, at their own Fantasy, either to Cut
a Purse, or any such like Actions as this, which belongs to their Calling.
Sometimes they go into the Tennis-Court; where, tossing some few Balls, they
take up a good Cloak, and lay down an Old one in the Place; and so get away as
far as they can, acting the Drunkard, for fear of being seen and pursued; and
to be tossed in like manner, if they should be taken: So likewise, if they come
where they are playing at Bowls, they seldom miss doing of something; for
whilst they measure a doubtful Cast, what is to be gotten, is their own lawful
Goods: And so, at the Season of Swimming, when Men are in the Water, they are
making away the Clothes, and leave the Swimmers to heat themselves without
Clothes. So that, by these little Contrivances with the Times, they become fit
for any greater Actions, as they shall be employed about. And so, when they are
capable of such great Undertakings, then we enroll them Comrades, and
Night-VValkers; of which Night-VValkers, the one of them the last VVinter, got
more himself alone, than Six others could do in Two Years: For, he would go
into the Streets himself, with a Flambeau lighted in his Hand; and if any one
would follow him for the Benefit of the Light, when he found themselves alone
in a convenient Place, he having an Exstinguisher in his Pocket for the
purpose, he as soon puts out his Flambeau, and then leaps upon the Neck of the
Man, and makes him pay him well for his Pains he has taken. But we have lost
this brave Man out of our Society; for they have drawn his Soul out of his
Body, as they would draw Water out of a Well, (That is, with a Rope) and now,
at this time, the VVind blows under his Feet: (That is as much as to say, He
hangs upon a Gibbet.)

Another of the Company, who is at present in the Country; which they call the
Great Leaper, by reason of his Great Agility: He is counted a brave Fellow
also; for within these few Days, he emptied the Pockets of Two Gentlemen as
they were a Hunting, Mounted on their brave Coursers; but he took them with so
much Subtilty one by one, pretending to mind some thing that was amiss in the
Furniture of their Horses, which they did not perceive, and so knew not what he
did.

So, we have Women also, (says Bondrille) which we call Encroachers; whose
Business is only, for the most part, to visit the Markets, and other
Assemblies; when the Thickness of the Crowd will give them leave to fish in
Troubled Waters. Others will go to light a little Fire in a House, where they
make as if they were near Neighbors; and the other Day she went to look for
Chambers to be Let; and, under pretense of selling some things she had to
sell, she took all that lay open, and could be with Convenience conveyed away.
And these good Pieces are not only Faithful Keepers of what you bring to them;
but also are Reformers of our Acqusitions: And in that they are as quick as any
thing can be, to disguise any thing that is put into their Charge to dispose
of; for they will so rarely disguise any thing, that it will be a very hard
matter for any one to know his own Goods again, although they see it before
their Eyes: Of which I am a VVitness; for a little before I was Enrolled in the
Brotherhood, it was my Hap to Lodge one Night with some of my Friends, in the
House of one of these VVork-VVomen; and giving her my Cloak, which I did
usually wear, praying her to adjust it Handsomely for me; meaning only, that she
should make it Clean, and no more: But on the Morrow-Morning I found my Cloak
lined with another Stuff, which she caused to be put in; the Cap was turned
up-side down, and Silk-Buttons in the place of a Silver-Galoon, with which it
was bound; insomuch, that I had already handled him Three or Four times, in
looking for him on all sides; but not knowing of him, till she put me out of my
pain, by showing of me what she had done, and the Work-man-ship she had
bestowed on it.

But that which surpassed all the rest for Subtilty, was one whom we called the
Giboubeuse. She usually goes about the Town with a Sackful of Straw, till she
could espy a Place where she might make a better Fortune; and having found
this, she would go in, and lay down her Pack for a better, and so be gone; as
she did not many Days ago, when she went into a Silk-Man' s-Shop, and there
lays down a Child in the place of a Bundle of Satin.

But to Conclude (says Bondrille) we live like the Bohemians, who without
buying of any thing, want nothing that is necessary for them. And as our
Quarters are in diverse Places, so we have Correspondents every where assuredly
true to us.

And then he began to discourse of his Exploits in the Wars, telling them, That
he had met with a Knowing Magician, who had predicted to him; That he should
Dye in the Middle of a Medley of People; and that his Grave should be in the
open Fields: Of which he was not much Cozened; for some short time after this,
he was taken in the Plains of Long-Boyau, doing of his Exercise; he was Killed
in the Middle of a great Assembly, who was in a Confusion to see the Spectacle;
and so, presently after, they carried him out to the great Highway, where an
Old-Wile served to circle him.

So some of our short Swordmen have Acquaintance amongst your Burgors-Sons,
who may serve to defray Charges every where; as being assured of the Supplies
out of their Purse upon all Occasions, if we can but make any thing of a
Difference amongst them, in hopes that their Purse or Pockets may be emptyed by
the Arm of those which carry your Cut-laces; because when they fall into any
Treaties, it is only of this kind; where their Discourse is only of Cutting off
of Heads, or Cutting their Bodies in pieces; promising them to take a severe
Revenge upon all their Enemies, if they should be as strong as the Great Mogul;
or, at the least, they say, They will make them come to a very Honorable
Composition. But these Advocates do oftentimes find their Practices so good,
that they never desire to see the End of the Controversies: But, on the
contrary, they frame new Differences underhand, to the End that they may drink
the oftener; for in such Medleys as these, they make the best Reparations for
the Belly.

And again, if they do make them believe, that they will Kill one another in
cold Blood, making a great Stir and Combustion; yet all they do in this great
Stir, is but to beat one another with the Flat Sides of the Sword, or
Bulls-Pisle, or a Cudgel, according to the Quality of the Offense that has
been committed by our Duellists, or their Seconds.

But to say no more of this Company; for they are an open Bank, fit for the
Extirpation of Men, which should do Service in the Public: For they never
Fight, but with the Quart-Pot; whilst these young foolish Fellows expect every
moment to see the Overthrow of their Enemies, by these false brave Fellows, who
call themselves by the names of the Repairers of Wrongs and Outrages, giving
themselves great Names and Titles; whereof a Knight is the least amongst them,
in all their Order; and making more Saints of this their Order, than there are
in an Almanac.

But this Liberty, which had been so openly taken by them at Ragonde's House,
began now to be much Retrenched by the Complaint of the Neighborhood; which
made the Short-Sword-Men, and the Spinners of Wool, to remove and withdraw:
Insomuch, that in the House before, where there was nothing in it that was
Good, but Evil; for it created more Mischief, than the BOX of Pandora. But now,
there is nothing to be seen, but the Amyntas, Mariannes, Partheniaes, the
Amaranthes, Fanchons, and Clorindes; and these but rarely visited by some
young, joyful Youths, who had never Courted the Ladies, but in a Romance; and
this only but to make them a little bolder, when they found the occasion to
appear before their Mistresses, whom they thought fit to be made their Wives.

And, in brief, you heard nothing now spoken of, but Flattering, and some
Love-Toyes; and Ragonde her self incloystered in a small Room, beholding these
new Miracles of Nature; so great was the Reformation: And her Business now, was
only to show them the Methods, which properly belonged to the Exercises which
they intended to profess; as namely, how to hold their Countenance before a
Looking-Glass, to set their Hair in diverse Fashions; and so consequently, to
dress and set themselves out in the best Manner they can; and sometimes, to
bite their Lips, to make it show more like unto Artificial Corral; pinch their
Cheeks, to make the Paint show the better; and to glance with the Eye to the
purpose, very handsomely, and a hundred such little Tricks as these, to make
them set off the better, and handsomer to see to. To all which, the Pommade,
Jessemy-water, Orange, False Water, False Pearls, and Ribbonds of all Colors,
are not forgotten for the Adornment of these pretty Creatures, who called
themselves all Sisters; and Old Ragonde, they called their Good Woman.

But Theodore, who had made Love to Mademoiselle Cloris, continued still to see
her always at Ragonde's House, and to Live with her, and other Ladies of
Pleasure, in a continual Debauchery, leading a very lewd and unregulated Life;
which lasted a long time, in spite of all his Friends could do, with all the
Demonstrances that they could make him to the contrary; insomuch, that the
Scandal of his Vicious Life was known every day more and more: So that, his
Friends at last acquainted him, That if he would sail against Wind and Tide, he
must expect to run the Hazard of falling upon very dangerous Shelves, which
would (without all doubt cast him away; for that the Debauches were only a
Gilded Pill, which, whosoever did suffer himself to be carried away by it,
would (without all doubt) in time find the Bitterness of it at last. But their
Policy was so well ordered, that within some few Hours after, most of all these
loose, and ill living People were taken, and secured by the Officers of
Justice, and most Prisons were filled with them; of which, Ragonde, and her
Pensioners were not exempted.

And now, see what comes by too much frequenting of such Houses and People as
are so debauched. But Ragonde, who had a little before made her Lodging upon
the Rampire of the Town, which (in her Thoughts) was a Place of least Scandal:
But however, she found to her Cost, that where the Sick-Man moves, his
Distemper goes along with him always.

But, in short, it was ordained, That the greatest Part our Debauched Girls
should be sent to some Islands newly Discovered; for which purpose they were
Embarked before the Lover, to be sent down the River to Roan: But many of them
were in Hopes of being Rescued by the People in Power of that Town, as they
went along, for the Service that they had rendered them in times past.

But some of them, being more vain, said; If a Turk's Man of War should come
Crusing out of the Straits, it might happen, that the Ship where they were
might be taken, and so some of them might be presented to the Grand Seignior;
and she thought her Deserts might make her to be Honored with his
Handkerchief, or a better Thing: So good a Conceit had she of her self and
Actions.

But, at length, they all took their Leave of the Queens-Court, the Red-House,
Chaillot, of Passy, of Soresne, of Boulogne, St. Cloud; and above all the rest,
of their so much beloved Lodging, the Sign of the Great State, where they had
often been better Regarded, than now they were. And so, following on their
Course till they came to Poissy, where at the same time many Thieves were
Executed; some on the Wheel, some Hanged, and others sent to the Galleys; to
the end, that they might root out all those Disturbers of their Public Peace
and Tranquillity, and that all People might Live in Security, both in Town and
Country.

And now, behold! this was the Unhappy End of those, who, by leading of a
Vicious Life altogether, without Control or Order, had made themselves the
Authors of their own Disgraces, and were not looked upon by any, but according
to the petulant Humors of the People.

But Theodore had escaped this Danger by means of some of the Archers that were
his Friends; who, for the means of some Money, so far favored him, that he got
home to his Friends and Parents; where he now exercises an Honest Employ,
living according to his Birth amongst good People of Honor, and in a good
Repute.

Now, let all those that are become Libertines like him, by any Accident
whatsoever, learn to labor by his Example, if they do really intend to hinder
the Tryumphs of an Evil over themselves in this manner; that they may not be a
Witness themselves one Day, of their Enemies Joy for their Miscarriages.

Under-neath was written this EPIGRAM:
True Fanfrons, that wears a Sword;
Free Catchers of all that the World could afford;
Who by your rare Virtues, have brought Imitations to see the Day:
But if you have a mind to do better, you may.
Since at the last, Theodore imitates your Life;
You ought at last, to imitate his, when your Time serves.
The Matter ( said I, when I had read it over to the Poet) is very Rare, and
the Style smooth enough: wherefore, it is (without all doubt) a Piece of your
own Composing.

Pardon me, (says he) for it is a Friends of mine, who gave it to me to
Correct it: But truly, I had rather leave it as it is, than to spoil the Works
of another.

Why, (says I to him) you are able to give a Luster to any Work, sooner than
do it Wrong.

I do not doubt that at all, (replied he): But, to speak without Vanity, I call
that a Thing Spoiled, which another (it may be) calls a Good Reformation. And I
am also persuaded, that any Man, loving of his Progenitors, cannot like it
well, if by Hazard, he should beget a Crooked Child; and another, to make him
Straight, should take his Bunch or Crookedness away: This is, in effect, then
such a Deformity. Wherefore, I had rather not run the Hazard at all, than to
make my self disliked of by my Friend. And besides, It is not my Business to
work in Prose.

But there are some Verses in it, (I replied to him.)

But he made me Answer, That they came not from him; neither were they of his
Composition.

But you have made very Good Ones in taking of Tobacco, (says I to him.)

But he made me Answer, That there was nothing less.

But I told him, I had heard them Rehearsed, and found them to be very
agreeable; and that I had from time to time, diverted my self in the Hearing,
and Seeing of them.

(...) at the same time, I saw upon his Table a great Lute; which made me say
to him: Sir, for ought that I can see, you are endued with a great many good
Qualities, and are able to give a Luster to all your other Works, by adding a
sweet Harmony to their Force.

And you, Sir, (says he) Methinks, are of a very easy Belief, that you can be
so easily persuaded to believe a Supposition, as to rest satisfied by seeing of
the Glove, and not the Hand: It is a hard matter for a Man to judge by the
outward Appearance, what is within-side: For in a word, to tell you the Truth,
This Study of a Lute, which you see, is only to put in some things of mine;
which are at your Service, if you please.

At the same time, he pulls out from under his Beds-Head a Shirt of Cloth,
which was Fine enough; but so Old, and full of Holes, that he could not lie in
it at Night, for fear of tearing it to pieces. But putting in of his Left-Arm
into the Sleeve, he put his Right-Arm into a Hole of the Shirt, thinking it had
been the other Sleeve; and so came presently out of his Bed, and went to the
Table; and there fell a Writing, till the Cold made him leave his Pen. And
after this he goes, and opens his Study, or Belly of the Lute; out of which, he
pulled a Lac'd-Band, laced with diverse sorts of Lace; with a pair of Cuffs so
deep, that they might reach from the Wrist to the Shoulder; with a Perrywig,
that was neither White nor Red, but between both: Which, when I saw it, I asked
of him, If he meant to dress himself like a Courtier?

To which he answered, muttering with his Lips, That he would have been better
accommodated with his Hair than he was, if the Rogue had not run away with his
Perry-wig, which he carried him to mend a Place in it, where the Hair was cut
away, and to cure a Figure of an Ostridges Egg. But truly (says he) this
should not have served for a Scabbard for my Head, if I had not been a little
too Familiar: And this made me to know, that I should sometimes pretend, but
always know every thing: Wherefore, if you should be obliged to make an
Answer, be sure that you do it so, that it may be pleasing: For the Old Saying
is; If a Thing be well Given, it may be well Taken.

But (says I) this kind of Discourse is a little Obscure and Intricate; for
there is none knows the Meaning of it, but your self.

With that he replies: If you please to hear me, I will tell you how the
Accident came: For, as it was my Hap to be one Evening with a Great Personage
of the Court, who was then in an indifferent good Humor, and asked me many
pleasant Questions; to which I made him Answer after a jesting way, or (as they
say) like a Buffoon; which made him as often to laugh heartily. But at last, he
asked me, If I were not aiding at the Funeral of one of my Brothers; telling
me, That that very day they had Hanged a Poet. To which it was my Hap to make
him for Answer, That I never did see any one Executed, but one Gentleman, who
had his Head out off; naming the Person; not thinking in the least, that the
Party who dyed by the Edge of the Sword, was any thing akin to him: But he as
soon cut off my Words, by throwing a Silver-Candlestick, with a Burning
Wax-Light in it, at my Head; which Burning Candle was so entangled in my Hair,
that the greatest Part of my Hair was burnt, before I could get the Gandle out
of it: Besides, I was in as much trouble how to get away, for fear of my Life;
for he pursued me with a Sword drawn in his Hand. And this is the main Reason,
why I wear a Perrywig. And another Reason is this: It fortuned, that not long
since, I would have Rescued a Man out of the Hands of some that were leading
some poor People to the Hospital; for which they fell upon me, and hurt my
Head, as you see; for the Plasters remain upon it yet.

But, by this time, my Poet had almost Dressed himself after his Fashion; and we
began to walk abroad together: But upon the Stairs, I Chanced to look back, and
spyed him with but one Stocken on; which I gave him Notice of, and so he went
back to put it on: and then came, and found me at the Street-Door, where I
staid for him. But we had not gone far, but a Man of his Acquaintance meets
him, and first Salutes him, and then asked of him, How he had passed the Night
away?

Without sleeping, (says he) but in the most agreeable Divertisements that
ever Man had; for, I believe, (says he) that the Nine Sisters were never
Inspired with so brave Spirits, nor endued with so many pleasant Thoughts, as I
was: Neither was it possible, that ever I should have attained to the Enjoyment
of such a happy Night's Divertisement, if their Spirits had not left them, to
Court and Caress me, to the great Envy of one or other.

Ha, Alas! (says the other) I was not so Happy as you; for I have blowed all
this Night; and that Demon, or Devil, that Inspires us in our Cursed
Philosophy, was far off from Caressing me; for he made a Cruset set very well
fitted with le Lain, Antimony, the Stains of Ice, or Orpine, live Sulphur,
Sanders, and other Drugs that were necessary; to which I had already given them
all the Degrees of Heat: So that, within two Days, it would have been Gold of
the Highest Pitch, that would have endured Trial without Dimunition: But it
broke, and was like to have spoiled my Face into the Bargain.

But by this their Discourse, I came to understand, that my Poet's Friend was
an Alchymist: But I seemed to know nothing at all, nor to take any notice of
what they said. So, continuing their Discourse together, saying at last:

Whither go you, my Friend?

I go (says the Poet) to look out something of Divertisement and Refreshings
for a Lover, (meaning Me) that is wholly crossed in his Love; for by Vows and
Promises, all is changed into an Evil Success, instead of being Recompensed
according to his Deserts, for his Civility and Faithfulness: Therefore, I am
going to try if I cannot make him quickly forget that Ingratitude.

Why then, (replied the other) you are like the Witches, that can do, and undo
that which they have done. For my part, I really thought, that it had been the
Poet's Part to have inflamed Love, and not to chill it with Cold. But if I may
pass my Thoughts of Love, I do believe it to be a Distemper, which is only
cured by Mirth, and not by Melancholy; because it is a Passion of the Soul,
which (when it is inflamed therewith to the Highest, it) deprives us of
Reason, and makes us go astray besides our selves, like brute Beasts or
Vagabonds* But, in brief, --

"Patience, (says the Poet, who brake off the others Discourse, saying;) "That
he should see him Laugh heartily by and by; and I wish, that the first Flash of
Lightning, that proceeds out of its Fiery Region, may destroy the Mount of
Parnassus, if I do not Cure our Lover before he be many Hours older, by showing
him his Parallels, or those that were in his Condition.

And so, by little and little, discoursing as we went, we came at last to the
Hospital, where they put those that are besides their Wits: And so, addressing
of themselves by common Voice and Consent, to the Governor of the Place, asked
of him, If they might not see those that were thus Distracted, or Fools? To
which the Governor, who was an Ancient, yet Venerable Man enough answered,
That they might And so brought them into a little Hall; and first shows them a
Looking-Glass, to see themselves; giving them to understand, that it is not
good to Insult too much over the Misfortunes of others.

But this Ancient Man brought us into a little Court, where the Diseased were
shut up in little Rooms asunder: At which, the Poet began to cry out; Stay
here! Gad, it is sufficient, it suffices me; for I have seen the greatest Part
of all their Fooleries: And I think, that these Separations would do well, if
they were but big enough to be an Enclosure for the greatest Part of the World,
to shut up Fools in: For there are but very few People, who are not tainted
with that kind of Disease.

Which Discourse made the Governor laugh a little; and making a Sign with his
Head, to show that he approved of our Discourse. But I as soon espied a Great
Man, who looked very Pale and Wan; and cried out without ceasing, with all his
Force, That there was no Mercy for him at all! I have defaced That which God
made; for I have eaten Heaven and Earth!

At which, I asked the Governor, What the Meaning of that Extraordinary
Discourse should mean? Who told me, That that Man had Eaten up the Revenues of
a Piece of Ground, and all the Household Stuff that was left him, to the very
Tester of his Bed, which now was all he had left of all his Goods; at which he
became Distracted, and so took up these Words; and continues them ever since in
his Mouth.

And so we came against another, who cried out as loud and fast; That the first
that came ought to set him at Liberty, by Releasing of him out of that Place;
for he was no more a Fool, since he came in again of himself, uncompelled.

To which I made Answer, That this Man spoke nothing, but what was very good
Sense.

To which the Governor replied; Frieud, do not mistake your self; for there is
more of Malice than Folly, in his Case: For the Business why he tarries here,
is only this; He having on a time Layn with his Daughter, for which he was put
into Prison; and had undoubtedly Dyed for it, but that he Counterfeited himself
Distracted; and so was Committed into this Place, to Sequester himself from the
Hands of Justice.

Then the Poet, who had been all this time without speaking of one word, asked
the Governor; If there were not some, that were Distracted for Love?

To which he Answered, Yes; for the greatest Part of the Men that were in for
that very Distemper, returned afar; if they do but speak of a Woman, they
presently cry My Love, my Heart, my Dear, my Soul! I Burn, I Dye! and the like:
And all this, is but to nourish up a Company of Twattling, Foolish Women, who
believe all they say to be True; and vant it abroad, that they have made so
many Slaves.

And so, showing him a little Lodging that was all full of Cobwebs; and told
him, That there had been one that had layn there for several Years: But, at
last, came one of his Friends to see him, who asked me Leave to go into his
Lodge to him, to make a small Collation with him, which I readily agreed to; so
they emptyed several Bottles of Wine together; which made me fear, that the
Strength of the Wine might trouble his Brains: But, on the contrary, he was so
well fortified, and his Senses so well settled, that after Three days
Examination, he was found a very Competent Judge, and fit to be sent out.
Before he parted, he writ this against Wall; which is here Visible for him that
should come next, although it be now almost all Defaced.

Then our Poet began to look at it nigh at hand; and for his better Perusal, he
wiped it over with the Corner of his Cloak, that he might Read it the better:
But, contrary to his Expectation, he found a Draft of Cupid in Debauch, his Bow
and Arrows thrown down, and all in Disorder; and over his Head these Two Verses
written.

Thou Son of Love, I am thine no more; All that thou do, is superfluous
Shower.

And under-neath was this Song written, in imitation of this Tyrant over our
Souls.

The Wine alone shall furnish me with Flame;
For Bacchus* has brought me under his Laws,
And made him throw his Arrows to the Ground:
Asking but another Glass,
To make him as Drunk as his Carcass.
All his Troops are on the Rout with the Wind;
And he has drank so much, that he is quite Blind:
For since he has thrown his Belt away,
We see him lie sleeping all the Day.
For with the Juice of the Bottle called Wine,
He has quenched his Flambeau called Divine.
Callet, I Renounce thy Love, as Folly*
Such Pleasures makes me Melancholy*
I abhor it, when thereon I think.
But he is my Friend, that taught me to Drink,
And drove Envy from my Memory;
And Revived my Senses, and Spirit^ like to Dye.
But our Poet quickly pulls an Ink-horn out of his Pocket, with which he writes
these Verses upon a piece of Paper; saying, That this was a good Matter to
furnish him with; for it was capable of passing a new thing, when he had a
little ordered it after his own Fashion.

But our Blower began to think it now his time to speak; therefore, he asked
the Governor, Where they put the Alchymists?

But he answered him; That he never saw any such there; for either the Fire of
Raymond alone, or the Mercury and Minerals consumed them; or else, at the
least, it sends them stark-Naked to the Incurables; and so we have none of
their Company.

But I was presently informed by the Governor, of a Young Man, who had many
Papers in his hand, walking from one End of the Course to the other, as if he
had been Rapt into some very profound Thoughts of great Concernment.

This is (says he) a Poet, who was Committed to my Charge the other Day by a
Courtier, more Fool than himself; who accused him of writing some Verses that
touched him, wherein he is not so much as named: Wherefore, I leave him at his
Liberty, as you see; and have often sent him away, but he as often returns
again to me, as if he had some other Pretensions here; and here he will stay in
spite of me, as if the House had been only built for the Commodity of the
Poets. But, for my own part, I was very Joyful to see that my Poet staid,
having marked his Design that he had to put the Trick upon me: But all this
time, I did not so much as let him know any thing, that I understood the
Meaning of the least of all his Intrigues; neither would I break off with a
Person, who had served me so often for very rare Divertisements, as he from
time to time had done.

So the Governor caused us to see several other distempered Persons, and told
us of all the several sorts of their Distempers.

And this done, we took our Leaves of the Governor. But, for my self, I had
almost every day some kind of Divertisement or other with my Poet; till it fell
out, that I had a Journey to go into the Country; which made me be a long time
from seeing of him, who was my only Object of Delight.

But our Poet continued still to do something or other, be it Good or Bad, as
his own proper Fantasy led him, either to the Praise or Dispraise of a Part,
or a Whole, without knowing the Virtue or Folly of the Person he writ of* But,
Right or Wrong, he made Verses, and carried them to Men's Houses, as if it had
been the Gazette. And some gave it the same Esteem, which did a little blind
his Ambition; he believing all they said to be Truth, because they made him
some small Presents.

But it fortuned, at a time, that he came to a House, where I was an Attendant
in the Family; and joining of himself with me by hazard, not knowing of me at
first, he gave me some Elogies, and Glorious Epithetes; more for my Quality
that I was in, than for my Personage: Not dreaming to find me there, he prayed
me very earnestly to Present to the Lord I served, some of his Works. But I
desired to be excused; telling him, That if I should Present it, there would
come no Profit by it; for my Lord was not of a Liberal Humor in that, or such
like Matters.

It may be, (says my Parnassi^n* whispering in my Ear) that he is of the
Humor of some, who had rather give a Hundred Pistols to a Lady of Pleasure,
than a Tester, or Two Shillings to a Poet.

But I answered him; That if he would know the Truth of it, my Lord does
Compose some things himself; and what he does, is very Excellent: Therefore,
any thing that is presented to him, must be the Finest, and best of Works; or
else, they may happen to fare no better, than an Old Italian Poet did, who
presented him with something, as he thought, to be very Rare; which my Lord
took, and carried it to his Desk; and from thence, instead of Money, (for which
the Poet waited) he brought another thing of the like Nature, being of his own
making, and gave it to the Poet; saying, Volte pour, volte Patramie: And this
was all the Reward he got.

Our Poet had still the same Suit of Spanish-Cloath, and Satten-Doublet,
pink't: Whether it was that he was not Proud, or that he was too Proud, I do
not know; but his Cloak had been lined with Plush; which was plain to be seen
by the pieces that remained, which were big enough to have covered a Pair of
Slippers.

But as he was talking to me in the middle of the Court, he was presently
surrounded by a great many Footmen, and the like, which knew him, and of what
Trade he was; and asked him for some of his Works, which he as readily promised
them: Which, when I saw it, I told him; That he had taken a very ill Place to
walk in, and that it was a bad Market: And withal, That a Poet ought not to be
so Familiar, as to declare all to the Common Sort* of People; and that he
(being a Poet) had to do with Persons of Quality, who would not suffer
Comparisons with others; especially, in Business of Consequence.

That is Truth, (says he) but Persons of our Profession, love an entire
Familiarity; and you need not to doubt, but that all manner of Public Persons
ought to have their Faces enlightened by every one; but more especially by the
Poets, who make up one Part of their Pulgibery in this World; for the
Accomplishment of which, they are obliged very often to do it: For oftentimes,
it so falls out, that they are fain to make as many Gestures, as a Dog that
has lost his Master, and seeks out the means to join himself with another. But
if that fails, he shall find one Wooden-fac'd Fellow or other of Porters, that
will shut the Door against his Nose; or else, it may be, make him sit Two or
Three Hours (as they say) to look to the Muleat the Gate, whilst (it may be)
they lose another better Occasion in another Place. And all this is done with a
little ugly-made Face, which cost them nothing.

But if a Spunger, or Hangeron do but chance to Caress, and make much of a
Song, (says our Poet) he is strait counted for a Gallant Man: The Gentleman
(they will say) has Means enough; and he is importuned to go, and Eat with the
Great Ones: For they will swear, they cannot tell how to Live without seeing of
him; for he is one of the best Wits of the Times, and a Person who (by his
Behavior) might (in his Travels) be a Guest to be Entertained by Monarchs, for
his Noble Parts: But if he make but a little of his Necessities known; Why,
they will say, Such an one is a Licker of Trenchers: And they shall throw all
the Quibbles they can, and shall employ the whole Morning in inventing one
Foolery or other, to pay him for his Dinner; or they will let him Languish and
Dye with Thirst, before they will give him to Drink, if he be at Table;
notwithstanding he should ask for it oftentimes: And after all, at last, he
shall be obliged to Rise and take it himself at the Side-Table: And then, it
may be, he shall find some Affront, or other put upon him, at his Return to the
Table again.

Wherefore, (in a word) we ought as much as we can with our Convenience, to
love the Servants as well as the Master; and not to follow the Maxims of some
Flatterers, who will cause the Servants Portion to be lessened, and have Water
put into their Wine: And afterward, are obliged to run in the Street, with a
Company of Laqueyes after him, crying a Vinegar-Merchant, and a Cutter of
Dishes. Such can never want Scoffers after them, as they walk the Streets.

But with this Poet was the Alchymist, of which I have already spoken. But, to
Regulate him the better, and to fit him for a little Discourse of his Calling,
I led him into an Arbor, where we might stay whilst a Breakfast was a
preparing for us; and, in the mean time, I began to question the Alchymist,
concerning the Transmutation of Metals: To which he seemed to be a Man very
quick and ready at his Answers, as any simple ignorant Person could be; who
would und^rtake to hold an Argument in Theology, that was the greatest Fool of
all those, that ever did undertake to look or study for the Phylosophers-Stone:
For his Brains were only Infected with the Fumes, of the Minerals, on which he
practiced. And so, finding no more Satisfaction in my Alchymist, than in my
Poet, I thought it now but high time to come to a Conclusion with them Both.

But in the mean time, our Poet was surprised with an Extreme Heat of
Parnassus's Fury, and called a-main for Pen and Paper; and when he had walked a
Turn or two, he steps a side, and there writes,

Illustrious Reflection! Great and Famous mersonage!
Tituler, --
But he could go no farther; for the Greatest of his Works showed him a Poet
either at the Beginning, or in the Middle of his Works; but, as for the
Conclusion, the greatest Part of it was only the Fragments of some scattered
Works of others.

But here our Rejoicing had end: For I knowing very well, that my frequenting
of such Persons, could be no way Profitable, but Prejudical to me: Wherefore,
I sought all honest Pretenses, to take my Leave, and to be rid of them;
promising them all the Favors and Kindnesses, that I was able to make or
express to them, for their Service.

And so Ends the* Extravagant Poet.

FINIS.
Books Printed for R. Bentley, and M. Magnes this Year, 1680.
Plays.
SErtorius, a Tragedy; by J. Bancroft, Gent. Theodosius, or the Force of Love.
Soldier's Fortune, a Comedy. Caesar Borgia, a Tragedy. Mr. Limberham, or the
Kind-Keeper; by J. Dreyden. Esquire. Murder of the Duke of Gloucester. King
Learc.
Novels.
Pilgrim. Palais-Royal. Essex and Elizabeth. Amors of Madame. The Emperor and
the Empire Betrayed.
In the Press.
Father Lamberg's History of Lutheranisme.

