DIALLING Performed Instrumentally by our HEMISPHERE in PLANE; Projected and
first fitted by Mr William Oughtred, and laid down according to his Method
formerly published for this very subject.

TOGETHER, With twenty one several Diagrams or Schemes, demonstratively
showing the reason and groundwork of all Dialling:As also, how to know,
distinguish and set down the Hour Lines for both Faces of all Planes at one
working.

By a Practitioner in the same Art.

PONDERIBVS SONITVM IACOBVS RIMEVS
printer's or publisher's device

LONDON, Printed by William Du-Gard; and are to be sold by William Hope, at
the sign of the Anchor, on the North-side of the Roial Exchange. 1652.

TO THE READER.
HEre I present unto your view a small Tract of Dialling performed by Mr
Oughtred's projection of our Hemisphere in Plane, according to his own method
in his book formerly published for this very subject, which by often practice
and trial I have found so useful and satisfactorie in all cases whatsoever (to
this Art belonging) that I have fitted twenty several Diagrams or Schemes for
ten several proposed Planes. The greater 10 showing the drawing and setting
down the hour lines Substyler and Poles height for every of them by the
Hemisphere or Instrument it self. The other or lesser 10 show how to
distinguish and set down the hour lines which are in use for either face of any
of these Planes.

In which ensuing discourse I assume to my self nothing but the making and
fashioning of the Diagrams, and a larger Explanation (demonstratively) of what
Mr Oughtred has in brief set down, wherein I resemble one lighting his Candle
at another man's, which as it cannot deminish or take away the luster from his,
so I must acknowledge it has given a light unto mine.

Here is further to be noted, for a great encouragment to the Practitioner,
that if he but barely know the rules of the Globe as Aequinoctial, Meridians,
Paralels of declination, Poles, etc. He shall most plainly see (as in a glass)
what the fundamental reason of Dialling is, neither can he be hoodwinkt (in
the use of this Instrument) from the true and full knowledge thereof.

I have likewise for better conveniencie fitted or ordered the Diagrams (to
this tract belonging) to be sticht or bound up by themselves, that so you may
lay open before you what Diagram you pleas, by the particular Explanation
whereof according to its number in the Book you shall most easily learn the
order of working, which I conceiv to be a readier way to the learner then to
bind them together and so be forced to turn from page to page for every
letter. Lastly these Diagrams or Schemes (being made only for
Demonstration-sake) are not so large as to expect every thing to be exactly
performed according to Arithmetical Calculation; yet I presume no man shall
find such difference from the truth as may make the least sensible error in
Time, for had I made them of a greater circumference the work would have been
so much the truer.

Which as I have found both useful and satisfactorie to my self, so if it prove
but acceptable to thee, I have my desire.

R. L.

A Definition of certain Terms or Words hereafter used for the better
understanding of the ensuing Discourse.
A Plane.
BY a Plane is meant any thing which is flat or smooth, be it Wall, board,
Stone, or any thing else whereon lines may be conveniently drawn; which must
be conceived to have length and breadth, but no thickness; that so when the Sun
forsake's the one face or side of any Plane, it must presently appear upon the
other:for every Plane has two faces or sides, whereon some hour lines may be
drawn for good use; Except the Horizontal, which can have but one.

Again, every Plane must cut or divide the Globe of the Univers into two equal
halvs:As the Horizontal Plane divide's the upper Hemisphere which we see, from
the lower which we see not:Or the Equinoctial Plane may be said to divide the
Northern half of the Globe from the Southern half thereof, or the Meridian
Plane; to divide the Eastern half from the Western half thereof:and so do all
other Planes whatsoever, according to their several situations.

The Horizontal line.
THe Horizontal line, is a line always level, or parallel to the Horizon;
being indeed a level-line.

A Perpendicular line.
A Perpendicular line is a line crossing the Horizontal, or any other line at
right angles, but most proper, that line which crosses the Horizontal at right
angles, pointing out the Zenith and Nader.

Declination.
THe Declination of a Plane is, what a Plane varie's or differ's from beholding
the due North or South, either to the East or Westwards.

Inclination.
THe Inclination of a Plane is the quantity of an Arch in degrees and minutes
which any plane is seated, or lifted up above the level of the Horizontal line.

Pole of the world.
THe Pole of the world is represented in the Instrument by the letter P,
through which all the Meridians pass.

Pole of the Plane.
THe Pole of the Plane must ever be 90:00 from the Plane it self, even as the
Pole of the world is 90:00 from the Equator.

Pole of the Meridian of the Plane.
SO must also the Pole of the Meridian of the Plane be 90:00 from the Meridian
it self; which will be far better understood in every of the several Diagrams
following.

Meridian or Hour-circle.
BY a Meridian is meant any of the Hour-circles in the Instrument, whereof
there are but 12 drawn, thereby pointing out the 24 hours, being 15:00 each
from other, which is an hour of time, and are sometimes termed Meridians, and
sometimes Hour-circles, as occasion shall be given.

The proper Meridian of the Plane.
THe proper Meridian of the Plane is that very Meridian, either real in the
Instrument, or pricked down, which passes through the Pole of the Plane.

Meridian of the place.
THe Meridian of the Place is that Meridian in this our Horizon, which make's
(the Sun being thereupon) Mid-daie and Midnight with us.

The Prime Vertical Circle.
THe Prime Vertical Circle is the Circle or Azumith which passes through the
Zenith and the points of East and West in the Instrument, represented by the
line W z E.

The Scale.
THe Scale of the Instrument is the Radius or Semidiameter thereof, viz. z S
being divided into 90:00 unequal degrees.

The limb of the Instrument.
THe limb of the Instrument is often named, by which you are to understand is
meant the innermost Circle of all in the Instrument, which is in every of the
Diagrams or Schemes divided into 360:00.

An Hour-line.
BY an Hour-line is meant any straight line drawn from the Pole of the Plane,
through the Intersection or crossing of any hourcircle with the Plane unto the
limb of the Instrument.

The Substiler line.
THe Substiler line is likewise a straight line drawn from the Pole of the
Plane, through the intersection or crossing of the proper Meridian of the
Plane, with the Plane it self, unto the limb of the Instrument, over which line
the Style or Gnomon is always placed.

Diagram.
BY the word Diagram is meant a Geometrical figure, whereof for every proposed
plane (in the ensuing Tract) there are two of the same number from no A to
ndeg; K, (both included).

hemisphere in plane for the latitude 51:30

An explanation of the Instrument.
THis Instrument is our Hemisphere in Plane for the Latitude 51:30 first
projected by Mr William Oughtred, and by him (as also by Mr Gunter) a Method is
set down for the making thereof, wherein the Circle

N E S W is the Horizontal Circle of the Plane. N z S the Meridian, or North
and South line. W z E the Prime Vertical Circle, or East and West line. z
represent's the Zenith, and sometimes the center of the Instrument. P the Pole
of the world. W E the Equator. The Arch represent's the Summer Tropic. The
Arch represent's the Winter Tropic. z S the Semidiameter is divided into 90:00
unequal degrees.
Next there are drawn through the Pole in the the Instrumen P 12 Meridians
which divide the whole face of the Plane into 24 parts, which are 15:00 each
from other (being an hour of time) therefore they are taken and deemed for
hour-circles also, and figured accordingly, which will be sufficient for our
present matter. These several Diagrams following, being made only for
demonstrationsake; But the Instrument would be much more useful and exact if
it were larger, and every Meridian, or every 5th Meridian of the 360:00 were
therein drawn, as hereafter will appear.

Further you are to note, that this Instrument is most proper for all dialls
with centers, in which the hour lines, substiler and style do meet, whereof
their natures, qualities and number follow:

First, The Horizontal Plane.
THe Instrument it self is an Horizontal dial:for if straight lines be drawn
from the center z to the several intersections of the hour-circles with the
limb (which represent's the Horizontal Plane) and in z erect a Style or Gnomon
51:30 above the Plane, equal to N P right over the Meridian z P n It shall be
a perfect Horizontal Dial.

An upright Plane fully beholding the North or South.
THis Plane is likewise represented by the line W z E in the Instrument, being
the Prime Vertical Circle, or East and West line thereof, being right to the
Meridian N z S, therefore to the Southwards a due South face, and to the
Northwards a due North face.

The Vertical Inclining Plane.
ALL Planes which are not level to, or with the Horizon, nor yet perpendicular
thereto, but lie sloping betwixt the Zenith and Horizon, are called Inclining
Planes:And if their Horizontal lines shall be parallel to the Prime Vertical W
z E, that is, fully beholding the North or South, they are then called Vertical
Inclining Planes:These Planes may Incline either to the North-part of the
Horizon, or to the South; and each Plane has two faces whereon some hourlines
may be drawn for use; The upper face lying open to the Zenith, and the lower
to the Nader, wherein you are to consider the height of the Pole above the
Plane by comparing the Inclination of the Plane to the Horizon, with the
Latitude of the place:and will be better understood by the demonstration
following, wherein A c A represent the Horizontal line.

z c n the Perpendicular line. N S the two Poles of the world, whereof N is
elevated 51:30 above A according to our Latitude. Ae c Ae the Equinoctial line
or Plane.
The other lines are several Planes proposed according to their several
Inclinations to the Horizon.

I will first propose a Plane whose Inclination is 20:00 in the North part of
the Horizon, viz. the line B c B; now hereby you may plainly perceiv that the
North Pole N is elevated above the upper face of this Plane but 31:30; for if I
take the angle of the Plane's Inclination A c B 20:00 out of A c N 51:30, there
will rest the angle B c N 31:30 for the North-Pole's height above the upper
face, and therefore the South-pole S must be elevated so much above the lower
face of the said Plane as the angle B c S shows, being the same with the
angle B c N.

If the Plane proposed were D c D, Northerly likewise, you may perceiv by the
situation of the Plane that the North Pole N will be elevated above the lower
face of this plane 20:00; for if I take the angle A c N 51:30 out of A c D
71:30 there will rest the angle N c D 20:00 for the North-pole's height above
the lower face, and and therefore so much for the South-pole above the upper
face thereof as the angle D c S shows.



Again, if the Plane proposed were F c F 18:30 Inclination in the Southern part
of the Horizon. Here, because F in the Southpart of the Horizon is lifted up
above the Horizontal line 18:30 according to the Inclination thereof; therefore
F being the other end of the Plane, must be so much deprest under it, so that
if I add the angle AcF 18:30 to the angle A c N 51:30, I shall have the angle F
c N 70:00 for the Northpole's height above the upper face, and so much must the
South-pole's height be above the lower face of this Plane, as the angles F c N
and F c S show.

If the Plane proposed were the line N c S, it must of necessity be a Polar
Plane, because it is the same with the Axis of the world, so that neither Pole
will be elevated above this Plane.

If the Plane proposed were the line Ae c Ae it must needs be an Equinoctial
Plane, and so the Poles will be elevated 90:00 above either face of the said
Plane.

The upright declining Plane.
THese Planes, because they do not directly behold the South or North, nor yet
the East or West fully, but are Planes which lie betwixt both, (and upright
withal) are called upright declining Planes, which have likewise two faces
whereon some hour lines for use may be drawn, the one face lying open to the
Southwards, the other face to the Northwards.

The Declining Inclining Plane.
IF a Plane shall Decline any way from the due North or South either to the
East or Westwards, and is not withal an upright plane, but is such a plane as
with its Declination inclines to the Horizon, it is then called a Declining
Inclining Plane.

The Meridian Plane.
THose Planes whose Horizontal lines are the same, or parallel to the Meridian,
and withal are upright Planes, are generally called Meridian Planes.

The Meridian Inclining Plane.
BUt those Planes whose Horizontal lines are the same, or parallel to the
Meridian, and withal the Plane shall Incline to the Horizon, then it is called
a Meridian Inclining Plane.

The Polar Plane.
THose Planes wherein a line may be drawn parallel to the Axis of the world are
called Polar Planes (although with some distinction) because that line points
unto the two Poles; and these Planes are always parallel to some one of the
hour-circles in the Instrument; For the direct Polar Plane is parallel to the
hour-circle of 6, and the Meridian plane is parallel to the hour-circle of 12.

The Polar declining Plane.
BUt the Polar declining Plane is a Plane which is parallel to some one of the
hour-circles in the Instrument betwixt 12 and 6, because of its Inclination to
the Pole, and Declination from the prime Vertical, or, East and West line in
the Instrument.

Next the Substiler and hour lines in a Meridian Plane make an Arch with the
Horizontal line of the plane, equal to the Latitude of the place:In direct
Polar planes they make an Arch of 90:00, but in Polar declining planes they
make an Arch with their Horizontal line of their planes more then the latitude
of the place, and less then 90:00.

Again, in direct Polar planes the Substiler line is the same with the Meridian
or 12 a clock line:In a Meridian plane it is the same with the hour of 6, but
in a Polar declining plane it is betwixt 12 and 6, according to the inclination
or distance of the proper Meridian of the plane with or from the Meridian of
the place.

I should now proceed to the setting down those several planes upon the
Instrument in their order; but because some of them are plain regular dials,
falling under every man's apprehension, and some comprehended in what shall be
spoken of the others, I will omit these several following.

The first therefore which I shall omit or pass over, is the Horizontal plane,
whereof the Instrument itself is a perfect pattern, as in folio 5 is declared.

The next following is the due South and North plane, which is likewise
represented in the Instrument by the line W z E, and is fully comprehended and
taught in any of the Diagrams no A B or C, of the upright declining planes.

The next following is the Vertical inclining plane, which is likewise
sufficiently explained in any of the Diagrams of number D E F G, of the
declining inclining planes, there being but the same method and order of
working for the one as for the other.

The last which I pass over are the direct Polar and Equinoctial planes, being
very plain regular Dialls, and indeed, not so proper for the Instrument as
aforesaid.

How to set down upon the Instrument these several Planes following, viz.
First, The upright declining Plane.
THe first therefore which I will begin withal is, how to set down upon the
Instrument any upright, or upright declining Plane:First you must be very
careful which way your declination tend's; for if you mistake herein, your
work must be extreme falls.

This upright declining Plane is proposed to decline 30:00 to the Eastwards of
the South; therefore I reckon in the limb of the Instrument 30:00 to the
Northwards of E, and 30:00 to the Southwards of W, in the greater Diagram,
number A, and so draw the line A z A for the Horizontal line of the Plane. Next
I cross it at right angles with the line C z E for the perpendicular line
thereof; for you must know that the Horizontal line of the Plane, and the
Perpendicular line thereto, in all upright planes must be the two first
lines:and in all incliners the Horizontal line must be the first, and a line
crossing the Horizontal at right angles must be the second (which upon the
matter is all one) before you can proceed any further.

This being don, you perceiv the Southern face of this plane to behold the
South-east quarter of the Instrument, and the Northern face thereof to behold
the North-west quarter of the Instrument, which is according to the declination
proposed.

How to set upon the Instrument any Vertical Incliner, or any Declining
Inclining Plane.
FOr all sorts of Incliners you must have recours unto the Semidiameter or
graduated scale in the Instrument z S.

Now this Plane Decline 24:20 Westerly from S. is proposed to Incline 36:00
Northerly.

First, because this plane decline's to the Southwestwarde, therefore in the
greater Diagram number D I reckon from W in the limb 24:20 Northerly, and so
much from E Southerlie, and so I draw the Horizontal line of the Plane A z A,
which I cross at right angles with the line B z B.

Next, I consider the Inclination proposed 36:00 northerlie, which I take out
of the Scale from S to e and put it over in the northern part of the line B z B
from B to T, or, (which is much the better way) I take the complement to 36:00
being 54:00 out of the Scale from z to e and put it over in the Northern part
of the line from z to T, because the Inclination proposed is northerlie, of
which you must have as much care as to the Declination; which point T will be
the highest point in this plane, being nearest the Zenith z. Now from the two
ends of the Horizontal line A and A, and through this point T; having found a
center, I draw the Arch of a circle A T A, which Arch is the Declining
Inclining plane proposed:And these two foregoing examples will be sufficient
for setting down or placing upon the Instrument all Planes whatsoever.

To find the place of the Pole of every upright Plane.
NOw after your Plane is justly set upon your Instrument with its horizontal
and perpendicular lines, the next thing requisite to know, is the place of the
Pole of your Plane, which must be carefully placed; for from the Pole of every
Plane (having a center) the Substyler and all the hour lines must be drawn to
the limb of the Instrument.

You are likewise to know, that the Pole of every Plane is always 90:00 from
the Plane it self, and ever, in all upright planes, at that end of the
perpendicular line in the limb of the Instrument, to which the face of your
Plane is opposite, for which you intend your Dial, because it is the
Semidiameter, and therefore the Radius or Sine of 90:00 which is general.

Thus in the greater Diagram no A the Southeasterlie face of the plane being
proposed, therefore at the Southern end of the perpendicular line, viz. at C in
the limb is the place of the Pole of that face of the plane. If the
Northwesterlie face (which is the contrary face) were intended for principal,
then the Pole thereof would be at E in the Northern end thereof.

To find the place of the Pole of every Inclining, or of every Declining
Inclining Plane.
IF the Plane be a Vertical Incliner, or a Declining inclining Plane, as in
the greater Diagram no D is proposed, then the Pole of the Plane must be
always in the line which crosses the Horizontal at right angles, betwixt the
limb and the center z, so that you know z T being the complement of
Inclination 54:00 if I take 36:00 out of the Scale from z downwards, it will
extend to d, which being put over in the same line B z B from z, it will reach
unto m, which must be the place of the Pole of this Plane, because z T is 54:00
of the Scale from z, and z m is 36:00 from z, which make's the line T z m to
be 90:00 betwixt the Plane at T, and the Pole thereof at m; and this is
general for all Planes of this nature.

To draw the Hour Lines upon all Planes with Centers.
YOu are to mark diligently where the Hour-circles in the Instrument do cross
or cut your Plane; for if a straight Ruler be laid to the Pole of the Plane,
and to those several intersections or crossings of the Hour-circles, with the
Plane and straight lines drawn from those several intersections or crossings to
the limb of the Instrument, those straight lines shall be the Hour Lines for
your Plane, and by reckoning the degrees in the limb of the Instrument you
shall know, how much every hour-line is distant either from the Horizontal line
of the Plane, or from the Perpendicular line thereof, or from the Substiler, or
any one hour-line from another; by which you may transfer the same lines upon
your Plane by a table made thereby as you pleas.

To draw the Substiler line upon all Planes with Centers.
YOu are to mark diligently where the Pole of your Plane falls to be either
upon an hour-circle, or meridian, or betwixt any two; for if the Pole of the
Plane fall upon a Meridian, as in the Diagram number D it does fall just upon
the Meridian or hour-circles of one in the point m, then this hour-circle of
one must be the proper Meridian of the Plane, because it passes through the
Pole of the Plane at m. Now if you lay a ruler to the Pole of the Plane m, and
to the intersection or crossing of this Meridian with the plane it self, in the
point L, and draw the straight line m L K to the limb of the Instrument, this
line shall be the Substiler line.

Furthermore, because the proper Meridian of the Plane, and the hour-circle of
one, in this Diagram no D, be one and the same, therefore the Substiler and
hour-line of one, must be one and the same line also, and serve for both.

But if the Pole of the Plane fall betwixt two meridians or hourcircles in the
Instrument, as in the Diagram no A it does, viz. betwixt the hour circles of 9
and 10 in the Instrument, at the point C: in the limb (because it is an upright
Plane) then for better demonstration sake, I will in the Diagrams following,
(where need shall require) make or prick one down, which in this Diagram no A
is C L P E, which is the proper meridian of this Plane, because it passes
through C the Pole thereof. Now laying a ruler to the Pole C, and to the
Intersection of this proper meridian with the Plane it self in the point L, and
draw the line C L K, it must be the Substiler line for this Plane.

To find the height of the Pole above all Planes having Centers.
THe next and last thing to know, is, how much the Pole is elevated above your
Plane:Now the height of the Pole above any Plane, is the measure of the arch of
the proper meridian of the Plane, which is intercepted or included betwixt the
Pole in the Instrument and the Plane:To know the quantity of which arch in
degrees and minutes, first reckon in the limb of the Instrument, from either
end of the proper meridian 90:00, mark where this acount end's, and from thence
through the center z draw an obscure, or occult line to the opposite point in
the limb, then take the distance betwixt the proper meridian and the center z
in the occult line, and see how many degrees and minutes it is in the Scale
from z downward; for the complement thereof being taken out of the Scale from
z, and extended in the occult line on the other side the center, shall point
out the pole of this proper meridian; which had, lay a ruler to the Pole of
this proper meridian, and to the Pole in the Instrument P, and make a mark in
the limb where the ruler cut's. Again lay the ruler to the Poles of the proper
meridian, and to the intersection or crossing of this meridian with the Plane,
and make a second mark in the limb where the ruler cut's; for the degrees and
minutes reckoned in the limb betwixt these two marks, will be the exact
measure of the arch of the proper meridian of the plane, which is intercepted
or included betwixt the Pole and the Plane, which is the height of the Pole
above all planes having centers.

Thus in the Diagram no A, from either end of the proper meridian of the Plane,
viz. from E or C in the limb, I reckon 90:00 which end's at A or A, being in
this Diagram the ends of the horizantal line, and therefore the same line A z A
serv's for the occult line before spoken of (and will be always so in all
upright planes). Next I find the distance betwixt the proper meridian and the
center z, viz. z L to be in the Scale 21:00; so that taking 69:00 the
complement thereof out of the Scale from z downwards, and extending it in the
occult line on the other side the center, it will point out the place of the
Pole of this proper meridian to be at h.

Now laying a ruler to the Pole of this proper meridian at h, and to the Pole
in the Instrument P make a mark in the limb where the ruler cut's, viz. n; or
(which is all one) draw the obscure line h P n; then keeping the ruler at h,
turn it to the point L, where the proper Meridian cut's the Plane, and make the
mark o in the limb, or the line h L o, and you shall find the degrees and
minutes betwixt n and o in the limb to be 32:40, which is the measure of the
arch of the proper meridian betwixt P and L, which is the North-pole's height
above the Northern face of the Plane, and therefore the South-pole must be
elevated so much above the Southern face thereof.

Again, in the Diagram no D, the proper meridian of the Plane which passes
through the Pole of the Plane, is the meridian or hour-circle of one, viz q m i
L q: from q therefore, either end of this hour-circle, which is (now the proper
meridian of the Plane) I reckon 90:00 in the limb, which end's at D, from which
point D through the center z I draw the occult line D z D; Next I find the
distance betwixt the center z and the proper meridian in the obscure line to
be z i 9:00 of the Scale; therefore taking the complement thereof 81:00 out of
the Scale from z downwards, it will extend on the other side the center, in the
occult line from z to h, which will be the place of the Pole of this proper
meridian; now laying a ruler to h the Pole of the proper meridian, and to P the
Pole in the Instrument, draw the obscure line h P n, then laying the ruler to
h, and to the point L, where the proper meridian crosses the Plane, and draw
the line h L o, and you shall find the degrees and minutes betwixt n and o in
the limb to be 17:00, which is the measure of the arch of the proper meridian
betwixt P and L, which is the Northpole's height above the upper face of this
declining inclining Plane, and therefore the South-pole must be elevated so
much above the lower face thereof.

To place the Style or Gnomon.
NOw the height of the Pole above the Plane being found for right placing the
Style or Gnomon you must know it must ever point directly to the pole, which is
elevated above that face of your plane for which you intend your Dial.

To know what hour lines must be in use for either face of any Plane
whatsoever.
Because you shall not incumber nor pester your Dial with useless or
unnecessarie hour lines, you shall most plainly perceiv, after your Plane is
truly placed upon your Instrument, what hour lines will be in use for either
face thereof, only by observing the intersections, or crossings of the
Tropiques and Parallels of the Sun's Declination with the Plane, which is very
plain and of excellent use.

For example in the Diagram no A* you perceiv the Southern face of the Plane to
be A C A in the Instrument, and the Northern face thereof to be A E A; now
imagining the Sun's diurnal arch to be in the Summer Tropique, you may perceiv
that from its rising, which is about before 4 till it com to the point d, where
the Tropique crosses the plane; it will shine upon the Northern face thereof,
which is until about 40 past 4 in the morn, from this point d: it immediately
appears upon the Southern face thereof, and so continue's till the same
Tropique cut's the Plane again in the point c, which you see will be amongst
the hour-circles about an hour past 2, and then forsaking the Southern face, it
appears again upon the Northern face, and so continue's till Sunset, which is
about past 8 in the Evening.

So that for the Northern face, the hour lines in use will be first 4 in the
morn, and then from 3 to 8, (both included); And for the Southern face, all the
hour lines from 5 in the morn, to 4 afternoon, (both included); because you see
that when the Sun is in the parallel of 20:00 South Declination, the Sun will
shine upon that Southern face from its rising till its setting, being about a
little past 4 afternoon, because that parallel 8, 20, 4, crosses not the plane
at all.

Again, in Diagram no D, the Sun being in the Summer Tropique, it will shine
upon the Northern or lower face of that plane, from its rising to the crossing
of that Tropique, with the Plane in the point a, which is about 25 past 6 in
the morn, from thence in the same moment of time, it will appear upon the
Southern or upper face thereof, and continue's thereupon till it cross the
Plane again in the point b. which is about 30 past 7 in in the Evening, and
then departing from that face, shine's upon the Northern face of the said Plane
till Sunset; But when the Sun is in 10:00 South Declination, viz. the parallel
g, i, 10, f, it will shine upon the Northern face from its rising at g, which
is a little before 7 in the morn, till it cross the Plane in the point i, which
is about past 7 in the morn; So that for the Northern, or lower face of the
Plane, the hour lines in use will be from 4 to 7 in the morn, (both included)
and only 8 in the evening; and for the Southern or upper face, all the
hour lines from 7 in the morn to 7 at evening, both included.

Further you must know, that by the Instrument you shall always have 12 of the
24 hour lines pointed out unto you by the intersections or crossings of the
hour-circles with the Plane.

It will fall out in all Southerlie Inclining, or in Southerlie Inclining
Declining Planes, that although the Northern face of a Plane be the face
proposed to find out the hour lines and Substiler for, yet in these planes the
hour lines will be drawn in and by the Instrument; for the lower or Southerlie
face thereof, which is the contrary face to the intended, which you shall
fully understand in the Diagrams no E and G, following.

You are to note, that the Tables following for every Diagram, are the several
distances in degrees and minutes taken out of the limb of the Instrument, which
the Substiler and hour lines are distant from the Perpendicular line of the
plane in all upright Planes, and in all Incliners, from the line crossing the
Horizontal at right angles, (which upon the matter is all one line).

Except the two Polar Declining Planes, whose hour lines in the Tables take
their several distances from the Substiler lines.

Lastly, in the 10 lesser Diagrams you have three whole circles, or rundles, in
each whereof the greater (which represent's the Plane) is divided into 24
hour lines by the Instrument, in which you have two scroles, whereof the
outermost is the Dial for the face proposed, and in the innermost scrole are
contained the hour lines which are in use for the contrary face; and the two
lesser circles or rundles are the Dialls for both faces of the proposed planes,
whereof, in all Inclining planes, the rundle No V is for the upper, and the
rundle No L stand's for the lower face of any of them.

Here follows a particular Explanation of the several Diagrams following, viz.
Diagrams No A and A.
Being the first example of an Upright Declining Plane, proposed to decline
30:00 Easterlie from South.

According to what has been formerly taught I draw the line

A z A for the Horizontal lines of this Plane. C z E for the Perpendicular
lines of this Plane. C the Pole of the Plane because a Southerlie face is
proposed. C L P E the proper Meridian of the Plane. L the point of this
Meridian's cutting or crossing the Plane. C L K the Substiler line of this
Plane. A z A serv's for the occult line, being 90:00 from C or E. z L 21:00
the Meridian's distance from z in the occult line. z h 69:00 the Pole of this
proper Meridian at h. n o in the limb, being the measure of the arch of this
proper Meridian, betwixt P and L is 32:40.
The Pole's height above this Plane 32:40.

The hour lines which are in use for the Northerlie face of this Plane, are
four in the morn, and all the hour lines from 3 to 8 (both included).

And for the Southern face thereof, all the hour lines from 5 in the morn to 4
afternoon, both included.

Here in this Diagram no A, because the South-easterly face of the Plane is the
face proposed to make a Dial for, therefore the hourlines and substiler, as
they are drawn in the semicircle of the Instrument A E A shall be the perfect
Dial, (without alteration) to be transferred upon the Southern face thereof,
which may easily be don by making a Table out of the limb of the Instrument of
the several distances of the hour lines and substiler from the Perpendicular
line of the Plane. Thus you shall find

The Table.
The hour of -- 5:75:00 -- 11:10:30 The hour of -- 6:57:20 -- 12 Perpendicular
The hour of -- 7:45:00 -- 1:13:20 The hour of -- 8:34:00 -- 2:29:45 The hour of
-- 9:26:00 -- 3:52:30 The hour of -- Substiler line -- 22:20 -- 4:79:40 The
hour of -- 10:18:00


Now if you would know how to set off the hour lines which are in use for the
North-westerly face, which is the back or contrary face to the proposed upon
that face of your Plane, which hour lines really by the Instrument you have not.

Sweep a circle as I have don in the lesser Diagram of this no A, viz. A B A E,
and set therein by help of the Table above, all the hour lines from 5 in morn,
to 4 afternoon, both included; in the lower semicircle A E A just as they lie
in the Instrument, which will be the perfect Dial for the South-easterlie
face proposed.

Now if you continue these 12 hour lines through the center to their opposite
quadrants in the upper semicircle A B A, you shall divide the whole circle into
24 hours, that so you may take thereout the hour lines which are in use for the
Northwesterlie face. As I have don and distinguished by the two Scroles;
whereof the greater or outermost Scrole is the Dial for the face proposed, and
in the lesser Scrole are the hour lines for the contrary face of the same
Plane.

And when you pleas to transfer these hour lines in the lesser scrole which are
for the contrary face, upon that face of your Plane, you must place them
contrary to what they are in the lesser scrole, because they are the hour lines
for the contrary face to the proposed, as I have don in the little rundle no
2, being the perfect Dial for the Northwesterlie, or contrary face, as the
little rundle no 1 is the Dial for the proposed.

The better to conceiv a reason hereof, imagine the two little rundles no 1 no 2
were both cut out of the Paper, and their backsides clapped together, their
Horizontal and Perpendicular lines agreeing aright, and center opposite to
center, then you will plainly perceive, that the Substiler line K z m in the
rundle number 2 will be one line with the Substiler line L z n in the rundle
no 1.

As also the hour lines will meet, and make one line with each hour-line of its
opposite quadrant, and this is general for all Planes whatsoever.

An explanation of the Diagrams No B and B.
THe second example of an Upright Declining Plane proposed to decline 63, 00
Westerly from South.

Here you have

A z A, the Horizontal lines of this Plane. B z B the perpendiculer lines of
this Plane. C, the place of the Pole, because the Southwesterly face is
proposed, being in the Southwest quarter. C L P E, the proper Meridian of the
Plane. L, the point of this Meridians crossing, or cutting the Plane. C, L, K,
the subtiler line. A z A, servs for the occult line, being 90, 00, from C, or
E. z L, 36, 00, the Meridian distance from z in the occult line. z h, 54, 00
the Pole of this proper Meridian at h. n, o, in the limb, being the measure
of the arch of this proper Meridian, betwixt P and L, is 16. 30, The Poles
height above this Plane 16. 30.
The hour lines in use for the Southwesterly face, are from a little past 10,
or indeed from 11 to 8 (both included) because 11, is the first perfect, or real
hour-line. And for the Northeasterly or contrary face, all the hour lines from
4 in the morn, to 11 before noon, both included.

Here you have the hour-line of 9 at night given you by the Instrument for one
of the 12 which for this Southwesterly face is useless, in respect the Sun
continues not so long above our Horizon, yet it must not be left out of either
the Table, or greater rundle of the lesser Diagram no B, because without it you
cannot divide the whole rundle (which represents the Plane) into 24 hours,
which being don, you will be enabled thereby to take thereout, such
hour lines as are in use for the Northeasterly or contrary face; as the lesser
scrole in the lesser Diagram no B shows, but they are to be placed contrary
to what they are in the lesser scrole, as the little rundle, for the
Northeasterly face shows, by the reason formerly given.

The Table.
The hour of -- 10:83:00 -- 35:40 Substiler. The hour of -- 11:33:30 -- 5:38:00
The hour of -- Perpendicular 12:00; 00 -- 6:41:45 The hour of -- 1:15:15 --
7:47:30 The hour of -- 2:23:00 -- 8:55:20 The hour of -- 3:29:00 -- 9:69:00 The
hour of -- 4:33:30 --


An Explanation of the Diagrams No C and C.
THe third example of an Upright Declining Plane proposed to decline 63:00
Easterlie from North.

Here you have

A z A the Horizontal lines of this Plane. B z B the Perpendicular lines of
this Plane. C the Pole of the Plane in the North-east quarter of the
Instrument, because the Northeast face is set for principal. C L P E the proper
meridian of this Plane. L the point of this Meridian's crossing the Plane. C L
K the Substiler line. A z A serv's for the occult line 90:00 from C or E. z L
36:00 the Meridian's distance from z in the occult line. z h: 54, 00 the Pole
of this proper Meridian at h. n o in the limb, being the measure of the Arch
of this proper Meridian, betwixt P and L is 16:30. The Pole's height above this
Plane -- 16:30.
The hour lines in use for the North-easterly face, are from 4 in the morn, to
11 before noon (both included); and for the Southwesterly, or contrary face;
all the hour lines from a little after 10, or indeed from 11 to 8 (both
included) because the hour-line of 11 is the first real or perfect hour-line.

Note that these two Planes no B and no C are both one and the same Plane,
only here is all the difference, that in the Diagram no B the South-westerly
face is proposed for principal; and in the Diagram no C the North-easterly face
is set for principal, as by the Poles of each face does appear; by which you
may plainly perceiv, that what face soever of any Plane is set for principal,
the hour lines and Substiler thereof, being taken out of the Instrument just
as they lie therein, shall be the perfect dial, without any alteration for
the face proposed; but the hour lines for the contrary face must be
contrarily placed, etc.

All which does most plainly appear in the two lesser Diagrams, no B no C.

Furthermore, because these two Planes have the same Declination, therefore at
one working you have the hour lines, Substilers and and Poles height for both,
as by the Tables and hour lines in use for each do appear, all agreeing in
every respect the one with the other.

The Table.
The hour of -- 10:83:00 --:35:40 Substiler. The hour of -- 11:33:30 -- 5:38:00
The hour of -- Perpendicular 12. 00:00 -- 6:41:45 The hour of -- 1:15:15 --
7:47:30 The hour of -- 2:23:00 -- 8:55:20 The hour of -- 3:29:00 -- 9:69:00 The
hour of -- 4:33:30 --


An explanation of the Diagrams No D and D.
THe first example of a Declining Inclining Plane, falling betwixt the Pole and
Horizon:

Proposed to Decline 24:20 Westerlie from the South.

Proposed to Incline 36:00 Northerlie.

Here you have likewise

A z A the Horizontal line of the Plane.

B z B the line crossing the Horizontal at right angles.

z T 54:00 from z being the complement of Inclination.

A T A the Declining Inclining Plane proposed.

z m 36:00 from z being the place of the Pole of the Plane at m.

q m i L q the proper Meridian of the Plane, being in this Diagram the same
with the hour-circle of one.

D z D the occult line 90:00 from either q in the limb.

z i 9:00 the Meridian's distance from z in the occult line.

z h 81:00 from z the Place of the Pole of this Meridian at h.

L the point of this Meridian's crossing the Plane.

m L K the Substiler line, and hour-line of one also.

n o in the limb, being the measure of the arch of this proper Meridian
betwixt P and L is 17:00.

The North-pole's height above the upper or South-westerlie face is 17:00, so
much also must the South-pole be elevated above the lower or North-easterlie
face, as by the situation of the Plane in the Diagram does appear.

The hour lines in use for the upper face are from 7 in the morn, to 7 in the
evening (both included).

And for the lower face from 4 in the morn to 7 before noon (both included) and
only 8 at evening, when the Sun is in the Summer Tropique.

The Table.
The hour of -- 8:63:00 -- 2:10:40 The hour of -- 9:42:20 -- 3:5:30 The hour of
-- 10:32:00 -- Perpendicular The hour of -- 11:25:00 -- 4:1:40 The hour of --
12:20:00 -- 5:12:40 The hour of -- Substiler -- 1:15:40 -- 6:33:50 -- -- --
7:75:30


An explanation of the Diagrams No E and E.
THe second Example of a Declining Inclining Plane falling to the Southwards of
the Zenith.

Proposed to Decline 45:00 Westerly from South.

Proposed to Incline 38:30 Southerlie.

Here you have

A z A the Horizontal line of this Plane.

B z B the line crossing the Horizontal at right angles.

z T 51:30 from z, being the complement of Inclination.

A T A the Declining Inclining Plane proposed.

z m 38:30 from z, being the place of the Pole of the Plane at m.

q m i L q the proper Meridian of this Plane.

D z D the occult line 90:00 from either q in the limb.

z i 36:00 the Meridian's distance from z in the occult line.

z h 54:00 from z the Plane of the Pole of this Meridian at h.

L the point of this Meridian's crossing the Plane.

m L K the Substiler line.

n o in the limb, being the measure of the arch of this proper Meridian
betwixt P and L is 62:40.

The North-Pole's height above the upper face 62:40.

Here in this Diagram no E, when the Sun is in the Summer Tropique, it will
begin to appear upon the upper, or Northwesterlie face of this Plane, just at 7
in the morn, but I have made the hour lines in use for this upper face, from 8
in the morn, to 8 at evening (both included) because the hour-line of 8 in the
morn is the first real or perfect hour-line.

And the hour lines in use for the lower or South-easterlie face are from 4 in
the morn, when the Sun is in the Summer Tropique to the point f in the Winter
Tropique, which is about half an hour past 2, therefore from 4 to 2, (both
included).

Here, as I have formerly said, (although in this Diagram) the North-west face
is the face proposed and set down, as the Pole of its Plane at m, in the
North-west quarter of the Instrument plainly shows, yet the hour lines in and
by the Instrument are all drawn for the South-east, or lower face, as the
lesser scrole in the lesser Diagram no E shows, being the same with the
hourlines and Substiler in the Instrument, viz. from 4 in the morn, to 3
afternoon:Now if by these you divide your plane into 24 hours, all the
hour lines which shall be in use for the upper face, viz. from 8 in the morn
to 8 in the evening (both included) shall be the perfect dial for this upper
face, because it is the face set in the Instrument for principal, as the greater
scrole and little rundle no V shows, being all one.

But the hour lines which are in use for the lower face, from 4 to 2, must be
contrarily placed, etc. as the little rundle no L shows, and this is general
for all Southerlie Incliners whatsoever.

The Table.
The hour of -- 4:83:00 -- Perpendicular, The hour of -- Substiler line --
72:40 -- 10:4:30 The hour of -- 5:69:30 -- 11:21:00 The hour of -- 6:56:00 --
12:38:00 The hour of -- 7:42:00 -- 1:54:00 The hour of -- 8:27:40 -- 2:69:30
The hour of -- 9:12:00 -- 3:83:30


An explanation of the Diagrams No F and F.
THe third Example of a Declining Inclining Plane, falling betwixt the Pole and
Zenith.

Proposed to Decline 24:20 Westerlie from South.

Proposed to Incline 75:00 Northerlie.

Here you have

A z A the Horizontal line of the Plane.

B z B the line crossing the Horizontal at right angles.

z T 15:00 being the complement of Inclination.

A T A the Declining Inclining Plane proposed.

z m 75:00 from z, being the place of the Pole of the Plane at m.

q m i L q the proper Meridian of the Plane.

D z D the occult line 90:00 from either q in the limb.

z i 15:00 the Meridians's distance from z.

z h 75:00 from z the place of the Pole of this Meridian at h.

L the point of this Meridian's crossing the Plane.

m L K the Substiler line.

n o in the limb, being the measure of the arch of the proper Meridian,
betwixt P and L is -- 20 00.

The North Pole's height above the lower or Northeasterlie face 20:00;
therefore the South Pole must be elevated so much above the upper or
South-westerlie face thereof.

The hour lines in use for the upper face, are from 8 in the morn to 7 in the
evening (both included).

And for the lower face, from 4 in the morn to 8 before noon (both included) and
only 8 in the evening, when the Sun is in the Summer Tropique.

The Table.
The hour of -- 8:60:00 -- 16:20 Substiler. The hour of -- 9:27:00 -- 2:17:30
The hour of -- 10:10:20 -- 3:22:30. The hour of -- Perpendicular -- 4:29:40.
The hour of -- 11:00:40 -- 5:38:20 The hour of -- 12:07:00 -- 6:52:30. The hour
of -- 1:12:30 -- 7:79:30.


An explanation of the Diagrams No G and G.
THe fourth example of a Declining Inclining Plane, falling near unto the
Winter Tropique.

Proposed to Decline 24:20 Easterlie from North.

Proposed to Incline 14:20 Southerlie.

Here you have

A z A the Horizontal line of the Plane.

B z B the line crossing the Horizontal at right angles.

z T 75:40 from z, being the complement of Inclination.

A T A the Declining Inclining Plane proposed: --

z m 14:20 from z, being the place of the Pole of the Plane at m.

q m i L q the proper Meridian of the Plane.

D z D the occult line 90:00 from either q in the limb.

zi 8:00 being the Meridian's distance from z.

z h 82:00 from z, being the place of the Pole of this Meridian at h.

L the point of the Meridian's crossing the Plane.

m L K the Substiler line.

n o in the limb, being the measure of the arch of this proper Meridian,
betwixt P and L is 116:00 Southerlie, from P to the edg of the Plane at L.

Here you must remember what was said at first, that every Plane cut's or
divide's the globe of the Univers into two equal halvs, which considered, if
you take 116 the distance of the North Pole from the Southern edg of the Plane
at L out of 180:00 the semicircle, there will remain 64:00 for the elevation of
the same Pole above the Northern edg of the same face, being the upper face of
the Plane. North-pole's height above the upper face 64:00.

Now the situation of this Plane in the instrument you see, that all the while
the Sun has above 15:00 North Declination, it shine's upon the upper face of
this Plane, from its rising to its setting (when the days are at longest with
us) for you see the parallel of 10:00 North Declination, crosses the Plane but
a very small time before the Sun setting, when it is therein.

So that for the upper or North-easterlie face you must have all the hour lines
from 4 in the morn to 8 at evening (both included).

And for the lower or South-westerlie face, first 8 and 9 in the morn, and then
from 2 to 7 in the evening, which hour lines will be of very small use, because
the Plane incline's so much Southerly.

Note likewise, that this Plane is a Southerlie Declining Inclining Plane, as
the Plane in the Diagram no E is, therefore the same method is to be observed,
as is there taught, which is also most plainly demonstrated in the lesser
Diagram of this number G.

The Table.
The hour of -- 8:79:10 -- Perpendicular. The hour of -- 9:64:30 -- 2:4:40 The
hour of -- 10:50:30 -- 3:20:00 The hour of -- 11:37:20 -- 4:35:40 The hour of
-- Substiler -- 34:20 -- 5:52:00 The hour of -- 12:24:00 -- 6:69:00 The hour of
-- 1:9:30 -- 7:85:10


An explanation of the Diagrams No H and H.
Being an example of a Meridian Inclining Plane, proposed to Incline 53:00
Westerlie.

I have said before, that for all Planes of this nature, the Meridian line, or
North and South line in the Instrument N z S must be one and the same line
with, and serve for the Horizontal line of the Plane; And therefore the Prime
Vertical, or East and West line in the Instrument W z E stand's for the line
which must cross the Horizontal line of the Plane at right angles:The rest of
the work differ's nothing from the former Declining Inclining Planes.

So that here the Meridian

N z S is the Horizontal line of this Plane.

W z E stand's for the line crossing the Horizontal at right angles.

z T 37:00 from z, being the complement of Inclination.

N T S the Meridian Inclining Plane proposed.

z m 53:00 from z, being the place of the Pole of this Plane at m.

q m i L q the proper Meridian of this Plane.

D z D the occult line 90:00 from either q in the limb.

z i 35:00 this Meridian's distance from z in the occult line.

z h 55:00 from z the place of the Pole of this Meridian at h.

L the point of this Meridian's crossing the Plane.

m L K the Substiler line.

n o in the limb, being the measure of the arch of this proper Meridian
betwixt P and L is 28:30.

The North-pole's height above the upper face 28:30.

The hour lines in use for the Eastern or upper face, are from 4 in the morn to
2 afternoon (both included).

And for the Western or lower face, all the hour lines from 1 to 8 in the
evening (both included).

The Table.
The hour of -- 12:90:00 -- 6:32:40 The hour of -- 9:65:00 -- 7:40:00 The hour
of -- 2:34:45 --:44:30 Substiler The hour of -- 3:7:50 -- 8:47:20 The hour of
-- Perpendicular. -- 00:00 -- 9:54:20 The hour of -- 4:10:45 -- 10:63:00 The
hour of -- 5:23:20 -- 11:74:15 If the Plane shall incline Easterlie as this
does Westerlie, the same order in working is to be observed in every respect.


An Explanation of the Diagrams No I and I.
THe first example of a Polar Declining Plane,

Proposed to Decline 52:00 Westerlie from South.

Proposed to Incline 64:00 Northerlie.

In these Polar declining Planes, you are to find out by the Instrument two
things in chief, and then the rest of the work will differ nothing from the
making of an ordinary Meridian, or direct Polar Dial.

The first is the Arch betwixt the Substiler and the Horizontal line of the
Plane in degrees and minutes.

The second is the Inclination or distance betwixt the proper Meridian of the
Plane, and the Meridian of the place; both which will be easily given you by
the Instrument.

Thus I set down upon the Instrument according to the Declination and
Inclination proposed.

A z A the Horizontal line of the Plane. B z B the line crossing the Horizontal
at right angles. z T 26:00 from z, being the complement of Inclination. A P T
A is the Plane proposed, which in this Diagram falls to be the same with the
Meridian or hour-cirlce of 9, cutting or crossing the Pole of the Instrument P;
and therefore must be a Polar Plane, and neither Pole elevated above either
face. z m 64:00 from z, being the place of the Pole of this Plane at m, which
falls just upon the hour-circle of three in the afternoon, and therefore the
Substiler, and hour-line of 3 must be one and the same line, and serve for
both; as formerly in the Diagram no D was demonstrated. q P m q the proper
Meridian of this Plane.
Now (as in every of the former Diagrams) if from the Pole of the Plane m,
through the point of this Meridian's crossing the Plane, which is at P the Pole
of the Instrument, you draw a right line to the limb, it must be the Substiler
line, and hour line of three also, which is represented by the line m P K,
whose Horizontal Arch betwixt A and K in the limb, is 61:00 which is the first
thing required.

The next is to observe where the Pole of your Plane falls to be either upon
an hour-circle (as here it does) or betwixt any two, for the distance thereof
from the Meridian of the Plane (which in the Instrument is z S) being taken
and converted into degrees and minutes, shall give the Inclination or distance
betwixt the proper Meridian of the Plane, and the Meridian of the place, which
is here represented by the Arch of the Equator m in the South-west quarter of
the Instrument, and therefore 3 hours of time, or 45:00 from the North and
South line in the Instrument, which is the Meridian of the place; And this is
the second thing required.

A K 61:The Horizontal Arch.

m 45:00 Inclination or distance betwixt the two Meridians.

Here the South-west face of this Plane is proposed for principal or upperface.

The hour lines in use for which face, are from 10 before noon, to 8 in the
evening (both included).

And for the lower face from 4 in the morn, to 8 aforenoon (both included).

Now to take the Table out of the Instrument, observe the place of the Pole of
your Plane (which in these planes will always fall upon the Equator) observe I
say, the place of the Pole of your Plane, amongst the Meridians or
hourcircles, which justly reckoned either way to the next hour-circles one by
one, by allowing 14:00 of the Equator for every hour of time, (and so
proportionably for any part of an hour, if the Pole fall betwixt two meridian
or hourcircles) you may make a Table thereby, to transfer your hour lines upon
your Plane, which must be the several distances of the hourlines from the
Substiler line of the Plane.

The Table.
The Substiler and hour of -- 3:00:00 The Substiler and hour of -- 4 and
2:15:00 The Substiler and hour of -- 5 and 1:30:00 The Substiler and hour of --
6 and 12:45:00 The Substiler and hour of -- 7 and 11:60:00 The Substiler and
hour of -- 8 and 10:75:00


Now for delineating your dial upon your Plane, (the Table being made) first,
as in the lesser Diagram of this number I, I draw the Horizontal line A A, next
at any convenient point therein, viz. at B; I sweep the Arch C D. and finding
out a chord of 61:00 for the arch betwixt the Horizontal line and Substiler, I
put it over from C to E, through which point E, I draw the Substiler line BHEF,
which must be the hour-line of 3 also, to which all the rest of the hour lines
must be parallel. Next at some convenient point in the Substiler line, viz. at
H, I sweep a semicircle, whose semidiameter H I, I proportion to be the height
of the Style above the Plane; then through this point I, at right angles to the
Substiler line, I draw the line G I G, and another line parallel to this A H L,
by which two parallel lines, you shall set down your hour lines upon your
Plane, by the Table and this Canon.

The Canon.
As H I Radius to I K the Tangent of 75:00, being the distance of the
hour lines of 8 and 10 from the Substiler.

So is H I 50/100 of an inch to I K 1 87/100 of the same measure to be set off
from eitherside the substiler, in the two parallel lines and so draw the lines
through the Plane, as the line 8 K 8 shows. And so for all the rest the same
method hold's.

An explanation of the Diagrams K and K.
THe second Example of a Polar Declining Plane,

Proposed to Decline 62:30 Easterly from South.

Proposed to Incline 70:00 Northerly.

According to which proposal I draw

A z A for the Horizontal line of the Plane.

B z B for the line crossing the Horizontal at right angle.

z T 20:00 from z, being the complement of Inclination.

A T P A is the Polar Declining Plane proposed, because it passes through the
Pole of the Instrument P.

z m 70:00 from z, the place of the Pole of this Plane at m.

q P m q the proper Meridian of this Plane.

P the point of this Meridian's crossing the Plane.

m P K the Substiler line, whose Horizontal Arch from A to K is 56:00 in the
limb of the Instrument.

The Inclination or distance betwixt the proper Meridian of the plane, and the
Meridian of the place is the Arch of the Equator v m, being in time about
three hours 48:00 before noon, which is 12:00 after 8 in the morn, or 57:00 in
measure, as the Pole of the plane at m shows.

The Horizontal Arch 56:00.

Distance betwixt the two Meridians 57:00.

The hour lines in use for the upper or Southeasterlie face are, from 4 in the
morn, to one after noon (and no more) except the plane be very large. And for
the lower face from 3 to 8 at evening (both included).

The Table of the distances of the several hour lines from the Substiler.
The hour of -- 3:78:00 -- Substiler line. The hour of -- 4:63:00 -- 9:12:00
The hour of -- 5:48:00 -- 10:27:00 The hour of -- 6:33:00 -- 11:42:00 The hour
of -- 7:18:00 -- 12:57:00 The hour of -- 8:03:00 -- 1:72:00 -- 2:87:00


Thus the Table being made, the delineation or drawing of your lines upon the
Plane, differ nothing from that of the former Diagram.

FINIS.
If any shall desire to have this Instrument ready printed off in paper for his
use or practice, he may be furnished with what quantity he desire's by
William Hope Bookseller at the Blew Anchor on the backside the Exchange,
London.

If in brass, he may have this or any other for the Mathematical practice,
made by Walter Hayes, at the Cross-Daggers in Moor-fields, near Bethlem-gate.

ERRATA.
In the Epistle line 20, read circles for rules. Page 9, line 13, for those
read these. Page 24, line 13, for plane read place. Page 28, line 5, for now,
the read now by the. Page 32, line 2, for (...):00 read 15:00.


