THE HISTORY and FALL OF Caius Marius.

A TRAGEDY.

As it is Acted at the Duke's Theater.

By Thomas Otway.

Qui color Albus erat nunc est contrarius Albo. LONDON, Printed for Tho.
Flesher, at the Angel and Crown in S. Paul's Churchyard. 1680.

TO THE LORD VISCOUNT FALKLAND.
My LORD,
WHen first it entered into my thoughts to make this Present to Your Lordship,
I received not only Encouragement, but Pleasure, since upon due examination of
my self, I found it was not a bare Presumption, but my Duty to the remembrance
of many extraordinary Favors which I have received at Your hands.

For heretofore having had the honor to be near You, and bred under the same
Discipline with You, I cannot but own, that in a great measure I owe the small
share of Letters I have to Your Lordship. For Your Lordship's Example taught me
to be ashamed of Idleness; and I first grew in love with Books, and learnt to
value them, by the wonderful Progress which even in Your tender years You made
in them; so that Learning and Improvement grew daily more and more lovely in my
Eyes, as they shone in You.

Your Lordship has an extraordinary Reason to be a Patron of Poetry, for Your
great Father loved it. May Your Lordship's Fame and Employments grow as great,
or greater then His were; and may Your Virtues find a Poet to record them,
equal (if possible) to that great Mr. Waller.
Genius which sung of him.

My slender humble Talent must not hope for it; for You have a Judgment which I
must always submit to, a general Goodness which I never (to its worth) can
value: and who can praise that well which he knows not how to comprehend?

Already the Eyes and Expectations of men of the best Judgment are fixed upon
You: for wheresoever You come, You have their Attention when present, and their
Praise when You are gone: and I am sure (if I obtain but Your Lordship's
Pardon) I shall have the Congratulation of all my friends, for having taken
this opportunity to express my self

Your Lordship's most humble Servant, Thomas Otway.

PROLOGUE
Spoke by Mr. Betterton. IN Ages past, (when will those Times renew?)
When Empires flourisht, so did Poets too.
When Great Augustus the World's Empire held,
Horace and Ovid's happy Verse excelled.
Ovid's soft Genius and his tender Arts
Of moving Nature melted hardest Hearts.
It did the Imperial Beauty Julia move
To listen to the Language of his Love.
Her Father honored him: and on her Breast,
With ravished sense in her Embraces pressed,
He lay transported, fancy-full and blessed.
Horace's lofty Genius boldlier reared
His manly head, and through all Nature steered;
Her richest Pleasures in his Verse refined,
And wrought 'em to the relish of the Mind.
He lasht with a true Poet's fearless Rage
The Villainies and Follies of the Age.
Therefore Moecenas that great Favorite raised
Him high, and by him was he highly praised.
Our Shakespeare wrote too in an Age as blessed,
The happiest Poet of his time and best.
A gracious Prince's Favor cheered his Muse,
A constant Favor he never feared to lose.
Therefore he wrote with Fancy unconfined,
And Thoughts that were Immortal as his Mind.
And from the Crop of his luxuriant Pen
E're since succeeding Poets humbly glean.
Though much the most unworthy of the Throng,
Our this-day's Poet fears h' has done him wrong.
Like greedy Beggars that steal Sheaves away,
You Will find h' has rifled him of half a Play.
Amidst this baser Dross you will see it shine
Most beautiful, amazing, and Divine.
To such ^^w Shifts of late are Poets worn,
Whilst w^ both Wit's and Caesar's Absence mourn.
Oh! when will He and Poetry return?
When shall we there again behold him sit
'Midst shining Boxes and a Courtly Pit,
The Lord of Hearts, and President of Wit?
When that blessed Day (quick may it come) appears,
His Cares once banished, and his Nation's Fears,
The joyful Muses on their Hills shall sing
Triumphant Songs of Britain's happy King.
Plenty and Peace shall flourish in our Isle,
And all things like the English Beauty smile.
You Critics shall forget your natural Spite,
And Poets with unbounded Fancy write.
Even This-day's Poet shall be altered quite:
His Thoughts more loftily and freely flow;
And he himself, whilst you his Verse allow,
As much transported as he is humble now.

Persons represented.
Men By Caius Marius. Mr. Betterton. Sylla. Mr. Williams. Marius junior Mr.
Smith. Granius. Mr. Percivale. Metellus. Mr. Gillow. Quintus Pompeius. Mr.
Williams. Cinna. Mr. Jevon. Sulpitius. Mr. Underhill. Ancharius a Senator.
Priest. Apothecary. Q. Pompeius 's Son. Guards, Lictors, Ruffians, etc.

Women By Lavinia. Mrs. Barry. Nurse. Mr. Noakes.

THE HISTORY and FALL OF Caius Marius. A TRAGEDY.
ACT I.
SCENE 1.
Within. Liberty! Liberty! Marius and Sulpitius!
Liberty! Liberty! Liberty! etc.

Enter Metellus, Antonius, Cinna, and Senators. Metell. WHen will the Tut'lar
Gods of Rome awake,
To fix the Order of our wayward State,
That we may once more know each other; know
The extent of Laws, Prerogatives and Dues;
The Bounds of Rules and Magistracy; who
Ought first to govern, and who must obey?
It was not thus when God-like Scipio held
The Scale of Power; he who with temperate poise
Knew how to guide the People's Liberty
In its full bounds, nor did the Nobles wrong,
For he himself was one --

Cinna. He was indeed,
A Noble born: and still in Rome there are
Most worthy Patrons of her ancient Honor,
Such as are fit to fill the seat of Power,
And awe this riotous unruly Rabble,
That bear down all Authority before 'em,
Were we not sold to Ruin.

Metell. Cinna, there
Thou'st hit my Mark: We are to Ruin sold;
In all things sold; Voices are sold in Rome:
And yet we boast of Liberty. Just Gods!
That Guardians of an Empire should be chosen
By the lewd noise of a Licentious Rout!
The sturdiest Drinker makes the Ablest Statesman.

Anton. Would it not anger any true-born Roman,
To see the giddy Multitude together,
Never consulting who it is best deserves,
But who Feasts highest to obtain their Suffrage?
As it is not many years since two Great men
In Rome stood equal Candidates together,
For high Command: In every house was Riot.
To day the Drunken Rabble reeled to one;
To morrow they were mad again for the other;
Changing their Voices with their Entertainment:
And none could guess on whom the Choice would settle;
Till at the last a Stratagem was thought of.
A mighty Vessel of Falernian Wine
Was brought into the Forum crowned with Wreaths
Of Ivy sacred to the Jolly God.
The Monster-people roared aloud for Joy:
When straight the Candidate himself appears
In pomp, to grace the Present he had made 'em.
The Fools all gaped. Then when a while he had
With a smooth Tale tickled their Asses Ears,
H' at both ends tapt his Butt, and got the Consulship.

Cinna. This Curse we owe to Marius Pride,
That made him first most basely bribe the People
For Consul in the War against Iugurtha:
Where he went out, Metellus, your Lieutenant.
And how the Kindness was returned, all know.
I never loved his rough untoward Nature,
And wonder such a Weed got growth in Rome.

Metell. What says my Cinna*

Cinna. That I like not Marius,
Nor love him --

Metell. There Rome's better Genius spoke.
Let us consult and weigh this subject well.
O Romans, he is the Thorn that galls us all.
Our harrass'd State is Crippled with the weight
Of his Ambition: We Are not safe in Marius.
Do I not know his Rise, his low Beginning,
From what a wretched despicable Root
His Greatness grew? Gods! that a Peasant's Brat,
Born in the outmost Cottages of Arpos,
And fostered in a Corner, should by Bribes,
By Covetousness, and all the hateful means
Of working Pride, advance his little Fate
So high, to vaunt it over the Lords of Rome!

Anton. Ambition, raging like a Demon in him,
Distorts him to all ugly forms, she has need to use.
In his first start of Fortune, Oh how vile
Were his Endeavors and Submissions then!
When suing to be chosen first AEdilis,
He was by general Vote repulst, yet bore it;
And in the same day shamefully returned,
T'obtain the second Office of that name.
Equal was his success, denied in both:
Yet could he condescend at last to ask
The Praetorship, and but with Bribes got that.
Yet this is he that has disturbed the World,
Rome's Idol, and the Darling of her Wishes.

Metell. I must confess it burdens much my Age,
To see the Man I hate thus ride my Country.
For, Romans, I have mighty Cause to hate him.
I was the first (and I am well rewarded)
That lent my hand to raise his feeble state.
When first I made him Tribune by my Voice,
I thought there might be something in his Nature
That promised well. His Parents were most honest,
And served my Father justly in their Trust.
Then as his Fortunes grew, when I was Consul,
And went against Iugurtha into Africa,
I took him with me one of my Lieutenants.
'Twas there his Pride first showed it self in Actions,
Oppressed my Friends, and robbed me of my Honor.

Cinn. The Story's famous. Base Ingratitude,
Dissimulation, Cruelty, and Pride,
Ill Manners, Ignorance, and all the Ills
Of one baseborn, in Marius are joined.

Metell. Even Age cannot heal the rage of his Ambition.
Six times the Consul's Office has he born:
How well, our present Discords best declare.
Yet now again, when time has worn him low,
Consumed with Age, and by Diseases pressed,
He courts the People to be once more chosen,
To lead the War against King Mithridates.

Anton. For this each day he rises with the Sun,
And in the Field of Mars appears in Arms,
Excelling all our Youth in warlike Exercise:
He rides and Tilts, and when the Prize h'has won,
He brings it back with triumph into Rome,
And there presents it to the sordid Rabble;
Who shout to Heaven, and cry, Let Marius live.

Metell. He shall not have it, by the Gods he shall not.
There is a Roman Noble just and valiant,
Sylla's his name, sprung from the ancient Stock
Of the Cornelii, bred from youth in War,
Flusht with Success, and of a spirit bold,
And, more then all, hates Marius, still has crossed
His Pride, and clouded even his brightest Triumphs:
He Is Consul now. Then let us all resolve
And fix on him, to check this Havocker,
That with his Kennell of the Rabble hunts
Our Senate into Holes, and frights our Laws.

Cinna. Agreed for Sylla.

All. All for Sylla.

Metell. Nay,
This Monster Marius, who has used me thus,
Even now would wed his Family with mine,
And asks my Daughters for his hated Offspring.
But, for my Wrongs, Lavinia shall be Sylla's,
My eldest born, her and the best of all
My Fortune I Will confirm on him, to crush the Pride
Of this base-born hot-brained Plebeian Tyrant.

Anton. Now Rome's last Stake of Liberty is set,
And must be pusht for to the Teeth of Fortune.

Cinn. Then Caius Marius shall not have the Consulship.

Metell. No, I would rather be Sulpitius Slave,
That furious Headlong Libertine Sulpitius,
That mad wild Bull, whom Marius lets loose
On each occasion when he would make Rome feel him,
To toss our Laws and Liberties in the Air.

Anton. That lawless Tribune then must be reduced,
Unhindg'd from off the power that holds him up,
His Band of full six hundred Roman Knights,
All in their youth, and pampered high with Riot,
Which he his Guard against the Senate calls;
Tall wild young men, and fit for glorious Mischiefs.

Metell. Fear nothing: let but Sylla once have Power,
And then see how like Day he will break upon 'em,
And scatter all those Goblins of the Night,
Confusion's Night, wherein the dark Disorders.
Of a Divided State, men know not where
Or how to walk, for fear they lose their way,
And stumble upon Ruin. Mark the race
Of Sylla's Life; observe but what has past,
How still h'has born a Face against this Marius,
And kept an equal stretch with him for Glory.

Cinn. H' has in the Capitol an Image set
Of Gold, in honor of his own Achievement;
Wherein's described how the Numidian King
Gave up Iugurtha Prisoner to Sylla,
And all in spite of Marius. Oh now,
If you are truly Roman Nobles, wake,
Resume your Rights, and keep your Sylla Consul.
Courage, Nobility, and innate Honor,
Justice unbiased, the true Roman Spirit,
Presence of Mind and resolute Performance
Meet all in Sylla.

Metell. Let Us agree for Sylla.

All. All for Sylla.
[Exeunt.
Enter Marius senior, Marius junior, Granius. Marius sen. There Rome's Demons
go.
Like Witches in ill weather, in this Storm
And Tempest of the State they meet in Corners,
And urge Destruction higher; for this end
The have raised their Imp, their dear Familiar Sylla,
To cross my way, and stop my tide of Glory.
If I am Caius Marius, if I Am he
That brought Iugurtha chained in triumph hither;
If I am he that led Rome's Armies out,
Spent all my years in Toil and cruel War,
Chilled my warm Youth in cold and winter Camps,
Till I brought settled Peace and Plenty home,
Made her the Court and Envy of the world;
Why does she use me thus?

Mar. jun. Because she is ruled
By lazy Droans that feed on others Labors,
And fatten with the fruits they never toiled for;
Old gouty Senators of crude Minds and Brains,
That always are fermenting Mischief up,
And style their private Malice public Safety....

Gran. One discontented Villain leads a State
To Madness. There Is that Bell-weather of Mutiny
And damned Sedition, Cinna, of a life
And manners sordid; one whose Gain's his God;
And to that cursed end he would sacrifice
His Country's Honor, Liberty, or Peace,
Nay, had he any, even his very Gods.

Mar. sen. H' has taken Rome even in the nicest Minute,
And easily debaucht her to his ends,
When she was over-cloy'd with Happiness,
Wantonly full, and longing after Change.
For Sylla too, a Boy, a Woman's Play-thing,
She has relinquisht me, and flouts my Age.
Constant ill Fortune wait upon her for it,
And wreck her Fate as low as first I found it,
When it lay trembling like a hunted Prey,
And hungry Ruin had it in the wind;
When Barbarous Nations, of a race unknown,
From undiscovered Northern Regions came,
To lay her waste, and sweep her from the Earth;
Till I, I Marius rose, the Soul of all
The Hope sh' had left, and with unwearied Toil,
Dangers each hour, and never-sleeping Care,
(A burden for a God) opposed my self
'Twixt her and Desolation, gorged the maw
Of Death with slaughtered numbers of her Foes,
Restored her Peace, and made her Name renowned.

Mar. jun. The Glory of that War must be remembered,
When Rome, like her old Mother Troy, shall lie
In Ashes.... Full 300000 men,
All sons of Fortune, born and bred in Fields,
Whose Trade was War, and Camps their Habitation,
Hung like a Swarm of Mischiefs on the Hills
Of Italy, and threatened Fate to Europe.

Gran. They came in Tribes, as if to take possession,
And seemed a People whom the hand of Fate
Had scourged by Famine from a barren Land,
Of Visage foul and ugly, pinched and chapt
By bitter Frosts and winter Winds; yet fierce
As hungry Lions of the Desert.
Their Wives with loads of Children at their backs,
Bold manly Haggs, whom Shame had long forsook,
And vagrant living had inured to Ill,
Followed in Troops like Furies.

Mar. jun. And all was done too when that Dolt Metellus
Shrank like a Worm, and Sylla scarce was heard of.

Mar. sen. That cursed Metellus still has bin my Plague,
And ever done me most deliberate Wrong;
Because, like a tame Hawk, I scorned to fly
Just at his Quarries, and attend his Lure.
Because I grew too great for him in Wars,
And served his Country well, he hates me. Twice
Have I already offered him Alliance,
And asked Lavinia, Marius, for thy Bed.
Beggary catch me when again I court him.
Why sigh'st thou, Boy? still at the unlucky name
Of that Lavinia, I Have observed thee thus
With thy Looks fixed, as if thy Fate had seized thee.

Mar. jun. Why did you name Lavinia? would sh' had never
Bin born, or that Metellus had not got her.

Mar. sen. Forget her, Marius: she is a dainty Bit,
A Delicate for none but Sylla's taste,
The Favorite Sylla, the Idol that is set up
To blast thy Hopes, and cloud thy Father's Glories.
Consider that, my Marius, and forget her.

Mar. jun. Forget her? oh! sh' has Beauty might ensnare
A Conquerour's Soul, and make him leave his Crowns
At random to be scuffled for by Slaves.
Forget her? oh! teach me, (great Parent) teach me;
Read me each day a Lecture of the Wrongs
Done you by that Inglorious Patrician;
Till my Heart know no Longings but Revenge,
And quite forget Lavinia e're dwelt there.
Methinks 'twould not be hard, even midst the Senate,
To strike this through him in his Consul's Chair,
Tumble him thence, and mount it in his stead.

Mar. sen. Oh! name not him and Consulship together:
Sylla and Consul? set 'em far apart
As East from West; for as they now are met,
It bodes Confusion, Rome, to thee and thine.

Gran. I Would rather see Rome but one Funeral pile,
And all her people quitting her like Bees,
Driven by Sulphur from their Hives;
Much rather see her Senators in Chains
Dragged through the Streets to death, and Slaves made Lords,
Then see that vain presumptuous Upstart's Pride
Succeed to lead the Armies you have bred.

Mar. sen. It Is such a Wrong as even Tortures Thought,
That we who 've been her Champion forty years,
Fought all her Battles with renowned Success,
And never lost her yet a man in vain,
Should, now her noblest Fortune is at stake,
And Mithridates Sword is drawn, be thrown
A side, like some old broken battered Shield:
To see my Laurels wither as I rust:
And all this managed by the cursed Craft,
Petulant Envy, and malignant Spite
Of that old barking Senate's-Dog Metellus.
Stake me, just Gods, with Thunder to the Earth,
Lay my gray Hairs low in the Cave of Death,
Rather then live in memory of such Shame.

Gran. Perish Metellus first, and all his Race.

Mar. sen. There spoke the Soul of Marius. By the head
Of Jove,
I hate him worse then Famine or Diseases.
Perish his Family, let inveterate Hate
Commence between our Houses from this moment,
And meeting never let 'em bloudless part.
Go, Granius, bid Sulpitius straight be ready
To meet me with his Guards upon the Forum.
By all the Gods, I Will chase this Demon out,
That rages thus in Rome; or let her blood
To that degree, till she grow tame enough
To tremble at the Rod of my Revenge.
Why did not thou applaud me for the Thought,
Take m'in thy Arms, and cherish my old Heart?
'T had bin a lucky Omen. Art thou dumb?

Mar. jun. As dumb as solemn Sorrow ought to be.
Could my Griefs speak, the Tale would have no end.
Must I resolve to hate Metellus Race,
Yet know Lavinia took her Being thence?
Lavinia! Oh! there is Music in the Name,
That softning me to Infant Tenderness,
Makes my Heart spring like the first leaps of Life.

Mar. sen. Then thou art lost: if thou art Man and Roman,
If thou have Virtue in thee, or can prize
Thy Father's Honor, scorn her like a Slave.
Hell! love her? Dam her: there is Metellus in her.
In every Line of her bewitching Face,
There Is a Resemblance tells whose Brood she came of.
I Would rather see thee in a Brothel trapt,
And basely wedded to a Ruffian's Whore,
Then thou should think to taint my generous Blood
With the base Puddle of that o're-fed Gown-man.
Lavinia? --

Mar. jun. Yes, Lavinia; is she not
As harmless as the Turtle of the Woods?
Fair as the Summer-Beauty of the Fields?
As opening Flowers untainted yet with Winds,
The pride of Nature, and the Joy of Sense?
Why first did you bewitch me else to Weakness?
When from the Sacrifice we came together,
And as by here is our Chariot drove along,
These were your words, That, Marius, that is She
That must give Happiness to Thee and Rome,
Confirming in thy Arms my wished for Peace
With old Metellus, and break Sylla's heart.

Mar. sen. Then she was charming.

Mar. jun. Oh! I found her so.
I looked and gazed, and never missed my Heart,
It fled so pleasingly away. But now
My Soul is all Lavinia's, now she is fixed
Firm in my Heart by secret Vows made there,
The indeleble Records of faithful Love,
You Would have me hate her. Can my Nature change?
Create me over again... and I may be
That haughty Master of my self you would have me:
But as I am, the Slave of strong Desires,
That keep me struggling under. Though I see
The hopeless state of my unhappy Love;
With Torment, like a stubborn Slave that lies
Chained to the Floor, stretched helpless on his back,
I look to Liberty, and break my Heart.

Mar. sen. Has she yet heard your Love, or granted here is?

Mar. jun. If Eyes may speak the language of the Heart,
If tenderest Glances, Sighs, and sudden Blushes
May be interpreted for Love in one
So young, so fair, and innocent as she,
Our Souls can never be Strangers. --

Mar. sen. No more: I Will have Lavinia named no more.
When next thou nam'st her, let it be with infamy.
Tell me, Sh' has whor'd, or fled her Father's house
With some course Slave to a secret Cell of Lust,
And then I Will bless thee.

Mar. jun. I shall obey. Gods, from your Skies look down,
And find like me one wretched if you can.
No, Sir, I Will speak that hateful Name no more,
But be as Cursed as you can wish your Son.

Enter Sulpitius. Mar. sen. Oh Sulpitius!
Thou darling of m' Ambition, art thou come?
What news?

Sulpit. I Have left a Present at your house,
The Head of a Metellus, a gay tall
Young thing, that was in time to have bin a Lord,
But he is but Worms-meat now.

Mar. sen. My best Sulpitius,
Thou always comfort'st me. See here a man,
A Stranger to my Blood as well as Fortune,
But merely of his choice my Honor's friend:
What mighty things would he not do for me?
Could thou, when Honor called thee, whine for Love?

Sulpit. How? my young son of war in Love? with whom?

Mar. jun. A Woman, Sir.... I must not speak her Name.

Sulpit. If it be hopeless Love, use generous means,
And lay a kinder Beauty to the Wound.
Take in a new Infection to the heart,
And the rank Poison of the old will die. --

Mar. jun. A Plantane leaf is excellent for that.

Sulpit. For what?

Mar. jun. For: broken Shins.

Sulpit. Why? art thou mad?

Mar. jun. Not mad, but bound more then a Madman is,
Confined to limits, kept, without my food,
Whipped and tormented.... Prithee do not wake me;
Let me dream on --

Sulpit. Oh! the small Queen of Fairies
Is busy in his Brains; the Mab that comes
Drawn by a little Team of smallest Atoms
Over men's Noses as they lie asleep,
In a Chariot of an empty Hazel-nut
Made by a Joiner Squirrel: in which state
She gallops night by night through Lovers brains.
And then how wiokedly they dream, all know.
Sometimes she courses over a Courtier's Nose,
And then he dreams of begging an Estate.
Sometimes she hurries over a Soldier's Neck,
And then dreams he of cutting foreign Throats,
Of Breaches... Ambuscado's, tempered Blades,
Of good rich Winter Quarters, and false Musters.
Sometimes she tweaks a Poet by the Ear,
And then dreams he
Of Panegyricks, flattering Dedications,
And mighty Presents from the Lord knows who,
But wakes as empty as he laid him down.
Sh' has bin with Sylla too, and he dreams now
Of nothing but a Consulship.

Mar. sen. A Rattle!
Give the fantastic giddy Boy a Rattle:
The puling Fondling should not want a Play thing.
A Consulship?

Sulpit. By all the Gods, he will shake it*
H' has drawn a Force from Capua here to Rome,
As if he meant Destruction or Success:
The Rabble too are drunk with him already....

Mar. sen. Alarm all our Citizens to Arms
That are my Friends. Draw you your Guards together,
And take possession of the Forum. Thou,
Inglorious Boy, behold my Face no more,
Till thou'st done something worthy of my Name.

Mar. jun. First perish Rome, and all I hold most dear,
Rather then let me feel my Father's Hate....

Mar. sen. Why, that is well said....

Sulpit. My Troops are all together,
All ready on the Forum: but the Heavens
Play tricks with us. Our Ensigns, as they stood
Displayed before our Troops, took fire untouched,
And burnt to tinder.
Three Ravens brought their young ones in the streets,
Devouring 'em before the people's eyes,
Then bore the Garbage back into their Nests.
A noise of Trumpets rattling in the Air
Was heard, and dreadful Cries of dying men.

Mar. sen. It was the Roman Genius that thus warns
Me, her old Friend, not to let slip my Fate.
Ambition! oh Ambition! if I 've done
For thee things great and well.... shall Fortune now
Forsake me?
Hark thee, Sulpitius, if it come to blows,
Let not a Hair of that Metellus escape thee,
Who'd strip my Age of its most dear bought Honors.
Else why have I thus bustled in the World,
Through various and uncertain Fortunes hurled,
But to be Great, unequalled, and alone?
Which only he can be who still spurs on
As swift at last as when he first begun.....
[Exeunt.
The end of the First ACT.
ACT II.
Enter Metellus and Nurse. Metell. I Cannot rest to night: Ill-boding Thoughts
Have chased soft Sleep from my unsettled Brains.
This seems Lavinia's Chamber, and she up.
Rest too to night has bin a stranger here.
Lavinia! my Daughter, hoa! where art thou?

Nurse. Now by my Maidenhead, (at twelve years old I had one)
Come: what, Lamb? what, Lady-bird? Gods forbid.
Where Is this Girl Lavinia?

Enter Lavinia. Lavin. How now? who calls?

Nurse. Your Father, Child.

Lavin. I Am here. Your Lordship's pleasure.

Metell. Why up at this unlucky time of Night,
When naught but loathsome Vermin are abroad,
Or Witches gathering poisonous Herbs for Spells
By the pale light of the cold waning Moon?

Lavin. Alas! I could not sleep: in a sad Dream,
Methought. I saw one standing by my Bed,
To warn me I should have a care of Sleep,
For 'twould be banefull --

Metell. Dreams give Children Fears.

Lavin. At which I rose from my uneasy Pillows,
And to my Closet went, to pray the Gods
TO avert the unlucky Omen.

Metell. 'Twas well done.
Nurse, give us leave a while: I must impart
Something to my Lavinia. Yet stay,
And hear it too. Thou know Lavinia's Age.

Nurse. 'Faith, I know her Age to an hour.

Metell. She Is bare Sixteen.

Nurse. I Will lay Sixteen of my Teeth of it; and yet no Disparagement, I have
but Six: she is not Sixteen. How long is it now since Marius triumphed last?


Metell. No matter, Woman, what is that to thee?

Nurse. Even or odd, of all days in the year, since Marius entered Rome in
Triumph, it is now even Thirteen years. Young Marius then too was but a Boy. My
Lais and she were both of an Age. Well, Lais is in Happiness: she was too good
for me. But as I was saying, a month hence she 'll be Sixteen. It Is since
Marius triumphed now full Thirteen years, and then she was weaned. Sure I shall
never forget it of all days.... Upon that day, (for I had then laid Wormseed to
my Breast, sitting in the Sun under the Dove-house-Wall) my Lady and you were
at the Show. Nay, I do bear a Brain! but, as I said before, when it did taste
the Wormseed on my Nipple, and felt it bitter, pretty Fool! to see it teachy
and fall out with the Nipple. Shout quo' the people in the streets. 'Twas no
need, I trow, to bid me trudge. And since that time it is Thirteen years; and
then she could stand alone, nay, she could run and waddle all about: for just
the day before, she broke her Forehead, and then my Husband (Peace he with him,
he was a merry man) took up the Baggage. Ay, quoth he, do thou fall upon thy
Face? thou will fall backward when thou have more wit; will thou not, Vinny?
and by my fackings, the pretty Chit left Crying, and said, Ay.... I warrant and
I should live a Thousand years, I never should forget it. Will thou not, Vinny?
quoth he; and, pretty Fool, it stopped, and said, Ay.


Metell. Enough of this; stop thy impertinent Chat.

Nurse. Yes, my Lord: yet I cannot choose but laugh, to think it should leave
Crying, and say, Ay.... And yet in sadness it had a Bump on its Brow as big as
a Cockrill's stone, a parlous Knock, and it cried bitterly. Ay, quo' my
Husband, fall'st upon thy Face? thou will fall backward when thou come to
Age, will thou not, Vinny? Look you now, it stinted, and said, Ay....


Metell. Intolerable trifling Gossip, peace.

Nurse. Well; thou wast the pretty'st Babe that e're I nursed. Might I but live
to see thee married once, I should be happy. It stinted, and said, Ay.


Metell. What think you then of Marriage, my Lavinia?
It was the subject that I came to treat of.

Lavin. It is a thing I have not dreamt of yet.

Nurse. Thing? the thing of Marriage? were I not thy Nurse;
I would swear thou had sucked thy Wisdom from thy Teat.
The thing?

Metell. Think of it now then, for I come to make
Proposals may be worthy of your Wishes.
They are for Sylla, the young, the gay, the handsome,
Noble in Birth and Mind, the valiant Sylla.

Nurse. A man, young Lady, Lady, such a man as all the world... why, he is a man
of Wax.


Metell. Consider, Child, my Hopes are all in Thee.
And now Old age gains ground so fast upon me,
Amongst all its sad Infirmities, my Fears
For Thee are not the smallest.
Therefore I Have made Alliance with this Sylla,
A highborn Lord, and of the noblest Hopes
That Rome can boast, to give thee to his Arms;
So in the Winter of my Age to find
Rest from all worldly Cares, and kind rejoicing
In the warm Sunshine of thy Happiness.

Lavin. If Happiness be seated in Content,
Or that my being blessed can make you so,
Let me implore it on my Knees. I am
Your only Child, and still, through all the Course
Of my past Life, have bin obedient too:
And as y' have ever bin a loving Parent,
And bred me up with watchful tender'st Care,
Which never cost me hitherto a Tear;
Name not that Sylla any more: indeed
I cannot love him.

Metell. Why?

Lavin. In deed I cannot.

Metell. Oh early Disobedience! by the Gods,
Debaucht already to her Sexe's Folly,
Perverseness, and untoward headstrong Will

Lavin. Think me not so, I gladly shall submit
To any thing; nay, must submit to all:
Yet think a little, or you sell my Peace.
The Rites of Marriage are of mighty moment:
And should you violate a thing so Sacred
Into a lawful Rape, and load my Soul
With hateful Bonds, which never can grow easy,
How miserable am I like to be?

Metell. Has then some other taken up your Heart?
And banished Duty as an Exile thence?
What sensual lewd Companion of the Night
Have you bin holding Conversation with,
From open Windows at a midnight hour,
When your loose Wishes would not let you sleep?

Lavin. If I should love, is that a fault in one
So young as I? I cannot guess the Cause,
But when you first named Sylla for my Love,
My Heart shrunk back as if you would done it wrong.
If I did love, I Would tell you.... if I durst.
Oh Marius!

Metell. Hah!

Lavin. 'T was Marius, Sir, I named,
That Enemy to you and all your House.
'Twas an unlucky Omen that he first
Demanded me in Marriage for his Son.
Yet, Sir, believe me, I as soon could wed
That Marius, whom I Have cause to hate, as Sylla.

Metell. No more: by all the Gods, 'twill make me mad,
That daily, nightly, hourly, every way
My care has bin to make thy Fortune high;
And having now provided thee a Lord
Of noblest Parentage, of fair Demeans,
Early in Fame, Youthful, and well allied,
In every thing as thought could wish a man,
To have at last a wretched puling Fool,
A whining Suckling, ignorant of her Good,
To answer, I Will not wed; I cannot love.
If thou art mine, resolve upon Compliance,
Or think no more to rest beneath my Roofs.
Go, try thy Risk in Fortune's barren Field,
Graze where thou will, but think no more of Me,
Till thy Obedience welcome thy Return.

Lavin. Will you then quite cast off your poor Lavinia?
And turn me like a Vagrant out of Doors,
To wander up and down the streets of Rome,
And beg my bread with sorrow? Can I bear
The proud and hard Reuilings of a Slave,
Fat with his Master's plenty, when I ask
A little Pity son my pinching Wants?
Shall I endure the cold, wet, windy Night,
To seek a shelter under dropping Eves,
A Porch my Bed, a Threshold for my Pillow,
Shivering and starved for want of warmth and food,
Swelled with my Signs, and almost choked with Tears?
Must I at the uncharitable Gates
Of proud great men implore Relief in vain?
Must I, your poor Lavinia, bear all this,
Because I am not Mistress of my Heart,
Or cannot love according to your liking?

Metell. Art thou not Mistress of thy Heart then?

Lavin. No.
It Is given away.

Metell. To whom?

Lavin. I dare not tell.
But I Will endeavor strangely to forget him,
If you will: forget but Sylla.

Metell. Thou do well.
Conceal his Name if thou would preserve his Life.
For if there be a Death in Rome that might
Be bought, it should not miss him. From this hour
Cursed be thy Purposes, most cursed thy Love.
And if thou marry'st, in thy Wedding-night
May all the Curses of an injured Parent
Fall thick, and blast the Blessings of thy Bed.

Lavin. What have you done? alas! Sir, as you spoke,
Methought the Fury of your words took place,
And struck my Heart, like Lightning, dead within me.
Gone too?
[Ex. Metell. Is there no Pity sitting in the Clouds
That sees into the bottom of my Grief?
Alas! that ever Heaven should practice Strategems
Upon so soft a Subject as my self!
What say Thou? have not thou a word of Joy?
Some Comfort, Nurse, in this Extremity.

Nurse. Marry, and there is but need on't^ 'ods my life, this Dad of ours was an
arrant Wag in his young days for all this. Well, and what then? Marius is a
Man, and so's Sylla. Oh! but Marius's Lip! and then Sylla's Nose and Forehead!
But then Marius's Eye again! how 'twill sparkle, and twinckle, and roll, and
sleer? But to see Sylla a horseback! But to see Marius walk, or dance! such a
Leg, such a Foot, such a Shape, such a Motion. Ah h h... Well, Marius is the
man, must be the man, and shall be the man.


Lavin. He Is by his Father's Nature rough and fiorce,
And knows not yet the follies of my Love:
And when he does, perhaps may scorn and hate me.

Nurse. Yes, yes, he is a rude, unmannerly, ill-bred Fellow. He is not the
Flower of Curtesy; but, I Will warrant him, as gentle as a Lamb. Go thy ways,
Child, serve God. What? a Father's an Old man, and old men they say will take
care. But a Young man! Girl, ah! a Young man! There Is a great deal in a Young
man, and thou shall have a Young man. What? I have bin thy Nurse these Sixteen
years, and I should know what is good for thee surely. Oh! ay... a Young man!


Lavin. Now prithee leave me to my self a while.
[Ex. Nurse. It Is hardly yet within two hours of Day.
Sad Nights seem long.... I Will down into the Garden.
The Queen of Night
Shines fair with all her Virgin-stars about her.
Not one amongst 'em all a Friend to me:
Yet by their Light a while I Will guide my steps,
And think what course my wretched state must take.
Oh Marius!
[Ex. Lavinia.
SCENE A walled Garden belonging to Metellus house.
Enter Marlus junior. Mar. jun. HOw vainly have I spent this idle Night!
Even Wine cannot heal the ragings of my Love.
This sure should be the Mansion of Lavinia;
For in such Groves the Deities first dwelt.
Can I go forward when my Heart is here?
Turn back, dull Earth, and find thy Center out...
[Enters the Garden.
Enter Granius and Sulpitius. Gran. This way... he went... Why, Marius! Brother
Marius!

Sulp. Perhaps he is wise, and gravely gone to bed.
There Is not so weak a Drunkard as a Lover;
One Bottle to his Lady's health quite addles him.

Gran. He ran this way, and leapt this Orchard-Wall.
Call, good Sulpitius.

Sulpit. Nay, I Will conjure too.
Why, Marius! Humors! Passion! madman Lover!
Appear thou in the likeness of a Sigh.
Speak but one word, and I am satisfied.
He hears not, neither stirs he yet. Nay then
I conjure thee by bright Lavinia's Eyes,
By her high Forehead, and her scarlet Lip,
By her fine Foot, straight Leg, and quivering Thigh,
And the Demeans that there adjacent ly,
That in thy likeness thou appear to us.

Gran. Hold, good Sulpitius, this will anger him....

Sulp. This cannot anger him. 'Twould anger him
To raise a Spirit in his Lady's Arms,
Till she had laid and charmed it down again.

Gran. Let Us go: h'has hid himself among these Trees,
To die his melancholic Mind in Night.
Blind is his Love, and best befits the Dark.

Sulpit. Pox of this Love, this little Scarcrow Love,
That frights Fools with his painted Bow of Lath
Out of their feeble sense.

Gran. Stop there... let us leave the Subject and its Slave;
Or burn Metellus House about his ears.

Sulpit. This morning Sylla means to enter Rome:
Your Father too demands the Consulship.
Yet now when he should think of cutting Throats,
Your Brother's lost; lost in a maze of Love,
The idle Truantry of Callow Boys.
I Would rather trust my Fortunes with a Daw,
That hops at every Butterfly he sees,
Then have to do in honor with a man
That fells his Virtue for a Woman's Smiles....
[Exeunt.
Enter Marius junior in the Garden. Mar. jun. He laughs at Wounds that never
felt their smart.
What Light is that which breaks through yonder Shade?
Lavinia in the Balcony. Oh! it is my Love.
She seems to hang upon the cheek of Night,
Fairer then Snow upon the Raven's back,
Or a rich Jewel in an AEthiop's ear.
Were she in yonder Sphere she would shine so bright,
That Birds would sing and think the Day were breaking.

Lavin. Ah me!

Mar. jun. She speaks,
Oh! speak again, bright Angel: for thou art
As glorious to this Night, as Sun at Noon
To the admiring eyes of gazing Mortals,
When he bestrides the lazy-puffing Clouds,
And sails upon the bosom of the Air.

Lavin. O Marius, Marius! wherefore art thou Marius?
Deny thy Family, renounce thy Name:
Or if thou will not, be but sworn my Love,
And I Will no longer call Metellus Parent.

Mar. jun. Shall I hear this, and yet keep silence.

Lavin. No.
It Is but thy Name that is my Enemy.
Thou would he still thy self, though not a Marius,
Beloved of me, and charming as thou art.
What Is in a Name? that which we call a Rose,
By any other name would smell as sweet.
So Marius, were he not Marius called,
Be still as dear to my desiring Eyes,
Without that Title. Marius, lose thy Name,
And for that Name, which is no part of Thee,
Take all Lavinia.

Mar. jun. At thy word I take thee.
Call me but Thine, and Joys will so transport me,
I shall forget my self, and quite be changed.

Lavin. Who art Thou, that thus hid and veiled in Night
Have overheard my Follies?

Mar. jun. By a Name
I know not how to tell thee who I am.
My Name, dear Creature,'s hateful to my self,
Because it is an Enemy to Thee.

Lavin. Marius? how came thou hither? tell, and why?
The Orchard-walls are high, and hard to climb,
And the place Death, consid'ring who thou art,
If any of our Family here find thee.
By whose Directions did thou find this place?

Mar. jun. By Love, that first did prompt me to enquire.
He lent me Counsel, and I lent him Eyes.
I am no Pilot; yet were thou as far
As the vast Shore washed by the farthest Sea,
I Would hazard Ruin for a Prize so dear. --

Lavin. Oh Marius! vain are all such Hopes and Wishes.
The hand of Heaven has thrown a Bar between us,
Our Houses Hatred and the Fate of Rome,
Where none but Sylla must be happy now.
All bring him Sacrifices of some sort,
And I must be a Victim to his Bed.
To night my Father broke the dreadful news;
And when I urged him for the Right of Love,
He threatened me to banish me his House,
Naked and shiftless to the World. Would thou,
Marius, receive a Beggar to thy Bosom?

Mar. jun. Oh! were my Joys but fixed upon that point,
I Would then shake hands with Fortune and be friends;
Thus grasp my Happiness, embrace it thus,
And bless the will turn that gave thee to my Arms.

Lavin. Thou know the mark of Night is on my Face,
Else should I blush for what the have heard me speak.
Fain would I dwell on Form; fain, fain deny
The things I Have said: but farewell all such Follies.
Do thou then love? I know thou wilt say thou do;
And I must take thy word, though thou prove false.

Mar. jun. By yon bright Cynthia's beams that shines above.

Lavin. Oh! swear not by the Moon, the inconstant Moon,
That changes Monthly, and shines but by seasons,
Lest that thy Love prove variable too.

Mar. jun. What shall I swear by?

Lavin. Do not swear at all.
Or, if thou will, swear by thy gracious Self,
Who art the God of my Idolatry,
And I Will believe thee.

Mar. jun. Witness, all ye Powr's.

Lavin. Nay, do not swear: although my Joy be great,
I Am hardly satisfied with this night's Contract:
It seems too rash, too unadvised and sudden,
Too like the Lightning, which does cease to be
E're one can say it is. Therefore this time
Good night, my Marius: may a happier hour
Bring us to crown our Wishes.

Mar. jun. Why will thou leave me so unsatisfied?

Lavin. What would thou have?

Mar. jun. The Exchange of Love for mine.

Lavin. I gave thee mine before thou did request it;
And yet I wish I could retrieve it back.

Mar. jun. Why?

Lavin. But to be frank, and give it thee again.
My Bounty is as boundless as the Sea,
My Love as deep: the more I give to Thee,
The more I have: for both are Infinite.
I hear a Noise within. Farewell, my Marius;
Or stay a little, and I Will come again.

Mar. jun. Stay? sure for ever.

Lavin. Three words, and, Marius, then good night indeed.
If that thy Love be honorably meant,
Thy purpose Marriage, send me word to morrow,
And all my Fortunes at thy feet I Will lay.

Nurse within. Madam!

Lavin. I come anon. But if thou mean not well,
I do beseech thee,

Nurse within. Madam! Madam!....

Lavin. By and by, I come.
To cease thy Suit, and leave me to my Griefs.
To morrow I will send.....
[Exit.
Mar. jun. So thrive my Soul. Is not all this a Dream,
Too lovely, sweet and flattering, to be true?

Re-enter Lavinia. Lavin. Hist, Marius, hist. Oh for a Falkner's voice,
To Lure this Tassell-gentle back again.
Restraint has Fears, and may not speak aloud:
Else would I tear the Cave where Echo lies,
With repetition of my Marius. --

Mar. jun. It is my Love that calls me back again.
How sweetly Lovers voices sound by night!
Like softest Music to attending ears.

Lavin. Marius.

Mar. jun. My dear.

Lavin. What a clock to morrow?

Mar. jun. At the hour of nine.

Lavin. I will not fail: It Is twenty years till then.
Why did I call thee back?

Mar. jun. Let me here stay till thou remember'st why.

Lavin. The Morning's breaking, I would have thee gone,
And yet no farther then a Wanton's Bird,
That lets it hop a little from his hand,
To pull it by its Fetters back again.

Mar. jun. Would I were thine.

Lavin. Indeed and so would I.
Yet I should kill thee sure with too much cherishing.
No more... Good night.

Mar. jun. There Is such sweet Pain in parting,
That I could hang for ever on thy Arms,
And look away my life into thy Eyes.

Lavin. To morrow will come.

Mar. jun. So it will. Good night.
Heaven be thy Guard; and all its Blessings wait thee...
[Ex. Lavin. To morrow! it is no longer: but Desires
Are swift, and longing Love would lavish time.
To morrow! oh to morrow! till that come,
The tedious Hours move heavily away,
And each long Minute seems a lazy Day.
Already Light is mounted in the Air,
Striking it self through every Element.
Our Party will by this time be abroad,
To try the Fate of Marius and Rome.
Love and Renown sure court me thus together.
Smile, smile, ye Gods, and give Success to both.
[Exit.
SCENE the Forum.
Enter Four Citizens. 3. Cit. WEll, Neighbors, now we are hear, what must we
do?

1. Cit. Why, you must give your Vote for Caius Marius to be Consul: and if any
body speaks against you, knock 'em down.


2. Cit. The truth on it is, there is nothing like a Civil Government, where good
Subjects may have leave to knock Brains out to maintain Privileges.


3. Cit. Look you.... but what is this Sylla? this Sylla? I Have heard great talk
of him.... He Is a damnable fighting fellow they say; but hang him... he is a
Lord.


1. Cit. Ay, so he is, Neighbors: and I know not why any one should be a Lord
more then another. I care not for a Lord: what good do they do? nothing but
run in our debts, and ly with our Wives. --


4. Cit. Why, there is a Grievande now. I have three Boys at home, no more mine
then Rome's mine. They are all fair curl'dhair Cupids; and I am an honest black
tawny Kettle-fac'd Fellow.... I Will have no Lords....

[Drum and Trumpets.
1. Cit. Hark! hark! Drums and Trumpets* Drums and Trumpets! They are coming.
Be you sure you roar out for a Marius; and do as much mischief as you can. --

Enter Marius senior and his Sons, Marius born upon the Shoulders of two Roman
Slaves; Sulpitius at the head of the Guards. [Trumpets.
Sulpit. Harken, ye men of Rome. I, I Sulpitius,
Your Tribune, and Protector of your Freedoms,
By virtue of that Office here have called you,
To choose a Consul. Mithridates King of Pontus has begun a War upon us,
Invaded our Allies, our Edicts violated,
And threatens Rome it self. Whom will you choose
To lead you forth in this most glorious War?
Marius, or Sylla?

All Cit. A Marius! a Marius! a Marius!

Mar. sen. Countrymen,
And Fellow-citizens, my Brethren all,
Or, if it may be thought a dearer name;
My Sons, my Children, glory of my Age;
I come not hither armed to force your Suffrage,
As Sylla does to enter Rome with Power,
As if he meant a Triumph over his Country.
I have not made a Party in the Senate,
To bring you into Slavery, or load
Your Necks with the hard Yoke of Lordly power.
I am no Noble, but a Freeborn man,
A Citizen of Rome, as all you are,
A Lover of your Liberties and Laws,
Your Rights and Privileges. Witness here
These Wounds, which in your Service I have got,
And best plead for me.....

All Cit. Marius! Marius! Marius! No Sylla! no Sylla! no Sylla!

Sulpit. No more remains,
Most honorable Consul, but that straight you mount
Tile Seat-Tribunall.... Lictors, bring your Rods,
Axes and Fasces, and present 'em here.
Hall, Caius Marius, Consul of the War.

Trumpets. Enter Metellus, Cinna, Antonius, Quintus Pompeius, his Son, etc.
Guards. Metell. See, Romans, there the Ruin of your Freedom,
The blazing Meteor that bodes ill to Rome.
Oppression, Tyranny, A varice and Pride,
All center in that melancholic Brow.
If you are mad for Slavery, long to try
The weight of abs'lute Chains, once more proclaim him,
And shout so loud till Mithridates hear,
And laugh to think your Throats fit for his Sword.
Take Me, take all your Senators, and drag
Us headlong to the Tiber.... plunge us in,
And bid adieu to Liberty for ever --
Then turn and fall before your new-made God;
Bring your Estates, your Children and your Wives,
And lay 'em at the feet of his Ambition.
This you must do, and well it will become
Such Slaves, who sell their Charters for a Holiday.

Cit. No Marius! no Marius!

Metell. Quintus Pompeius, in the Senate's name,
As Consul, we command thee to demand
Justice of Marius, and proclaim him Traitor.

Q. Pomp. Descend then, Marius, Traitor to the State
And Liberty of Rome, and hear thy Sentence.

Mar. sen. Now, by the Gods, this Cause is worthy of me,
Worthy my Fate.
Is this the Right and Liberty of Rome,
To pull its lawful Consul from his Seat,
Unjudg'd, and brand him with the mark of Traitor?
Draw all your Swords, all you that are my Friends.
Sulpitius, dam the Rabble, let 'em fall
Like common Dross with that well-spoken Fool,
That popular Clack: or let us sell our Fates
So dear, that Rome may sicken with our Fall.

All Cit. No Marius! no Marius! Down with him; down with him...

Sulp. Ha! what art Thou?

Y. Pomp. The Consul's Son.

Sulp. A Worm;
A thin Skin full of Dirt; and thus I tread thee
Into thy mother Earth.....
[Kills him.
Mar. sen. Drag hence that Traitor,
And bring me straight his Head upon thy Dart.
The Fate of Rome's begun.

Q. Pomp. Our Children murdered,
Thus massacred before our eyes? Come all
That love Pompoius, and revenge his Loss.

Sulpit. Fall on.

All Cit. No Marius! no Marius! Liberty! Liberty! etc.
They fight. Marius conquers....
Mar. sen. Thanks for this good beginning, Gods. These Slaves,
These wide-mouthed Brutes that bellow thus for Freedom,
Oh! how they ran before the hand of Power,
Flying for shelter into every Brake!
Like cow'rdly fearful Sheep they break their Herd,
When the Wolf's out, and ranging for his Prey.
Sulpitius, thy Guards did noble Service.

Sulpit. Oh! they are Fellows fit for you and I,
Fit for the work of Power: say the word,
Not one amongst 'em all but what shall run,
Take an old grumbling Senator by the Beard,
And shake his Head off from his shrinking Shoulders.

Mar. sen. Sylla, I hear, is at the Gates of Rome.
Proclaim straight Liberty to every Slave
That will but own the Cause of Caius Marius.
Horror, Confusion, and inverted Order,
Vast Desolation, Slaughter, Death and Ruin
Must have their Courses c're this Ferment settle.
``Thus the Great Jove above, who rules alone,
``When men forget his Godlike Power to own,
``Uses no common means, no common ways,
``But sends forth Thunder, and the World obeys.
[Ex. omnes.
The end of the Second ACT.
ACT III.
Enter Sulpitius, Granius, and all the Guards. Sulpit. ROme never saw a Morning
sure like this:
Now she begins to know the Rod of Power;
Her wanton Blood can smart.
Were I the Conful, not a Head in Rome
That had but Thoughts of Sylla should stand safe.

Gran. Slaughter should have continued with the Day.
Mercy but gives Sedition time to rally.
Every soft, pliant, talking, busy Rogue,
Gathering a Flock of hot-brained Fools together,
Can preach up new Rebellion. Till the Heads
Of all those heav'nly-inspired Knaves be crushed,
No Power can be safe.....

Sulp. Much will this day
Determine; Sylla's now before the Walls,
And all his Forces ready for command.
Four thousand Slaves have taken hold on Freedom,
And come on Proclamation to our side.

Gran. Where should my Brother be? he came not home to night.

Sulpit. Think of him as a Wretch that is dead,
Stabbed with an Eye, run through the Brains with Love.

Gran. He talked of sending Sylla a Defiance.

Sulpit. Writ with a Pen made of a Cupid's Quill.

Gran. Why, what is Sylla?

Sulpit. A most courageous Captain at a Congee:
He fights by measure, as your Artists sing,
Keeps Distance, Time, Proportion, rests his Rests,
One, two, and the third in your Guts.
Oh! he is the very Butcher of a Button.

Gran. Would I could see my Brother. That damned love
Of Women ruins noblest purposes.

Sulpit. That Sex was first in mockery of us made.
They are the false deceitful Glasses where
We gaze, and dress our selves to all the shapes
Of Folly. What is it Women cannot do?
She Will make a Statesman quite forget his Cunning,
And trust his dearest Secrets to her Breast,
Where Fops have daily entrance: make a Priest,
Forgetting the hypocrisy of's Office,
Dance and show tricks, to prove his strength and brawn:
Make a Projector quibble, an old Judge
Put on False hair, and paint: and after all,
Though she be known the lewdest of her Sex,
She Will make some Fool or other think she is honest.
Your Father promised me to meet me here.
I wonder he delays so long.

Gran. He comes.
And with him too my Brother.

Sulpit. See your General,
Salute him all my Fellow Soldiers.
[Shout.
Mar. sen. This,
Sulpitius, looks like Power. Granius, here
Receive thy Brother to thy Arms and bless him:
H' has done a thing most worthy of our Name,
Sent a Defiance into Sylla's Camp,
Challenging forth the stoutest Champion there,
In vindication of his Father's Cause.
And not an Outlaw there dare send his Answer.
Once more, Sulpitius, are the People ours,
Enraged with Sylla's coming armed, to force
The City. At the Celimontane Gate
He Is posted now: let us send him straight Commands
IN the name of the Senate and the Roman People,
TO advance no farther, till the state of Rome
Be heard in public, and my Choice confirmed,
Or he continued Consul.....

Sulpit. That would be
But to prolong Necessity; for Rome
Must bleed: and since the Rabble now is ours,
Keep the Fools hot, preach Dangers in their Ears,
Spread false Reports of the Senate, working up
Their Madness to a Fury quick and desperate,
Till they run headlong into civil Discords,
And do our business with their own Destruction.
Granius, go thou,
Send word to Sylla that he lay down Arms,
And render up himself to Rome.

Mar. jun. There Is still
A dangerous Wheel at work, a Thoughtfull Villain,
Cinna, wh' has raised his Fortune by the Jars
And Discords of his Country: like a Fly
Over Flesh, he buzzes about itching Ears,
Till he has vented his Infection there,
To fester into Rancour and Sedition.
Would he were safe.

Mar. sen. And safe he shall be: let him be proscribed,
The Fine upon his head its weight in Gold.
Would I could buy Metellus's as cheap.
I have a tender Foolishness within me
May sometimes get the better of my Rage:
Sulpitius, therefore keep me warm; still ply
My ebbing Fury with the Thoughts of Sylla,
The ungrateful Senate, and Metellus Pride;
And let not any thing may make me dreadful
Be left undone. Now to our Troops let us hasten,
And wait for Sylla's Answer at our Arms.
Ex. Mar. sen. and Granius.
Sulpit. Is not this better now then whining Love?
Now thou again art Marius, son of Arms,
Thy Father's Honor, and thy Friends Delight.

Enter Nurse and Clodius. Mar. jun. Sulpitius, what comes here? a Sail,
Sulpitius.

Sulpit. A tattered one, and weather-beaten much.
Many a boistrous Storm has she bin tossed in,
And many a Pilot kept her to the wind.

Nurse. Clodius.

Clod. Madam.

Sulpit. Madam.

Nurse. My Fan, Clodius.

Sulpit. Ay, good Clodius, to hide her Face.

Nurse. Good morrow, Gentlemen.

Sulpit. Good even, fair Gentlewoman.

Nurse. Fair Gentlewoman? really it is very hot.

Sulpit. It should be so by your Ladyship's parcht Face.

Nurse. Marry come up, my Gossip: whose man are you?

Sulpit. A Woman's man, my Sibyll, would thou try
My strength in Feats of amorous engagement.
Lead me amongst the Beauteous, where they run
Wild in their Youth, and wanton to their Wildness,
Where I may choose the foremost of the Heard,
And bear her trembling to some Bank, bedeckt
With sweetest Flowers, such as Joy would choose
To dwell in; throw my inspired Arms about her,
And press her till she thought her self more blessed
Then Io panting with the Joys of Jove.

Nurse. Panting? Joys? and Jove? now by my troth, it is very pretty. But,
Gentlemen, can any of you tell where I may find young Marius?


Mar. jun. Yes, I can tell you, Madam. I am he.

Sulpit. Hah! by this light, a Baud. So ho!
Come let us away. I hate a morning-Bawd,
That stinks of last-night's office.....
[Ex. Sulpit.
Nurse. Pray, Sir, what saucy Fellow's he that is gone?

Mar. jun. A Gentleman, Nurse, that loves to hear himself talk; and will speak
more in a minute then he will stand to in a month.


Nurse. And he speak any thing against me, I Will take him down, and he were
lustier then he is, and twenty such Jacks; or I Will find those that shall. But
now, Sir, I wish you much Joy.... I hear you are --


Mar. jun. Married, this day the blessed deed was done.
When the unhappy Discords first took flame
Betwixt my Father and the Senate; then
A holy Priest of Hymen, whom with Gold
I bribed to yield us privately his Office,
Joined our kind Hands, and now She Is ever mine.

Nurse. Well: before God, I am so vexed, that every part about me quivers. But
pray, Sir, a word: and, as I told you, my young Lady bade me find you out. What
she bade me say, I Will keep to my self. But first let me tell you; if you have
led her into a Fool's Paradise, as they say; for the Gentlewoman is young, and
therefore if you should deal doubly with her, though you don't look like a
Gentleman that would use double-dealing with a Lady. --


Mar. jun. Commend me to thy Lady. I protest --

Nurse. Good heart, and in faith I will tell as much. Lord! Lord! she will be a
joyful Woman.


Mar. jun. Bid her devise this Evening to receive
Me at her Window: here is for thy pains.....
[Gives money.
Nurse. No truly, Sir; not a Dram.

Mar. jun. Away; I say you shall.

Nurse. This Evening, say you? well, she shall be there.

Mar. jun. And stay, kind Nurse, behind the Garden-wall.
Within this hour my man shall meet thee there.
And bring thee Cords made like a Tackling-Ladder,
Which to the blessed Mansion of my Joy
Must be my Conduct in the secret Night.
Farewell.... be true, and I Will reward thy pains.

Nurse. Now Heavens bless thee.... Hark you, Sir.

Mar. jun. What say thou, Nurse?

Nurse. Nothing, but that my Mistress is the sweetest Lady, Lord! Lord! when
'twas a little prating thing.... Oh!.... there is a Spark, one Sylla, that would
fain have a finger in the py.... but she, good soul, had as lieve hear of a
Toad, a very Toad, as hear of him. I anger her sometimes, and tell her Sylla is
the properer man.... But I Will warrant you, when I say so, she looks as pale as
any Clout in the versall world. Well, you will be sure to come....


Mar. jun. As sure as truth.

Nurse. Well, when it was a Little thing, and used to ly with me, it would so
kick, so sprawl, and so play.... and then I would tickle it, and then it would
laugh, and then it would play again. When it had tickling and playing enough, it
would go to sleep as gently as a Lamb. I shall never forget it.... Then you will
be sure to come....


Mar. jun. Can I forget to live?

Nurse. Nay, but swear though.

Mar. jun. By this Kiss, which thou shall carry to Lavinia. --

Nurse. Oh! dear Sir, by no means. Indeed you shall not. I have bin drinking
Aqua vitae. Oh! those Eyes of yours!


Mar. jun. Till night farewell....

Nurse. Till night; I Will say no more, but da da. Come, Clodius.
Ah! those Eyes!
[Ex. Nurse and Clodius.
Mar. jun. What pains she takes with her officious Folly?
How happy is the Evening-tide of Life,
When Phlegm has quenched our Passions, trifling out
The feeble Remnant of our filly Days
In Follies, such as Dotage best is pleased with,
Free from the wounding and tormenting Cares
That toss the thoughtfull, active, busy Mind?
Though this Day be the dearest of my Life,
There Is something hangs most heavy on my Heart,
And my Brain's sick with Dullness.

Enter Marius senior. Mar. sen. Where Is this Loyterer,
This most inglorious Son of Cains Marius?
With folded Arms and down-cast Eyes he stands,
The Marks and Emblem of a Woman's Fool.

Mar. jun. My Father.

Mar. sen. Call me by some other Name;
Disgrace me not: I Am Marius;
And surely Marius has small right in Thee.
Would Sylla's Soul were thine, and thine were his,
That he, as Thou have done, now Glory calls,
Might run for shelter to a Woman's Arms,
And hide him in her Bosom like a Babe.

Mar jun. Then I Am a Coward.

Mar. sen. Art thou not?

Mar. jun. I am,
That thus can bear Reproaches, and yet live.
Durst any man but you have called me so?
Oh! let me fall, embrace and kiss your Feet.
You Have raised a Spirit in me prompts my Heart
To such a Work as Fame never talked of yet.
How 'll you dispose Lavinia?

Mar. sen. Let her fall,
As I would all her Family and Name,
Forgotten that they either ever gave
Thy Father's Head Dishonor, or thee Pain.

Mar. jun. 'Twas an unlucky Sentence. She Is scarce more
Metellus Daughter now then Yours: our Hands
Were by a Priest this morning joined. May Heaven
Avert the will Omen, and preserve my Father.

Mar. sen. Married? say ruined, lost, and cursed.

Mar. jun. Y' have torn
The Secret from me, and I wait your Doom.....

Mar. sen. Go where I never more may hear thee named;
Go farthest from me, get thee to Metellus,
Fall on thy Knees, and henceforth call him Parent.
I 've yet one Son, that surely wo'n't forsake me:
Else in this Breast I still have glorious Thoughts,
That will at least give Luster to my Ruin.
Farewell.... my once best Hopes, now greatest Shame.

Mar. jun. Condemn me rather to the worst of Deaths,
Or send me chained to Sylla like a Slave,
Then banish me the blessing of your Presence.
I 've thought and bounded all my Wishes so,
To die for You is Happiness enough;
'Twould be too much to enjoy Lavinia too.

Mar. sen. Again Lavinia?

Mar. jun. Yes, this Coward Slave,
This most inglorious Son of Caius Marius,
Though wedded to the brightest Beauty, raised
To the highest expectation of Delight,
Even in this Minute when Love prompts his Heart,
And tells what mighty Pleasures are preparing,
Is Master of a Mind unfettered yet.

Mar. sen. What can thou do?

Mar. jun. This Night I should have gone,
And taken possession of Lavinia's Bed.
But by the Gods, these Eyes no more shall see her,
Till I 've done something that is above Reward,
And you your self present her to my Arms.

Mar. sen. Why do thou talk thus to me?
[Trumpets.
Mar. jun. Hark,
The Trumpets sound, and Business is at hand.
It seems as if our Guards upon the Walls
Were just engaged, and Sylla come upon 'em.
The Gods have done me Justice.

Mar. sen. Get thee gone,
And leave me to my Fate,
Thou maimed and wounded, and unfit for War.

Mar. jun. I Will follow you.....

Mar. sen. Thou shall not.

Mar. jun. By the Gods, I will.

Mar. sen. How? disobeyed then?

Mar. jun. Bid a Courser spurred
Stop in his full Career; bid Tides run back,
Or sailing Ships stand still before the wind,
Or Winds themselves not blow when Jove provokes 'em.

Mar. sen. Away, and do not tempt my Fury father.

Mar. jun. Why? would you kill me?

Mar. sen. No, no: I hope thou art reserved yet for
A better Fate.

Mar. jun. Thanks, Heaven:
These few kind words show I Am not quite unhappy.

Mar. sen. Then do not contradict my will in this;
But part, and when our hands next meet again,
Be It in the Heart of Sylla or Metellus....
[Exit. [Trumpets again.
Mar. jun. Sound higher, ye shrill Instruments of War,
And urge its Horrors up, till they become,
If possible, as terrible as mine.
Oh my Lavinia! though this Night I fail,
At my return I shall be doubly happy.
Such Trials the great ancient Hero's past,
Who little present Happiness could taste,
Yet did great Actions, and were Gods at last.
[Exit.
SCENE Metellus house.
Enter Lavinia. Lavin. GAllop apace, ye firy-footed Steeds,
Toward Phoebus Lodging. Such a Charioteer
As Phaeton would lash you to the West,
And bring in cloudy Night immediately.
Spread thy close Curtains Love-performing Night
To sober-suited Matron all in black;
That jealous eyes may wink, and Marius
Leap to these Arms untalkt-of and unseen.
Oh! give me Marius; and when he shall die,
Take him, and cut him out in little Stars;
And he will make the Face of Heaven so fine,
That all the world shall grow in love with Night,
And pay no worship to the gaudy Sun.
Oh! I have bought the Mansion of a Love,
But not possessed it.... Tedious is this Day,
As is the Night before some Festival
To an impatient Child that has new Robes,
Enter Nurse and Clodius. And may not wear 'em. Welcome, Nurse: what news?
How fares the Lord of all my Joys, my Marius?

Nurse. Oh! a Chair! a Chair! no Questions, but a Chair! So.

Livin. Nay, prithee Nurse, why do thou look so sad?
Oh! do not spoil the Music of good Tidings
With such a melancholic wretched Face.

Nurse. Oh! I am weary, very weary. Clodius, my Cordial-bottle.
Fie! how my bones ache! what a Jaunt have I had!

Lavin. Do not delay me thus, but quickly tell me,
Will Marius come to night? speak, will he come?

Nurse. Alas! alas! what haste? oh! cannot you stay a little? oh! do not you
see that I Am out of breath? oh this P^isick! Clodius, the Cordial.


Lavin. The Excuse thou make for this unkind Delay
Is longer then the Tale thou have to tell.
Is thy News good or bad? answer to that.
Say either, and I Will stay the Circumstance.

Nurse. Well, you have made a simple Choice: you know not how to choose a man.
Yet his Leg excells all men's. And for a Hand and a Foot and a Shape, though
they are not to be talked of.... yet they are past compare. What, have you Dined
within?


Lavin. No, no* what foolish Questions do thou ask?
What says he of his Coming? what of that?

Nurse. Oh! how my Head aches! what a Head have I!
It beats as it would fall in twenty pieces.
My Back of the other side! ah! my Back! my Back!
Beshrew your heart for sending me about
To catch my Death.... This Back of mine will break.
[Drinks.
Lavin. Indeed I Am sorry if thou art not well.
But prithee tell me, Nurse, what says my Love?

Nurse. Why, your Love says like an honest Gentleman, and a kind Gentleman, and
a handsome.... and I Will warrant a virtuous Gentleman. [Drinks.] Well... what?
where is your Father?


Lavin. Where Is my Father? why, he is at the Senate.
How odly thou reply'st?
Your Love says like an honest Gentleman,
Where Is your Father?

Nurse. Oh good Lady dear!
Are you so hot? marry come up, I trow.
Is this a Poultice for my aching Bones?
Henceforward do your Messages your self.

Lavin. Nay, prithee be not angry, Nurse; I meant
No ill. Speak kindly, will my Marius come?

Nurse. Will he? will a Duck swim?

Lavin. Then he will come.

Nurse. Come? why, he will come upon all four, but he will come.
Go, get you in, and say your Prayers: go.

Lavin. For Blessings on my Marius and Thee.

Nurse. Well, it would be a sad thing though....

Lavin. What?

Nurse. If Marius should not come now.... for there is old doings at the Gates,
they are at it ding-dong. Tantarara go the Trumpets; Shout, cry the Soldiers;
Clatter go the Swords. I Will warrant... I made no small haste....


Lavin. And is my Marius there? alas my Fears!
[Trumpets. The Noise comes this way. Guard my Love, ye Gods,
Or strike me with your Thunder when he falls.
[Exeunt.
SCENE the Forum.
Enter Marius senior, Marius junior, Granius, Sulpitius, Catulus, etc. Guards,
Lictors, on one side: Metellus, Sylla, Quintus Pompeius, Guards, on the other.
[Trumpets sound a March. Metell. OH thou God,
Deliverer of Rome, most blessed of men!
See here the Fathers of thy bleeding Country
Prostrate for Refuge at thy feet: see there
The Terror of our Freedom, and thy Foe,
The Persecuter of thy Friends, the Scourge
Of Truth and Justice, and the Plague of Rome.

Mar. sen. What art Thou, that can lend thy slavish ears
To flattering Hypocrisy?

Sylla. My Name thou have heard,
And fled from. I am the Friend of Rome,
The Terror and the Bane of thee her Foe.

Mar. sen. If the art her Friend, why come thou here thus armed,
Slaughtering her Citizens, and laying waste her Walls?

Sylla. To free her from a Tyrant's Power.

Mar. sen. Who is that Tyrant?

Sylla. Thou, who have oppressed
Her Senate, made thy self by force a Consul,
Set free her Slaves, and armed 'em against her Laws.

Mar. sen. Hear this, ye Romans, and then judge my Wrongs.
Have I oppressed you? have I forc^d your Laws?
Am I a Tyrant? I, whom ye have raised,
For my true Services, to what I am?
Remember the Ambrons, Cimbri, and the Teutons;
Remember the Confederate War.

Sylla. Where Thou,
Cold and delaying, were by Silo braved,
Scorned by thy Soldiers, and at last compelled
Ingloriously to quit the unwieldy Charge.
Remember too who banished good Metellus,
The Friend and Parent of thy obscure Family,
That raised thee from a Peasant to a Lord.

Mar. sen. Basely thou wrongst the Truth. My Actions raised me.
Had thou bin born a Peasant, still thou would bin so:
But I by Service to thy Country 'ave made
My Name renowned in Peace, and feared in War.

Sylla. In the Iugurthine War, whose King was taken
Prisoner by me, and Marius triumphed for it.

Mar. sen. Thou stol'st him basely, stolst him at the price
Of his Wive's Lust: thou barterd'st his Betraying,
And in the Capitol have Pageants set
In memory of thy Vanity and Shame.

Syll. Thy Shame.

Mar. sen. My Honor, proud presumptuous Boy,
Who would be gaudy in an unfit Dress,
And wear my cast off Glories after me.

Syll. I Would rather wear some Beggar's rotten Rags,
By him left dangling on a highway Hedge,
Then soil my Laurels with a Leaf of thine,
Thou scorned Plebeian.

Mar. sen. Worst Perdition catch thee.

Syll. Disband that Rout of Rebels at thy heels,
And yield thy self to Justice and the Senate.

Mar. sen. Justice from Thee demanded on my Head?
First clear thy self, quit thy usurpt Command;
Approach and kneel to me, whom thou have wronged.

Syll. Upon thy Neck I would.

Mar. sen. As soon thou would take
A Lion by the beard: thou dare not think on it.

Syll. I dare, and more.

Mar. sen. Then, Gods, I take your word,
If there be truth in you, I shall not fall
This day. My Friends and Fellow Soldiers, now
Fight as I Have seen you: for the Life of Sylla,
Leave it to me; for much Revenge must go
Along with Death when such a Victim bleeds.

Syll. My Lords, withdraw.

Metell. No, trust the Gods, I Will see
My Country's Fate, and with her live or die.

Mar. sen. Now, Sylla.

Syll. Now, my Veterans, consider
You fight for Laws, for Liberty, and Life.

Mar. sen. Rebellion never wanted that Pretense.
Thou Shadow of what I have bin, thou Puppet
Of that great State and Honors I have born,
If thou wilt do something worthy of thy place,
Let Us join our Battle with a Force may glut
The Throat of Death, and choke him with himself;
As fiercely as destroying Whirlwinds rise,
Or as Clouds dash when Thunder shakes the Skies.
[Trumpets sound a Charge: They fight.
Re-enter Marius senior taken by Sylla's party. Mar. sen. Forsaken, and a
Prisoner? Is this all
That Is left of Marius? the old naked Trunk
Of that tall Pine that was? Away, ye Shrubs,
Ye clinging Brambles; do not clog me thus,
But let me run into the Jaws of Death,
And finish my ill Fate. Or must I be
Preserved a public Spectacle, exposed
To Scorn, and make a Holyday for Slaves?
Oh! that Thought's Hell. Sure I should know thy Face.
Thou have born Office under me. If e're
In my best Fortune I deserved thy Friendship,
Give me a Roman's Death, and set me free,
That no Dishonor in my Age overtake me.

Officer. I Have served and loved you well: nor would I see
Your Fall.... My Orders were, to save your Life.

Mar. sen. You Are a Time-server, that can flatter Misery.
Enter Marius junior, Granius and Sulpitius, Prisoners. My Sons in Bonds too
and Sulpitius?

Sulpit. Yes, the Rat-catchers have trapt me. Now must I
Be food for Crows, and stink upon a Tree,
Whilst Coxcombs strowl abroad on Holydays,
To take the Air, and see me rot. A pox
On Fortune, and a pox on that first Fool
That taught the world Ambition.

Enter Quint. Pompeius, four Lictors before him. Q. Pomp. Draw near,
Ye men of Rome, and hear the Law pronounced.
Thou Marius, whose Ambition and whose Pride
Has cost so many Lives, the first that e're
Waged Civil Wars in Rome, Thee and thy Sons,
Thy Family and Kin, with that vile Slave
And Minister of all thy Outrages,
The cursed Sulpitius, Banishment's thy lot;
After to morrow's Dawn if found in the City,
Death be thy Doom: so has the Senate said.
So flourish Peace and Liberty in Rome.
Ex. Quint. Pompeius, Lictors crying Liberty.
Mar. sen. I thank ye, Gods, upon my knees I thank ye,
For plaguing me above all other men.
Come, ye young Hero's, kneel and praise the Heavens,
For crowning thus your youthful Hopes. Ha, ha, ha!
What pleasant Game has Fortune played to day?
Oh! I could burst with Laughter. Why, now Rome's
At Peace. But may it be as short and vain,
As Joys but dreamt of, or as Sick men's Slumbers.
Now let us take hands, and bending to the Earth,
To all The Infernal Powers let us swear.

All. We swear.

Mar. sen. That Is well: By all the Destinies,
By all the Furies, and the Fiends that wait
About the Throne of Hell, and by Hell's King,
We'll bring Destruction to this cursed City;
Let not one Stone of all her Towers stand safe.

Mar. jun. Let not her Temples nor her Gods escape.

Gran. Let Husbands in their Wives Embraces perish.

Mar. sen. Her Young men massacred,

Sulpit. Her Virgins ravished.

Mar. jun. And let her Lovers all my Torments feel,
Doting like me, and like me banished.
Thus let 'em Curse, thus raving tear their Hair,
And fall upon the ground as I do now.

Mar. sen. Rise then, and to Lavinia go. This Night's
Thy own.

Mar. jun. And ever after Pain and Sorrow.
But go thou, find Lavinia's Woman out....
[To his servant. Tell her I Will come, and bid her cheer my Love,
For I Will not fail, but in this Night enjoy
Whole Life, and forgive Nature what is to come.

Mar. sen. Thus then let us part; each take his several way,
As to a Task of Darkness: when we meet
In hated Exile, we'll compute Accounts,
And see what Mischief each has gathered then.
For, Rome, I shall be yet once more thy Lord,
If Oracles have truth, and Augurs ly not.
For yet a Child, and in my Father's Fields
Playing, I seven young Eagles chanced to find;
Which gathering up I to my Parents bore.
The Gods were sought: who promised me from thence
As many times the Consulate in Rome.
Six times already I Have that Office bore,
And so far has the Prophecy proved true.
But if I Have managed ill the time that is past,
And too remiss six elder Fortunes lost,
The youngest Darling Fate is yet to come,
And Thou shall feel me then, Ungrateful Rome.
[Exeunt.
The end of the Third ACT.
ACT IV.
SCENE the Garden.
Enter Lavinia and Marius junior. Lavin. Will thou be gone? it is not yet near
Day.
It was the Nightingale, and not the Lark,
That pierced the fearful hollow of thy Ear.
Nightly on yon Pomegranate-tree she sings.
Believe me, Love, it was the Nightingale.

Mar. jun. Oh! 'twas the Lark, the Herald of the Morn,
No Nightingale. Look, Love, what envious Streaks
Of Light embroider all the cloudy East.
Night's Candles are burnt out, and jocund Day
Upon the Mountain-tops sits gally dressed,
Whilst all the Birds bring Music to his Levy.
I must be gone and live, or stay and die.....

Lavin. Oh! oh! what wretched Fortune is my lot!
Sure, giving Thee, Heaven grew too far in Debt
To pay, till Bankrupt-like it broke; whilst I,
A poor compounding Creditor, am forced
To take a Mite for endless Sums of Joy.

Mar. jun. Let me be taken, let me suffer Death,
I am content, so Thou will have it so....
By Heaven, yon gray is not the Morning's Eye,
But the Reflection of pale Cynthia's Brightness.
Nor is it the Lark we hear, whose Notes do beat
So high, and Echo in the Vault of Heaven.
I Am all desire to stay, no will to go.
How is it, my Soul? let us talk: It is not Day.

Lavin. Oh! it is, it is.... Fly hence away, my Marius.
It is the Lark, and out of tune she sings,
With grating Discords and unpleasing Strainings.
Some say the Lark and loathsome Toad change Eyes:
Now I could wish they had changed Voices too;
Or that a Lethargy had seized the Morning,
And she had slept, and never waked again,
To part me from the Embraces of my Love.
What shall become of Me, when Thou art gone?

Mar. jun. The Gods that heard our Vows, and know our Loves,
Seeing my Faith, and thy unspotted Truth,
Will sure take care, and let no Wrongs annoy thee.
Upon my Knees I Will ask 'em every day,
How my Lavinia does: and every night,
In the severe Distresses of my Fate,
As I perhaps shall wander through the Desert,
And want a place to rest my weary Head on,
I Will count the Stars, and bless 'em as they shine,
And court 'em all for my Lavinia's Safety.

Lavin. Oh Banishment! eternal Banishment!
Never to return! must we never meet again?
My Heart will break, I cannot think that Thought
And live. Could I but see to the end of Woe,
There were some Comfort.... but eternal Torment
Is even insupportable to Thought.
It cannot be that we shall part for ever.

Mar. jun. No, for my Banishment may be recalled;
My Father once more hold a Power in Rome:
Then shall I boldly claim Lavinia mine,
Whilst happiest men shall envy at the Blessing,
And Poets write the Wonders of our Loves.

Lavin. If by my Father's Cruelty I Am forced,
When left alone, to yield to Sylla's Claim,
Defenseless as I am, and thou far from me,
If, as I must, I rather die then suffer't,
What a sad Tale will that be when it is told thee?
I know not what to fear, or hope, or think,
Or say, or do. I cannot let thee go.

Mar. jun. A Thousand things would, to this purpose said,
But sharpen and add weight to parting Sorrow.
Oh my Lavinia! if my Heart e're stray,....
[Kneels. Or any other Beauty ever charm me,
If I live not entirely only thine,
In that cursed moment when my Soul forsakes thee,
May I be hither brought a Captive bound,
T'adorn the Triumph of my basest Foe.

Lavin. And if I live not faithful to the Lord
Of my first Vows, my dearest only Marius,
May I be brought to Poverty and Scorn,
Hooted by Slaves forth from thy gates, O Rome,
Till flying to the Woods to avoid my Shame,
Sharp Hunger, Cold, or some worse Fate destroy me;
And not one Tree vouchsafe a Leaf to hide me.

Mar. jun. What needs all this? --

Lavin. Oh! I could find out things
To talk to thee for ever.

Mar. jun. Weep not; the time
We had to stay together has bin employed
In richest Love.....

Lavin. We ought to summon all
The spirit of soft Passion up, to cheer
Our Hearts thus laboring with the pangs of Parting.
Oh my poor Marius!

Mar. jun. Ah my kind Lavinia!

Lavin. But do thou think we e're shall meet again?

Mar. jun. I doubt it not, and all these Woes shall serve
For sweet Discourses in our time to come.

Lavin. Alas! I have an ill-divining Soul;
Methinks I see thee, now you are from my Arms,
Like a stark Ghost with Horror in thy Visage.
Either my Eyesight fails, or thou look pale.

Mar. jun. And trust me, Love, in my Eye so do Thou.
Dry Sorrow drinks our Blood.... Farewell.

Lavin. Farewell then.
[Ex. Mar. jun.
Nurse within. Madam.

Lavin. My Nurse.

Nurse within. Your Father's up, and Daylight broke abroad.
Be wary, look about you.....

Lavin. Hah! is he gone? My Lord, my Husband, Friend,
I must hear from thee every day in the hour:
For absent Minutes seem as many Days.
Oh! by this reckoning I shall be most old,
E're I again behold my Marius. Nay,
Gone too already? 'twas unkindly done,
I had not yet imparted half my Soul,
Not a third part of its sond jealous Fears.
But I Will pursue him for it, and be revenged;
Hang such a tender Tale about his Heart,
Shall make it tingle as his Life were stung.
Nay too.... I Will love him; never, never leave him;
Fond as a Child, and resolute as Man.
Ex. Lavin.
Enter Metellus musing. Metell. Sylla this morning parts from hence to Capua,
To head that Army. Cinna must be Consul:....
Ay, Cinna must be. He Is a busy fellow,
Knows how to tell a story to the Rabble,
Hates Marius too: that, that is the dearest point.
I hope the Snares for Marius laid may take him.
A hundred horse are in pursuit to find him:
And if they catch him, his Head's safe, that is certain.
Octavius will be the other.... be it so,
An honest, simple, downright-dealing Lord:
A little too Religious, that is his fault.
Enter a Servant. What now?

Servant. A Letter left you by a Lictor,
Who told us that it came from the Lord Sylla.
Metellus reads the Letter. BLame not, Sir, my parting
So suddenly: just now I Have had advice
Of some Disturbance in the Camp at Capua.
Commend my tender'st Faith to fair Lavinia.
You're Sylla 's Advocate with her and Rome.
Enter Nurse. Well, Nurse.

Nurse. My Lord.

Metell. How does my Daughter?

Nurse. Truly very ill:
She has not slept a wink:
Nothing but tossed and tumbled all this night;
I left her just now slumbering.
This Lord Sylla does so run in her Head.

Metell. Oh! were he in her Heart, Nurse!

Nurse. Were he?
Why, she thinks of nothing else, talks of nothing else, dreams of nothing
else. She would needs have me ly with her the other night. But about midnight
(I Will swear it waked me out of a sweet Nap) she takes me fast in her Arms, and
cries, Oh my Lord Sylla! but are you, will you be true? then sighed, and so
stretched.... I swear I was half afraid.


Metell. She Is strangely altered then.
This Morning two new Consuls must be chosen.
If they are true, those tidings thou have brought me,
Wait while she wakes, and tell her it is my pleasure,
At my return from the Forum that I see her....
[Ex. Metell.
Nurse. So, so; -- here will be sweet doings in time. How many hundred lies a
day must I tell, to keep this Family at peace?


Enter Lavinia. Lavin. Oh Nurse! where art thou? is my Father gone?

Nurse. Gone? yes; and would I were gone too.

Lavin. Why do thou sigh? what cause have thou to wish so?
Were thou distressed, unfortunate as I am,
Thou had then cause.
What shall I do? Oh, how alone am I!
I walk methinks as half of me were lost;
Yet, like a maimed Bird, flutter, flutter on,
And fain would find a Hole to hide my head in.

Nurse. 'Odds my Boddikins! but why thus dressed, Madam? why in this pickle, say
you now?


Lavin. Seem not to wonder, nor dare to oppose me,
For I am desperate, and resolved to Death.
In this unhappy, wayward, humble Dress,
After my Love a Pilgrimage I Will take,
Forsake deserted Rome, and find my Marius.

Nurse. And I must stay behind to be hang d up, like an old Polecat in a
Warren, for a warning to all Vermin that shall come after me. Would I were
fairly dead for a week, till this were over.


Lavin. This Morning's opportunity is fair,
When all are busy in electing Consuls;
I shall escape unseen without the Gates,
And this night in a Litter reach Salonium.

Nurse. I care not; I Will have nothing to do in it: you shall not stir.
Nay, I Will raise the House first. Why Clodius! Catulus! Sempronia! Thesbia! Men
and Maids, where are you? Oh! oh! oh!...

Lav. gets from her. Nurse falls down. [Ex. Lavin.
Enter Clodius. Clod. What Is the matter, Mistress?

Nurse. Oh Clody, Clody, dear Clody! is it thee, my dear Clody? help me, help me
up. Run to my Lord to the Forum presently: tell him his Treasury is robbed, his
House a-fire, his Daughter dead, and I mad. Run, run. You Will not run. Oh! oh!

[Exeunt.
SCENE changes to the Country.
Enter several Herdsmen belonging to Marius. 1. Herds. GOod morrow, Brother,
you have heard the News.

2. Herds. News, quoth a? trim News truly.

1. Herds. Why, they say our Lord and Master's stepped a one side* s there any
thing in it trow?


2. Herds. Any thing in it? alas aday! alas aday! sad times! sad times, Brother!
not a penny of money stirring.


1. Herds. Nay, I thought there was no good Weather toward, when my bald-fac'd
Heifer stuck up her Tail Eastward, and ran back into a new Quick-set, which I
had just made to keep the Swine from the Beans.


2. Herds. And the other night, as I was at Supper, in the Chimnycorner, a whole
Family of Swallows, that had occupy'd the Tenement these seven years, fell
down, Nest and all, into the Porridgepot, and spoiled the Broth. Sad times!
sad times, Brother!


3. Herds. Did you meet no Troupers this way?

2. Herds. Troupers? I saw a parcel of Raggooners, I think they call 'em,
trotting along you Wood-side upon ragged Hide-bound Jades. I warrant they came
for no goodness.....


1. Herds. 'Twas to seek for Lord Marius, as sure as Eggs be Eggs.
These-Bitious folk make more stir in the world then a thousand men. Would my
Kine were all in their Stalls.


Enter several Soldiers in quest of Marius. 1. Sold. This is the way. How
now, you pack of Boobies? whose Fools are you?


2. Herds. Why, we are such Fools as you are, any body's Fools that will pay
us our Wages.


2. Sold. Do you belong to the Traitor Marius?

1. Herds. We belong to Caius Marius, an't like your Worship.

1. Sold. Why, this is a civil Fellow. But you, Rogue, you are witty and be
hanged, are you?


2. Herds. I's poor enough to be witty, as you are poor enough to be valiant. Had
I but Money enough, I Would no more be a Wit then you would be a Soldier.


2. Sold. Let the hungry Churl alone.

1. Sold. Hark you, you Dog, where is your Lord, the Traitor Marius?


2. Herds. In a whole Skin, if he be wise.....

2. Sold. Where is he, you Pultroon?

2. Herds. Look you, I keep his Cows and his Oxen here at Salonium, but I keep
none of him. If you must needs know where he is, then I must needs tell you I
don't know.


1. Sold. Let Us to his house hard by, and ransack that. Sirrah,
If we miss of him, you may repent this.
[Ex. Soldiers.
1. Herds. It Is all one to me, I must pay my Rent to some body.

2. Herds. Why, this it is now to be a Great man. Heaven keep me a Cow-keeper
still.... I say....


Enter Marius senior and Granius. Mar. sen. Where are we? are we yet not near
Salonium?
Lead me to yonder shady Poplar, where
The poor old Marius a while may sit,
And joy in Rest. Oh my distempered Head!
The Sun has beat his Beams so hard upon me,
That my Brain's hot as molten Gold. My Skull!
Oh my tormented Skull! Oh Rome! Rome! Rome!
Hah! what are those?

Gran. They seem, Sir, Rural Swains,
Who tend the Herds that graze beneath these Woods.

Mar. sen. Who are you? to what Lord do ye belong?

2. Herds. We did belong to Caius Marius once: but they say he is gone a
Journey: and now we belong to one another.


Mar. sen. Have ye forgot me then? ungrateful Slaves!
Are you so willing to disown your Master?
Who would have thought to have found such Baseness here,
Where Innocence seems seated by the Gods,
As in her Virgin-nakedness untainted?
Confusion on ye, ye sordid Earthlings.
[Ex. all but one.
1. Herds. Oh fly, my Lord, your Foes are thick abroad:
Just now a Troup of Murderers past this way,
And asked with horror for the Traitor Marius.
By this time at Salonium, at your House,
They are in search of you. Fly, fly, my Lord....
[Exit.
Mar. sen. I shall be hounded up and down the World,
Now every Villain, that is Wretch enough
To take the price of Blood, dreams of my Throat.
Help and support me till I reach the Wood,
Then go and find thy wretched Brother out.
Asunder we may dodge our Fate, and lose her.
In some old hollow Tree or o'regrown Brake
I Would rest my weary Lims, till Danger pass me.
[Goes into the Wood.
Enter Soldiers again. 1. Sold. A thousand Crowns? it is a Reward might buy
As many Lives, for they are cheap in Rome;
And it is too much for one.

2. Sold. Let Us set this Wood
A flaming, if you think he is here, and then
Quickly you will see the old Droan crawl humming out.

1. Sold. Thou always love to ride full speed to Mischief. There Is no
consideration in thee. Look you, when I cut a Throat, I love to do it with as
much Deliberation and Decency as a Barber cuts a Beard. I hate a slovenly
Murder done hand over head: a man gets no credit by it.


3. Sold. The man that spoke last spoke well. Therefore let us to you adjacent
Village, and sowce our selves in good Falernum....

[Ex. Soldiers.
Mar. sen. O Villains! not a Slave of those
But has served under me, has eat my Bread,
And felt my Bounty.... Drought! parching Drought!
Was ever Lion thus by Dogs embossed?
Oh! I could swallow Rivers: Earth yield me Water;
Or swallow Marius down where Springs first flow.

Enter Marius junior and Granius. Mar. jun. My Father!

Mar. sen. Oh my Sons!

Mar. jun. Why thus forlorn? stretched on the Earth?

Mar. sen. Oh! get me some Refreshment, cooling Herbs,
And Water to allay my ravenous Thirst*
I would not trouble you if I had Strength:
But I Am so faint that all my Lims are useless.
Now have I not one Dram to buy Food,
Must we then starve? no, sure the Birds will feed us.

Mar. jun. There stands a House on yonder side of the Wood,
It seems the Mansion of some Man of note:
I Will go and turn a Beggar for my Father.

Mar. sen. Oh my Soul's comfort! do. Indeed I want it.
I, who had once the plenty of the Earth,
Now want a Root and Water. Go, my Boy,
And see who will give a Morsel to poor Marius.
Nay, I Will not starve: no, I will plunge in Riot,
Wallow in Plenty. Drink? I Will drink, I Will drink.
Give me that Goblet hither.... Here Is a Health
To all the Knaves and Senators in Rome.

Mar jun. Repose your self a while, till we return.

Mar. sen. I will; but prithee let me rave a little.
Go, prithee go, and don't delay. I Will rest;
[Ex. Mar. jun. As thou shall, Rome, if e're my Fortune raise me.....
Enter Lavinia. Another Murderer? this brings smiling Fate:
A deadly Snake clothed in a dainty Skin.

Lavin. I Have wandered up and down these Woods and Meadows,
Till I have lost my way.....
Against a tall, young, slender, well-grown Oak
Leaning, I found Lavinia in the Bark.
My Marius should not be far hence.

Mar. sen. What art Thou,
That dare to name that wretched Creature Marius?

Lavin. Do not be angry, Sir, what e're thou art;
I am a poor unhappy Woman, driven
By Fortune to pursue my banished Lord.

Mar. sen. By thy dissembling Tone thou should be Woman,
And Roman too.

Lavin. Indeed I am.

Mar. sen. A Roman?
If thou art so, be gone, lest Rage with Strength
Assist my Vengeance, and I rise and kill thee.

Lavin. My Father, is it you?

Mar. sen. Now thou art Woman;
For Lies are in thee. I? am I thy Father?
I never was yet so cursed; none of thy Sex
E're sprung from me. My Offspring all are Males,
The Nobler sort of Beasts entit'led Men.

Lavin. I am your Daughter, if your Son's my Lord.
Have you never heard Lavinia's name in Rome,
That wedded with the Son of Marius?

Mar. sen. Hah!
Art thou that fond, that kind and doting thing,
That lest her Father for a banished Husband?
Come near --
And let me bless thee, though thy Name's my Foe.

Lavin. Alas! my Father, you seem much oppressed:
Your Lips are parcht, bloud-shot your Eyes and sunk.
Will you partake such Fruits as I have gathered?
Taste, Sir, this Peach, and this Pomegranate; both are
Ripe and refreshing.

Mar. sen. What? all this from Thee,
Thou Angel, whom the Gods have sent to aid me?
I don't deserve thy Bounty.

Lavin. Here, Sir,'s more.
I found a Crystal Spring too in the Wood,
And took some Water; it is most soft and cool.

Mar. sen. An Emperor's Feast! but I shall rob thee.

Lavin. No, I Have eat, and slak'd my Thirst. But where is my Lord,
My dearest Marius?

Mar. sen. To the neighboring Village
He Is gone, to beg his Father's Dinner, Daughter.

Lavin. Will you then call me Daughter? will you own it?
I Am much o'repaid for all the Wrongs of Fortune.
But surely Marius cannot be brought to want.
I Have Gold and Jewels too, and they will buy Food.

Enter Marius junior. Mar. sen. See here, my Marius, what the Gods have sent us.
See thy Lavinia.

Mar. jun. Hah!
[They run and embrace.
Mar. sen. What? dumb at meeting?

Mar. jun. Why weeps my Love?

Lavin. I cannot speak, Tears so obstruct my Words,
And choke me with unutterable Joy.

Mar. jun. Oh my Heart's Joy!

Lavin. My Soul!

Mar. jun. But have thou left
Thy Father's House, the Pomp and State of Rome,
To follow desert Misery?

Lavin. I come
To bear a part in every thing that is thine,
Be It Happiness or Sorrow. In these Woods,
Whilst from pursuing Enemies you're safe,
I Will range about, and find the Fruits and Springs,
Gather cool Sedges, Daffadills and Lillies,
And softest Camomill to make us Beds,
Whereon my Love and I at night will sleep,
And dream of better Fortune.

Enter Granius and Servant with Wine and Meat. Mar. sen. Yet more Plenty*
Sure Comus, the God of Feasting, haunts these Woods,
And means to entertain us as his Guests.

Servant. I am sent hither, Marius, from my Lord,
Sextilius the Praetor, to relieve thee,
And warn thee that thou straight depart this place,
Else he the Senate's Edict must obey,
And treat thee as the Foe of Rome.

Mar. sen. But did he,
Did he, Sextilius, bid thee say all this?
Was he too proud to come and see his Master,
That raised him out of nothing? Was he not
My menial Servant once, and wiped these Shoes,
Ran by my Chariot-wheels, my Pleasures watched,
And fed upon the Voidings of my Table?
Durst he affront me with a sordid Alms?
And send a saucy Message by a Slave?
Hence with thy Scraps: back to thy Teeth I dash 'em.
Be gone whilst thou art safe. Hold, stay a little.

Serve. What Answer would you have me carry back?

Mar. sen. Go to Sextilius, tell him thou have seen
Poor Caius Marius banished from his Country,
Sitting in Sorrow on the naked Earth,
Amidst an ample Fortune once his own,
Where now he cannot claim a Turf to sleep on.
[Ex. Servant. How am I fallen! Music? sure, the Gods
[Soft Music. Are mad, or have designed to make me so.
Enter Martha. Well, what art Thou?

Marth. Am I a Stranger to thee?
Martha's my name, the Syrian Prophetess,
That used to wait upon thee with good Fortune;
Till banished out of Rome for serving Thee.
I Have ever since inhabited these Woods,
And searched the deepest Arts of wise Foreknowledge.

Mar. sen. I know thee now most well. When thou were gone,
All my good Fortune left me. My loved Vulturs,
That used to hover over my happy Head,
And promise Honor in the day of Battle,
Have since bin seen no more. Even Birds of prey
Forsake unhappy Marius: Men of prey
Pursue him still. Have thou no Hopes in store?

Marth. A hundred Spirits wait upon my will,
To bring me Tidings, from the Earth's farthest Corners,
Of all that happens out in States and Councils.
I tell thee therefore, Rome is once more thine.
The Consuls have had Blows, and Cinna's beaten,
Who with his Army comes to find thee out,
To lead him back with Terror to that City.

Mar. sen. Speak on.

Marth. Nay, e're thou think it he will be with thee.
But let thy Sons and these fair Nymphs retire,
Whilst I relieve thy wearied Eyes with Sleep,
And cheer thee in a Dream with promised Fate.

Mar. jun. Come, my Lavinia, Granius, we will withdraw
To some cool Shade, and wonder at our Fortune.
[Ex.
Martha waves her Wand.... [A Dance. Mar. sen. O Rest, thou Stranger to my
Senses, welcome.

Enter Servant and a Russian. Serve. Ten Attick Talents shall be thy Reward,
Sextilius gives 'em thee. Dispatch him safely.

Ruff. Fear not, he never wakes again.

Mar. sen. No more,
I 'll hear no more. Metellus live? no, no;
He dies, he dies. So bear him to the Tiber,
And plunge him to the bottom. Hah Antonius!
Where are my Guards? dispatch that talking Knave,
That when he should be doing public Service,
Consumes his time in Speeches to the Rabble,
And sows Sedition in a City. Down,
Down with Pompeius too, that called me Traitor.
Hah! art thou there? welcome once more, old Marius,
To Rome's Tribunal.

Ruff. Now Is the time.

Mar. sen. Stand off.
Secure that Gaul.... Dare thou kill Caius Marius?
[Wakes. Hah! speak? what art thou?

Ruff. By Sextilius hired
I hither came to take your Life, Spare mine,
And I Will for ever serve you at your feet.

Mar. sen. What barbarous Slaves are these, that envy me
The open Air; set Prices on my Head,
As they would do on Wolves that slay their Flock!
Enter Sulpitius. [Trumpets. Trumpets! Sulpitius, where have thou bin wandering
Since the late Storm that drove us from each other?

Sulpit. Why, doing Mischief up and down the City,
Picking up discontented Fools, belying
The Senators and Government, destroying
Faith amongst honest men, and praising Knaves.

Mar. sen. Oh, but where is Cinna?

Sulpit. Ready to salute you.....

Enter Cinna attended with Lictors and Guards. Cinn. Romans, once more behold
your Consul; so,
Is that a Fortune fit for Caius Marius?
Advance your Axes and your Rods before him,
And give him all the Customs of his Honor.

Mar. sen. Away: such Pomp becomes not wretched Marius.
Here let me pay Obedience to my Consul.
Lead me, great Cinna, where thy Foes have wronged thee,
And see how thy old Soldier will obey.

Cinn. O Marius, be our Hearts united ever,
To carry Desolation into Rome,
And waste that Den of Monsters to the Earth.

Mar. sen. Shall we?

Cinn. We'll do it. That godly Soothsaying Fool,
That sacrificing Dolt, that Sot Octavius,
When we were chosen Consuls in the Forum,
Disowned me for his Colleague; said, the Gods
Had told him I designed Tyrannick power;
Provoked the Citizens, who took up Arms,
And drove me forth the Gates.

Mar. sen. Excellent Mischief!
What Is to be done?

Cinn. No sooner was I gone,
But a large part of that great City followed me.
There Is not an honest Spirit left in Rome,
That does not own my Cause, and wish for Marius.

Mar. sen. Bring me my Horse, my Armor, and the Laurel
With which, when I Would overcome three barbarous Nations,
I entered crowned with Triumph into Rome.
I go to free her now from greater Mischiefs.
Enter Marius junior and Granius. O my young Warrior!

Mar. jun. Cursed be the Light,
And ever cursed be all these Regions round us.
Lavinia's lost, born back with force to Rome,
By Ruffians headed by her Father's Kinsmen;
And like a Coward too I live, yet saw it.
[Exit.
Mar. sen. Oh Marius! Marius! let not 'Plaints come from thee,
Nor cloud the joy that is breaking on thy Father.
If she be back in Rome, Lavinia's thine.
To morrow's Dawn restores her to thy Arms.
For that fair Mistress Fortune, which has cost
So dear, for which such Hardships I have past,
Is coy no more, but crowns my Hopes at last.
I long to embrace her, nay, it is Death to stay.
I Am mad as promised Bridegrooms, born away
With thoughts of nothing but the joyful day.
[Exeunt.
SCENE Metellus House.
Enter Metellus, Lavinia, Priest of Hymen. Lavin. NAy, you have caught me; you
may kill me too:
But with my Cries I Will rend the Echoing Heavens,
Till all the Gods are Witness how you use me.

Metell. What? like a Vagrant fly thy Father's House?
And follow fulsomely an exll'd Slave,
Disdained by all the World? But abject Thou,
Resolve to go, or bound be sent to Sylla,
With as much Scorn as thou have done me Shame.

Lavin. Do, bind me, kill me, rack these Lims: I Will bear it.
But, Sir, consider still I am your Daughter;
And one hour's Converse with this Holy man
May teach me to repent, and show Obedience.

Metell. Think not to evade me by protracting time:
For if thou do not, may the Gods forsake me,
As I will Thee, if thou escape my Fury....
[Ex. Metell.
Lavin. Oh! bid me leap (rather then go to Sylla)
From off the Battlements of any Tower,
Or walk in Thievish ways, or bid me lurk
Where Serpents are: chain me with roaring Bears;
Or hide me nightly in a Charnell-house
O're-cover'd quite with Dead men's rattling Bones,
With reeky Shanks, and yellow chapless Sculls:
Or bid me go into a new-made Grave,
And hide me with a Dead man in his Shroud:
Things that to hear but told have made me tremble:
And I Will go through it without fear or doubting,
To keep my Vows unspotted to my Love. --

Priest. Take here this Vial then, and in this moment
Drink it, when straight through all thy Veins shall run
A cold and drowzy Humor more then Sleep:
And in Death's borrowed likeness shall thou lie
Two Summer-days, then wake as from a Slumber.
Till Marius by my Letters know what is past,
And come by stealth to Rome. --

Lavin. Give me; Oh! give me: tell me not of Fears.

Priest. Farewell: be bold and prosperous.
[Exit.
Lavin. Oh! farewell.....
Heaven knows if ever we shall meet again.
I have a faint cold Fear thrills through my Veins,
That almost freezes up the heat of Life.
I Will call him back again to comfort me.
Stay, Holy man. But what should he do here?
My dismal Scene it is fit I act alone.
What if this Mixture do not work at all?
Shall I to morrow then be sent to Sylla?
No, no... this shall forbid it; ly thou there.....
Lays down the Dagger. Or how, if, when I Am laid into the Tomb,
I wake before the time that Marius come
To my Relief? There, there is a fearful Point.
Shall I not then be stifled in the Vault,
Where for these many hundred years the Bones
Of all my buried Ancestors are packt?
Where, as they say, Ghosts at some hours resort,
With Mandrakes shreeks torn from the Earth's dark Womb,
That living Mortals hearing them run mad?
Or if I wake, shall I not be distracted,
Environed round with all these hideous Fears,
And madly play with my Forefathers Joints;
Then in this Rage with some great Kinsman's Bones,
As with a Club, dash out my desperate Brains?
What? Sylla? get thee gone, thou meager Lover:
My Sense abhors thee. Do n't disturb my Draught;
It Is to my Lord. [Drinks.] Oh Marius! Marius! Marius!
[Exit.
The end of the Fourth ACT.
ACT V.
SCENE Cinna's Camp before the Walls of Rome.
[Trumpets sound a General. Enter Cinna, Marius senior, and Sulpitius, Granius,
two Ambassadors, Guards. Cinn. Ambassadors from Rome? How many Slaves;
Traitors, and Tyrants, Villains was I called*
But yesterday? yet now their Consul Cinna.
Oh! what an excellent Master is an Army,
To teach Rebellious Cities Manners! Say,
My Friend and Colleague Marius, shall we hear 'em?

Mar. sen. Whom?

Cinn. The Ambassadors.

Mar. sen. From whence?

Cinn. From Rome.

Mar. sen. My loving Countrymen? they must be heard,
Or Sylla will be angry.....

Cinn. In what state
And Pageantry the solid Lumps move on?
And though they come to beg, will be attended
With their ill-order'd Pomp and awkward Pride.
Who are ye? and from whence?

1. Emb. From wretched Rome.
To thee, most mighty Cinna, and to thee.
Most dread Lord Marius, in her name we bow.

Cinn. What Is your Demand?

1. Emb. Hear but our humble Prayers,
And all Demands be made by God-like Cinna.
Whither, oh! whither will your Rage pursue us?
Must all the Fortunes and the Lives of Rome
Suffer for one Miscarriage of her Masters?
Your sorrowful afflicted Mother Rome,
In whose kind Bosom you were nursed and bred,
Stretches her trembling Arms to implore your Pity.
Fold up your dreadful Ensigns, and lay by
Your warlike Terrors, that affright her Matrons,
And come to her e're Sorrows quite o'rewhelm her.
But come like Sons that bring their Parents Joy:
Enter her Gates with Dove-like Peace before ye,
And let no bloody Slaughter stain her Streets.

Cinn. Thus it is you think to heal up smarting Honor,
By pouring flattering Balm into the Wound,
Which for a time may make it whole and fair,
Till the false Medicine be at last discovered,
And then it ranckles to a Sore again.
Take this my Answer: I will enter Rome;
But for my Force, I Will keep it still my own,
Nor part with Power to give it to my Foes.

Mar. sen. Sulpitius, see, what abject Slaves are these?
Such base Deformities a long Robe hides.

Sulpit. I cannot but laugh to think on it.

Mar. sen. What?

Sulpit. How these politic Noddles, that look so grave upon the matter in the
Senate House, will laugh and grin at one another when they are set a sunning
upon the Capitol.


2. Emb. May we return with joy into our City,
Proclaiming Peace agreed with Heaven and You?

Cinn. Go, tell 'em we expect due Homage paid,
Of every Senator expect Acknowledgment,
Mighty Rewards, and Offices of Honor.

1. Emb. But on that Brow there still appears a Cloud,
That never rose without a following Storm.

Mar. sen. Alas! for me, a simple Banished man,
Driven from my Country by the right of Law,
And justly punished as my ills deserved,
Think not of me: whatever are his Resolves,
I shall obey.

Both Emb. May all the Gods reward you....
[Ex. Embass. and Attendants.
Cinn. Now, Marius.

Mar. sen. Now, my Cinna.

Cinn. Are not we
True-born of Rome, true Sons of such a Mother?
How I adore thy Temper?

Mar. sen. Those two Knaves,
Those whining, fawning, humble, pliant Villains,
Would cut thy Throat or mine for half a Dram.

Cinn. Let Us not delay a moment.

Mar. sen. Oh! let us fly,
Enter this cursed City; nay, with Smiles too,
But false as the adulterate Promises
Of Favorites in power, when poor men court 'em.

Cinn. They always hated me, because a Soldier.

Mar. sen. Base Natures ever grudge at things above 'em,
And hate a Power they are too much obliged to.
When Fears are on them, then their kindest Wishes
And best Rewards attend the gallant Warrior:
But Dangers vanished, infamous Neglect,
Ill Usage and Reproach are all his portion;
Or at the best he is wedded to hard Wants,
Robbed of that little Hire he toiled and bled for.

Sulpit. I 'd rather turn a bold true-hearted Rogue,
Live upon Prey, and hang for it with my Fellows,
Then, when my Honor and my Country's Cause
Called me to Dangers, be so basely branded.

Mar. sen. E're we this City enter then, let us swear
Not to destroy one honest Roman living.

Sulpit. Nor one chaste Matron.

Cinn. Nor a faithful Friend,
Nor true-born Heir, nor Senator that is wise.

Mar. sen. But Knaves and Villains, Whores and base born Brats,
And the endless swarms of Fools grown up in years,
Be Slaughter's Game, till we dispeople Rome.

Cinn. Draw out our Guards, and let the Trumpets sound,

Mar. sen. Till all things tell 'em Marius is at hand.
O Sylla, if at Capua thou shall hear
How Fortune deals with me, fall on thy Knees,
And make the Gods thy Friends to keep thee from me.
Sulpitius, as along the Streets we move
With solemn pace and meditating Mischiefs,
Whom-e're I smile on lot thy Sword go through.
Oh! can the Matrons and the Virgins Cries,
The Screams of dying Infants, and the Groans
Of murdered men be Music to appease me?
Sure Death's not far from such a desperate Cure.
Be It with me rather (Gods,) as Storms let loose,
That rive the Trunks of tallest Cedars down,
And tear from Tops the loaded pregnant Vine,
And kill the tender Flowers but yet half blown.
For having no more Fury left in store,
Heavens face grows clear, the Storm is heard no more,
And Nature smiles as gally as before.....
[Exeunt.
SCENE Metellus House.
Enter Metellus. Metell. A Peace with Marius? O most base Submission!
That overruling Fears should weigh up Reason!
Was not the City ours, and Sylla too
At Capua, almost in a Trumpet's call?
And to submit! Could I but once have fought for it,
I might have met this Marius in Arms,
And bin revenged for all the Mischiefs done me.
Nurse.

Enter Nurse. Nurse. Here, an't shall please you.

Metell. Go wake Lavinia. Tell her, she must hence
For Capua this Morning: for the Truce
Favors her Journey, and secures her Passage.
[Exit.
Scene draws, and discovers Lavinia on a Couch. Nurse. Wake her? Poor Titmouse!
it will be as peevish,
I Will warrant you, and rub its nye's, and so frown now.
Well: Mistress! why, Lavinia! fast, I warrant her.
Why, Lamb! why, Lady! Fie, you Slugg-a-bed.
What, not a word? You take your penny worth now,
Sleep for a week: for the next Night (my word for it)
Sylla takes care that you shall rest but little.
Gods forgive me.....
Marry and Amen. How sound is she asleep?
I must needs wake her. Madam! Madam! Madam!
Now should your Lover find you in this posture,
He Would fright you up in faith, What? will not it do?
Dressed too? and in your Clothes? and down again?
Nay, I must wake you. Lady! Lady! Lady!
Alas! alas! help, help, my Lady's dead.
Ah! welladay that ever I was born!
Some Aqua vitae. Hoa! my Lord.... my Lady....

Enter Metellus. Metell. Lavinia dead?

Nurse. Your only Daughter's dead:
As dead as a Herring, Stock Fish, or Door-nail.

Metell. Stiff, cold, and pale. Where are thy Beauties now?
Thy Blushes that have warmed so many Hearts?
All Hearts that ever felt her conquering Beauty,
Sigh till ye break: and all ye Eyes that languisht
In my Lavinia's Brightness, weep with me,
Till Grief grow general, and the World's in Tears.

Nurse. Oh Day! oh Day! oh Day! oh hateful Day!
Never was seen so black a day as this.
Oh Day! oh woeful Day! oh Day like Night!

Metell. No more: Thus in her Bridal Ornaments
Dressed as she is she shall be born to Burial,
IN the Sepulcher where our Forefathers rest.
Be It done, whilst all things we ordained for Joy
Turn from their Office, and assist in Sadness.
[Exit.
Nurse. It shall be done and done and overdone, as we are undone. And I will
sigh, and cry till I am swelled as big as a Pumkin. Nay, my poor Baby, I Will
take care thou shall not die for nothing: for I will wash thee with my Tears,
perfume thee with my Sighs, and stick a Flower in every part about thee....

[Ex. Nurse.
SCENE changes to the Forum, where is placed the Consul's Tribunal.
Enter two Citizens. 1. Cit. WHither, oh! whither shall we fly for Safety?
Already reeking Murther's in our Streets,
Matrons with Infants in their Arms are butchered,
And Rome appears one noisome House of slaughter.

2. Cit. Hear us, ye Gods, and pity our Calamities.
Stop, stop the Fury of this cruel Tyrant;
Or send your Thunder forth to strike us dead,
E're our own Slaves are Masters of our Throats.

1. Cit. Ruin draws near us: Oh my Friend! let us fly
To the Altars of our Gods, and by the hands
Of one another die as Romans ought.
[Exeunt.
Enter Ancharius the Senator and his Grandson. Child. Hide me, my Grandsire:
the ugly men are coming
That killed my Mother and my Sister Thesbie.
Will they kill you and me too?

Anch. Oh my Child!
I cannot hide thee, nor know what to do.
Derepit Age benums my weary Lims:
I cannot resist, nor fly....

Child. Then here we'll sit;
Perhaps they will not come yet: or if they do,
I Will fall upon my Knees and beg your Life.
I am a very little harmless Boy;
And when I cry, and talk, and hang about'em,
They Will pity sure my Tears, and grant me all.

Enter several Old men in black with Cypress Wreaths, leading Virgins in white
with Myrtle, who kneel before the Tribunal. Then enters Marius senior as
Consul, Lictors, Sulpitius, and Guards. Mar. sen. I thank ye, Gods, ye have
restored me now.
[Mounts the Tribunal. What Pageantry is this, Sulpitius, here?
Remove these Slaves, and bear'em to their Fates.

1. Old man. We come not for our selves, but in the name
Of Rome, to offer up our Lives for all.
Pity a wretched State, thou raging God,
And let loose all thy dreadful Fury here.

Mar. sen. I know ye all, great Senators; ye are
The Heads and Patrons of Rebellious Rome.
Ye can be humble when Affliction galls ye:
And with that Cheat at any time ye think
To charm a generous Mind, though ye have wronged it.
False are your Safeties when indulged by Power:
For soon ye fatten and grow able Traitors.
False are your Foars, and your Afflictions falser:
For they cheat you, and make you hope for Mercy,
Which you shall never gain at Marius's hands.
Who trusts your Penitence is more then Fool.
Rebellion will renew: ye cannot be honest.
You Are never pleased but with the Knaves that cheat you,
And work your Follies to their private ends.
For your Religion, like your Clothes you wear it,
To change and turn just as the Fashion alters.
And think you by this solemn piece of Fooling
To hush my Rage, and melt me into Pity?
Advance, Sulpitius: old Ancharius there,
Who was so violent for my Destruction,
That his Beard brussled as his Face distorted;
Away with him. Dispatch these Triflers too.
But spare the Virgins, 'cause mine Eyes have seen 'em:
Or keep 'em for my Warriors to rejoice in.

Anch. Thou who were born to be the Plague of Rome,
What would thou do with me?

Mar. sen. Dispose thee hence
Amongst the other Offall, for the jaws
Of hungry Death, till Rome be purged of Villains.
Thou dy'st for wronging Marius. --

Child. Oh my Lord!
(For you must be a Lord, you are so angry.)
For my sake spare his Life. I have no Friend
But him to guard my tender years from Wrongs.
When he is dead, what will become of me,
A poor and helpless Orphan, naked left
To all the Ills of the wide faithless world?

Mar. sen. Take hence this Brat too; mount it on a Spear,
And let it sprawl to make the Grandsire sport.

Child. Oh cruel man! I Will hang upon your Knees,
And with my little dying Hands implore you.
I may be fit to do you some small pleasures.
I Will find a thousand tender ways to please you;
Smile when you rage, and stroke you into Mildness;
Play with your manly Neck, and call you Father:
For mine (alas!) the Gods have taken from me.

Mar. sen. Young Crocodile! Thus from their Mothers Breasts
Are they instructed, bred and taught in Rome.
For that old Paralitick Slave, dispatch him:
Let me not know he breaths another moment.
But spare this, 'cause 't has learnt its Lesson well,
And I Have a Softness in my heart pleads for him.
Enter Messenger. Well now.

Mess. Metellus.

Mar. sen. Hah! Metellus? what?

Mess. Is found.

Mar. sen. Speak, where?

Mess. In an old Suburb Cottage,
Upbraiding Heaven, and cursing at your Fortune.

Mar. sen. Haste, let him be preserved for my own Fury.
Clap, clap your hands for joy, ye Friends of Marius.
Ten thousand Talents for the news I Will give thee:
The Core and Bottom of my Torment's found;
And in a moment I shall be at ease.
Rome's Walls no more shall be besmeared with Blood,
But Peace and Gladness flourish in her Streets.
Lets go. Metellus? we have found Metellus.
Let every Tongue proclaim aloud Metellus;
Till I have dashed him on the Rock of Fate.
Then be his Name forgot, and heard no more.
[Exeunt.
SCENE a Churchyard.
Enter Marius junior. Mar. jun. AS I have wandered musing to and fro,
Still am I brought to this unlucky place,
As I had business with the horrid Dead:
Though could I trust the flattery of Sleep,
My Dreams presage some joyful news at hand.
My Bosome's Lord fits lightly on his Throne,
And all this day an unaccustomed Spirit
Lifts me above the ground with cheerful thoughts.
I dreamed Lavinia came and found me dead,
And breathed such Life with Kisses on my Lips,
That I revived, and was an Emperor.

Enter Catulus. Catul. My Lord already here?

Mar. jun. My trusty Catulus,
What News from my Lavinia? speak, and bless me.

Catul. She Is very well....

Mar. jun. Then nothing can be ill.
Something thou seem to know that is terrible.
Out with it boldly, man, What can thou say
Of my Lavinia?

Catul. But one sad word, She Is dead.
Here in her Kindreds Vault I Have seen her laid,
And have bin searching you to tell the News.

Mar. jun. Dead? is it so? then I deny you, Stars.
Go, hasten quickly, get me Ink and Paper.
It Is done: I Will hence to night.
Have thou no Letters to me from the Priest?

Catul. No, my good Lord.

Mar. jun. No matter, get thee gone.....
[Ex. Catulus. Lavinia! yet I Will ly with thee to night;
But, for the means. Oh Mischief! thou art swift
To catch the straggling Thoughts of Desperate men.
I do remember an Apothecary,
That dwelt about this Rendezvous of Death:
Meager and very rufull were his Looks;
Sharp Misery had worn him to the Bones;
And in his needy Shop a Tortoise hung,
An Allegator stufft, and other Skins
Of ill-shap'd Fishes: and about his Shelves
A beggarly account of empty Boxes,
Green earthen Pots, Bladders, and musty Seeds,
Remnants of Packthread, and old Cakes of Roses,
Were thinly scattered, to make up a Show.
Oh for a Poison now! his Need will sell it,
Though it be present Death by Roman Law.
As I remember this should be the House.
His Shop is shut: with Beggars all are Holydays.
Holla! Apothecary; hoa!

Enter Apothecary. Apoth. Who Is there?

Mar. jun. Come hither, man.
I see you are very poor;
Thou may do any thing: here is fifty Draohma's,
Get me a Draught of that will soonest free
A Wretch from all his Cares: thou understand'st me.

Apoth. Such mortal Drugs I have; but Roman Law
Speaks Death to any he that utters 'em.

Mar. jun. Art thou so base and full of Wretchedness,
Yet fear to die? Famine is in thy Cheeks,
Need and Oppression starveth in thy Eyes,
Contempt and Beggary hang on thy Back;
The World is not thy Friend, nor the World's Law;
The World affords no Law to make thee rich:
Then be not poor, but break it, and take this.

Apoth. My Poverty, but not my Will consents....
[Goes in, fetches a Vial of Poison. Take this and drink it off, the Work is
done.

Mar. jun. There is thy Gold, worse Poison to men's Souls,
Doing more Murders in this loathsome world
Then these poor Compounds you are forbid to sell.
I sell thee Poison, thou have sold me none.
Farewell... buy Food.... and get thy self in flesh.
Now for the Monument of the Metelli....
[Exit. Scene draws off, and shows the Temple and Monument. Reenters. It
should be here: the door is open too.
The insatiate mouth of Fate gapes wide for more.

Enter Priest, and Boy with a Mattock and Iron Crow. Priest. Give me the
Mattock and the wrenching Iron:
Now take this Letter, with what haste thou can
Find out young Marius, and deliver it.
[Ex. Boy. Now must I to the Monument alone.
What Wretch is he that is entering into the Tomb?
Some Villain come to rob and spoil the Dead.
Whoever thou art, stop thy unhallowed purpose.

Mar. jun. Whoever thou art, I warn thee to be gone,
And do not interrupt my horrid purpose.
For else, by Heaven, I Will tear thee joint by joint,
And strew this hungry Churchyard with thy Lims.
My Mind and its Intents are savage wild,
More fierce and more inexorable far
Then empty Tigers or the roaring Sea.

Priest. Then as a sacrilegious Slave I charge thee,
Obey and go with me, or thou must die.

Mar. jun. I know I must, and therefore I came hither.
Good Reverence, do not tempt a desperate man.
By Heaven, I love thee better then my self:
For I against my self come hither armed.
Stay not, be gone.... Live, and hereafter say,
A Mad-man's Mercy gave thee honest Counsel.

Priest. I do defy thy Mercy and thy Counsel,
And here will seize thee as a Thief and Robber.

Mar. jun. Will thou provoke me? then here, take thy Wages.
[Kills him.
Priest. I Am killed. Oh Marius! now too late I know thee.
Thou'st slain the only man could do thee good.
Lovinia.... oh!...
[Dies.
Mar. jun. Let me peruse this Face.
It is the honest Priest that joined our hands,
In a Disguize concealed. Give me thy Hand,
Since in ill Fate's black Roll with me you are writ,
I Will bury thee in a triumphant Grave.
Thou detestable Maw, thou Womb of Death,
Gorged with the dearest Morsel of the Earth,
Thus will I force thy rotten Jaws to open,...
Pulls down the side of the Tomb. And spite of thee yet cram thee with more
Food.
Oh gorgeous Palace! oh my Love! my Wife!
Death has had yet no power upon thy Beauty;
That is not conquered. Beauty's Ensign yet
Is Crimson in thy Lips and in thy Cheeks;
And the pale Flag is not advanced yet there.
Why art thou still so fair? shall I believe
That the lean Monster Death is amorous,
And keeps thee here in Darkness for his Paramour?
For fear of that, I Will stay with thee for ever.
Come, bitter Conduct, thou unsavory Guide:
Here Is to my Love.....
[Drinks the Poison. And now Eyes look your last.
Arms take your last Embrace, whilst on these Lips
I fix the Seal of an eternal Contract....
She breaths and stirs.....
[Lavinia wakes.
Lavin. in the Tomb. Where am I? bless me, Heaven!
It Is very cold; and yet here is something warm.....

Mar. jun. She lives, and we shall both be made immortal.
Speak, my Lavinia, speak some heavenly news,
And tell me how the Gods design to treat us.

Lavin. Oh! I have slept a long Ten thousand years.
What have they done with me? I Will not be used thus;
I Will not wed Sylla. Marius is my Husband.
Is he not, Sir? Methinks you're very like him.
Be good as he is, and protect me.

Mar. jun. Hah!
Will thou not own me? am I then but like him?
Much, much indeed I Am changed from what I was;
And never shall be my self, if thou art lost.

Lavin. The Gods have heard my Vows; it is my Marius.
Once more they have restored him to my Eyes.
Had thou not come, sure I had slept for ever.
But there is a sovereign Charm in thy Embraces,
That might do Wonders, and revive the Dead.

Mar. jun. Ill Fate no more, Lavinia, now shall part us,
Nor cruel Parents, nor oppressing Laws.
Did not Heaven's Powers all wonder at our Loves?
And when thou toldst the tale of thy Disasters,
Was there not Sadness and a Gloom amongst'em?
I know there was: and they in pity sent thee,
Thus to redeem me from this vale of Torments,
And bear me with thee to those Hills of Joys.
This World's gross air grows burdensome already.
I Am all a God: such heavenly Joys transport me,
That mortal Sense grows sick and saints with lasting.
[Dies.
Lavin. Oh! to recount my Happiness to thee,
To open all the Treasure of my Soul,
And show thee how it is filled, would waste more time
Then so impatient Love as mine can spare.
He Is gone; he is dead; breathless: alas! my Marius.
A Vial too: here, here has bin his Bane.
Oh Churl! drink all? not leave one friendly Drop
For poor Lavinia? Yet I Will drain thy Lips.
Perhaps some welcome Poison may hang there,
To help me to overtake thee on thy Journey.
Clammy and damp as Earth. Hah! stains of Blood?
And a man murdered? It Is the unhappy Flamen.
Who fix their Joys on any thing that is Mortal,
Let 'em behold my Portion, and despair.
What shall I do? how will the Gods dispose me?
Oh! I could rend these Walls with Lamentation,
Tear up the Dead from their corrupted Graves,
And dawb the face of Earth with her own Bowels.

Enter Marius senior, and Guards driving in Metellus. Mar. sen. Pursue the
Slave; let not his Gods protect him.

Lavin. More Mischiefs? hah! my Father?

Metell. Oh! I am slain.
[Falls down and dies.
Lavin. And murdered too. When will my Woes have end?
Come, cruel Tyrant.

Mar. sen. Sure I have known that Face.

Lavin. And can thou think of any one good Turn
That I have done thee, and not kill me for it?

Mar. sen. Art thou not called Lavinia?

Lavin. Once I was:
But by my Woes may now be better known.

Mar. sen. I cannot see thy Face.....

Lavin. You must, and hear me.
By this, you must: nay, I will hold you fast....
[Seizes his Sword.
Mar. sen. What would thou say? where is all my Rage gone now?

Lavin. I am Lavinia, born of Noble race.
My blooming Beauty conquered many Hearts,
But proved the greatest Torment of my own:
Though my Vows prosper'd, and my Love was answered
By Marius, the noblest, goodliest Youth
That Man e're envied at, or Virgin sighed for.
He was the Son of an unhappy Parent,
And banished with him when our Joys were young;
Scarce a night old.

Mar. sen. I do remember't well,
And thou art She, that Wonder of thy kind,
That could be true to exiled Misery,
And to and fro through barren Deserts range,
To find the unhappy Wretch thy Soul was fond of.

Lavin. Do you remember't well?

Mar. sen. In every point.

Lavin. You then were gentle, took me in your Arms,
Embraced me, blessed me, used me like a Father.
And sure I was not thankless for the Bounty.

Mar. sen. No; thou were next the Gods my only Comfort.
When I lay fainting on the dry parcht Earth,
Beneath the scorching heat of burning Noon,
Hungry and dry, no Food nor Friend to cheer me:
Then Thou, as by the Gods some Angel sent,
Came by, and in Compassion did relieve me.

Lavin. Did I all this?

Mar. sen. Thou did, thou sav'dst my Life.
Else I had sunk beneath the weight of Want,
And bin a Prey to my remorseless Foes.

Lavin. And see how well I am at last rewarded.
All could not balance for the short-term'd life
Of one Old man: You have my Father butchered,
The only Comfort I had left on Earth.
The Gods have taken too my Husband from me.
See where he lies, your and my only Joy.
This Sword yet reeking with my Father's Gore,
Plunge it into my Breast: plunge, plunge it thus.
And now let Rage, Distraction and Despair
Seize all Mankind, till they grow mad as I am.
[Stabs her self with his Sword.
Mar. sen. Nay, now thou have outdone me much in Cruelty.
Be Nature's Light extinguished; let the Sun
Withdraw his Beams, and put the world in Darkness,
Whilst here I howl away my Life in Sorrows.
Oh! let me bury Me and all my Sins
Here with this good Old man. Thus let me kiss
Thy pale sunk Cheeks, embalm thee with my Tears.
My Son, how came thou by this wretched End?
We might have all bin Friends, and in one House
Enjoyed the Blessings of eternal Peace.
But oh! my cruel Nature has undone me.

Enter Messenger. Mess. My Lord, I bring you most disastrous News.
Sylla's returned: his Army's on their march
From Capua, and to morrow will reach Rome.
At which the Rabble are in new Rebellion,
And your Sulpitius mortally is wounded.

Enter Sulpitius (led in by two of the Guards) and Granius. Mar. sen. Oh! then
I Am ruined from this very moment.
Has my good Genius left me? Hope forsakes me.
The Name of Sylla's banefull to my Fortune.
Be warned by me, ye Great ones, how y' embroil
Your Country's Peace, and dip your Hands in Slaughter
Ambition is a Lust that is never quenched,
Grows more inflamed and madder by Enjoyment.
Bear me away, and lay me on my Bed,
A hopeless Vessel bound for the dark Land
Of loathsome Death, and loaded deep with Sorrows.
[He is led off.
Sulpit. A Curse on all Repentance! how I hate it!
I Would rather hear a Dog howl then a Man whine.

Gran. You're wounded, Sir: I hope it is not much.

Sulpit. No; it is not so deep as a Well, nor so wide as a Church-door. But it is
enough; 'twill serve; I am peppered I warrant, I warrant for this world. A Pox
on all Madmen hereafter. If I get a Monument, let this be my Epitaph:

Sulpitius lies here, that troublesome Slave,
That sent many honester men to the Grave,
And died like a Fool when h' had lived like a Knave.
[Ex. omnes.
FINIS.
EPILOGUE
Spoke by Mrs. Barry, who acted Lavinia. A Mischief on it! though I Am again alive,
May I believe this Play of ours shall thrive?
This Drumming, Trumpetting, and Fighting Play?
Why, what a Devil will the People say?
The Nation that is without, and hears the Din,
Will swear we are raising Volunteers again.
For know, our Poet, when this Play was made,
Had naught but Drums and Trumpets in his head.
He Had banished Poetry and all her Charms,
And needs the Fool would be a Man at Arms.
No Prentice e're grown weary of Indentures
Had such a longing mind to seek Adventures.
Nay, sure at last the Infection general grew;
For the other day I was a Captain too:
Neither for Flanders nor for France to roam,
But, just as you were all, to stay at home.
And now for you who here come wrapped in Cloaks,
Only for love of Underhill and Nurse Nokes;
Our Poet says, one day to a Play ye come,
Which serves ye half a year for Wit at home.
But which amongst you is there to be found,
Will take his third day's Pawn for Fifty pound?
Or, now is he Cashiered, will fairly venture
To give him ready Money for's Debenture?
Therefore when he received that Fatal Doom,
This Play came forth, in hopes his Friends would come
To help a poor Disbanded Soldier home.


