A Persvvassion to Loyalty, OR THE SVBIECTS DVTIE.

Wherein is proved that resisting or deposing of Kings (under what specious
pretenses soever coached) is utterly unlawful.

Collected by D. O.

Dedicated to all dutiful Subjects.

LONDON, Printed. 1642.

To the dutiful Subject.
THe Puritan-Church-Policie, and the Iesuitical society began together: See M.
Heokers preface. And the preface of Che^^nic before his examen against the
(...) of the Council of Trent.
the one in Geneva, 1536. and the other in Rome, 1537. since their beginning,
they have bestirred themselves busily ( as he that compasses the Job. 1.7.
Earth, or they that coasted sea and land) each one in his order. The Puritan
to break down the wall of Sion, by disturbing the peace of the Reformed
Church: the Jesuit to build up the ruins of Babylon,, by maintaining the
abomination of the deformed Synagogue. These (though brethren in sedition and
heady) are head-severed, Mat. 23.15.
the one staring to the Presbytery, and the other to the Papacy, but they are
so fast linked behind, and tayle-tyed together with firebrands between them,
that if they be not quenched by the power of Majesty, they cannot chose (when
the means are fitted to their plot) but set the Church on fire, and the state
in an uprore. Their many and long prayers, their much vehement preaching, and
stout opposition against orders established, their show of austerity in their
conversation, and of singular learning in their profession, (as the evil fiend
transformd into an angel of light) brought them first to admiration Whereby
they have not only robbed widows houses under pretense of prayer, and
ransacked their seduced disciples by show of devotion, but also battered the
courts of Princes, by animating the Peers against Kings, and the people against
the Peers for pretended reformation. And whereas God has inseparably annexed
to the Crown of earthly Majesty, a supreme Ecclesiastical sovereignty for the
protection of piety and an absolute immunity from the juditiall sentence, and
Martial violence, for the preservation of policy: These sectaries bereave
Kings of both these their Princely prerogatives, exalting themselves (as the
son of perdition) above all that is called God: 2 Thel. 2.3, 4.
Least they might seem sine ratione insanire, to sow the seeds of Sedition
without show of reason, Caedem faciunt Scripturarum (as the heretics in
Tertullians time were wont to do) in materiam suam, they kill the Scripture to
serve their turns: and pervert the holy Word of the eternal God, by strange
interpretation, and wicked application against the meaning of the Spirit, by
whom it was penned; the Doctrine of the Church, to whom it was delivered; and
the practice of all the Godly, (as well under the Law as the Gospel) that did
believe, understand, and obeyit; to maintain their late, and lewd opinions. I
have in my hand above forty several places of the old and new Testament, which
both the brethren of the enraged opposite faction do indifferently quote, and
seditiously apply, in defense of their dangerous opposition, and damnable
error, against the Ecclesiastical supremacy, and the indeleble character of
royal inunction. Unto the which places, falsely expounded, perverted and
applied, I have added the interpretation, of the learned Protestants since the
time of Martin Luther, who began to discover the nakedness of the Romish
Church, 1517. More especially insisting in the K. Henry 8. K. James. The
Cranmer. Io. Whitgist. Rich. Bancrost. Archb. of Cant. Henry Earl of
Northampton. Robert Earl of Salisbury.
most mighty Kings, the most reverend Prelates, The L. Burleigh L. Treasurer of
England. The L. Elsmere. L. Chancellor of England. The L. Stafford The L Cook.
B. Jewel. B. Horn. B. Pilkington. B Elmere. B. Couper. B. Bilson. B.
Babington. B. Andrews. B Barsow. B Bridges. D. Ackworth. D. Saravia. D. Cosens.
D Surcliffe. D. Prythergh. D. wilkes. D. Morton. D. Tocker. M: Bekinsaw. M.
Fox M. Nowell. M. Hooker, and many others.
honorable Lords, loyal Clergy and other worthy men, that have in the Church
of England, learnedly defended the Princely right, against disloyal and
undutifull opponents: I protest in all sincerity, that I have not detorted any
thing, to make either the cause it self, or the favorers of it more odious,
than their own words, (published with the general approbation of their several
favorits) do truly infer and necessarily enforce. I hope the loyal Subject,
and Godly affected, will accept in good part my endeavor, and industry,
intended for the glory of God, the honor of the King, and the discovery of the
seditious. The displeasure of the Malecontented-factious (which can no more
abide the truth, then the owls can light, or the frantique the Physician) I
neither regard nor care for. Farewell.

The Table of the Book.
The duty of Prelates, Peers, People, by Scripture, Chap. 1. Page 1. Fathers
of the first 300 years, cap. 2 page 3 second 300 years, cap. 3 page 6 third
300 years, cap. 4 page 14 fourth 300 years, cap. 5 page 16 fifth 300 years,
cap. 6 page 20


Sedition of Putitans Papists Concord in the matter, of sedition. cap. 7. p.
24. Discord in the manner, of sedition. cap. 7. p. 24. Danger of their doctrine
to Prince. People, cap. 8. p. 26 Puritan-Jesuitisme, or the general consent of
the principal Puritans and Jesuits, against Kings, from the year 1536, until
the year 1602, out of the most authentic Authors. cap 9. p. 27.



The first Chapter proves by the test money of Scripture, that Kings are not
punishable by man, but reserved to the Judgment of GOD.
KINGS have their Authority from God, Romans 13.1
and are his Vicegerents in earth Pro. 8.15.
, to execute justice and judgment for him amongst the sons of Men 2 Chronicles.
196.
. All Subjects (as well Prelates and Nobles, as the inferior people) are
forbidden with the tongue, to revile Kings, Exo. 22.28
with the heart, to think ill of them Eccl 10.20
, or with the hand, to resist them Romans 13.2
. The great King of Heaven does impart his own Name unto his LIEUTENANTS the
Kings of the Earth: and calls them Gods, with an ego dixi Psalm. 8 2.6
. Whose Word is Yea and Amen: with this only difference, that these Gods shall
dye like men Psalm. 82.7
, and fall like other Princes. Wherefore Nathan the man of God, must reprove
David, 2 Samuel 12.7.
, that he may repent, and be saved. And the Sages, Judges, and Nobles, (without
fear or flattery) must advise and direct Roboam. 1 Reg. 12.7.
Other attempts against Kings, the King of Kings has neither commanded in his
Law, nor permitted in his Gospel. David (says Ambrose) null^s Legibus
tenebatur, etc. David though he were an Adulterer, Apolog. David cap. 10.
and an Homicide, was tied to no Law: for Kings are free from bonds, and can by
no compulsion of Law, be drawn to punishment, being freed by the power of
Government. Thus far Ambr.

Saul the first King of Israel was rather a monster, than a man: after the
spirit of God had forsaken him, and the evil spirit was come upon him 1 Samuel
^6.14.
. There were not many sins against God, Man, or Nature, wherein he transgressed
not; yet his excess was punished, neither by the Sacerdotall Synod, nor the
secular Senate: Who can loy his hand on the Lords Anointed, and be guiltless
1 Samuel 16 9:
? The very Annointment was the cause of Saul's immunity from all humane
coersion: as Augustine affirms, Quaero si non habebat. Saul sacramenti
sanctitatem, Aug. contr. lit. Petil l. 2 c. 48.
quid in eo David venerabatur? If Saul had not the holiness of the Sacrament,
I ask what it was that David reverenced in him; he honored Saul for the
sacred and holy unction, while he lived: and revenged his death. Yea, he was
troubled and trembled at the heart, because he had cut off a lap of Saules
garment. Lo, Soul had no innocence, and yet he had holiness: not of life, but
of unction. So far Augustine.

Who questioned David for his murder and adultery? who censured Solomon for
his idolatry? though their c^^nes were capital by the Law of God. After that
Kingdom was divided, all the Kings of Israel, and most of the Kings of Judah,
were notorious Idolaters: yet during those Kingdoms, which endured above 200
years, no Priest did challenge, no Statesmen did claim power from the
highest, to punish or depose their Princes. And the Prophets persuaded all men
to obey, and endure those idolatrous Princes, whose impiety they reproved with
the loss of their lives,

Christ sled when the people would have made him a King Joh. 6.15
. He paid tribute for himself and Peter Mat. 17.27.
. When the question was propounded concerning the Emperors Subsidy, he
concluded for Caesar Mat. 22.21.
. And standing to receive the judgment of death before Pilate, he acknowledged
his power to be of God Ioh. 19.15.
, This Savior of Mankind, whose actions should be our instruction, did never
attempt to change that Government, or to displace those Governors, which were
directly repugnant to the scope of information that he aimed at.

John Baptist did indeed reprove King Herod with a Non licet Mar. 6 18
, but he taught not the Soldiers to leave his service, or by strife and
impatience, to wind themselves out of the band of allegiance, wherein the Law had
left them, and the Gospel found them Luke 3.14
.

The Apostle delivered unto the Church the Doctrine of obedience and patience,
which they had learned by the Precept, and observed by the practice of our Lord
Christ. Peter commands obedience to all manner of men in Authority 1 Pet.
2.15.
. Paul forbids resistance against any power Romans 13.1, 2, 3.4.
, And S. Jude makes it blasphemy, to revile Government, or to speak evil of
Governors Jude 8.
. If therefore an Angel from heaven preach otherwise, than they have
delivered, let him be accursed Gal. 1.8.
.

The second Chapter prooveth the same by the Fathers of the first 300 years.
THe true Church, which had the Spirit of understanding, to discern the voice
of Christ, from the voice of a stranger, never taught, never practiced, never
used or approoved other weapons, than salt tears, and humble prayers against
the Paganism, Heresy, Apostasy and Tyranny of earthly Kings.

Justinius Martyr, Tertullian and Cyprian, shall bear witness for 300 years,
wherein the Kings and Potentates of the earth, bathed themselves in the blood
of innocents, and prosessed enmity against Christ and his servants.

Ad inquisitionem vestram, Christianos nos esse profitemur, etc. At your
inquisition we profess our selves to be Christians, though we know death to be
the guerdon of our profession (says Justin Martyr to the Emperor Antonius) did
we expect an earthly kingdom, Second. apolog. ad Ant. Imp. p. 113.
we would deny our Religion, that escaping death, we might in time attain our
expectation: But we fear not persecution, which have not our hope fixed on the
things of this life, because we are certainly persuaded that we must dye. As
for the preservation of public peace, we Christians yield to you (O Emperor)
more help and assistance, than other men. For we teach, that no evil doer, no
covetous man, nor seditious that lies in wait for blood, can have access to
God: And that every man does pass to life or death, according to the merit of
his deeds. Thus far he.

We (says Tertullian to Scapula the Viceroy of Carthage) are defamed, Tertull.
lib. au Scap.
for seditious against the Imperial Majesty: Yet were the Christians never
found to be Albinians, Nigrians, or Cassians (Albinus, Niger, and Cassius were
traitors against Marcus Antonius, Commodus, Pertinax and Severus the Emperors)
but they that swear by the Emperors deity, the very day before; they that
vowed and offered sacrifice for the Emperor's health, are found to be the
Emperor's enemies. A Christian is enemy to no man, much less to the Emperor:
knowing, that the Imperial Majesty, is ordained of God, and therefore
necessarily to be loved, reverenced, and honored, whose prosperity, together
with the welfare of all the Roman Empire they desire so long as the world
stands. We do therefore honor the Emperor, in such sort, as is lawful for
us, and expedient for him: we reverence him as a mortal man, next unto God, of
whom he holds all his authority, only subject to God, and so we make him,
sovereign our all, in that, we make him subject, but to God alone: So far
Tertullian.

S. Cyprian shows many good reasons, for the patience of the Saints, in his
book against Demetrianus. God (saih he) is the revenger of his servants, when
they are annoyed. Wherefore no Christian when he is apprehended, does resist or
revenge himself against your unjust violence, though the number of our people
be very great. The confidence we have, that God will reward, does confirm our
patience, the guiltless give way to the guilty, the innocent rest content with
their undeserved punishment and tortures, being certainly assured that the
wrong done to us, shall not be unrewarded. The more injury we suffer, the most
just and grievous shall God's vengeance be on them that persecute us. It is
therefore clear and manifest, that the plagues which comed own from Gods
indignation, do not come through us poor persecured Christians, but from him
whom we serve, for the wrong done unto us. So far Cyprian.

As many as lived according to Christ's institution, did never revile the
government of Tyrants, much less by force resist their violence, following the
patience of Christ, who could by his own power, the might of his Angels, or the
strength of his creatures, have at the first withstood, or at the last
revenged, the injury of the people, Ioh 19.15 John 8.22 Luke 23.11 Mar. 15 15
Mat. ^7.27, 28, 29.
the buffet of the Priests servant, the scorn of Herod, the judgment of Pilate,
and the violence of the soldiers. He yielded himself patiently to death, to
teach all his Disciples, that an injury done by authority, is patiently to be
endured, not forcibly to be repelled. As soon also as Paul became a Christia,
his seditious and bloody spirit, which he had learned of the Pharisees, was
changed into a desire of peace and quietness. He honored the heathen
Magistrates, as Agrippa, Foelix and Lisias, ratifying his doctrine, by the
practice of his life. I know that Cardinal Alane, Cardinal Bellarmin,
Ficlerus, Simancha, and other upholders of the Papal tyranny, that Stephanus
Iunius, Franciscus Hottomanus, Georgius Buchananus, and other pillars of the
Puritan anarchy, do answer, that the Church then, as it were swathed in the
bonds of weakness, had not strength sufficient to make powerful resistance.
But these Fathers that then lived, do convince them, and all other sectaries of
falsehood, by making demonstration of the strength and potency of the godly
Christians, in case they would have put their forces to the strongest proof.
Seeing that all public places, as Courts, Camps, Consistories, Cities, and
country Villages, were stored and furnished with men of that profession and
quality, as does most evidently appear by the words of Tertullian, in his
Apologetical defense of the Christians; Vna nox pauculis faculis, etc. One
night with a few firebrand, would yeel us sufficient revenge, if it were
lawful for us to requit evil for evil. But God forbid, that Christians
should either revenge themselves with humane fire, or be grieved to suffer that
wherewith they are tried. Were we disposed, not to practice secret revenge, but
to profess open hostility, should we want number of men, or force of Arms?
Are the Moors, or the Parthians, or any one nation whatsoever, more in number
than we, that are spread over all the World? We are not of you, and yet we have
filled all the places and rooms which you have. Your Cities, Islands, Castles,
Towns, Assemblies, your Tents, Tribes, and Wards; yea, the Imperial Palace,
Senate and seats of Judgment. For what war, were not we able and ready, though
we were fewer in number than you, that go to our Martyrdom so willingly? If it
were not more lawful in our Religion to be slain, than to slay? We could
without armor, not by rebelling against you, but by departing from you, do you
displeasure enough, even with our separation. For if so great a multitude, as
we are should break out from you, in any other corner of the world, the loss
of so many citizens would shame and punish you. You would fear to see your
selves left solitary, even amazed, as among the dead. You should then see
silence and desolation every where. You would have many more enemies than
inhabitants. Whereas now, you have fewer enemies, because of the multitude of
your citizens that are almost all Christians. Haec Tertullianus.

We see by these three witnesses, that the Church of God, in the first 300
years wanted, neither number of men, strength, nor courage to resist
persecution, and to have established the Christian Faith, if that course had
been lawful: but because their Lord had given them no sword to strike withal,
they chose rathe to be crowned Martyrs for their Religion, than to be punished
as traitors for rebellion. What number of men, what strength of arms had the
Church (think you) the next 300 years after it had been backed by Princes,
defended by Laws, provoked by Honorable favors to profess Christianity? Yet
all that while the servants of God, neither did nor would resist Apostasy,
Heresy, or Tyranny: but yielded their lives with all submission, though they
wanted neither means nor multitude, convenient for any wars, as the next
chapter by impregnable demostration shall show.

The third Chapter prooveth by the Fathers of the second 300, years, that the
pleasure of Princes must be endured with patience, when their decrees cannot be
obeyed with a good Conscience.
THe next 300 years, the Christians did as patiently endure Heresy, Apostasy
and Tyranny, to the glorious trial of their Faith, and the eternal reward of
their Patience. Whereof we have a cloud of witnesses, namely, Hosius,
Liberius, Athanasius, Hilarious, Basilius Magnus, Gregorius Nazianzenus, Lucifer
Calaritanus, Cyrillus Alexandrinus, Optatus Milevitanus, Ambrosius, Augustinus,
Chrysostomus, Leo the first, and Gregory the great.

Hosius was a famous Confessor in the Church, before Constantine the great, a
worthy Bishop during that Emperor's reign, and after his death greatly
esteemed of all good men, yea even of Constantius the Arrian Emperor himself,
for his old age, great experience, excellent learning, and good conversation.
When this worthy Prelate, was commanded by the Emperor, to subscribe to the
condemnation of Athanasius, he returned to the Imperial Majesty, this stout,
constant, Christian and dutiful answer; Ego confessionis munus imple vi
primum, cum persecutio moveretur, ab avo tuo Maximiniano: Obsequere and scribe
contra Athanasium qui enim contra illum scribit ille planeonobiscum, etc.
I was then a confessor when your grandfather Maximinian persecuted the Church.
And if you do now raise persecution, I am ready to endure any thing, rather
then bettray the truth and shed innocent blood. I do not like your manner of
writing against Athanasius; Cease from it, be not of the Arrian opinion; Give
no ear to the Eastern Bishops: believe me rather, that for age might be your
grandfather. Leave off, I beseech you, and call to mind, that you are a mortal
man. Fear that dreadful day of Judgment. Enterpose not your self (O Emperor)
into the Ecclesiastical service, neither command us in this kind to condemn
the innocent; but learn rather of us. God has entrusteed your Majesty with the
Empire, and committed unto us the service of the Church: he that with an
envious eye maligneth your Imperial Sovereignty, contradicts the ordinance
of God. Hosius apud Athan. ad solitariam vitam agentes.
Take heed (O Prince) least drawing to your self the right of the Church, you
become guilty of grievous transgression, It is written, Give unto Caesar the
things that are Caesar's, and to God the things that appertain to God: it is
therefore, neither lawful for us Priests to usurp your Kingdom; nor for you
Princes, to meddle with the sacred service and sacrifices of the Church. Thus
far Hosius.

You see the grounds, that this good Bishop stood upon: rather resolved to
suffer any death or torture, than by his consent to betray the truth, or to
condemn the guiltless. He admonishes freely, and reprooveth sharply, he
offers his life to the Prince's pleasure: It was far from his meaning, to
revile the sacred Majesty, or to stir up any rebellion against this Heretical
Emperor, which infringed the Canons of the Church, without all regard of truth
or equity, to serve the humors of the Arrians, and to wrek his anger on them
all, which yielded not to that Heresy.

Liberius, a Bishop of Rome, did neither excommunicate nor depose this wicked
Emperor Constantius, but appeared at his command, and endured his pleasure, to
the admiration of the Arrians and the confirmation of the Christians, as we
find in Athanasius, Trahitur Liberius ad Imperatorem, etc. Liberius was haled
to the Emperor, when he came to his presence, he spoke freely, Cease (says he)
O Emperor, to persecute the Christians, go not about by any means, to bring
heretical impiety into the Church of God. Liberius quo supra apud Athanas.
We are ready, rather to endure any torture, than to be called Arrians. Compel
us not to become enemies unto Christ. Fight not against him (we beseech you)
that has bestowed the Empire upon you. Render not impiety to him for his
grace, persecute them not which believe in him, least you hear, Acts 9.5,
it is hard for thee to kick against the prick. Oh would to God you did so
hear it, that you might (as Paul did) believe it. Lo we are at hand, and come
to your presence, before our enemies the Arrians can invent any thing to
inform against us, we hastened to come at your command, though we were assured
of banishment: that we might abide our punishment, before any crime could be
objected, much less prooved against us. Whereby it may appear, that all
Christians are (as we now be) undeservedly punished, and the crimes laid to
their charge not true, but fained by sycophancy or deceitful subtilty.

Thus spoke Liberius, and every man admired his resolution; but the Emperor
for answer commanded him to banishment. Thus far he.

Pope Liberius had not learned the language of his successor Pius Quintus,
when he bellowed against our late Queen, nor that principle of the Puritans,
that the inferior officer may use force of arms against the chief Magistrate
that shall become a tyrant (whereof every seditious sectary will be judge) and
not only defend himself and his own people, but also any other that shall fly
unto him. Politia Christ. lib. 6 cap. 3.
Which opinion Lambertus Danaeus avoucheth, contraty to the Law, the Gospel and
the general consent of all Orthodoxall Fathers.

Hilarious, a Bishop of France, wrote the same time to this same Emperor in most
humble manner, Hilarious ad Imper. Constant.
Benefica natura tua domine beatissime Auguste: Your mild nature, most blessed
Emperor, agreeing with your gracious disposition, and the mercy which flows
abundantly from the fountain of your fatherly godliness, do assure us, that
we shall obtain our desire. We beseech you, not only with words, but also with
tears, that the Catholic Churches, be no longer oppressed with grievous
injuries, and endure intolerable persecutions, and contumelies, and that
(which is most shameful) even of our brethren. Let your Clemency provide, etc.

Surely, if it had then been known that the Pope, by his absolute power or
indirect authority, could have punished or deposed Kings, which the Papists
avouch, or for the Peers or the People to have done it, which the Puritanes
affirm, some of these old Bishops would have pressed that point against this
heretical Prince, which abused his sword to the blaspheming of Christ, the
murdering of the Saints, the seducing of many thousand souls: by
strenghtning, maintaining and establishing the Arrian error. But they took it
to be no Christian man's part, to bear armor (no not defensive) against his
Prince, though never so wicked, cruel or ungodly.

Holy Athanasius confesses the power of Kings to be of God, and their impiety
not to be punished by man. Sicut in toto mundo Deus Rex est Imperator and
potestatem exercet in omnibus: As God is King and Emperor over all the World,
Ad Antioch. quest. 55.
and exercises his power in all creatures: so the King and Prince is over all
earthly men, and does by his absolute power what he will, even as God himself.
Haec ille.

When it was objected against this reverend Father Athanasius, that he had
incensed Constans the religious Emperor of the West, against Constantius,
Apolog. Athan. ad Constant.
in the behalf of the persecuted Christians: he cleared himself from that
accusation, in an Apology to the said Emperor Constantius. The Lord, says he,
is my record, and his anointed your brother, that I never made mention of your
Majesty for any evil before your brother of blessed memory, that religious
Emperor Constans. I did never incite him against you, as these Arrians do
slander me, but whenever I had access unto him, I recounted your gracious
inclination. God knows what mention I made of your godly disposition. Give me
leave and pardon, most courteous Emperor, to speak the truth. The servant of
God Constans was not easily drawn to give ear to any man in this kind. I was
never in such credit with him, that I durst speak of any such matter, or
derogate from one brother before another, or talk reproachfully of one
Emperor, in the hearing of another. I am not so mad, neither have I forgotten
the voice of God, which says, Curse not the King in thine heart, and backbite
not the mighty in the secrets of thy chamber: for the birds of the air shall
tell it, and the winged foul shall bewray thee. If then, the things that be
spoken in secret against Princes cannot be hid: Is there any likelihood, that I
in the Emperor's presence and before so many, as continually attended his
person, would say any thing otherwise then well of your Majesty? Thus far
Athanas.

L Cook in his speech at Garnets arraignement.
This is sounder and seemelier doctrine for Subjects, than that which Henry
Garnet and Robert Tesmond, taught some Romish Catholic Gentlemen of England,
who employed Thomas Winter into Spain, in the month of December, Anno Dom.
1601, to make request to the Spanish King, in the behalf and names of the
English Pope-Catholiques, that he would send an army hither into England, for
the advancement of their Catholic cause; and to promise, that the forces of
the Papists here should be ready to do him service against the late Queen.

The self same doctrine of sedition was published in the year after, viz. Anno
Dom. 1602, by Guilielmus Bucanus, a man of no mean esteem among the Puritans,
and that at the earnest request of Beza and Goulartius, the chiefest Ministers
of the Church of Geneva, (if the Author himself belie them not) whose words
are as follows: Subditis (...) fit publica and manifesta jaeviti^, licet
fieri supplices, implorare auxilia ab aliis, and suscipere eorum defensionem
aliis Regibus licet: Subjects when they endure public and manifest wrong,
Loc. com. Theol. loco. 77. p. 845.
may lawfully become suppliants to foraign States, and crave their aid against
their Princes, and other Kings ought to take upon them their defense and
protection. So far Bucan.

Subjects must square their subjection, according to the rule of Gods Word, not
after the affection and fancies of men. 1 Samuel 22 ^8.
Saul commanded Doeg to murder 85 Priests, to destroy their City, men, women
and children with the edge of the sword. Did David for whom they were slain,
when he had Saul in his power, take revenge, or suffer his servants to do it,
when they were ready and offered themselves to slay Saul? David 2 Samuel 11.4.17.
defiled Vrias his bed, and caused him to be killed: Did Absolon well, to
conspire against him, that was both a murderer and an adulterer? Solomon 2
Reg. 11.8.
brought into the land many strange wives, and as many different Religions into
the Church: Did the high Priest, the Peers, the Prophets, or the people offer
to chastise or depose him? Achab 1 Reg. 21 8, 9.
suffered Jezabel to put Naboth to death, and to kill the Lords Prophets: Did
Elias depose him, entice his subjects to rebel against him, or implore
foraigne aid to destroy him? Herod Mark 6.27. Act. 12.24.
beheaded John Baptist, killed James, imprisoned Peter, and would have slain
him also, if he had not been delivered by an Angel: Did Peter take vengeance
on Herod, which he might have done with a word, as well as on Act: 5.5:
Ananias? No, he did leave him to the Lord, whose judgment insued in most Acts
12.23.
fearful manner. In a word, wicked Princes have never been lawfully punished
by Prelates, Potentates, or people of their Kingdom, as the Papists and
Puritans aver; but must be reserved to the judgment of God, as the Protestants
affirm.

Gregory Nazianzen, in this Oration at the funeral of S. Basil, reports,
that the Emperor's Deputy in Pontus, Basilius magnus.
commanded S. Basil to put out a widow, that had taken sanctuary to save her
self from forced marriage. The Bishop (not willing to violate the
Ecclesiastical Laws granted by the Imperial Majesty) refused so to do. The
Governor call the Bishop before him, threatened to whip him, and to tear his
flesh with iron books; the people hearing that indignity offered to the Bishop,
fell to an uprore, and would have slain the Lieutenant, Monodia Nazian, inter
opuscula Basil, fol: 95
had not that innocent man of God, with much ado, stayed that furious tumult,
and delivered his persecutor from that peril, to whose pleasure he did
afterward submit himself.

The same Nazianzen, for his admirable learning called the Divine, writes of
Julian the Apostata-Emperor's death: Julian was punished by the mercy of God,
thorough the tears of Christian men; which tear: were many, and shed of many,
for that they had no other remedy, against that persecutor. Thus far Nazianzen.

This godly father lived under five Emperors, Constantius, Iulianus, Valens, 2
O^at. cont. Julian
Valentianus and Theodosius, in all which time, he could find no remedy
against the Tyranny, Heresy and Apostasy of Princes, beside prayers and tears:
The Devil of Hell had not as yet hatched the distinctions of proprie and
improprie, direct and indirecte, simpliciter and secundum quid, absolute and
inordine ad spiritualia, wherewith the Jesuits do fill the schools with
clamorous evasions, the Church with erroneous superstition, and many Christian
states with tragical sedition.

Lucifer Calaritanus, in sundry books against Constantius, uses many immodest
and disloyal speeches: but he persuaded not the Pope to depose him, the state
to punish him, the people to rebel against him or foreign aid to suppress
him; but threatened him with the dreadful punishment of God. He that (in the
servency of zeal) durst call so cruel an Emperor, Thief, Church-robber,
Murderer, Beast, Hangman, Heretic, Apostata, Idolator, the forerunner of
Antichrist, and Antichrist himself, would surely have encouraged the Pope, the
Peers, or the people, to have removed that evil King, and placed a better in
his stead: If there had been any such opinion in those days, as our modern
Jesuits and Puritans bear now the World in hand. As this Father in his
writings kept not the modesty of the other Fathers, which lived in that age
under Constantius: so he did not continue in the unity of the Catholic
Church. Orat, in obit. sratris Satir.
Lucifer (says Ambrose) divided himself from our Communion, though he were
banished with us for our Religion.

When Ambrose was commanded, to deliver up his Church in Millaine to Maxentius
an Arrian Bishop, he declared his resolution in a sermon to the people, which
were very sorry for his departure. Orat. Ambrosii adpopulum inter epist. 32.33.
Quid turbamini? volens nunquam vos deseram: Why are you troubled? I will never
willingly depart from you. If I be compelled, I have no way to resist: I can
sorrow, I can weep, I can sigh, my tears are my weapons against Soldiers,
Armor, Goths: such is the munition of a Priest; by any other means than
tears, I neither ought nor can resist. So far Ambrose.

Not disability but duty, not want of strength and martial forces, but a
reverend regard of the Emperors Majesty, commanded by the Law of God, kept this
blessed Ambrose from resisting. For he might easily have wrought the Churches
liberty, his own safety, and the Arrians calamity, by the overthrow of the
Emperor, through the force of the Garrison in that City, which refused to
attend the Prince to any other Church than that wherein Ambrose was. The stout
and peremptory answer of the Captains and Soldiers, is thus reported by
Ambrose in an Epistle to Mercellina, a religious woman. Si prodire vellet
haberet copiam se praesto futuros: Epist. 35.
The Emperor may go at his pleasure, they would be ready to attend him, if he
would go to the Catholic Assemblies, or otherwise, they would keep on their
way to that Congregation wherein Ambrose was. Thus far the Soldiers.

They refused (as you see) to obey, and preferred God's true Service, before
the Emperor's favor: they reviled not his secred person, they resisted not his
Sovereign power, but yielded themselves to his mercy and pleasure, Epist eadem
to save their souls from Gods wrath and displeasure, as we find in the same
Epistle, Vnum Job miraturus ascenderam, I went to Church to extol the patience
of Job, where I found every one of my hearts, a Jacob, worthy to be extolled.
In every one of you, Job is revived; in each of you his patience, and virtue
shined; what could be said better by Christian men, than that which the Holy
Ghost this day spoke in you? We beseech (O Emperor) we offer not to fight, we
fear not to dye, we entreat your clemency. Oh it was seemly for Christian
Soldiers, to desire the tranquillity of Peace and Faith, and to be constant in
truth, even unto death. Thus far Ambrose.

S. Augustine relates the same of the Christian Soldiers, under Julian the
Apostata Emperor: Iulianus extitit Imperator insidelis, Julian was an
unbeleeving Emperor, was he not an Apostata? An Oppressor and an Idolater?
Christian Soldiers served that unbeleeving Emepror: When they came to the
cause of Christ, they would acknowledge no Lord but him that was in Heaven:
when they were commanded to adore Idols, and to offer sacrifice, they
preferred God before their prince. But when he called upon them to war, August:
in Psalm. 124.
and bad them invade any Nation, they presently obeyed. They did distinguish
their eternal Lord, from the temporal King, yet they submitted themselves to
their temporal Lord, for his sake that was their eternal King. Deschism.
Donatist. Lib. 3.
So far he.

Optatus Milevitanus, is another pregnant witness: Cum super Imperatoren nemo
sit nisi solus Deus. Seeing there is no man above the Emperor, beside God
alone, which made the Emperor; Donatus, by advancing himself above the
Emperor, does exceed the bounds of humanity, and makes himself a God rather
than man, in that he fears and reverenceth him not, Com. in Evang. Ioh l. 12.
c. 36.
whom all men should honor, next after God. So far Optat.

S. Cyril is of the same judgment. Cui legis prevaricatores liberare licet nisi
Legis ipsius authori? Who can acquit them that break the Law, from
transgression, beside the Lawgiver? As we see by experience, in all humane
States, no man can without danger break the Law, but Kings themselves, in whom
the crime of prevarication has no place. For it was wisely said of one, that
it is a wicked presumption, In Epist. ad Timoth. c. 2. v. 1.
to say to a King, Thou do amiss. So far he.

And also S. Chrysostom. What means the Apostle, says he, to require
Prayers and Supplications, Intercessions and Thanksgiving, to be made for all
men? He requires this to be done in the daily service of the Church, and the
perpetual rite of Dive Religion. For all the faithful do know, in what manner
prayers are powered out before the Lord morning and evening, for all the word:
even for Kings, and every man in authority. Some man will (peradventure) say,
that, for all, must be understood of all the faithful. Which cannot be the
Apostles meaning, as may appear by the words following, viz for Kings: seeing
that Kings neither did then, nor in many ages after serve the living God, but
continued obstinatly in infidelity, which by course of succession they had
received. Thus far Chrysostom.

See the preface before Basilic. Dor.
Our Modern Reformers teach us that which Paul and Chrysostom. neither knew nor
believed, that wicked Princes are not to be prayed for, but to be resisted, etc.

When the faction of Eutiches had prevailed against the Catholics, Leo the
first, had no other remedy than Prayers to God, sighs, tears and petitions to
the Emperor: Omnes partium nostrarum Ecclesiae, etc. All the Churches of these
parts, Bpist. 24. ad Theod. Imper.
all we Priests even with sighs and tears, beseech your Majesty, to command a
general Synod to be held in Italy, that all offenses being remooved, there
may remain, neither error in Faith, nor division in L^^e. Favor the
Catholics, grant liberty to protect the Faith against Heretics, defend the
state of the Church from ruin, that Christ his righthand may support your
Empire. Thus far Leo.

When Gregory the great was accused for the murder of a Bishop in prison, he
wrote to one Sabinianus, to clear him to the Emperor and Empress. Breviter
suggeras serenissimis Dominis meis: Epist. lib. 7. Epist. 1.
You may briefly inform my sovereign Lord and Lady, that if I their servant,
would have busied my self with the death of the Lombards, that Nation would by
this time have had neither Kings, nor Duks, nor Earls, and should have been in
great confusion and division: but because I stood in aw of God, I was ever
afraid to meddle with the shedding of any man's blood So far Gregory.

These Lombards were Pagans, invaders of the Country, ransackers of the City,
persecutors of the Saints, robbers of the Church, oppressors of the poor: whom
Gregory the first might, and would not destroy, quia Deum timuit, because he
seared God. It is very like, that his successor Gregory the 7, feared neither
God nor man, when he erected the papal croisier against the regal scepter,
and read the sentence of deprivation against the Emperor Henry: Ego authoritate
Apostolica, etc. I by the power Apostolical, do bereave Henry of the German
Kingdom, and do deprive him of all subjection of Christian men, absolving all
men from the allegiance, which they have sworn unto him. And that Rodolph,
whom the Peers of the Empire have elected, may govern the Kingdom: I grant
all men, that shall serve him against the Emperor, forgiveness of their sins,
Carol. Sigon. de Regoo It^. l. 9. in vita Hen. 3.
in this life and in the life to come. As I have for his pride dejected Henry
from the Royal dignity, so I do exalt Rodolph for his humility, to that place
of Authority. Thus far Gregory the 7.

Benno Guard in vit. Greg 7.
It is no wounder, that Gregory his chair clave a sunder, as some writers
affirm, at the giving of this sentence; because the proud Pope, and his wicked
sentence, were too heavy a burden for Peter's stool of humility to bear.

The fourth Chapter proves the Immunity of Kings by the Fathers of the third
300 years.
AFter the death of Gregory the great, which was about the year of our Lord
604. Sabinianus did succeed him, who lived but one year, after whom came
Boniface the 3, which obtained of Phocas to be called Universal Bishop; since
that time periit virtus Imperatorum and pietas Pontificum, the Emperors waxed
weak, and the Bishops wicked. What the judgment of those Fathers then was,
concerning subjection to wicked Kings, I will make evident by the testimony of
of Gregorius Turonensis, Isidorus, Damascenus, Beda, Fulgentius, Leo the 4, and
the Fathers astembled in a Council at Toledo in Spain.

Gregory Turonensis, acknowledges such an absolute power in Childerick a most
wicked King of France, Histor. lib. 5 cap. 1.
as was free from all control of man. Si quis de nobis (Rex) justitiae limits
transcendere voluerit, etc. If any one of us (O King) do pass the bonds of
justice, you have power to correct him, but if you exceed your limit, who shall
chastise you? We may speak unto you; if you list not to hearken, who can
condemn you, but that great God, who has pronounced himself to be
righteousness? Hactenus ille.

Isidorus says no less for the immunity of the Kings of Spain. Let all
earthly Princes know, that they shall give account of the Church which Christ
has committed to their protection. Yea, whether the peace and discipline
Ecclesiastical be advanced, by faithful Kings, or dissolved by the
unfaithful, he will require a reckoning at their hands, which has left his
Church in their power. So far Isidor,

John Damascene pleads not only for the Exemption of wicked Kings themselves,
but also of their Deputies. Parall^l. (...) 1. c. 21.
The Governors (says he) which Kings create, though they be wicked, though
they be thieves, though they be unjust, or otherwise tainted with any crime
must be regarded. We may not contemn them, for their impiety: but must
reverence them, because of their authority, by whom they were appointed our
Governors. So far he.

Fulgentius says, that no kind of Sedition can stand with Religion. Cum pro
nostra fide libere respondemus. etc. When we answer freely for our profession,
we ought not to be taxed with the least suspicion of disobedience or contumely,
seeing we are not unmindfull of the Regal dignity, and do know, that we must
fear God, and honor the King, according to the Doctrine of the Apostle, Give
to each one his due, fear to whom fear, Fulgent. ad Thrasim Reg. 1 Pet. 2.7.
honor to whom honor appertains. Of the which fear and honor Saint Peter
has delivered unto us the manifest knowledge, saying, As the servants of God,
honor all men. love brotherly fellowship, fear God, honor the King. Thus
far Fulgent.

Our Countriman Beaa, for his great learning called Venerable, Lib. 4 expos. in
Samuel. ^ Sam. 24.6.
is of the same mind. David (says he) for two causes spared Saul, who had
persecuted him most maliciously First, for that he was his Lord, anointed with
holy oil. And secondly, to instruct us by moral precepts, that we ought not
to strike our governors, (though they unjustly oppress us) with the sword of
our li^s: nor presume slanderously, to tear the hemme of their superfluous
actions. So far he.

Leo the fourth about the year 846. agnised all subjection to Lotharius the
Emperors: Cap. de (...) did. 5.
I do profess and promise (says Leo) to observe and keep unviolably, as much
as lies in me, for the time present and to come, your Imperial ordinances and
commandments: together with the decrees of your Bishops, my predecessors: It
any man inform your Majesty otherwise, know certainly, that he is a liar. So
far Leo.

The Bishops of Spain assembled in a National Council at Toledo, made this
Decree against Perjury and Treason. Council. Tol. 5. Can. 2 (...) ann. Dom. 636.
Quicunque amodo ex nobis: Whosoever among us shall from this tune forward,
violate the oath which he has taken for the safeguard of this Country, the
state of the Gotish nation, and the preservation of the Kings Majesty:
whosoever shall attempt the Kings death, or deposition: whosoever shall by
tyrannical presumption aspire to the Regal Throne; let him be accursed before
the Holy Spirit, before the blessed Saints, let him be cast out of the
Catholic Church, which he has polluted by perjury, let him have no Communion
with Christian men, nor portion with the just, but let him be condemned with
the Devil and his angels eternally, together with his accomplices, that they may
be tied in the bond of damnation, which were joined in the society of sedition.
Thus far the Fathers in that Synod.

I conclude therefore with these learned Fathers, that it is not for the
people, otherwise then with humility and obedience, to control the actions of
their Governors: but their duty is only to call upon the God of Heaven, and so
submit themselves to his mercy, by whose ordinance the Scepter is fallen into
his hand and power, that enjoys the Crown, whether he be good or bad. A right
of deposing, must be either in him that has an higher power, which is only
God: or in him, that has better right to the Crown, which the Pope cannot
have, because he is a stranger: nor the Peers or people, because they are
subjects. Be the King for his Religion impious, for his Government unjust, for
his Life licentious, the subject must endure him, the Bishop must reprove him,
the Councellor must advise him, all must pray for him, and no mortal man has
authotity to disturb or displace him, as may evidently be seen by the Chapter
following.

The fifth Chapter confirms this Doctrine by the Fathers of the fourth 300
years.
IN this age of the Church, the Popes exalted themselves above all that is
called God, and upon private displeasures and quarrels, did curse and ban
Princes, incensing their neighbour-Nations, and persuading their own Subjects
to make war against them, as if Christ had ordained his Sacraments, not to be
seals of Grace, and helps of our Faith, but hooks to catch Kingdoms, and rods
to scourge such Potentates as would not, or could not procure the Pope's
favor. How far these Popish practices, did displease the godly and learned, I
will show by S. Bernard, Waltramus Bishop of Nanumberg, the Epistle
Apolegeticall of the Church of Liege against Paschalis the Pope, and the Author
of Henry the fourth his Life.

Saint Bernard, in one of his Sermons upon the words of Christ, I am the Vine,
commends the answer of a certain King, Been quidam Rex, cum percussus humana
sagitta, etc. It was well said of a King when he was shot into the body with an
arrow, and they that were about him, desired him to be bound until the arrow's
head were cut out, for that the least motion of his body would endanger his
life; no, (quoth he) it does not beseem a King to be bound let the Kings power
be ever safe and at liberty. And the same Father in an Epistle to Ludovicus
Crassus the King of France teaches subjects, how to rebel and fight against
their Princes; Quicquid vobis de Regno vestro de anima and Corona vestra facere
placuerit: Whatsoever you please to do with your Kingdom, Bernard Epist. 221.
your soul, or your Crown, we that are the children of the Church cannot
endure or dissemble the injuries, contempt, and conculcation of our mother,
Questionless we will stand and fight even unto death in our mothers behalf,
and use such weapons, as we may lawfully, I mean not Swords and Spears, but
Prayers and Tears to God.

When Gregory the 7, had deposed Henry the 4, he gave away the Empire to one
Rodolphus Duke of Saxony, that was a sworn subject to that distressed Emperor;
which Rodolph, in a battle against his Sovereign Lord, lost his right hand,
and gained a deadly wound. After his death, the Pope made one Hermanus King of
Germany, who enjoyed his Kingdom but a little time, for he was slain with a
stone, which a woman threw upon him from a turret, as he made an assault (in
sport) against his own castle, Ex vita Henr. 4. quae habetur in fasciculorerum
scien^io um Col^^^ae impresso.
to try the valor of his Soldiers. Then did Egbertus, by the Popes
encouragment ascend the Imperial Throne, whereon he sat but a while: for as he
stepped aside from his Army into a Mill, to rest himself in the heat of the
day, he was discovered by the Miller to the Emperor's friends, and lost his
life for his labor. During this hurly-burly in that State, Walthramus a godly
Bishop, wrote to one Ludovicus, an Earl of the Empire, diswading him from
partaking with the seditious against that good Emperor, whom the Pope had
deposed. Walthram by the grace of God, that he is, to Jews the noble Prince,
with instance of prayer, offreth himself in all things serviceable. Concord is
profitable to every Realm, and Justice much to be desired: these virtues are
the mother of devotion, and the consecration of all honesty. But whosoever
seeks after civil dissension and incenseth other to the effusion of blood,
he is a murderer and partaketh with him, who gaping for blood, goes about
seeking whom he may devour: The worthy vessel of election, that was taken up
to the third Heaven, protests, saying, Let every soul submit himself to the
higher power, there is no power but from God. He that resists power,
resists the ordinance of God. If that be true (which some men prate among
women and the vulgar sort) that we ought not to be subdued to the Kingly power,
Then it is false which the Apostle teaches, that every soul must submit
himself under power and superiority. Can the truth lie? Epist. Wald. quae
habetur in appendice Marian. Scot.
Did not Christ the Lord speak by the Apostle? Why do we provoke the Lord? Are
we stronger than he? Does not he think himself stronger than the Lord, the
resists the ordinance of God? Seeing there is no power but of God: What says
the Prophet? Confounded be they that strive against the Lord, and they that
resist him shall perish. Rodolphus, Hermanus, Egbertus, with many other
Princes, resisted the ordinance of God, in Henry the Emperor, but lo they are
confounded, as though they had never been, for as their end was ill, their
beginning could not be good, etc. Haec ille.

Pope Paschalis seeing the bad success of those seditious subjects, which his
predecessors Gregory and Vrbanus had armed against Henry, that worthy Emperor:
did persuade the Emperor's own son, against all Law of God, Nature and Nations,
to rebel against his father. The Bishop of Liege took the Emperors part,
against this young Prince, for the which he was excommunicate, his Church
interdicted, and Robert Earl of Flaunders commanded by the Pope, as he hoped
to have the forgiveness of his sins, and the faof the Church of Rome, to
destroy that Bishop and his false Priests.

The Churchmen of Liege terrified with the Popes excommunication, and fearing
the Earls oppression, wrote an Apology for themselves about the year 1106.
Epist. Leodiensium apud Simonem Scard.
We are excommunicate (say they) because we obey our Bishop, who has taken
part with his Lord the Emperor. These are the beginnings of sorrow; for Satan
being loosed, compasses the earth, and has made a division between the
Prince and the Priest: who can justly blame the Bishop that takes his Lords
part, to whom he has sworn allegiance? Perjury is a great sin, whereof they
cannot be ignorant, that by new schism and novell traditions do promise to
absolve subjects from the guilt of perjury, that forswear themselves to their
Lord the King, etc.

In the progress of their Apology they determine three great questions.

First, whether the Pope has power to excommunicate Kings?

Secondly, to whom it belongs to inflict temporal punishment, when
Churchmen offended against Faith, unity or good manners?

And thirdly, what remedy subjects have against their Kings, that are impious
or tyrannous? Si quis respectu sancti Spiritus, etc. If any man having respect
to the Spirit of God, shall turn over the old and new Testament, he shall
plainly find that Kings, ought not at all or very hardly be excommunicate,
whether we consider the etimology of their names, or the nature of their
excommunication. Even til this day has this point been questioned, and never
determined Kings may be admonished and reproved, by such as be discreet and
sober men, for Christ the King of Kings in earth, who has placed them in his
own stead, has reserved them to his own judgment, etc.

Their answer to the second question, is grounded on the testimony of Saint
Augustine, the practice of Princes, and the authority of Paul, Kings (say they)
and Emperors by their public Laws, have forbidden heretics, to enjoy any
wordly possession. Wherefore seeing we are no heretics, and that it belongs
not to the Pope, but to Kings and Emperors to punish heresies, why does our
Lord Paschalis send Robert, his armor-bearer, to destroy the possessions and
to overthrow the villages of the Churches, which in case they deserved
destruction, ought to be destroyed by the Edict of Kings and Emperors, which
carry the sword, not without good cause? etc.

For answer to the third question, they show by sundry places of Scripture,
that there is no other help against evil Princes, than prayer and patience.
Nihil modo pro Imperatore nostro dicimus, etc. We will for the present say
nothing in defense of our Emperor, but this we say, though he were as bad as
you report him to be we would endure his government, because our sins have
deserved such a Governor. Even such a Prince ought not to be resisted by
violence, but endured by patience and prayer. Moses brought many plagues upon
Pharaoh, whose heart God had hardened, but it was by prayer and the lifting up
his hands to heaven. And S. Paul requires prayers to be made for all men, for
Kings and such as are in authority: which Kings were neither Catholics nor
Christians. Baruch also from the mouth of the Prophet Jeremy, wrote unto the
Jews, which were captives unto the King of Babylon, that they must pray for the
life of Nabuchadnezzar the King of Babylon, and Balthazar his son, that their
days in earth may be as the days of Heaven, Epist. Leod.
etc. S. Paul teaches why we ought to pray for evil Kings namely, that under
them we may lead a quiet life. It would become an Apostolic man, to follow the
Apostles doctrine: it were prophetical to follow the Prophet, etc. Thus far
they in their Epistle Apologeticall.

He that wrote the life of this Emperor Henry the 4, Vita Hen. 4 quo supra.
an ancient, a modest, and an impartial relator of such occurrents as
happened in his time, declares his dislike of the Popes practices, and the
Germans tumults against their said Sovereign Lord. Magnum mundo documentum
datum est. A great instruction was given to the World, that no man should rise
against his master. For the hand of Rodolph being cut off showed a most just
punishment of perjury; he feared not to violate his fidelity sworn to the King,
and his right hand was punished, as if other wounds had not been sufficient to
bring him to his death, that by the plague of the rebellious, the fault of
rebellion might be perceived. Thus far he.

The sixth Chapter proves the same by the testimony of the Writers from the
1200 years downward.
I Will for conclusion produce Otho Frisingensis, Thomas Aquinas, Gratianus,
Philip the fair King of France, the Parliament of England, in the time of
Edward the 1, Vincentius and Aeneas Silvius, that afterward was Pope, by the
name of Pius Secundus.

Otho Frisin in his Epistle dedicatory before his Chronicle.
Otho Frisin gensis has an excellent saying in his Epistle dedicatory to
Frederick Barbarossa, Cum nulla persona mundialis inveniatur quae mundi Legibus
non subjaceat, etc. Although no earthly man can be found, that is not subject
to the Laws of the World, and in respect of subjection, liable to correction:
Kings as it were placed over Laws, are not restrained by them, but reserved to
the examination of God, according to the words of the King and Prophet, Against
thee only have I sinned. Psalm. 51.5.
It becomes therefore a King, both in respect of the noble disposition of his
mind, and the spiritual illumination of his soul, to have God, the King of
Kings, and Lord of Lords, ever in his mind, and by all means possible to take
heed, that he falls not into the hands of God, seeing it is (as the Apostle
says) a fearful thing to fall into the hands of the living God. It is more
fearful for Kings, than for any other; because Kings have none but God
himself above them, whom they need fear. It shall be so much more horrible
for them, by how much they may offend more freely than other men. So far Otho.

Thomas Aquinas, Aquin* de regimine prin. lib. 1. cap. 6.
(if the tractate de Regimine Principum be his) makes three sorts of Kings;
Kings by Election, Kings by Subordination, and Kings by Succession.

For the first, he says, that they which did establish, may abolish.

For the second, we must have our recourse to him that did surrogate the
subordinate King: as the Jews did to Caesar against Herod: for the last, his
resolution is, Recurrendum esse ad omnium Regem Deum, that we must fly to God,
the King of all Kings, in whose only power it is to molifie the cruel heart of
a Tyrant. And that men may obtain this at the hands of God, they must cease
from sin; for wicked Princes, by Divine permission are exalted to punish the
sins of the people, tollenda est igitur culpa ut cessat tyrannorum plaga, we
must therefore remove our sins, that God may take away his punishment. Thus far
Thomas.

Gratianus, which compiled the Decrees, is very peremptory, that the Bishop of
Rome ought not to meddle with the temporal sword, the state of Commonwealths,
or the change of Princes. He says nothing indeed de Regni ordinibus, which in
his time, and a 100 years after him, never dreamed of any such authority. Cum
Petrus qui primus Apostolorum a Domino fuerat electus, materianlem* ladium
exerceret: When Peter whom the Lord had first chosen of all the Apostles, drew
the material sword, to defend his Master from the injuries of the Jews, he was
commanded to shearh his sword: Mat. 26.52
For all that take the sword, shall perish by the sword. As if Christ should
have said, Hitherto it was lawful for thee and thine ancestors to persecute
Gods enemies with the temporal sword, hereafter thou must put up that sword
into his place, and draw the sword of the Spirit, which is the Word of God, to
slay the old man: Cause. 23. quest. 8. pa^ag. 1. Romans 13* 4.
whosoever beside the Prince, and without his authority, that has lawful
power, and as the Apostle teaches, bears not the sword in vain, to whom
every soul must be subject, whosoever (I say) without or beside the Princes
authority, bears the sword, shall perish by the sword. Thus far Gratian.

About the year 1300 began a quarrel between Boniface 8, and Philipus Pulcher
the French King, about the collation of Benefices, Prebends and other
Ecclesiastical promotions. Whereupon the Pope wrote unto the said King, as
solloweth: Boniface Bishop the servant of Gods Servants, to his well-beloved
Son Philip, by Gods grace King of France, greeting and blessing Apostolical.
Fear God and keep his Law: We give thee to understand that thou art subject
to us both in Spiritual things, and Temporal, and that no gift of benefices
or prebends belongs to thee. If thou have in thy hand any vacant, keep the
profits of them to the Successors and if thou have bestowed any, we decree the
collation void, and recall it, how far soever it has proceeded. Whosoever
believes otherwise, we account him a fool: Dated at Lateran the fourth of the
Calends of December, and in the 6. year of our Papacy. King Philip returned
his hautinesse, a correspondent answer, viz. Philip by the grace of God, King
of France, to Boniface bearing himself for Pope, Philip. Pulcher.
Salutem modicam sive nullam Sciat tua maxima fatuitas. Lattle health or none
at all. Let thy great fooleship know, that in temporal things we are subject
to no man. And that the gifts of prebends and Ecclesiastical promotions, made
and to be made by us, were and shall be Lawful, both in time past and in time
to come. For such collations belong to us in the right of our Crown: wherefore,
we will manfully defend the possessours of the said dignities, and do judge
them that think otherwise fools and mad men. Given at Paris the Wednesday
after Candlemasse, 1301. Questionless this King that did so scornefully reject
the Popes challenge pretended from Christ, would little regard the claim of the
Nobles, derived but from the people.

The same busy Boniface, of whom some write, that he came in like a Fox
craftily, reigned like a Lion cruelly, and dyed like a Dog miserably, would
take upon him the decision of a controversy between the Kings of England and
Scotland, and commanded King Edward of England either to cease his claim, or
to send his procurators to the Apostolic sea, to show his right, and to
receive such order from the Pope, as justice and equity would require. The
Lords and Commons then assembled in Parliament at Lincoln, sent Boniface this
answer in the Kings behalf. Whereas our most dread Lord Edward by the grace of
God, the Noble King of England, caused your Letters to be read openly before
us, touching certain occurrents of state between him and the King of Scotland,
we did not a little marvel at the contents thereof, so strange and
wonderful, as the like has never been heard of. We know (most holy father)
and it is well known in this Realm, and also to other nations, that the King
of England ought not to make answer for his right before any judge
Ecclesiastical or secular: by reason of the free estate of his Royal dignity
and custom, Parliament at Lincoln quoted by M. Beken-shaw.
without breach at all times unviolably observed: Wherefore after treaty had
and diligent deliberation, this was our resolution, that our said King ought
not to answer in judgment, nor send procurators or messengers to your court:
seeing that tends manifestly to the disinheriting of the right of the Crown,
the overthrow of the state of the Kingdom, and the breach of the Liberties,
Customs, and Laws of our Fathers, for the keeping whereof, we are bound by
the duty of an oath, and will (by Gods help) maintain and defend with all our
power and strength, etc. Dated at Lincoln Ann. Dom 1301. and anno, Edwardi
primi 29. This was then the resolution of the state of this land: if our late
sectaries Popish or Puritan, bring in any other Doctrine, we may not leave the
cawsey of truth and obedience, whereon our forefathers walked to their
commendation, to follow these new guides, in their bypath of pride,
disobedience, and contempt of authority, to our destruction.

Vincentius in his Speculo Historiali has a notable place to dissuade from
sedition and perjury. Vt pace omnium bonorum dixerim, li. 15. c. 84.
haec sola novitas (ne dicam haeresis) nec dum e mundum emerserat. That I may
speak with the favor of all good men, this mere novelty (if not heresy) was
not sprung up in the world, that Priests should teach Subjects, that they owe
no subjection to wicked Kings, and albeit they have given an oath of fidelity
unto them, they are not bound to keep it: Nay they that obey an evil Prince,
are to be held as excommunicated, and all such as rebel against him, are free
from the guilt of the crime of perjury. So far he.

I will end this Chapter with Aeneas Silvius, Pius 2. de o^tu and author,
imperii cap. 23.
who dyed in the year 1464 Sit tandem finis litium, Let there be an end of
contention, and one principal head to determine all Temporal matters: let the
occasion of perpetual debate be taken away, let men acknowledge themselves
subject to their Prince, and give reverence to him, whom God has made his
vicegerent on earth. As that which God commands must be obeyed without
contradiction, so the Temporal Commandments of Caesar, may not be resisted.
But let the Kings themselves beware that they opreise no man unjustly, nor give
their people cause to cry to God against them, for the earth is the Lords and
the fullness thereof: he will not forget the cry of the poor: and for the sin
of the Prince he translateth the Government from one Nation to another. There
is nothing more offensive to the greatest God the King and Creator of Heaven
and Earth, then the neglect of justice, and the oppression of the poor: as the
Psalmist says, The poor shall not always be forgotten, and the patient abiding
of the needy shall not perish for ever. So far Silvius.

The Seventh Chapter shows the concord of Papist and Puritan for the
deposition of Kings, and their discord about the means and persons to be
employed in the execution of their Designements.
CHilderick was deposed, and Pipine crowned King of France about the year 750.
The truth of which History is this: Childerick void of all Princely gravity,
gave himself over to pleasure and wantonness, leaving the burden of the
State to Pipinus, that was his Lord Marshall: Who conspired with the Nobles, to
advance himself, by the desition of the King his master. To set a better
color on the matter, Pipine sent his Chaplain to Pope Zachary, to have his
answer to this Question: Whether should be King, he that bare the name and did
nothing, or he he that grverned the Kingdom? The Pope gave sentence with the
Marshall against the King, whereupon, Childerick was made a shorn Monk, and
Pipine a crowned King.

It is a wonder to see how these opposite sectaries, do insist upon this fact
of the Frenchmen, to justify their dangerous Doctrine, and seditious
conspiracies against Princes. As Card. Bellarmine de pontif. lib. 2. cap. 17.
Thomas Harding against the Apology of the Church of ENGLAND fol. 181. Franc.
Fevardentius in his Commentary on Hester page 85. Boucher, alias Raynolds de
justa abdicatione Henrici. 3 lib. 3. cap. 14. Ficklerus de jure magistratuum
fol. 30. Alexander Carerius patavinus de potestate Papae, lib. 2 cap. 3. D.
Marta de temporali and spirituali pontificis potestate, lib. 1. cap. 23. and
Doleman in his conference touching succession part. 1. cap. 3. page 48. And
also these Puritans, Christopher Goodman in his treatise of obedience, page 53.
George Buchanan de jure Regni apud Scotos, page 47. Danaeus de politia
Christiana lib. 3. cap. 6. page 221, Brutus Celta de jure magistratuum page
286. Philadelphus dialogo 2, page 65. Franc. Hottomanus in his Francogallia
cap. 12. and Speculum tyrannidis Philipi Regis page 27.

Cardinal 'Pellarmine the grand-master of Controversies, De ^ontis. lib. 2. c.
17.
cannot endure to hear that this deposition was done by any other then the
papal Authority.

Caeterum quod monachus iste (says Lambertus Danaus) whereas this monk
Bellarmine contendeth that Childerick was lawfully deposed by Pope Zacharias, a
stranger, a Priest, no Magistrate, but (in this respect) a private person,
though he were Bishop of Rome. Resp. Danaei ad Bellar. l. 2. c. 17 page 316.
Will he ever be able to prove or defend his assertion? Can Zachary have
authority in France, being a stranger? Can he depose the public Magistrate,
being but a private person? or transfer that principality to Pipin that he
has no right unto? and commit so many sacriledges and impieties, stealing from
Childerick, and giving to Pipin another man's right? authorizing subjects to
violate their oaths, which they had sworn to their King? transporting Kingdoms
from one man to another, whereas it does only belong to God to depose Kings, and
dispose of Kingdoms? Thou may see (Bellarmin) how many outrages this thy
Zachary has committed, beside that he did thrust his sickle into another man's
harvest, and meddled with the Cobbler beyond his Last, in that, being but a
Priest, he took upon him the decision of the right of Kingdoms. Thus far
Danaeus, who is not so violent against the Pope, Danaeus pol. Christ. l. 6 c. 3
page 414.
as he is virulent for the deposing power of Peers, or States of the Kingdom.

Men cannot say (as it is in the Proverb) nimium altercando veritas amittitur,
seeing that in this opposition, the truth is not lost, but divided among them.
For their premises, brought together, will unavoidably conclude, that this
deposing power, is neither in the Pope, the Peers, nor the People. Though it
were, the reason of the seditious Papists and Puritans, a facto, adjus, is
sophistical in the Schools, where nothing can be concluded ex meris
particularibus, of mere particular instances. Absurd in Law, quia legibus non
exemplis vivitur, for men must do as the Law requires, not as other men
practice. Erroneous in Divinity, non ideo quia factum credimus, August. ad
Consen. de mendac. c. 9.
faciendum credamus, ne violemus praeceptum dum sectamur exemplum: We may not
do that, which has been done by other men, least we break the Law of God, in
following the example of man. And dangerous in policy, as my Lord of
Northampton, the ornament of learning observes. The fly (says that noble
Earl) setting on the cart-whele, might as well wonder at the dust raised in
the way, as Gregory or Zachary, draw counsel to power, and make that fact
their own which was hammered in the forge of ambition, contenanced with the
color of necessity, and executed by Pepin, a minister, that being weary of
subordination, resolved by this trick, when the means were fitted and prepared
to the plot, to make himself absolute. The case of Kings were pitiful, if ex
factis singularibus, it were lawful to draw leaden rules in their disgrace.
Thus fas the Earl.

The eight Chapter shows the danger of this Doctrine, and the Original of
the Puritan position, concerning the power of statesmen to punish and depose
Princes in Monarchies.
THese desperate attempts, suggested by the Devil, executed by the people,
encouraged by the State, and approved by the Pope, must serve as admonitions to
Princes, to humble themselves before God: Qui non dabit Sanctos suos in
captionem dentibus little, who will not give his Saints for a pray to their
teeth. For it is not heard (as our great King remembers) That any Prince
forgeteth himself in his duty to God, Law of Monarch. page 60.
or in his vocation? But God with the greatness of the plague revengeth the
greatness of his ingratitude.

These practices therefore must be no president for Peers or People to follow,
because God has forbidden Christian subjects to resist, though Kings reign as
Tyrants: and commanded them to endure with patience, though they suffer as
Innocents. And also, because that in stead of releeving the Commonwealth out of
distress, which is ever the pretense of seditions practitioners, they shall
heap mischief on it, and desolation on themselves: as (Aquinas) if he be the
Author of the book de regim. principum, shows manifestly. Esset multitudini
periculosum and ejus rectoribus: de reg. prin. l. 1. c. 6.
It were dangerous to subjects and governors, that any should attempt to take
away the life of Princes, though they were Tyrants: for commonly, not the well
disposed, but the ill affected men, do thrust themselves into that danger. And
the government of good Kings, is as odious to bad men, as the rule of Tyrants
to good people. Wherefore the Kingdom, by this presumption would be rather in
danger to forgo a good Prince, than a wicked Tyrant. So far Thomas.

They that are the authors or abettors of sedition, can neither avoid shame in
Earth, nor escape eternal damnation. Though God the great Judge do sometime
permit Rebels, in his Justice to prevail against Kings for their contempt of
the Law of the highest, and the neglect of their own duty; The reward of
Rebellion shall be no better than the recompense of Satan, who is the
instrument of the Lords wrath for the punishment of all disobedience. It is
most true that as sick men, near their death, have many idle fancies, Chrysoss.
so the World before the end thereof shall be troubled with many errors. In
these declining days of the World, many Countries, Cities and Cantons,
renounced their old government, and submitted themselves to such a new regiment
as they best liked: for confirmation of which practices, there wanted not
politic Divines, (what wine is so sour that some hedgegraps will not yield)
to invest the people and Nobles with the power over Kings, to dispose of their
Kingdoms.

Marsilius Patavinus says, the deposition of a King, Marsilius Patav. de
translat. Imporii, c. 6.
and the institution of another in his place, belongs not to the Bishop of
Rome, to any Priest, or to the College of Priests, but to the universal
multitude of the Subjects. So far he.

From these, the Puritans have learned their error, of the power of Statesmen
over Kings, then which, no opinion can be more dangerous: where the Nobility
are as ready to practice, as the Puritan preachers are to prescribe. What
presumption is it in men, to pass the bounds which God has set them, to
control the wisdom of the Lord, and his unspeakable goodness, when he makes
trial of the patience of his Saints, by the out rage and tyranny of cruel
Kings, that they which are found patient in trouble, constant in truth and
loyal in subjection, may be crowned with glory. Were we persuaded, that the
hearts of Kings are in Gods hand, that the hairs of our head are numbered, and
that no affliction can befall us, which God does not dispose to the exercise of
our Faith, the trial of our constancy, or the punishment of our sin, we would
as well admire the Justice of God, in permitting Tyrants, that our sins may be
judged, and punished in this world, as praise his mercy and favor, in giving
rest to his servants, under the protection of godly and gracious Princes.

The ninth Chapter shows the general consent of the Modern Puritans touching
the coercion, deposition, and killing of Kings, whom they call Tyrants.
THe Citizens of Geneva, changed the Government from a Monarchy to a Democrity,
in the year of Christ 1536 In the which year, John Calvin came into that City,
to visit his friend Farellus; And was chosen the public reader of Divinity. At
his first coming thither, he published his Teologicall Institutions; Wherein
he does very learnedly and Christianly entreat of the authority of Princes, and
the duty of Subjects. One only place is harsh, and dangerous: delivered in
obscure and doubtful terms, to excuse (as I conceive) the outrage of the
Citizens against their sovereign Magistrates. Instit. l. 4. c. 20. 31.
His words are these, Si qui sunt populares Magistratus, ad moderandam regum
libidinem constituti.

Christopher Goodman published a Treatise of obedience at Geneva, Page 119.
not without the very good liking and approbation of the best learned in that
City, 1557, Wherein he affirms, That if Magistrates transgress Gods Law
themselves, and command others to do the like, they lose that honor, and
obedience which otherwise is due unto them: and ought no more to be taken for
Magistrates: but to be examined and punished as private transgrestors. So far
Goodma^.

1577, Page 206.
Came forth the Vindiciae contra Tyrannos, with this resolution, That Princes
are chosen by God, established by the people; every private man is subject to
the Prince; the Multitude and the Officers of State which represent the
Multitude, are Superiors to the Prince, yea they may judge his actions, and if
he make resistance, punish him by forcible means, So far he.

Anno 1588, Hermanus Renecherus published observations upon the 1 Psalm, wherein
he investeth the Presbitery with all the Popes prerogatives. Concerning the
Presbiterian power over Kings, this is his notable annotation: Page 72.
God (says he) has ordained the Civil Magistrate for the good of the
Ecclesiastical order, therefore the Ecclesiastical State is the highest
throne of Gods earthly Kingdom, the supreme Seat of all excellency, and the
chiefest Court wherein God himself is president, to distribute eternal gifts
to his servants. Whereas the political Empire is but as it were an inferior
bench, wherein Justice is administered according to the prescription of the
Ecclesiastical sovereignty. Thus far Renecherus.

I will make an end with William Bucanus, whose book was published at the
request and with the approbation of Beza and Goulartius, maine pillars of the
Church of Geneva, 1602. They (says Bucanus) which have any part of Office is
the public administration of the Commonwealth, Loco 76 p. 844.
as the Overseers, Senators, Consuls, Peers, or Tribunes, may restrain the
insolency of vill Kings. Thus far he.

This Puritan dangerous error, is directly repugnant to the Law, the Gospel,
the precepts of the Apostles, the practice of Martyrs, and the doctrine of the
Fathers, Councels, and other Clasicall Writers, as I have proved in the 6
former Chapters, wherein the holy Texts of Scripture, which the Papists and
Puritans do damnably abuse against the Ecclesiastical and Civil authority of
Kings, shall be answered by the godly Protestanes: whose labor God used to
reform his Church since the year of our Lord, 1517. and by the ancient
Fathers and Orthodoxall Writers in every age of the Church.

Inferior Magistrates (says Johannes Baptista Ficklerus) are the defenders
and protectours of the Laws and Rights of the State, De jury magist. fol. 18.
and have authority (if need require) to correct and punish the supreme King.
So far Ficklerus.

An English fugitive, which was the Author of the book de justa abdicatione
Henrici Tertij, affirms, That all the Majesty of the Kingdom, is in the
assembly of Statesmen, to whom it belongs to make Covenants with God, to
dispose of the asssises of the Kingdom, to appoint matters pertaining to war
and peace, lib. 3 c. 8.
to bridle the Kingly power, and settle all things that belong to public
Government. So far he.

And the most seditious Dolemon says, Part 1. c. 4. page 72.
that all humane Law and order Natural, National, and Positive, does teach,
that the Common wealth, which gave Kings their authority for the common good,
may restrain or take the same from them if they abuse it to the common ill: so
far Doleman: and of this opinion are many other as may appear by D. Morton by
whom they are discovered and refuted.

How far this gangrene will extend, I know not. The Kings of Christendom are
daily crucified, (as Christ their Lord was) between two thieves; I mean the
Papist and Puritan, which have prepared this deadly poison for Princes, whom
they in their own irreligious and traitorous hearts, shall condemn for
tyranny. I hope neither Peers nor People will be so fond to believe them, or
wicked to follow them, which pretend the Reformation of Religion, and defend he
subversion of Christian States. If inferior officers, or the public assembly
of all States, will claim this power, it stands them upon, (as they will
avoid everlasting damnation) not to derive a title from Rome, Lacedemon, or
Athens, (as Calvin does, whom the rest follow) but from the hill of Sion, and
to plead their interest from the Law or the Gospel. Si mandatum non est
praesumptio, and ad poenam proficiet, non ad praemium: August in quest mixed.
quia ad contumeliam pertinet conditoris, ut contempto Domino colantur servi,
and spreto Imperatore, adorentur Comites. If their opposition against Kings be
not commanded of God, it is presumption against God: for it is a contumely
against God the Creator of all States, to despise Lords and honor servants, to
contemn the Sovereign Emperor, and to reverence the Peers of the Empire. So
far Augustine. My son (says Solomon) fear God and the King, Pro. 24.21.
and meddle not with the seditious: for their destruction shall come suddenly,
and who knows the end of them? The conclusion of all is, That Kings have
supreme and absolute authority under God on Earth, not because all things are
subject to their pleasure, which were plain tyranny, not Christian
Sovereignty: but because all persons, Within their Dominions, stand bound in
Law, allegiance, and conscience, to obey their pleasure, or to abide their
punishment. And Kings themselves, are no way subject to the control censure,
or punishment of any earthly man, but reserved by special prerogative to the
most fearful and righteous judgment of God, with whom there is no respect of
persons. He whose servants they are, will beat them with a rod of iron, and
break them in pieces like a potters vessel, if they abuse that great, and
sovereign power, (which God has endued them withal,) to support error, to
suppress truth, and to oppress the innocent. God, of his great mercy grant us
the spirit of truth, to direct us in all loyalty, that we being not seduced by
these seditious Sectaries, may grow in grace, stand fast in obedience, embrace
love, follow peace and increase more and more in the knowledge of our Lord
Jesus Christ. To whom be all praise, power, and dominion now and for ever. Amen.

FINIS.

